MR. WHITING'S ORATION.

AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT THE CELEBRATION OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE, AT
SHEFFIELD, JULY 4th, 1796.

BY SAMUEL WHITING, ESQUIRE.

Published at the request of the COMMITTEE.

PRINTED AT STOCKBRIDGE, BY LORING ANDREWS. 1796.

AN ORATION, etc.
IN performing an office so honorable and pleasing as that of addressing this
respectable audience, on an occasion so happy, the Speaker's heart must be cold
indeed not to be animated -- but it must be a bold one not to palpitate with
the tremblings of respect.

IT is presumed that no parade of apology will be necessary to secure the
candor and indulgence of the assembly: However capable that may be of the
severity of criticism, and however his weakness and inexperience may open a
field for its exercise; he flatters himself the sentiments naturally inspired
by the occasion will alone prove his sufficient protection and security.

ON the memorable day of which this is the twentieth anniversary, the name of
America was enrolled on the list of empires; a day, the remembrance of which
must ever dwell sweetly on the minds of freemen, as having emancipated a
numerous and a virtuous people from a foreign yoke of colonial subjection, and
raised them to the blessed enjoyment of liberty, of internal sovereignty, and
independence. To commemorate that important event are we now assembled; and to
that end I have the honor to stand in this place. I know not how better to
recommend myself to your candid attention and sympathy, than by offering a few
simple reflections upon the happiness and respectability of the American
Empire, considered as well in a natural, social, and domestic view, as on a
national scale; and the importance to the cause and interest of republican
systems, and political liberty in general, which is probably attached to the
successful support, and final establishment, or the failure and dereliction of
the Constitution of the United States.

IT is happy for the Speaker, inexperienced as he is in the employment, that
the task to which he is called, and the topic which he is at liberty to assume,
preclude the necessity of argumentative persuasion, foreign illustration, or
scientific research. As well might we resort to the problems of Euclid, to
demonstrate that the radii of a circle are in every part equal, as, in speaking
of the felicity of our country, to offer a syllogism. Like the light of Heaven,
it bursts irresistably upon the senses; we meet an attesting witness at every
step, and a shining illustration in almost every object around us. It is a
theme which demands so little from the invention and ingenuity of the Speaker,
that the schoolboy who lashes his top in the street, might be eloquent upon
it; and the lisping infant venture to declaim. It is a theme which requires but
to be mentioned to interest the hearer; and on which, so familiar are the
subjects of its effects, suggestion is argument, and the pointing of a finger,
demonstration.

WHILE we leave to the legislator and the statesman to trace the annals of past
ages, to review the once great, flourishing and happy -- but now long lost and
extinct, republics of Greece and Rome; to compare former systems with our own,
and availing themselves of the event of past experiments, to point out those
measures the pursuit of which would lead us to a similar fate, and to deduce
lessons of wisdom and policy calculated to guide us in the paths of happiness
and glory -- it is ours, my friends, to reflect -- and never should the
reflection be long absent from the minds of any of us -- what a glorious and
all important experiment now rests its issue on the American character -- an
experiment which, whatever be the specific systems of policy which we adopt,
must inevitably derive the fairest portion of its success from the existence
and exercise of those virtues which form the individual character, and which
are equally essential to the christian and the man, as to the citizen.

TO the extent which happiness can be constituted and insured by the provisions
of nature, perhaps no country on the face of the earth is happier, or under
superior obligations of gratitude in that respect. Not that the gales are
loaded with perfume from our aromatic groves, as the Asiatic can boast. Not
that our gardens and our fields are crowned with the luscious fragrance of the
orange, the burgamot, the pineapple, and the grape, with all the luxuriance of
an Italian vale. Not that our hills and our streams embosom treasures of
silver, gold and gems, like the mountains of Potosi and Chili, the rivers of
Africa, and the mines of Golconda. If blessings like these are not the boast,
so are they neither, I trust, the envy of Americans. None of the laws of nature
seem to be more certain and invariable in their operation, than that which
limits happiness to exertion, and renders it incompatible with habits of
inertion and torpitude. With an economy which we see imitated in the revenue
policy of some wise nations, she seems to have ordained that it shall never be
imported in a finished state, but that man himself shall contribute to the
production of the happiness which he feels.

LET Europe exult in her luxuries and her pageants, Asia in her spices and her
gems, and Africa in her golden sands: In a happy retirement from them all, from
the corruptions, the follies, and the tumults of one, and the vices, the
ignorance, and barbarities of the others, America, collected within herself,
sits smiling in the bosom of peace, of security. Amply possessed of the
bullion, the unwrought materials of wealth and felicity, and conscious of the
means, which as amply reside within herself, of coining and manufacturing them,
she covets not the enjoyment of their luxuries, at the expense of participating
their vices and their miseries.

OURS are the rational, sentimental, and manly enjoyments which result from the
union of natural advantages with temperance, industry and economy. With that
happy temperament of climate which, equally removed from torrid and frigid
extremes, is propitious to the health and vigor of both body and mind, as well
to the growth of all the variety of animal, vegetable, and mineral productions
which either the necessities or conveniences of mankind require -- with an
immeasurable expanse of country in our rear, fertile to a degree almost to
exceed credibility, and for the most part generous and easy of cultivation,
skirted and interspersed with lakes and rivers which present commerce with a
source of inland navigation capable of being improved by locks and canals to a
degree of facility, expedition and safety to transportation little short of the
ocean; and with these advantages promising to become a fund of national
affluence, beyond the reach of calculation, and scarcely to be exhausted in the
lapse of ages -- with an extent of seacoast of more than a thousand miles,
beautifully indented with bays and harbors; intersected at convenient
intervals by rivers which open an easy navigation to the fruitful and pleasant
interior country; and even that immense stretch of coast-navigation so situated
as to receive the least possible injury or inconvenience from those winds which
are usually most inclement and disastrous in their effects -- with a spirit of
enterprise and exertion completely adequate to the most beneficial improvement
of these blessings, and to which no human undertaking is unequal, regulated
(...) habits of virtue -- what, I ask, have Americans to wish from the bounty
of Heaven, which is not already placed within their reach; or which, if
obtained, would not be productive of effeminacy, vice and misery, rather than
of substantial enjoyment?

ALTHOUGH it is yet to be decided, not only in experiment but argument, as well
whether the expansive and dispersed situation of the United States be capable
of supporting a republican form of government for any considerable period of
time, as whether that dispersion be not a circumstance favorable to its
success; I feel not the smallest hesitation in ranking it among the subjects of
gratitude and felicitation to Americans, that it precludes from us at present
one formidable source of partial influence, of faction, and tergiversation to
which we should be exposed by such an enormous conflux of population as
constitutes a London or a Paris. It is a notorious fact, that much of the
eccentricity, distraction, injustice and cruelty which have marked certain
stages of the revolution in France, has originated in that unhappy mass of
influence possessed by the city of Paris, and the direction given to that
influence by the wild, vicious, licentious, and disorganizing dispositions and
manners common to such immense congregations of people. Whether we have any
thing to fear for American posterity from the future growth and accumulation of
the projected metropolis of the United States, I will not hazard a conjecture.

THE present state of society in America seems to be a fair medium between the
rudeness of aboriginal simplicity, and the effeminacy and luxury which always
mark the advanced stages of civil refinement. It is that state in which the
virtues of hospitality, temperance, industry and economy delight to dwell, and
which, from its characteristic spirit of enterprise, exertion and vigor, is
most favorable to the cultivation of the useful arts and sciences.
Agriculture* notwithstanding the discouragements of emigration to the western
country, and the scarcity of labor, is rising in improvement, and favored by
that state of the markets produced by the situation of Europe, is adding to our
wealth in a manner almost unparalleled. Manufactures, aided by the invention of
machines for the abridgment of manual labor -- inventions which, as well for
the importance of their effects, as for their number and ingenuity, have never,
perhaps, in a similar period of time, been equalled in any other country -- are
making a rapid progress, and strengthening in one very important part our
independence. Navigation and commerce, under all the formidable embarrassments
to which they are subjected by the capricious and ungenerous systems of the
conflicting European powers, are still sufficiently beneficial and productive
to the American adventurer to call forth exertions, and to excite improvements
which at some future day may place the naval strength of America in a situation
less liable to receive laws at their hands.

BUT I should do injustice to my country, if, in enumerating the existing
circumstances which constitute its happiness and its honor, I were to omit
crediting the account with a fair portion of even the polite and elegant
refinements. The Muses have not disdained to visit the sequestered shade of an
American vale, and to listen with the kindest indulgence to the invocation of
many a timeful bard. The canvas is learning to breathe with artificial life;
the pencil is wresting from the hand of death a portion of his awful oblivion;
and many of the deceased fathers of our country still seem to live upon our
walls. Polite literature is making a progress in improvement which must afford
the most pleasing satisfaction to every lover of the mental accomplishments.
While our schools and our colleges, with increasing effect, are rearing the
tender youth to future usefulness and glory, our presses are laboring with the
noble productions of maturer genius and science, and our legislative councils
are resounding with the thunder of patriotic eloquence.

TO the many blessings enjoyed by Americans which have already been mentioned,
there is yet another to be added, without which the rest could be but half
enjoyed. We have a Constitution to preserve and to defend -- a Constitution
justly the admiration of the world, and in the preservation and defense of
which, no exertions, no sacrifices, could be illy bestowed. -- When I recollect
the hazardous scene of probation through which that Constitution has so lately
passed, and the noble and magnanimous support which it has received at a time
when all the formidable batteries of faction and intrigue were opened against
it, shall I not be pardoned in bestowing a few reflections and observations
upon the subject from which that scene derived its origin?

I MOST cordially congratulate this assembly, and my country in general, on the
happy result of the late critical and alarming situation of America respecting
the consummation of her Treaty with Great Britain. It would be arrogance in the
Speaker to attempt with confidence to appreciate the merits or demerits of the
Treaty itself: Such are the variety, extent, and intricate combination of
objects embraced by a Treaty of commerce and navigation, that to judge with
accuracy of the wisdom and eligibility of its arrangements, requires an
acquaintance with the relations, interests, laws, usages, finances, strength
and dispositions of nations, which the reading or other means of information of
comparitively few enable them to acquire. -- The merits of a treaty of
intercourse between independent nations, rest on principles essentially
different from those by which we are to judge of the merits of a constitution
of internal government. The former are not to be measured by the partial
advantages which are secured to any one nation or empire; but a treaty, being
for the most part a convention, compromise, or adjustment of opposing interests
and views, contemplates a reciprocity of benefits, regulated by, and adapted
to, all the variety of circumstances which may either enforce, or weaken the
respective claims of the contracting parties.

COULD America prevail with the nations of Europe with whom her interest may
induce her to wish to preserve an amicable and commercial intercourse, to
submit exclusively to her legislature the power of forming treaties of amity
and commerce, by which they would consent to hold themselves bound, we might
then hope to see provisional stipulations for the interest of our country more
consonant to the ideas and demands of a certain class of our citizens. We might
then hope to see Europe obsequiously throwing open her ports to receive us on
our own terms, and consenting to take from us, at her own doors, not only the
productions of this country, but those of any others of which we might choose
to be the carriers. But it will probably be long before we may expect to meet
such a convenient measure of courtesy and acquiescence in the nations with whom
we may have to negociate.

AMIDST the clamor and virulence of objection which has heaped in the way of
the Treaty in question, and that in many instances from the tongues and pens of
persons who, we might suppose, possessed the means of information to render
them competent to a fair decision, what shall be the criterion by which to
measure our approbation, and establish its character and value in the popular
estimation? With those who can conceive that the Treaty may possess merits
which to every capacity may not be obvious, it is some commendation that it is
ostensibly founded in a system of pacification and neutrality -- that it was
negociated by a person well acquainted with, and capable of understanding the
true interests of his country; one whose patriotism and integrity were tried
and approved, bearing a special commission from, and acting under the immediate
direction and instructions of, a Washington. In their estimation the effect of
the cavilling, rant, and declamation of the champions of opposition, is in some
measure balanced by the consideration that on a lengthy, cool, deliberate
investigation of its merits in the Senate of the United States -- a select
council of the wise men of the nation, composed of an equal representation of
all the States in the union -- it was found deserving of the qualified advisory
approbation and consent of two thirds of that venerable constitutional body,
and comes to us at length with the signature and ultimate approbation and
responsibility of that man who has more than once arrested the tottering
fortunes of his country, and conducted them to safety, happiness and glory.

WHEN the climax of American happiness is crowned with the name of WASHINGTON,
the imagination has spent its flight. It is the key-stone which binds and
sustains the mighty ark. It was he found us divided, weak, dependent, oppressed
colonies, prostrate at the footstool of a despotic jurisdiction, separated from
us by a thousand leagues of ocean, obedient and tumbling at the missive
mandate; and who, after the hasty lapse of twenty years, has seen us united,
powerful, happy, and taking an honorable rank among the nations of the earth.
-- Has seen us, did I say? -- next to the protection and guidance of Heaven, it
is the praise of Washington to have led us by the hand to that glorious station
-- with the wisdom of the sage, to have pointed the arduous ascent, and with
the fortitude of the hero, to have led the dubious way. In every emergency, one
has been our hope, and one our resort. When the burden of foreign oppression
became too heavy to be borne, and called loudly to resistance, did we want a
General to lead forth our undisciplined yeomanry to the field? -- A Washington!
was the exulting cry -- and lo! as if enchantment and magic awaited his call,
that undisciplined and unarmed band became an army formidable even to veterans!
When conquest and glory had crowned our exertions in the field, and the fate of
America trembled between the Scylla of foreign despotism, and the Charybdis of
internal anarchy -- when it became necessary, by an efficient constitution of
government, to substantiate the blessings of freedom and independence, which
our arms had acquired -- Washington was unanimously called to preside at the
council; and the result has proved itself worthy of its origin, by an eight
years experience. Did we want a Supreme Executive Magistrate, in whom we might
hope to find concentrated the confidence of electors thus widely dispersed, and
various in their manners, views and interests, to stand at the helm of that
constitution, and guide it through the tempests of faction? -- With an
unanimity which never, under similar circumstances, before was known,
Washington was again summoned, reluctant and diffident, from his beloved scenes
of philosophic retirement, and to complete the immortal glory of his character,
has given lessons of wisdom in administration to the astonished world.

IT is the praise of Washington alone, that the panegyric which suppresses a
single trait in his character, subtracts from the fullness of his fame. We have
heard of an Alexander, a Caesar, and a Charles; but the panegyrist who would
secure our admiration and esteem for their characters, like one who exhibits
figures on a wall from a magic lantern, must show them only in a single light;
and by an artful use of veils and disguises, screen them from too severe a
scrutiny. -- Naked and unveiled, it is the native man -- the entire and
undisguised character -- which we admire. Do we view him in the domestic
circle, in the senate, in the field, or at the levee; the scene, indeed, is
changed, but the man is still the same. -- Is he formidable as an enemy? -- he
is faithful and affectionate as a friend. Is he illustrious as a statesman and
a magistrate? -- he is amiable as a citizen. Is he great as a hero? -- he is
good as a christian and a man. Such is the man to whom America is thus
indebted: but -- I blush for my country to add -- such is the character which
the breath of malevolence, even in America, has basely assailed. -- Would to
Heaven that his country were as unstained with disgrace for its ingratitude, as
his peaceful, philosophy soul is invulnerable to the vile abuse! -- But never
yet was complete justice rendered to the fame of living merit* posterity shall
more justly appreciate the character and the services of the Savior of their
country; and "The sons shall blush, whose fathers were his foes."

THE period of each revolving year, while it discloses the hidden rocks and
shoals which that administration whose wisdom and firmness it is our pride to
boast, could alone enable us to shun; is continually adding bright features of
dignity, importance, and respectability to the American name and empire. Since
the day on which we were last assembled to celebrate the event which we are now
commemorating, Treaties have been concluded, ratified, and legislatively
provided for, with Great Britain, Spain, Algiers, and the hostile tribes of
Indians northwest of the Ohio; from which we may hope and expect a termination
of the long, expensive, and distressing war with those savages -- a suspension
of the ruinous depredations upon our maritime property by that piratical
African power, and the restoration of our unfortunate fellow-citizens from a
grievous captivity among them -- the establishment and security of very
essential interests of the United States, in their commercial relations with
Spain; while at the same time a foundation is laid of lasting harmony and
friendship with that respectable nation -- and an amicable and concillatory
adjustment, removal, and redress of subsisting differences, complaints, and
wrongs between the United States and Great Britain* In a review of the progress
of which, it is not, perhaps, the least deserving subject of congratulation and
joy, that our inestimable Constitution has stood the test of an experiment the
most critical and alarming with which, possibly, it may ever have to encounter;
and has proved itself capable of sustaining a shock, to which alone the
soundness and solidity of its materials, and the wisdom of its construction,
could have been found equal.

TO every scene of experimental probation, calculated to try the principles of
republican economy, through which the American Constitution is called to pass,
is probably attached a weight of importance, interest and concern bounded by no
limits but those which circumscribe the love of freedom, and the abodes of
hope. To that adventurous country which has dared to set a bold example to the
world, by erecting the standard of liberty and independence in the face of
menacing despotism, are the wondering eyes, and anxious hopes, of many a
transatlantic disciple of liberty directed. If ever the injured cause of
freedom and the rights of man is to be sustained against the lawless
encroachments of tyranny, on the one hand, or licentiousness and anarchy, on
the other, perhaps a fairer field for the experiment may never be offered, or,
indeed, could be wished, than is presented in the United States of America.
When we contemplate the local situation of the country; the manner of its
original settlement and population; the native genius of its inhabitants; their
manners, habits, and modes of education; the sources and vehicles of
information which they possess; and the previous systems of policy to which
they have been accustomed; we may fancy to ourselves that we behold the
oppressed of the earth committing to the event of American exertions their
ultimate hopes -- that we hear them imploring the blessings of Heaven upon
those exertions, and in the ardour of their wishes and their expectations,
addressing the American people in these impassioned strains: "Favored of
Heaven! how happy is your lot! It is you whom the guardian genius of liberty,
of humanity, and innocence, has chosen to reach forth her celestial charter to
the groaning children of oppression and sorrow. Every advantage, and every
blessing necessary to ensure success to the cause are liberally planted in your
land; you have riches -- you have strength -- you have knowledge -- you have
virtue -- O remember that it is not for yourselves alone that you possess them;
Europe, Asia, and Africa have an interest in the result of your measures! --
Where, alas! shall freedom dwell with man, if America afford her not an asylum?
-- Remember that it is not the happiness of yourselves, your wives, and your
children alone for which you are providing; continue to be free, and hope is
ours; the ruin of your cause is to us the messenger of despair!"


