Mr. Appleton's DEDICATION SERMON.

THE IMMENSITY OF GOD. A SERMON, DELIVERED TO THE CONGREGATIONAL SOCIETY IN
HAMPTON, NOVEMBER 14, 1797; AT THE DEDICATION OF THEIR NEW HOUSE, FOR PUBLIC
WORSHIP. BY JESSE APPLETON, A. M. Minister of the Congregational Church in
Hampton.

PUT OFF THY SHOES FROM OFF THY FEET, FOR THE PLACE WHEREON THOU STAND IS
HOLY GROUND. Exodus iii. 5. TO THE CONGREGATIONAL SOCIETY IN HAMPTON, THE
FOLLOWING DISCOURSE, AND EVERY FACULTY OF ITS AUTHOR ARE AFFECTIONATELY
DEDICATED.

I KINGS, viii. CHAP. 27 VERSE. BUT WILL GOD INDEED DWELL ON THE EARTH? BEHOLD
THE HEAVEN AND HEAVEN OF HEAVENS CANNOT CONTAIN THEE, HOW MUCH LESS THIS HOUSE
THAT I HAVE BUILDED?
THERE is no one of the divine perfections, on which we can seriously reflect
without being lost in wonder.

WHEN we cast our thoughts back to the ages preceding the creation, and reflect
that the space which is now occupied by this earth, by these heavens, and by
the universe itself, was then a mighty void; -- that there was not a single
particle of matter, or a ray of created light, in all this boundless extent, we
are amazed at beholding this material system rising instantaneously into life.
That creation, of which we can entertain any tolerable conception, is nothing
more than the change of one thing into another. -- When a tree, or a plant is
produced, certain particles from the earth, and air are differently arranged,
placed in a new relation to each other, and thus assume a new appearance. Yet
strictly speaking, there is in all this no new creation; matter only assumes a
different form: -- all the materials were provided before. But there was a
time, when there were no materials in the universe; and when all the matter,
which is now in existence, was created from nothing. This surpasses our
comprehension, and the thought confounds us. Our astonishment still increases
when we are told that all this took place, without any thing like that which is
called labor, or exertion. God spoke and it was done. He said, Let there be
light, and there was light. By the word of the Lord, were the heavens made, and
all the hosts of them, by the breath of his mouth. He shakes the earth out of
its place, and the pillars thereof tremble: He commands the sun, and it
rises not, and seals up the stars; he alone stretches out the heavens, and
treads upon the waves of the sea.

THE eternity of God is equally incomprehensible with his power. -- To every
object which we behold, there is a season and a time. A time for its beginning,
duration, and destruction. It can be said of none of the objects, which fall
within our view, that it has been even so forever, there was a time wh^^ they
were not. But the supreme God is the King eternal and immortal; he is without
beginning of days, or end of life. Look back to the time when he first exerted
his creating power: fix this period as far distant as you please. Call in, to
the aid of your imagination, all the leaves that are shaken in the wind, all
the grains of dust, that compose this globe; all the drops of water which the
ocean contains: and all the drops of water which the ocean contains: and all
the particles of light which constantly, and in every direction, emanate from
the sun; let each leaf, each grain, each drop of water, and each ray of light
be put to signify an hundred years. -- Then say that as many years have
elapsed, since God began to create, as are signified by this inconceivable
multitude of leaves, particles, etc. Let this be considered as one Era, in the
divine existence. Imagine that the commencement of it is a point, from which
you are to begin a new calculation: and enquire how long the Deity existed
before he began to create.

SUPPOSE, again, that each one of these drops, grains, etc. is divisible into a
thousand parts, and that each of these parts, was placed for a thousand years.
Say, then, that God had existed before he began to create for a duration,
consisting of as many years as all these parts express. -- This second Era will
be a million times longer than the first, but still it bears no proportion to
the divine existence. -- We lose ourselves in the calculation, and approach no
nigher to the divine origin. There never was a time when God did not exist. He
inhabiteth eternity. He is and was, and is to come. He alone can say, Before me
there was no God, neither shall there be any after me.

IT is inconceiveable by us, how any being should be possessed of perfect
independence. Every object which we see, depends on some other for its origin,
its properties, and its duration. All the objects which we see are the effects
of some cause. When we observe a well cultivated field, we know that it was not
the effect of chance; we know that some intelligent agent has been employed.
When we observe a building, we know that it must have been the effect of human
art. For every house is builded by some man. We know likewise, that there was a
time, when this world did not exist; that it is the effect of some cause, and
dependent on some superior being. We next contemplate this being, and can
hardly be restrained from proceeding in our usual mode, and from enquiring into
the origin of the Deity. But reflecting on the absurdity of such an enquiry, we
are obliged to adopt this conclusion, that there is a being, who is uncreated
and independent, although we are utterly unable to conceive how such a thing is
possible. He alone can adopt the following language, " I am, and there is none
else beside. Before the day was, I was." "If I were hungry, I would not tell
thee, for the world is mine, and the fullness thereof."

BUT we proceed to consider that attribute of God, which is spoken of in the
text, viz. the divine immensity, or omnipresence. "Will God indeed dwell on the
earth? behold, the heaven, even the heaven of heavens cannot contain him."

THIS thought occurred to the mind of King Solomon in the midst of the prayer,
which he made at the dedication of the temple: -- It is a consideration, which
ought to impress our minds while engaged in the solemnities of this day.

WE are so much conversant with material objects; we have so frequently heard
it said that no body can be in two places at the same time; we are so
constantly seeing bodies move from one place to another, as that it is
impossible for us to form any just ideas of a being who is incapable of moving
from place to place, but is equally present in all places. All the just
conceptions, which we can possibly have of the divine immensity, is by
comparing our ideas of God, with the ideas, which we entertain of finite
objects. As it is much easier to tell what the Deity is not, than what he is;
so it is much more practicable to show what lines will not circumscribe him,
than to form any right notions of the real extent of his presence. We measure
space by the distances at which different material objects are placed from each
other. We say that all that space over which our eyes can glance, does not
confine the Deity: that he is present, not only in every place on this globe,
but that he is equally so, at all the bodies which surround this globe: that
the most distant star, which can be discerned is as really in the divine
presence as we are. Solomon himself could form no other conception of the
divine greatness, but what he obtained by such comparisons. Heaven, and the
heaven of heavens cannot contain thee. This was acknowledging himself unable to
comprehend the omnipresence of God. For he has here taken into view the
greatest expanse which can be defined, and of which he had any idea, and yet he
asserts that this cannot circumscribe the presence of God.

"THE Hebrews" we are told "acknowledged three heavens, the first, the aerial
heavens, in which the birds fly, the winds blow, and the showers are formed:
the second, the firmament, in which the stars are placed: the third, the heaven
of heavens, the residence of the Almighty, and abode of saints and angels."
These, doubtless, were the ideas, which the sacred writers entertained on the
subject. They frequently speak of these different heavens.

WHEN it is said, There is a multitude of water in the heavens: The rain comes
down, and the snow from heaven: Can the heavens give showers, etc. respect is
evidently had to the first, or aerial heaven.

WHEN it is said, The stars shall fall from heaven. The heavens declare the
glory of the Lord, and the firmament shows his handy work: By his spirit, he
has garnished the heavens, etc. the inspired writers plainly allude to the
second heaven, or the region of the stars.

BUT God is said by the Psalmist to have set his glory above the heavens: i. e.
above the first, and second heavens; which exactly comports with the ideas
which the Jews entertained of the place of the divine residence -- St. Paul
speaks of the throne of majesty in the heavens: -- of being caught up to the
third heaven. Stephen saw the heavens opened, and Jesus standing at the right
hand of God. God is said to ride upon the heaven of heavens.

WE see then what the author of our text meant by the heaven of heavens: viz.
the space which lies far beyond all material objects, such as the moon, the
sun, and the fixed stars: -- the space, in which, he supposed the angels were
convened; and where the Almighty dwelt in light inaccessible and full of glory,
which no mortal eye has seen or can see. This, he confesses, cannot confine
the Almighty.

SUPPOSE that the farthest star, which we ever behold, is placed at a distance,
expressed in miles, by millions multiplied by millions. Let an angel be
stationed at this star, and from thence, commence his flight unto boundless
space; let him proceed with the greatest conceivable velocity, and let his
flight be continued through the greatest duration of which the mind can form
any idea, he is yet surrounded by God; he has not found the place where God is
not present. Can thou by searching find out God: caust thou know the Almighty
to perfection? Whither shall I go from thy spirit: or whither shall I flee from
thy presence? Thy presence fills heaven and earth. But the heaven, and the
heaven of heavens can not contain thee?

IN contemplation of the divine immensity, it is natural to enquire, with the
devout King of Israel, Will God indeed dwell on the earth? If God is present in
all places, and fills the Universe, with what propriety can it be said, that He
is peculiarly present in any particular place? Yet the scriptures speak of
God's being in Heaven -- of his appearing on mount Sinai -- of his appearing to
Moses in the burning bush; -- of his being in the Jewish temple, and in all
religious assemblies.

IN answer to this, we observe first, that by such representations, cannot be
meant that God is essentially, more present in one place than another; he
cannot, if we may use the expression, contract himself into one place, and
withdraw himself from other places. Accordingly, the scriptures teach us, that
he is as really present in the caves of a mountain, in the bowels of the earth,
or in the bottom of the sea, as in the heavens above. Do I not fill heaven and
earth, says the Lord? Though they dig into hell, thence shall mine hand take
them: though they climb up into heaven, thence will I bring them down: though
they hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I will search them out thence: and
though they be hid in the bottom of the sea, thence will I command the serpent,
and he shall bite them.

GOD is as really present in the humble cottage, or the open field; as in the
splendid palace, or majestic temple.

BUT in the style of scripture, the Deity is said to be present in all places,
where he makes any peculiar manifestations of himself; where he places such
objects and produces such appearances and effects, as give to beholders, the
most lively conceptions of his energy and attributes.

THE sacred writers represent him, as sitting on a throne in the heavens; -- as
being surrounded by ten thousand times ten thousand glorified spirits.

THERE is, probably, somewhere, in the universe, a place where God makes a most
clear, and glorious discovery of his nature and perfections; where he
condescends to be viewed, not as by us, through the medium of clouds and
darkness; but in a light too resplendent for our present organs of vision; a
light, which no mortal can approach unto. And as the purest and most exalted
beings would not only be most desirous of acquainting themselves with the
divine nature; but would likewise be more than all others prepared for enjoying
the clearest manifestations of God, it is extremely reasonable to suppose that
this glorious place is filled with an innumerable multitude of saints and
angels.

THIS representation will answer to the very figurative description which
Micaiah gave of the objects which he saw in vision. I saw the Lord sitting on a
throne and all the hosts of heaven standing by him, on his right hand, and on
his left.

WE are not to suppose, however, that the Deity is really visible, in any
place. He is a spirit, and no one has seen God, at any time.

THE Almighty is said to have appeared to Moses, in the bush: yet we cannot
imagine that God was any more in that burning bush, than in any other place
whatever. But as the bush was on fire, without being consumed, there was a very
evident and striking proof of the divine energy.

GOD is said to have appeared, when, in order to impress the minds of men, with
a sense of his power and presence, he has caused some remarkable luminous
appearance. This was the case, when Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and
seventy of the elders saw the God of Israel: when there was under his feet, as
it were, a paved work of sapphire: and as it were the body of heaven in his
clearness.

IN the ancient tabernacle, and in the Jewish temple, there was the Shekinah,
or a visible light in testimony of the divine presence. Before Solomon made his
dedication prayer, It came to pass that when the priests had come out of the
holy place, the cloud filled the house of the Lord: So that the priests could
not stand to minister because of the cloud: for the glory of the Lord had
filled the house of the Lord.

NOTWITHSTANDING this God was in reality, no more present in Solomon's temple,
than he now is in christian churches. But such an appearance as was then made,
exactly corresponded with the genius of the Mosaic dispensation. Every thing,
under this economy was calculated to strike upon the senses. They had a variety
of rites, forms and ceremonies. A pure, simple, and spiritual worship, would
have been ill received by a people, ignorant, gross, and uncultivated. They
needed something of external pomp, to captivate their attention.

BUT it is very evident from the prayer of Solomon, that he expected the Deity
to make some manifestation of himself in that temple, separate from that
glorious light, which filled the holy place. He believed that religious worship
there performed, would be more acceptable to God, than if it were performed in
a different place; and that God would be more likely to meet his people and
answer their prayers when they assembled at the temple for public worship, than
if they wholly neglected divine service, or convened in a different temple. He
believed that the eyes of God would be open toward that house, day and night.
For when he intercedes with God, in behalf of his people, it is on condition
that they should pray, either in, or toward that house. When thy people Israel
be smitten down before the enemy, because they have sinned against thee, and
shall turn again, and confess thy name, and pray, and make supplication unto
the Lord, in this house; then hear thou in heaven, and forgive the sin of thy
people Israel.

IN this sense, God is now present in all christian churches. Public worship,
is an institution which he has ordained; and we cannot doubt his readiness to
bless the means which are of his own appointment. The same encouragement is
given to religious assemblies, under both dispensations. To the Israelites it
was said, In all places where I record my name, I will come unto thee, and
bless thee. To the disciples of Jesus, it is said, Where two or three are met
together in my name, there will I be in the midst of them and bless them.

CHRISTIAN temples, and christian worship are extremely different from the
temple and worship of the Jews. Christianity considers its votaries as
spiritual. Jewdaism addressed itself much more the senses. It was the law of a
carnal commandment. Their religious service stood in meats and drinks, and
diverse washings, and carnal ordinances, imposed on them until the time of
reformation. This time of reformation came, when christianity was first
introduced, and the pomp and ceremony of the Mosaic establishment were done
away. The law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did.
Accordingly, our Savior declares, The hour comes, when ye shall, neither in
the mountain of Samaria, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father. He faith
further, The hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship
the Father, in spirit and in truth: for the Father seeks such to worship him.

IN christian churches, there is no Shekinah, or visible token of the divine
presence; yet Christ has promised to be in the midst of his worshipping
servants.

IN christian churches, there is no sacred fire, no place answering to the
Jewish holy of holies, no incense evening and morning sacrifices or sprinkling
of blood. Our prayers are to ascend up instead of incense, and the lifting up
of our hands to be as the evening sacrifice. The way into the holy of holies is
how laid open; even that new and living way which Christ has consecrated
through the veil.

IN the christian church, there is no succession of high priests who are to
offer, first for their own sins, and then for the sins of the people: But Jesus
Christ is the high priest over the house of God: He has appeared to take away
sin by the sacrifice of himself: and by one offering he has forever perfected
them that are sanctified. Let us, therefore, draw near with a true heart, in
full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience,
and our bodies washed with pure water.

AS God manifested himself in a peculiar manner to the Jewish worshippers in
the temple, so has he, in all ages of the gospel, to christian assemblies. The
astonishing spread of christianity soon after our Savior's resurrection, was
brought about, under God, by public preaching. It was by the preaching of
Peter, that three thousand souls were, in one day, added to the church. It was
by the preaching of Paul and Barnabas in the synagogue, that a great multitude
both of the Jews and Greeks believed in Iconium. It was because St. Paul
reasoned in the Corinthian synagogue, that he persuaded the Jews and the
Greeks. And although it is certain that all who were thus persuaded, and the
whole church which he (thus persuaded) established at Corinth, were not really
religious, yet the alteration which took place with regard to many of them, was
so great, as to afford a striking proof of the divine power and presence. For
after speaking to the Corinthian disciples, of fornicators, idolaters,
effeminate, thieves, covetous, drunkards, revilers, and extortioners, he
subjoins, And such were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye are justified,
but ye are sanctified. When so many men, infamous for every species of
transgression, were persuaded to embrace the gospel of Christ, and did
afterward adorn the doctrines which it contained; when they were turned not
only from darkness unto light, but also, from the dominion of sin, to the
practice of holiness, was not the divine energy as fully manifested in the
christian ministry, as was the glory of the Lord, in the Jewish temple?

THE effects of christian ministrations have not, in latter ages, been so
obvious and surprising; and from the difference between the circumstances of
those to whom the gospel was then preached, and those to whom it is now
addressed, it is utterly impossible that they should be.

WE cannot doubt however, that the divine spirit yet attends on a preached
word, and that by the cooperation of both these, the kingdom of Christ is
continually enlarged. For as the rain comes down, and the snow from heaven,
and returns not thither, but waters the earth, and makes it bring forth,
and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater: So shall
my word be, says the Lord, that goes forth out of my mouth: it shall not
return unto me void: but it shall accomplish that which I please, and prosper
in the thing, where unto I send it. When Christ ascended up on high, he gave
gifts unto men, that God might dwell among them.

IMPROVEMENT.
WE are now to improve the subject: and

1. The consideration that God is present in every place, ought to be a
powerful motive to sobriety and christian obedience.

THERE are but few men so excessively depraved as to lose all sense of shame
and decency; there are few men who are willing to be guilty of the worst
conduct in the presence of such as they esteem (...) and honorable: but does
the presence of the (...) and honorable fill heaven and earth? Are these (...)
great, as that the heaven, even the heaven of heavens cannot contain them? Do
the wise and honorable search the hearts and try the reins of the children of
men? Are the darkness and the light both alike to them? Do they compose a
tribunal at which each individual must hereafter be arraigned? Have the wise
and honorable eternal rewards, and eternal punishments at their disposal? Are
they able to destroy both soul and body in hell? If not, Who art thou, that
should be afraid of a man that shall die, and the son of man that shall be
made as grass, and forgettest the Lord thy maker, that stretched forth the
heavens, and laid the foundation of the earth?

WE may long lie concealed from the inspection of our fellow men. Some of the
vilest of mortals are wrapped about so completely in the externals of devotion,
as to obtain for the greater part of their lives, a reputation for
extraordinary sanctity and uprightness. They may bless themselves in the
success of their hypocrisy; they may exult in the pious frauds, which they have
played off, upon the world. But what avails this, when their secret sins are
all in the light of God's countenance? There is no darkness or shadow of death,
where the workers of iniquity can hide themselves.

LET no one therefore think there is any veil so thick, or any darkness so
gross, through which the eye of God cannot penetrate! Let no one imagine that
because he commits his wickedness in retirement from the world, he thereby
evades the presence of the Almighty. Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their
counsel from the Lord: and their works are in the dark: And they say who sees
it? Who knows it?

LET us remember that wherever we are, and in what employment soever we are
engaged, whether in devotion, whether in the business or the amusements of
life, we are surrounded by the divine presence; that our actions, our thoughts,
and most secret desires are open and naked to his view.

2. LET a consideration of the divine immensity cheer the gloom of solitude.
What though no human form appears in your view? Your mind is not cheered with
social intercourse; and your ears are not delighted with the impassioned
language of friendship? -- You are yet in the presence of the most glorious
being in the universe; that being who bestowed upon you, your social feelings,
and endued you with your other capacities of enjoyment. Remember the words of
Jesus Christ: Behold the hour comes, yea is now come, that ye shall be
scattered every man to his own and shall leave me alone, and yet I am not
alone, because the Father is with me.

EVERY good man may, with much propriety, apply this language to himself. The
thickest darkness, the most dreary waste, or the most gloomy wilderness cannot
prevent us from maintaining fellowship with the Father, and his Son Christ
Jesus.

Should fate command me to the farthest verge
Of the green earth, to distant barbarous climes,
Rivers unknown to song: where first the sun
Gilds Indian mountains, or his sitting beam
Flames on the Atlantic isles, it is naught to me:
Since God is ever present, ever felt,
In the void waste, as in the city full:
And where he vital breathes, there must be joy.
THOMPSON. 3. LET our subject teach us to admire the condescension of God. When
we consider the power of the Almighty; that he created all worlds by a
sovereign command; that his influence extends not only to this earth, this
system, the fixed stars, and the universe, but throughout infinite space; it
almost baffles our belief, that he should regard the services of so
contemptible a being as man. Will God indeed, dwell on the earth? Behold the
heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain him: how much less this house,
which ye have built. When I consider the heavens, the work of thy fingers, the
moon and the stars, which thou have ordained: what is man, that thou art
mindful of him, or the son of man that thou visitest him?

THIS God, whose greatness is unsearchable, who circumscribes with his
presence, all beings, and all worlds, has shown the tenderest regard to the
happiness of the human race. He has sent his Son to reveal to them the great
doctrines relating to life and immortality: -- to direct their hopes to the
unfading inheritance: and to open a way in which this inheritance may
consistently be bestowed on guilty men. He has done more. -- He even beseeches
us, through the medium of the christian ministry to be reconciled to God.

BY the person of Jesus Christ, he has given, in the different periods of the
church, some apostles and some prophets, and some evengelists: and some pastors
and teachers, for perfecting the saints for the work of the ministry: and for
edifying the body of Christ. He manifests himself in religious assemblies: He
hears the prayers which are offered, and blesses the word which is spoken.

4. THE foregoing observations teach us, that when we assemble for public
worship, it should be with reverance, and humility. What adoration is due from
feeble, dependant creatures, to that being, on whose greatness, we have been
now contemplating! Before you join a religious assembly, reflect on the
purposes, for which you are going, and the nature of that God, who is there
worshipped.

WHEN Jacob had received a vision from God, in Haran, he exclaimed with
astonishment. This is no other than the house of God; this is the gate of
Heaven. Let the same reflection dispel all our worldly or trifling thoughts,
when we enter the place of divine service. -- God has, in compassion to our
weakness, instituted these means, which are suited to our capacities. He
appears not in that terrible majesty, in which he once descended on mount
Sinai. Behold his terror does not make us afraid, neither does his hand lie
heavy upon us. -- He says, Come and let us reason together. -- He has shown us
our own immortality; that our existence will be protracted throughout endless
ages -- that it will be spent, either in chains of darkness, or in the paradise
of GOD. -- He points out to us the way, in which we may avoid the one, and
obtain the other. And that the conditions of salvation may be thoroughly known,
and the importance of it duly estimated, he has appointed that a seventh part
of our time should be devoted, to the purposes of religious instruction and
religious worship. And having by Christ and his apostles, enjoined it upon us
to spend this season in religious assemblies, he has encouraged us to this
duty, by the hopes of meeting in the place, where he records his name, the
enlightening, convincing, and comforting influences of divine Grace.

WHEN we consider public worship in connection with a future state: when we
consider the effects, which have in the different ages of the church, been
produced by the ministration of the word; that it has pleased God, by the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe: and further; -- when we
reflect on the probability there is, that those who do not, by the means which
God has appointed, attain to virtue and holiness, will forever remain enemies
to God, by wicked works: it must appear infinitely important, how the gospel is
preached, and in what manner it is received; Take heed therefore, how ye hear.

WHEN in the house of divine worship, reflect that God will indeed dwell upon
the earth, and although the heaven, even the heaven of heavens cannot contain
him, yet his favor may be sought, and his blessing expected, in this house
which ye have built. He draws nigh unto us, in the ministry of reconciliation,
and whosoever will, is invited to come and take of the waters of life freely.
The great solemnity of christian worship is evident both from a consideration
of the greatness of that Being to whom it is paid, and from the end which is to
be answered by assembling together. For the redemption of the soul is precious,
etc. Keep thy feet therefore, when thou go into the house of God. He is
greatly to be feared in the assembly of his saints, and to be had in reverence
by all that are round about him.

THAT the Jews might be encouraged to adhere to the true worship of God, and to
confide in his mercy under their various afflictions, they were exhorted by the
prophet to reflect on the divine interpositions, which had been made in favor
of their ancestors.

LOOK to the rock whence ye were hewn, and to the hole of the pit, whence ye
were dug. Look unto Abram your father, and to Sarah that bare you, I called
him alone and blessed him, and increased him. In consideration of that they
were encouraged to hope that the Lord would comfort Zion, and build all her
waste places: -- that he would yet make her wilderness as Eden, and her desert
as the garden of the Lord. And although the present is not a day of sorrow, but
of joy and gladness of heart, it is presumed that some short account of the
divine proceeding toward this church, will not be unacceptable or useless. We
will therefore remember the days of old, and consider the years of many
generations.

Sec Dr. BELKNAP'S History of New Hampshire, Vol. 1. p. 38.
THE first house ever erected in this town, was built in the year 1636, at the
expense of the colony of Massachusetts; which expense was to be refunded by the
first settlers. No settlements were made, however, until two years after this,
when 56 persons, from the county of Norfolk in England, having obtained liberty
from the General Court of Massachusetts, came over, and fixed their residence
in this place.

THE name which was given to this town by the Aborigines, was Winnicumet. Of
the names of the first settlers of Hampton, only sixteen are transmitted to us;
and but four BACHELOR, MOLTON, PALMER, and TUCXE.
of these names yet continue in the place.

IN proof of the piety of our ancestors, it may be remarked, that a church was
gathered, and a minister The Rev. STEPHEN BACHELOR.
settled, when the first settlements were made, viz. in the year 1638.

THERE were two towns Portsmouth, and Dover.
in this state, incorporated before this; in neither of which were the churches
under the care of any particular pastor, until several years after this church
was established.

IN this town and Exeter, settlements were made, churches formed, and ministers
chosen, the same year.

THE first pastor of this church, the Rev. STEPHEN BACHELOR, was removed three
years after his first ministerial connection with them.

OF his successor, the Rev. TIMOTHY DALTON, it is recorded that he continued in
the ministry twenty two years, and died in an advanced age. The donation which
he made for the use of the ministry, will be a perpetual monument of his
liberality, and regard for religious worship.

FOURTEEN years previous to his death, the Rev. JOHN WHEELWRIGHT He was
cotemporary at the University, with OLIVER CROMWELL, as appears from Dr.
MATHER'S letter to GEORGE VAUGHAN, Esquire. -- See BILKNAP'S History of
New Hampshire, Vol. 3. p. 339.
was settled as colleague with him.

THIS man makes a very considerable figure, in the ecclesiastical history, not
of this state only, but of New England in general. He is said to have been See
HUTCHINSON'S History of Massachusetts, Vol. 1. p. 55.
"a zealous minister of character, both for learning and piety." He was brother
in law to the famous Ann Hutchinson, who about the middle of the last century,
occasioned much disturbance among the churches in the vicinity of Boston, by
propagating antinomian tenets. Having unfortunately embibed the same ideas of
religion, he rendered himself peculiarly obnoxious to the government and clergy
of Maschusetts, by preaching a sermon, which in those times of accrimonious
zeal, was thought to savor of heresy and sedition. Ibid. -- p. 57.
Being called to an account, and refusing to make any acknowledgment, he was
disfranchised, and ordered to leave that vicinity after 14 days. He then came
into this state, and laid the foundation of the town See a copy of the original
deed from the natives to WHEELWRIGHT and others, in BELKNAP'S History of
New Hampshire, Vol. 1. -- Appendix.
and church at Exeter. He was then minister of this church, and afterward
preached at Salisbury. In the year 1644 he was received into favor again, by
the government of Massachusetts, upon his making some slight acknowledgments.
In the time of the Commonwealth, he was in England, from whence he wrote a
letter I have lately been at London about five weeks. My Lord Protector was
pleased to send one of his guard for me, with whom I had discou^^^ in private,
about the space of an hour. All his speeches seemed to me very orthodox and
gracious. He spoke very experimentally to my apprehension, of the work of God's
grace, etc. Extract from Mr. Wheelwright's letter to the church at Hampton,
dated April 20, 1658. Hutchinson's History of Massachusetts, Vol. 1. 193.
to this church, in which he discovered his friendship for the interest of
CROMWELL. "He lived to be the oldest minister in the colony," which says a
respectable historian, "would have been taken notice of, if his persecutors had
not remained in power."

SOON after his removal, and before the death of Mr. DALTON, the care of this
church was committed to the Rev. SEABORN COTTON. Of the records which he kept,
but a few imperfect sketches are transmitted to our hands. We of consequence,
know little of him, or the state of the church, when under his care. The term
of his ministry was sixteen years.

TEN years after his decease, the church again enjoyed the stated
administration of christian ordinances, by his son, the Rev. JOHN COTTON.
During his life 487 See Hampton church records.
were initiated into the christian church by baptism; and 220 were admitted to
the Lord's supper. He died in the 14th year of his ministry.

THE vacancy occasioned by his departure was in a few months supplied by the
Rev. NATHANIEL GOOKINS, who was separated to the ministerial office in the year
1710. He is spoken of by many who are now living, with peculiar esteem and
veneration. He continued in the ministry twenty-four years; in which time, 1013
Ibid.
were baptized, and 320 admitted to full communion.

HIS successor was the Rev. WARD COTTON, whose ministerial life was longer than
that of any other pastor of this church. His official relation to the church
was dissolved in the year 1765, after having been their minister for the term
of 31 years. At the time of his settlement, the church consisted of 253
members, male and female. He received the addition of 519. -- 417 Hampton
church records.
of whom partook at the Lord's Table. The number of baptisms was 1200.

ABOUT ten months entervened between Mr. COTTON's dismission and the settlement
of the Rev. EBENEZER THAYER. The number of church members was then 246, -- 92
of whom were males. In the time of his ministry, he baptized 641 persons;
received 223 into the church; -- 102 Ibid.
of whom were communicants at the Lord's Table. The rest were taken under the
watch and discipline of the church, but thought themselves unqualified for so
holy an ordinance as that of the sacrament.

HIS relation to this church was dissolved by death on the 6th of September
1792. There are few present, it may be, who were not personally acquainted with
him. You of this congregation, for a time, rejoiced in his light. The affection
with which his name is mentioned, and the tears which do anually drop over his
grave, are the surest testimony of your attachment, and of his virtues. The
succession of ministers in this Church is as follows: Stephen Bachelor, settled
1638 -- removed 1641. Timothy Dalton, 1639 -- died 1661. John Wheelwright, 1647
-- removed uncertain. Seaborn Cotton, 1660 -- died 1686 -- aged 53. John
Cotton, 1696 -- died 1710 -- 57. Nathaniel Gookins, 1710 -- died 1734 -- 48.
Ward Cotton, 1734 -- removed 1765 -- Ebenezer Thayer, 1766 -- died 1792 -- 58.





AN hundred and fifty four years have elapsed, from the time when this church
was planted, to the death of its late pastor. And although there have been
eight ministers, and consequently seven vacancies, either by removal, or death,
the church has never been destitute, but in one instance for the space of an
entire year, during that whole period. This is infallible proof, either of
great unanimity, or of uncommon zeal for the enjoyment of Gospel ordinances.
And the enterprise and exertion which you have discovered in preparing a
convenient house for public worship, will be considered as infallible evidence,
that the flame of your forefathers, is not wholly extinguished. This building
which we now consecrate to God, was erected on the 24th of May last, through
your unremitting labor and assiduity, and the blessing of a kind providence,
it is now brought to its present state of convenience and decency.

WE might justly be charged with ingratitude, should we, on this occasion
forget to make mention of the success which has attended the labor of your
hands. The welfare of the artificers and assistants, has been precious in the
sight of God, and no considerable casualties have taken place to damp the joy
which we now experience. This is not to be attributed to the strength of our
own arms or the prudence of our designs. For Except the Lord build the house,
they labor in vain who build it. It is he who has girded us with strength,
and has made our way perfect. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for
his mercy endures forever.

THE last consideration which we shall bring to view, is the purpose for which
this house was erected. If so much zeal and activity were well employed in
preparing a sanctuary, in which to attend on the means of grace: how much more
important is it to be possessed of that moral purity and love to God, to the
attainment of which all these means are to be subservient.

LET not the means content us, while the end is not answered. Let it never be
forgotten, that the design, for which we convene in this earthly temple, is
that we may hereafter become pillars in the temple of our God.

AND now May the Lord who made heaven and earth, bless you out of Zion! May the
influences of his Holy Spirit, accompany the exhortations that shall here be
delivered: May our prayers come up with acceptance from this alter, and may God
glorify the house of his glory. And finally,

MAY you be built upon the foundation of the prophets and apostles, Jesus
Christ being the chief corner stone, in whom, all the building, fitly framed
together, grows unto an holy temple in the Lord: in whom may ye also, be
builden together for an habitation of God, through the Spirit.


