ORATION, DELIVERED ON THE FOURTH OF JULY 1796. BEING THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE
AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE. AT MEREDITH BRIDGE.

BY THE REV. SIMON FINLEY WILLIAMS, A. B.

"O Socii, neque enim ignari sumus ante malorum
"Revocate animos, maestumque timorem mittite,
"Forsan et haec olim, meminisse juvabit.
VIRGIL. PUBLISHED BY THE DESIRE OF A NUMBER OF THE GENTLEMEN PRESENT.

PRINTED AT DOVER: BY SAMUEL BRAGG, JUN. FOR THE SUBSCRIBERS MDCCXCVI.

AN ORATION.
Friends and Fellow Citizens,
WHEN we take a survey of man's composition, with the various workings of the
human mind, we must be sensible that prejudice, in many respects, has an undue
influence upon our actions; to divest ourselves of this is immediately
necessary, in order to think with reason, believe with caution, and decide with
equity. -- The passions that exist in the human mind qualify us for the
discharge of duty and equip us with armor for the variety of scenes before us.
Whether we wish to spend our days on the public Theater or to live recluse from
all human inspection, we have a province within ourselves, wherein we ought
ever to reign. To attend to the dictates of nature, observe the springs of
action, and cultivate those virtues early implanted by a liberal hand, is not
only a profitable but pleasing work. As reason is the distinguishing character
of man, the due exercise of that reason must be a main share of human felicity
-- the dictates of reason too are various and refer to innumerable objects, but
never lead us amiss so long as we attend to the simplicity of her language, and
our souls submit to her unflattering addresses. Nature being attended to, shows
us our dignity as well as our infirmity, and is never backward to remind us of
the great duty we owe to God and ourselves, our Country and the world. The
variety of order in created Being illustrate, not only the superior skill of
the artist, but opens a way for the most extensive usefulness as well as the
more refined amusement. The powers of action and capability of enjoyment are
ever wisely proportioned to the sphere in which the different species, are to
roll. Instinct has her influence on every order and ever impels each one to
fill the circle marked by Heaven. As reason is that which dignifies the nature
of man above the brutal herd and feathered tribe, it is also a distinguishing
trait in his character, that he is as far superior for sociability than they,
as reason exceeds instinct. The powers of sympathy within us create the most
pleasing as well as the most painful sensations. For us to be capable of an
happy enjoyment it is necessary that we should be capable of loving and being
loved -- certain powers of attraction are therefore all necessary, for the
rational as well as material system, without which mankind would enjoy no more
good from society than the beasts of the field, no more pleasure from the
charms of Friendship than the fowls of heaven -- but the attracting influence
of love, as it unites the heart it opens and fills the mind with the most
cordial ideas. Any one insensible of those soft emotions, have so far
degenerated as to possess an obduracy, nothing inferior to the impenetrable
Adimant. The laws of self preservation that bear rule in the animal, work by
the principles of self love, in the rational world.

When we see the beasts of the field, in league against the enemies of their
species, and the fowls of heaven at war in defense of their associates, it
gives us a faint idea of the principle on which cities are founded, society
ordained, order and government established in the world.

But as love is a spark from an uncreated, undiminished blaze, in its exercise
it must work agreeable to the nature of its source, which is not confined to
the emolument of one simple being, but the universal good.

The same principle that impels us to seek our own, impels us to seek another's
welfare; self love in its due exercise, flows forth to our kindred and friends,
our country and the world -- variety of relation makes way for a variety of
exercise -- and the more extensive the exercise of our love, the more extensive
our happiness. By the practice of a true public benevolence, we secure to
ourselves the charms of a bright and lasting reputation, and are delivered from
the terrors, of being handed down as criminals to posterity. By a real
discharge of the duties we owe to the world, and a reasonable conformity to the
design of God manifest, in the constitution of nature, we arrive to the summit
of happiness. Human felicity is in a great measure in our hands -- Opportunity
and advantages are now before us -- even some of the greatest evils incident to
human nature, become channels of bliss -- our greatest afflictions a prelude to
our greatest mercies, -- pain mitigated gives pleasure -- sorrows that are past
become pleasing on reflection -- enterprises executed with toil and hazard
afford the most joyful solace -- matters that have caused the greatest grief,
we often call up to mind painted under a variety of beautiful colors -- in
this way we take pleasure in viewing the turf that covers the remains of a well
loved departed friend, if the tear of sympathy shows itself upon the cheek,
it is even pleasure to weep.

To perpetuate to posterity, the memory of our adventures, not only the most
pleasing but the most hazardous expeditions, is the desire of men, and appears
to be the practice of all nations, -- While men were as yet unpolished by art,
and unskilled in letters, for what were those rude heaps of dirt thrown up, but
as monuments to perpetuate their various achievments.

Let us cast our eye to the Mosaic page, and we find that Noah on his
deliverance from the deluge, erects an altar to the Lord; Jacob on his way to
Bethel sets up a stone in memory of his converse with God. Israel having gained
a conquest over their enemies, erect a pillar, by the name of Ebenezer.

Let us look but a few centuries back, and we may behold their pillars, their
statues, and their monuments of glory. Let us read the inscription, here stands
painted to our view the field of battle, with the number of the wounded and
slain; on this side stands the Victor's name, engraved on the venerable marble,
time has not defaced nor posterity lost the memory of his departed shade. --
The policy of Ulisses, the fatigue of AEneas, the prowess of Hector, the wiles
of Greece, and the fall of Troy, stand enrolled on the pages of our ancestors,
and are sung by their venerable bards. View the savage tribes, even at this day
erect their warlike pile, hear them howl in warlike form at their rude
festivals, their wars, their huntings and their various conquests. And shall we
my fellow citizens, who live in the golden age of the world, who are happy to
be actors in the most celebrated century of time, who enjoy the fruits of the
most glorious enterprise, and have seen the commencement of the most
illustrious era that ever adorned the annals of history -- Shall we hide it
from generations yet unborn? No! let it be held in everlasting remembrance.

Need I call to your minds the day, the great important day on which AMERICA
declared herself a FREE, SOVEREIGN and INDEPENDENT Nation, and vowed to defend
it, at the price of blood and property. Twenty full years are this day
completed since that resolution took place, and such breath was breathed from
American souls. From that hour, the prison doors were opened, the clanking,
galling chains of slavery fell from the wearied limb, the brightest diamond
dropped from the British crown, and the supercilious brow hung with
disappointment and sad remorse. If I call up to the mind of any son or parent,
friend or brother, a companion or lover who became victims in the field and day
of battle -- If the expiring cry for quarter, the fainting groan from a
quivering, dying lip, call from any of us the tear of sympathy; still it is a
most pleasing animating thought, they fell in the field of honor, they died in
the bed of glory -- every drop of their blood was a ransom paid for our
INDEPENDENCE, and the dews of the night were the richest tears of heaven shed
to bathe their unburied heads. Past sighs, past groans and tears, may cause the
mind to faint that is unacquainted with toil, and enervated by uninterrupted
effeminate felicity, but can never cramp the ardour of him, who swam to honor
through crimsom gore, whose body is figured with the pointed steel.

This day we happily enjoy the dear bought valuable prize. How busy was the
guardian angel of our land to inspire each soul with heroic fire and a love for
freedom -- decrepit age was renewed to youth, the almost dry bones flushed with
animated vigor; Infants thirsting for military glory in their country's cause,
instantly grew up to men of valor; The feeling mother gave up her son -- the
spouse her lord -- the tender virgin from a warm embrace impelled her lover to
distinguish himself in the field of battle.

Heaven seemed to unite all Americans into one soul, except some fugitive
Cains; all interest was one stock in our common cause; And who my fellow
countrymen can regret, when they view the spoils of our victory? Was it better
to hazard our all than tamely submit to the galling oppression of that yoke
which neither we nor our fathers were able to bear?

Liberty purchased by blood, is infinitely better than slavery in chains of
gold. Had we stupidly submitted to the insolence of other men's pride, we at
this day might have been dragging out a miserable, lingering dying life, whilst
our houses and lands, our wives and little ones should be the use of other men,
and exposed to the insult and cruelty of an ^^ughty purchaser. As the heavens
gathered blackness over our heads, and the muttering thunders began to roar
from the distant pole, thank God! the cloud immediately burst, one perpetual
blaze of light o'er-spread our world, discovering the fair lines written in the
volume of the divine decree, as the voice issues from the four winds, AMERICA
and her SONS shall not be SLAVES.

Let us review the day of carnage, we now see the riches, the honors and
reputation that have been its reward, every scar is preferable to a crown, the
richest diamond compares not with the laurels of victory, the bread thrown on
the water is returning four fold; the blood spilt, flows back in streams of
milk and honey.

The spreading blaze of freedom still continues to extend itself from pole to
pole. All nations aspire after equal glory -- human nature assumes her right --
Despots stand leaning on their sceptres, crowns grow heavy and tremble on the
head of kings -- the hearts of tyrants fail -- the joints of tyranny are
loosed, their aspiring prospects fall and crush together -- generations yet
unborn shall arise and call us blessed. Kingdoms may cease, but freedom is a
spark from heaven and cannot be obliterated.

The revolution, sovereignty, and independence of AMERICA, shall be enrolled in
perpetual memory. The days of our battles and triumphs be founded as a tribute
of praise by future bards, while their authors and actors, lie slumbering
beneath the ground: and while the virtues of our heroes will be rehearsed the
illustrious name of WASHINGTON, shall swell every note; his virtues stand
inscribed in letters of gold. A character fair and unsullied like his must
remain so long as the powers of nature are unshaken, and the pillars of marble
are undissolved; and when time impairs and alters all the effects of art, his
works shall follow him. While the stars shall fade away, the sun himself grow
dim with age and dying nature sink in years, yet HE shall stand, (...) in
immortal youth and be a pillar in the temple of our God.

Shall I mention the Caesar's, Alexanders, and Scipios of the world. A Cicero
and Demosthenes by the art of Rhetoric and eloquence may embellish their
characters and enroll them on the list of martial Deities. But we need not the
force of rhetoric nor the inviting voice of eloquence to persuade the world
that WASHINGTON, is the hero of the age, the friend to man, the guardian of our
rights, and the boast of our land. Should I mention the warlike, venerable
David, who fought and killed Goliath, who put to slight the armies of the
Aliens, yet one behind me might whisper to your ear and say, his character is
tainted with perfidy to his friend and Captain Uriah. You might tell he is
charged by Nathan as being guilty of murder and adultery. Should I reach the
wisdom, the council and policy of a Solomon, still the character, the council
and political talents of WASHINGTON shine uneclipsed, his civil and military
virtues soar above the powers of rheroric, the very sound of his name breathes
the best of eloquence.

Should it be the case that the short term since the cessation of hostilities
has suffered us to forget his assiduous care for his country, his prowess in
the field and day of battle; yet his hand has not been withdrawn, nor his eye
ceased to be watchful for our good. Could the pillow of his bed give evidence
or the curtain around him utter language, they would doubtless attest the
constancy of his love.

If any of us are guilty of so gross ingratitude as to have lost a remembrance
of his past virtues, let us only call to mind the latest acts of his firmess
and patriotism. When faction in a southern state had reared her head, by a
personal appearance, he silences their complaints, and awes them in submission
to rightful government. While the interest of particular men, and perhaps the
influence of a foreign court, were endeavoring to blow up a second breeze with
the British crown, how inflexibly just, how inviolably constitutional were his
endeavors to prevent the ill, and secure to his land, the blessings of civil
and commercial peace. The decisive die was ready to be cast, a TREATY of amity
and commerce must be signed and effected with England, or the glory of AMERICA
be eclipsed, faith become violated, our navigation interrupted, and a new scene
of hostilities commence. Knowing how to answer the unconstitutional demands of
those who made them, not regarding the unmanly reflections of Dissentients, nor
the idea of popularity, he places his hand and fixes his seal to an instrument
for our political salvation. By that act he triumphs over every idea of
mercenary servitude, stops the breath of faction, gives law to our land and
immortalizes his name; and still, even for this the breath of slander blows
against him her noxious blast. But let the offspring of the hedge hog race, who
have no other powers or defense, than to use a feeble dirty quill, scribble
against a character like his, their attempts are vain, as if their feeble arm
should essay with mud to deface the glories of the moon, while they rank
themselves among the envenomed tribe, they live unloved, suffer unpitied, die
unlamented, and rankle with despair. Let us then my fellow citizens, while we
call up to view past scenes, stand prepared for events yet to come: Let us view
our past and present circumstances, and learn how to surmount any difficulties
that are ahead instead of flying from them; to anticipate adversity in an
unpleasing task, yet in many respects, it is prudent and necessary. Let us then
call up to view the day in which our beloved President must be called by an
irrevocable decree, to retire from the feat of action, noise and bustle, and
take his stand in the armies above -- Where shall a second WASHINGTON be found:
who for us will fill that seat, so long dignified by his person and benefited
by his services: As he retires let every eye attend him, drop a tear and wish
his manes all the joys of heavenly rest. By an imprudent election, our towering
edifice must fall, our gold become dim, and our glory turn to shame.

Changes in government have ever been considered some of the most weighty
events of time. It Is a period in which men too often indulge a vicious avarice,
and the low unmanly arts of chicane instead of laudable ambition or an honorary
thirst for fame: A particular interest is often more regarded than personal
ability: How has it been the case, under a Turkish government, that a mean
fellow has been taken from the oar of a galley and the next day by the caprice
of a prince has been invested with all the powers of a Sultan or Mayor. For
want of proper attention to elections, whole empires have been governed by
ignorance, the prime minister has been the dupe of abandoned women, and led by
babes. -- Some have crawled imperceptibly to power by succession: some have
been invested with regal dignity in the cradle, while others have been
proclaimed in the very last stages of the dotage of life.

In absolute government all public service is due to the Prince, and he
nominates all public servants; but in a free government like ours, a very
principle service is due to the people. The right of government springs not
from the cradle, but dotage destroys it.

Every circumstance renders it incumbent on all to instruct themselves in those
affairs wherein they may be actors or adequate judges of those who act. It Is
the part of every good citizen to consult the nature and institutions of
government, the rights and duties that belong to the governing and governed
powers. Happy is the state of that land, when and where their leading Ministers
are wise, firm, brave and prudent; but woe to that people whose leader is a
child.

The long continuance of our rights and privileges depend on our use of them,
and the spirit with which they are defended. As we enjoy liberty and peace,
it is in our hands to secure them; and after we have tasted the joys and just
begin to reap the fruits of a free and equal government, shall we by
supineness, sloth and dissipation make suit to slavery, shall we alienate our
rights and tamely submit to ignominy and reproach; shall it be in vain for us
that we have fought, bled and conquered. In the name of heaven, who that has
any soul within him can endure, that the fame of AMERICA, towering in the
world, like Atlas, with her top above the clouds, should be blasted from the
annals of history, and become a jest to every insulting foe. If our
INDEPENDENCE was obtained by the price of blood and treasure, never let us
esteem these too dear to defend it, we have peace, we have health, we have
liberty on our side, and what is wanting to perpetuate these in a lasting
duration, but a conformity of disposition among ourselves; united force is ever
the most strong, and while this is the defense of our land, nations esteem our
friendship and court an alliance. We have each of us therefore fellow-citizens,
duties to discharge whether we are called to the cabinet, the field or the
plough. Different stations call for the exercise of different abilities; every
man ought ever to possess a mind of his own, and fortitude sufficient to act
his own mind in every station and on all events; but he who is ever awed by
popularity, who can be bought by interest or flattered by sycophants, is
unworthy to hold a seat any where, but at his own fire. The very idea of
popularity carries with it the right or liberty of private judgment, for this
men ought not to be censured or reviled. To clothe with calumny, the
legislative body, or any part of them, for the use of their own judgment, is
ignoble and ill becoming an American: too many judge before they examine, and
censure, before they understand; there may be views for steps in government not
known by every honest minded citizen, nor is it necessary or attainable in all
circumstances. When a legislative body are chosen and organized, it is expected
they will act for the greatest general good consistent with the constitution,
by which they are to govern themselves; but when matters of debate come before
them, are they to act their own minds, or to leave their seats till they obtain
the mind of their constituents, and so not act their own minds, but the minds
of a confused multitude. This would be a very uncertain way of procedure
indeed, and if practiced each in a community having a particular fancy to be
gratified, a mob must be our supreme Law. But if it should be the case that a
body-politic should miss in judgment -- In a government like ours there are
other ways to correct the evil and redress a grievance than by personal
slander, news-paper calumny, or open riot.

A certain degree of faith is to be placed in every member of the cabinet,
without which society cannot exist; he who in reality forfeits this, forfeits
all at once; and if an honest man is the noblest work of God, the perfidious
clothe themselves in the livery of fallen Angels, to be ever jealous and
suspicious is a striking symptom of badness of heart. How amiable the character
of him whose noble soul consults not popular applause, but how to act the
honest man and the hero; who will boldly risk a short lived eclat, rather than
alienate the privileges of his countrymen, and violate his own conscience.

Members who have been tried in an hour of hazard, who have been valiant and
firm in junctures of dangers, whose councils have developed us from the
labyrinth of perplexity, who have boldly risqued both life and property in our
defense, who has led us by the hand when in infancy to the paths of peace,
should never be weaned from our affections, nor be thrown from our breasts by
the sour fumes of ingratitude.

Every member receives the benefit of Government; and as his life and property
are under its protection, it is but just and reasonable he should aid in its
support.

An honest and frugal industry shall strengthen his hand, and encourage his
heart; his oil shall not fail in the cruise nor the meal in his barrel be
wanting; the fruit of his own tree shall rejoice his spirit, and the fat of his
lands and flocks make his face to shine: under his own shade he may rest a
wearied limb, and the song of liberty and peace be forever upon his tongue. The
blessings, joys and pleasures of INDEPENDENCE are so great, we can never be too
careful to secure them or scarcely risque too much in their defense.

The example of the ancient Romans should animate each soul with heroic fire.
Liberty is often to be defended as well as obtained by force of arms: For this
a Roman would out-brave death in its most haggard form. When superstition
prevailed, and God was vainly thought to delight in flesh and gore; how freely
did they offer human blood upon their altars for atonement, propitiation and
purgation. But shall not reason make an American as bold in defense of his
privileges, as superstition could a Roman.

We are not called at this enlightened age of the world, to offer ourselves as
bound victims to appease a stern deity, or purchase our liberty from the hands
of a foreign nation; no, thank God, heaven smiles, and Liberty is already ours,
and it is ours to defend it; if unhappily we should have the call to it, even at
the mouth of the cannon, or point of the bayonet -- A life that dare not
venture itself in the open field, in its country's cause, is not worth holding;
whereas a character established through the fatigues of war, and honored with
the scars of victory, ought ever to be set in letters of gold. -- A military
character is a most commanding character, every thing in the nature of the duty
conspire to form the soul noble for achievements; while their form and air as
far exceed the soft addresses of an effeminate macaroni, as the globe exceeds
an egg-shell. A military life tends not to harden the heart, but to embellish
the soul with every manly virtue which lead them to despise the low, small arts
of disguise. To triumph over weakness is the part of a weak mind; but to
protect the innocent and show lenity to the conquered, are the exercises of the
great and noble. To insult the defenseless, to torment the miserable, may be
the triumphs of a villain, and the boast of a coward. Humanity shudders at
needless sufferings, and he who lays foundation for it, or rejoices in it
degrades human nature. Great minds ever aspire after great objects, and leave
the low mercenary scenes of intrigue, to miscreants of the earth.

A rage for dissipation and unlawful pleasure, tends to settle the subject into
luxury and false refinement, which as it enervates the mind, may suit a
worshiper at the temple of Venus, but can by no means embellish the character
of the son of Mars. As it destroys all feeling for deflowered beauty; they may
for a time triumph over the vile conquests of their villainy, but at the end
find their reputation irretrievably lost, their constitutions ruined, their
beauty departed as a fading flower, and every manly rational delight become a
stranger to their guilty breast. But a sense of dignity and honor, as it crops
the folly of vice, it leads the soul to triumph over danger, and adorns the
happy possessor with good manners, wholesome fashions and laudable customs.

The day of peace is too often a day of dissipation among men; but shall
deluding pleasure cramp the prospect of our rising nation. A relaxation from
toil is a time to gather strength against fatigue; peace should ever brace our
nerves against the hardships of war; and every leisure train up our troops for
martial prowess.

Let us then my fellow-citizens stand in defense of our INDEPENDENCE, by
fighting against its enemies in our own breasts, and we shall easily overcome
those that are without.

Let us secure and transmit the valuable legacy to a nation yet unborn. Let
each throw in their mite to maintain and defend our laws and support our
government unshaken.

Conformity of disposition in the day of peace will strengthen our hands
against the day of battle. The breath of faction is contagious and has ruined
families, states and empires.

Let us gird our loins and stand clad in the armor of our defense, and our
banner will be terrifying to every invading foe.

This day America is at peace with the world -- what love fired the Angelic
choir, when a band was sent forth from the host of the Lord, to proclaim peace,
and sound salvation to the sons of men; hear them shout on their way, glory to
God in the highest, on earth peace, good will toward men. May we not join this
day, renew the song, and resound the joyful Jubilee -- How glorious the present
Era, let us hail the auspicious day -- our seat of government is respected,
our laws are wholesome and influential, our troops are not called to resist a
foe in open field, nor to traverse with weary step the unfrequented wood amidst
a savage tribe.

The minds of men expand, benevolence with her balmy influence extends herself:
bigotry and fanatacism give way to candor and reason; may true philanthropy
crowd from the earth, all party names, and our land ever refuse to nourish the
seeds of superstition and enthusiasm.

The civil and religious horizon, begins to brighten to our view; the darkness
of ignorance gives way to the glorious dawn that shall eventually enlighten all
nations, and harmonize an universal world to be one people under one God,
governed by one law. When that happy period shall arrive, peace shall be
accented by every lip, the olive branch waved in every hand, Ephraim shall not
envy Judah, nor Judah vex Ephraim; swords shall be beaten into ploughshares,
spears into pruning hooks, nation shall not lift up the sword against nation,
nor learn war any more.

Let us this day anticipate the joys of a full and final accomplishment, by the
foretastes now in our enjoyment -- Let the exercise of the social virtues fit
us to quaff the social cup, not mixed with the gall of contention, or
overflowing with the froth of sensuality, luxury and debauch; but may an
inviolable regard to our rights, a strict adherence to truth, and a perpetual
discharge of justice, compassion to the distressed, the feeble and the
stranger, be the distinguishing badge of Americans, then shall we be honorable
as we are Independent, and powerful as we are free.

Arise then Fellow-Citizens, put on strength, and show yourselves men; view the
privileges now in our hands, contemplate the prospects that are before us, view
the riches, the honors, and reputation of our nation, the happiness of our
wives and little ones, depending on our conduct; if we wantonly trifle these
away, or stupidly receive the yoke of oppression, we must descend to the grave
with the curses of millions on our guilty heads, and a rising generation shall
tread upon our ashes with contempt; under such circumstauces it would be better
for us this day to be among the dead than the living. Stand equipped for every
event, a preparation for danger will never hasten it upon us, but if called to
the use of arms, when their springs are dead with rust, our privileges, our
lives, our all are at hazard: If the voice of peace should lull our souls to
sleep, what must be our surprise, when an enemy sword in hand shall enter our
camp -- by a watchful prudent diligence, we may still keep our hands on the
neck of our enemies, may still live at peace with the world, and be honorable
among the nations, but he who betrays his trust, he who flinches, in the hour
of battle in his countries cause, is a curse to society; he who refuses to aid
and defend our rights, but stupidly bows his neck to the yoke of oppression and
the tyrants lash, is unworthy of an immortal soul, possesses the spirit, and
deserves the burial of an ASS.

FINIS

