AN ORATION; IN DEFENSE OF DIVINE REVELATION; TOGETHER WITH THE VALEDICTORY
ADDRESSES; DELIVERED IN THE BAPTIST MEETING HOUSE, IN PROVIDENCE, AT THE
COMMENCEMENT OF RHODE ISLAND COLLEGE, SEPTEMBER 6, A. D. 1797.

BY BENJAMIN ALLEN, A. B.

PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.

PROVIDENCE: Printed by CARTER and WILKINSON, and sold at their Book-Store,
opposite the Market. M, DCC, XCVII.

An ORATION.
MANKIND have differed in nothing more than in their religious opinions. Their
creeds have been as various as their countenances. Education has no small share
in producing this wonderful variety. We are passive to its influence.

Religion, of some kind or other, has been acknowledged by all mankind, in all
ages, and in all parts of the globe. It has been considered as the most noble
employment of the soul, and productive of the most beneficial consequences to
civil society. These things have occurred, although most of the religions
extant owe their existence more to ignorance than to argument, and are more the
effects of blind credulity, than reasonable conviction. This arises from the
nature of the subject. Our religion is formed before the reasoning faculties
are sufficiently matured for examination. Principles imbibed in infancy are
extremely difficult to be eradicated. They grow with our growth, they
strengthen with our strength. Here commences the boasted empire of conscience,
whose dictates it is thought the highest criminality to violate. There is
something too in the subject of religion so solemn and awful, that we dare
scarcely attempt to reason ourselves out of pre-established errors. A dread of
something hereafter, the hopes of happier days, rush upon the anxious soul, and
disarm it of its reasoning power. Men in all ages have been the subjects of
religious fear. Immoderate forebodings of a world to come, have robbed the
present of half its lawful enjoyments.

Religion, designed to render man "mild and sociable to man," has rendered him
selfish and implacable. Absurdities and persecutions have been the attendants
of every system of religion under heaven. How often have the rights and dignity
of human nature been insulted, degraded and trampled upon? How often have the
honor and character of Deity been traduced, by the impious and absurd
doctrines of religious establishments? How often have mankind been deceived and
led astray from truth, by systems bearing only the name of Divinity? How often
has the sacred name of Jehovah been insulted by men acting under the specious
appearance of superior piety? These abuses, with many others committed under
the mask of religious hypocrisy, have induced some to reject all revelation, as
repugnant to reason; imposing on the ignorance and credulity of the vulgar;
degrading the exalted abilities of man, and inconsistent with the character of
Deity. They either artfully insinuate, or openly declare, that the religion of
a Savior stands on the same foundation with that of a Mahomet, and the fables
of antiquity. They insist that ignorance and imposition are equally the
supporters of all. They renounce all the luminous truths of revelation; they
place in their stead the forlorn "age of reason." They aim their wit and
ridicule at the very existence of Christianity, and treat with impious and
ungenerous contempt that life and immortality brought to light by the gospel.
They rob virtue of her hope. They add insult to the misfortunes of life. They
transform the beauties of Paradise into the barren wilds of nonexistence. They
plant on the grave the seeds of annihilation. They level man with the brute.
Destined, like a meteor of the night, to blaze for a moment, he vanishes
forever in the shades of darkness. Today he exults in the highest glory;
tomorrow he mingles with the worm in the dust.

Man, as a being prone to err, becomes an object of commiseration. Ridicule is
a breach of humanity; it is oftering violence to the feelings of the human
heart. We will shed the tear of sorrow over the tomb of man's departed glory;
but let us not deprive him of that religion which alone can alleviate the
misfortunes of life.

While men have been pleading an universal toleration of religious opinions, we
rejoiced at their success; we saw them disarming persecution of her weapons; we
imbibed their sympathy; we warmed with their philanthropy. That elegance of
style and independency of thought which characterize the writings of some who
have opposed revelation, have in some instances captivated the passions and
seduced the judgment. They have with great exultation vilified the character of
the clergy. We are sensible of ecclesiastical abuses; they cannot be too much
exposed: but while we deprecate the ambition of the clergy, so destructive to
the peace of civil society, when strengthened by the arm of the magistrate, let
us not abuse indiscriminately an order of men so important and useful to
mankind. Society, in an improved state, cannot exist without them. Though they
form the mind and mend the heart, yet some, either from ignorance or envy, have
represented them as unfriendly to the improvements of the human mind -- to the
lights and progress of philosophy. We feel ourselves peculiarly pleased and
honored in appealing to the present occasion, as a full refutation of their
illiberal aspersions. Those venerable Worthies, whose prefence gives dignity
and respect to the ceremonies of this day; whose benevolence is at this moment
listening to the feeble efforts of the speaker, rise superior to the
insinuations of malice, and sufficiently evince their attachment to science and
virtue.

But what have the systems and errors of men to do with the religion of heaven?
We renounce all systems but the system of God. Men, in supporting their
favorite opinions, have undoubtedly been led into error. This by no means
derogates from truth. While we smile at the incomprehensible commentaries of
system-builders, our veneration for the great original is increased. Like its
divine Author, it cannot be destroyed. Heaven and earth shall pass away, and
nature dissolve at the feet of Jehovah -- but religion exists forever.

As a system coming from heaven, with every mark of its divinity, it ought to
influence our belief and actions. But, say some, the belief of the Christian
scriptures is no proof of their truth and importance. Because, continue the
objectors, the same proof is applicable to every system of error extant. This
will be granted. Things are either true or false, independent of belief. "Man
cannot create, he can only discover."

But the credence of false systems of religions, is no proof or argument
against one which carries indelible characters of its divinity. It rather
heightens its value. Virtue never more interests the heart than when contrasted
with vice. To reject all truth, merely because we are liable to err, is the
height of absurdity. Man, it is true, is from his cradle exposed to deception.
This by no means argues him destitute of knowledge. Admit this reasoning to be
just, and you not only destroy the credibility of revealed religion, but you
strike at the root of all knowledge, and level man's boasted acquirements in
the dust.

The weakness of human reason to determine on many things in morals and
religion, points out to man the necessity of some superior guide, of some
unerring standard, to which he may refer his actions, and appreciate their
worth. The very idea of man's moral agency involves in it the supposition of
laws to ascertain and govern his actions. From whom can those laws originate,
but the Legislator of the Universe? If God govern the natural world by
universal laws, why not the moral? The same necessity is evident in both. The
promulgation of these laws is the revelation we plead for. The necessity and
importance of such a revelation becomes a serious and all-interesting enquiry.
It involves in it man's present and future happiness.

The great end Deity had in view, in delivering to man a transcript of his
mind, was to make known to him his true character; to teach him in what his
real happiness consists; to confirm the wishes of his heart in immortality; to
offer the greatest incentives to virtue, the greatest determents from vice, by
establishing the doctrine of a future state of rewards and punishments. The
incomprehensibility of some parts of revelation has, with great force and
dependence, been urged as an insuperable objection to their veracity. It
remains for those who make the objection to prove this peculiar to revelation.

As well might we reject the truth of our own existence, because we cannot
comprehend the laws of animal motion. Shall we disbelieve the existence of all
those magnificent scenes disclosed to our view throughout the works of
creation, because we cannot comprehend all the laws by which they are governed?
Man, after all his wonderful discoveries, will find more to admire than to
comprehend -- more to animate his devotion than to confirm his unbelief.

This, so far from being an argument against the truth of revelation, is one of
the greatest in its favor. If man had been its author, would it not in every
respect have been within the sphere of his comprehension? Like all the works of
man, whether of genius or imitation, it might have been perfectly understood.

In a revelation coming from heaven, we cannot expect, in the present state of
existence, fully to comprehend all its designs. The weakness of human reason is
such, as to render us totally unqualified to scan the counsels of the Divinity.

That there are many things beyond the comprehension of the human mind, is the
experience of philosophy. The Christian scriptures are not a singular case.
Omniscience is an attribute of Deity only. It is sufficient for man he can
learn his duty, and motives powerful enough to prompt him to its performance.
Revelation contains both in an eminent degree. All knowledge flows from God.
The mind that can fully comprehend the anatomy of a fly, is equal to the
knowledge of the universe. The power that can give animation to a mite, can
with the same ease move unnumbered worlds.

Astonished at the wonderful discoveries made in the philosophic world, some
have supposed revelation to be superfluous. Philosophy, it is true, discloses
to us ten thousand scenes, all beautiful; all magnificent; all sublime.
Affrsted by science, man has read the great volume of creation; he has
triumphed over the elements; he has rendered the laws of nature obedient to his
will. But however extensive man's researches may be; however he may have
improved his mind or exalted his nature by the lights of reason and philosophy;
yet, assisted by these alone, all his prospects, all his expectations,
terminate in uncertainty. Clouds and darkness hover over the regions of the
grave. We mark man's entrance into life; we observe the developement of his
genius, in all his wonderful discoveries; we follow him to the tomb -- but,
destitute of the light of revelation, we lose him forever.

The disposition of Deity toward man, in pardoning his sins, and restoring him
to future happiness, can never be discovered by the efforts of reason, however
improved by philosophy, or matured by experience. The history of ages proves to
us the uncertainty in which the light of nature and the sagacity of philosophy
leave man, with respect to a future existence.

The human mind, long before the dawn of the Christian era, had arrived at an
astonishing degree of refinement. Poets had reached the height of sublimity,
orators had harangued in all the vehemence of eloquence, philosophers had
taught the principles of morality; but the great problem of man's immortality
remained unsolved. It was reserved for revelation to demonstrate the truth of
man's resurrection. Her energising voice awakes the slumbers of the tombs. She
gives to man a new creation. She proclaims him the heir of immortal glory.
Situated in the midst of gazing worlds, he interests the feelings of all that
bright train which bow before the burning throne of God.

The prospects of man are great -- his happiness inviolate. Deity has
distinguished him as an object of his peculiar beneficence and attention. He
has stamped on him the seal of his divinity. His progress in science and
religion proves the infinite perfectibility of his mind. Erect in stature, man
seems formed for contemplating all the beautiful and sublime works of nature.
Although an inhabitant of earth, his wishes reach beyond the stars. The
glittering portals of heaven lie wide extended for man's reception. The shades
of ignorance and tyrannic gloom, which have so long beclouded the prospects of
man, are vanishing before him. Wafted on the wing of inspiration, we hail the
period as not far distant, when the religion of peace and good will shall
emancipate man, and give to the universe the highest possible happiness.

VALEDICTORY ADDRESSES.
I. To the CORPORATION.
IN retiring from the place of our education, gratitude demands our
acknowledgments to the honorable Corporation.

If to form the mind to virtue and knowledge, is an object of the first
magnitude in a free state, what respect is due to the founders and patrons of
this flourishing institution! Your benevolent exertions in the cause of science
and religion, merit the eulogium of every friend of humanity, but more
especially of us, who this day receive the honors of this University. To you,
Gentlemen, are due the first fruits of all our toils. It is to you, ye friends
of science and freedom, we owe the birth of that institution which calls us her
sons. This renders your names and your virtues dear to our memories. Sensible
of the importance and necessity of a general diffusion of knowledge in a
republican government; actuated by the noble principles of patriotism and
philanthropy, you have founded and fostered to its present respectability you
asylum of the arts and sciences. Your exertions have not been in vain. Under
your patronage, and the blessings of an approving heaven, each returning
anniversary has rewarded your toils, and animated your zeal.

Go on, generous Sirs, in your laudable undertakings; perfect the important
designs of your institution, and immortalize your names.

II. To the CHANCELLOR.
WITH sentiments of the highest esteem we turn to the honorable Chancellor of
the College. We come to offer him the spontaneous effusions of our hearts.
Deign, worthy Sir, to accept this small tribute of gratitude.

Superior merit and distinguished virtues command our respect and veneration.
To whom are they more justly due, than to him who is honored with the most
dignified rank among the worthy patrons of this feat of literature?

He who patronizes the arts and sciences, becomes the benefactor of mankind. We
know your zeal and exertions in the cause of education and freedom. The
interest and welfare of this institution lie near your heart. May its future
prosperity be equal to your benevolent wishes. May ever be blessed by the
guardianship of such illustrious worthies. We hope the patronage of a character
so influential, will become an example of imitation to the worthy citizens of
Rhode Island. -- Then shall our Alma Matter rejoice in the number of her native
sons, and receive the patronage of the Legislature. Your rewards shall then be
the gratitude of an enlightened people, and the approbation of the Judge of the
Universe.

III. To the PRESIDENT.
REV. SIR,
PARTIAL as we are to the place of our education; warm as our bosoms glow with
love and gratitude to you, for your attention and solicitude in advancing our
literary acquirements and future prosperity; we do not wish to intrude on your
feelings, by a public recital of your many virtues, of which few of your
acquaintance, none of this society, can be ignorant. But we cannot conceal our
attachment and veneration for the man who has been our affectionate friend and
literary guide. It is to you we are indebted for those lessons of wisdom and
morality, which add dignity to our natures, and sensibility to our feelings.
You have unbarred to us the gates of glory. -- You have presented to our minds
religion in all her God-like excellencies. Never shall the cold hand of
unbelief chill those bosoms which have been warmed with your persuasive
devotion.

Your paternal tenderness, so soothing to our bosoms, shall never be forgotten.
Accept, dear Sir, our unfeigned thanks for your many kind offices. To deserve
your future friendship and patronage is the first wish of our hearts. While the
finger of science directs the sons of Columbia to yon seat of the Muses, may no
demon of discord enter those peaceful walls where our best friend presides.
Long, Sir, may you continue the father of this rising institution -- a guide to
our youth -- an ornament of religion, and the admiration of an enlightened age.

IV. To the PROFESSORS and TUTORS.
TO the worthy Professors and Tutors is justly due the tribute of gratitude. In
looking back on the past scenes of collegiate life, we behold you, Gentlemen,
alluring us through the delightful walks of science and refinement. You have
animated us in the pursuit of virtue and knowledge by your own amiable examples
and extensive acquirements. If we have not improved, it cannot be imputed to
your want of attention. You have on all occasions convinced us of the necessity
and importance of acquiring and maintaining characters fair and unfullied. May
our future conduct in life never disappoint the benevolent wishes of your
hearts. We can never sufficiently admire those talents and virtues, which have
been so zealously devoted to our best interest. That respect and esteem you
have taught us to entertain for the great and the good, we feel in a
pre-eminent degree for you. This, Gentlemen, is not the language of adulation,
but the sentiments of those, who wish to express the feelings of their hearts.
Time will not permit us to trespass on your patience, by relating the many
favors you have conferred on us. Farewell, ye guardians of our education; may
the best of heaven's blessings reward your virtues.

V. To the STUDENTS.
THE interest we feel in your welfare, who are to follow us in those peaceful
walks of literature, will not permit us to part from you in silence. You,
fellow Students, still inhabit you edifice dedicated to the genius of man. You
are still the votaries of science. Never will you behold more tranquil moments;
enjoy them rationally, and you must be happy.

Your time at this period of life is doubly valuable. Its wise improvement will
add a splendor to your rising sun. Let this consideration animate you to
pursue with unremitting attention your literary studies. Let each day behold
you advancing in virtue and knowledge. In youth ten thousand fascinating charms
captivate the passions, and divert the mind from the nobler pursuits of
science. These can be overcome by resolution and perseverance only. Render each
moment subservient to the great objects now in view. You are placed here by the
affection of parents, whose wishes and expectations are deeply interested in
your present and future respectability. Let them not be disappointed.

Encourage a noble ambition, which scorns the low arts of envy, or the secret
insinuations of detraction. Let not a competition of interest weaken or
diminish your friendship. The great man's glory is in the rewards of virtue and
excellency. Let your hearts be ever open and ready to receive the advice of
your instructors. The counsels of the aged are experience in anticipation.

In parting with you, our feelings are supported by the pleasing reflection,
that the field of science you are now exploring is happily calculated to
alleviate a further separation from the arms and society of your friends. We
now, young Gentlemen, bid you adieu, wishing you may do honor to the place of
your education, and receive the approbation of a grateful country.

VI. To the GRADUATES.
WITH a heart filled with the tenderest emotions, I now address a society with
whom I have participated in the most friendly intercourse; in whose arms and
attachment I have passed the happiest moments of my life; with whom I have
formed a connection in pursuits the most honorary to our natures, and useful to
mankind. We have enjoyed in common the pleasures and advantages of science and
philosophy. But these scenes, so pleasing to the youthful mind, are soon to be
closed. The time set apart and devoted to our education is measured and
completed. A new day advances with haste, to light us to the bosom of our
country. The delightful retreats of philosophic repose are to be exchanged for
the rights and duties of civil society. This to us becomes an all-important
period; while it terminates our residence in the school of classic erudition,
it gives us admission on the wide theater of the world. We become citizens of
an enlightened nation. Let us carry with us into its bosom those lessons of
patriotism and freedom we have been taught in the shades of the academic grove.
Let our future lives, as citizens and as men, be worthy the place of our
education. May those who have with parental care guided the steps of our youth,
rejoice in our future usefulness to mankind. We cannot deny them this small
recompense. May our lives be ever governed by the great lights of reason and
revelation. Then shall we meet these our friends beyond the narrow tide of
time, where sighing and sorrow shall be no more, and tears shall be wiped from
all faces. Animated by this heart-cheering prospect, set us putin the career of
unlimited improvement. The God of boundless love will never suffer the
wonderful acquirements of man to sleep in the cold bed of death. Each
improvement we make in virtue, each acquisition we gain in science, will be
treading the courts of immortality.

Although separated as we soon shall be by returning to our homes -- yet by
indulging a retrospective view of the sciences we have studied together, of the
pleasures we have enjoyed in each other's society, and the friendships we have
here contracted, shall we not daily meet in yon retreat of the Muses, and steal
ourselves from the cares of a busy world? Yes, my Class-Mates, the recollection
of your friendship and tenderness shall often, through the varied scenes of
future life, excite the tear of sympathy and love. Your friendly images are too
deeply engraved on the tablets of my heart for time ever to erase. Receive,
dear Brothers, my best wishes for your future happiness. May the gentle breath
of peace forever attend you. But why should we, in the midst of this listening
and sympathising audience, recount our attachments, or renew the sincerity of
our friendship? They are not insensible of our feelings. They can witness to
the reluctance of our parting.

But time hastens us to perform the most pleasing and affecting scene of this
day's anniversary.

To you, ye Companions of my youthful days, I now appeal for a description of
sensations with which my heart is agitated.

I must bid you a long, perhaps to some of you -- an eternal adieu!. Let not
our separation weaken or break the cords of friendship and love.

I have now arrived at the most trying scene my duty has ever called me to
perform. The curtain of separation is fast drawing. One more moment dissolves
forever our collegiate connection. With the sincerity of a friend, the love of a
brother, and the benediction of heaven, I wish you all an affectionate FAREWELL!

Finis.

