AN ORATION, ON THE PROPRIETY OF INTRODUCING THE SCIENCE OF JURISPRUDENCE INTO
A COURSE OF CLASSICAL EDUCATION. PRONOUNCED IN THE BAPTIST MEETING HOUSE, IN
PROVIDENCE, AT THE ANNIVERSARY COMMENCEMENT OF RHODE ISLAND COLLEGE, SEPTEMBER
6th, A. D. 1797.

BY SAMUEL W. BRIDGHAM, A CANDIDATE FOR THE DEGREE OF MASTER IN THE ARTS.

PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OF THE STUDENTS.

PROVIDENCE: Printed by CARTER and WILKINSON. M,DCC,XCVII.

AN ORATION.
That a Science which is universal in its use and extent, accommodated to each
individual, yet comprehending the whole community, should ever have been deemed
unnecessary to be studied in an University, is a matter of astonishment and
concern.

BLACKSTONE.
MAN's knowledge is circumscribed not only by the limitation of his faculties,
but also by that of his existence. Perfection being unattainable, a resolution
to arrive at the happy summit of universal knowledge, would be as preposterous
as an attempt to arrest the sun in his rapid progress through the skies. Into
what path then is man, that offspring of imperfection, that child of error, to
be conducted? Let him, in his pursuits after knowledge, be allured to those
branches only which have most for their object his own happiness, connected
with that greater good, the good of society. Learning is the most precious
jewel; and could I add, without being charged with partiality for a favorite
study, I would say, that no learning is so excellent for all degrees of men as
a knowledge of laws, and the principles of legislation.

Universal diffusion of legal information beautifies and adorns Justice with
all her splendid suit: it presents her in an attitude so divine, that I excuse
the ancients who worshipped her as a goddess. To the honest industrious
yeoman-citizens it affords a shield of protection against the secret
insinuations of fraud, and the bold attacks of malevolence.

Although ecclesiastical and civil authority should never be blended together,
yet our Reverend Teachers of Holy Things ought not to be unskilled in the
science of jurisprudence. Their duty consists in holding up the mirror to the
face of man, to reflect his weaknesses, his follies, his imperfections and
vices; to teach him obedience to divine institutions and civil authority. If
the whole duty of man is to be laid before him by his spiritual guides, the
more extensive and universal their knowledge, the more useful will their
instructions be to all classes of hearers.

To judges and jurors the knowledge of jurisprudence is of superlative concern.
Shall man's dearest interests be adjudged by ignorance, by prejudice, and by
passion? The wisdom of ages, improved and collected in those massy volumes of
English jurisprudence, requires a laborious investigation, to empower the
judges to merit the epithet and maintain the dignity of the fathers of the
rights of the people.

Ill fated and deplorable is the condition of that country, whose legislators
are ignorant. Their duty consists in expounding, modelling and creating laws.
To maintain the propositions, that man can explain statutes he knows nothing
about, can comment upon texts of which he is totally ignorant, or can remedy
defects in laws of which he has no knowledge, is preposterous in the extreme.
As well might the unskilled in mechanics undertake to amend the defects in a
complicated machine, or the untutored barbarian to enucleate those mighty
wonders which decorate and adorn the vast amphitheatre of nature. A wise
legislator is therefore a bright luminary to his country, and merits universal
applause. His path is decorated with flowers, and leads to glory. Every man is
his enemy, and his country's too, who would rob him of his wreaths, or tarnish
his honor.

Wherever the principles of legislation are well understood, political jealousy
and discontent are unknown or silenced. In every change of government from
despotism to freedom, and in every improvement of law from barbarous rigor to
polished mildness, ignorant citizens and blind legislators revolt against
measures suggested by wisdom, and which eventually prove glorious and
triumphant.

At the establishment of the federal constitution of the United States, some
ignorant Americans, through blindness, felt all the horrors to be apprehended
from internal agitation and civil commotion: yet how glorious has that
institution proved -- and how cordially do they now acquiesce in the system
they so bitterly condemned.

The feudal system in England has been represented as a disgrace to its
history. But if we contemplate the nature of English jurisprudence, our
thoughts will bring home to our minds conviction, that the feudal system is the
grand basis of that stupendous fabric: that it is the rock on which the wise
men of the world have builded, and the storms and tempests have beaten upon the
superstructure, and it has not yet fallen. There were doubtless many evils in
this system, but they were such as were not to have been prevented in the early
age of the world. A pure American-like government could not have been hoped for
in that period, when the savage foot roamed over half creation, and nature
blushed at the dawn of science. The policy of the times would not admit of that
spirit of liberty which now animates the republican. Let us not then be
deluded: let the natural light which is within us shine with its full luster:
let charity, that celestial spark, that emanation of divinity, irradiate and
sublime our souls: no longer let the dictates of sound policy be execrated, or
magnanimous exploits stigmatized, by the enemies of man, or by misguided
zealots.

Let these reflections serve to convince the mind of the vast importance of a
general diffusion of the knowledge of jurisprudence. Permit me now to suggest,
that while the fortunes of our citizens are incompetent for this purpose,
propriety, public good and political necessity, plead the cause of this
science, and solicit her introduction to the classical exercises of a
collegiate education. In all countries celebrated for improvement, this science
has been particularly cultivated, and made a branch of classical learning. No
gentleman in those countries deems his education complete, till he has been
indoctrinated in the science of laws. Public institutions for the promotion of
literature are the heart and seat of life to our government, whence proceed the
arteries in tides of health to nourish and support the whole system. This our
seminary, though yet in her infancy, has afforded presages of her rising
greatness. Already do her sons contend with those of Oxford and Cambridge for
the laurels of Parnassus. Let us then give eclat to her rising glory, till she
shall be elevated with those bright constellations of the East.

Thou Seat of Literature, thou Alma Matter of Wisdom, hasten thy progress in the
career of glory; and let me exhort thy patrons and fathers to venerate and
cherish in thy bosom the heaven-born science of jurisprudence. May the genius
of freedom inspire your breasts, ye patrons of science, with the glorious
ambition to raise up a luminary in the West, which shall eclipse her sister
lights. With pleasing rapture I anticipate the great event. The dawn of truth
will burst the reluctant clouds of night, and her meridian sunshine establish
and perpetuate the glory of America. The decrees of wisdom shall afford
protection to innocence, and secure the rewards of industry. The funeral dirge
of injustice and oppression shall be triumphantly sung over anarchy's expiring
ruins.

Finis.

