THE MAN OF THE TIMES: OR, A SCARCITY OF CASH. A FARCE. AS PERFORMED, WITH
UNIVERSAL APPLAUSE, AT THE CHURCH-STREET THEATER, CHARLESTON.

Written by MR. BEETE, Comedian.

CHARLESTON: PRINTED BY W. P. YOUNG, STATE-PRINTER, 43, BROAD-STREET.

[Copy-right secured according to Law.]

To the Public.
THE great applause testified on the representation of the ' Man of the Times,'
and the advice of several of the author's friends, by whom the manuscript was
perused, and whose approbation it met with, induce him to present it to the
public; expecting, that, as it is a maiden piece, and the moral being
unexceptionable, it will not be treated with inurbanity, but meet with that
candor, so grateful to an author, and so becoming in a generous, indulgent
public, who wish to encourage native dramatic literature, so that our stage may
not always exhibit foreign productions.

CHARLESTON, MAY, 1797.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
MAJOR UPRIGHT, MR. WHITLOCK, OLD SCREWPENNY, MR. BEETE, CHARLES SCREWPENNY,
MR. RADCLIFFE, GRUB, MR. NELSON, NOTEALL, MR. ASHTON, JAMES, MR. JONES,
WILLIAM, MR. J. JONES, RICHARD, MR. HELMBOLD.
WOMEN.
LYDIA UPRIGHT, MRS. JONES, KATY, MISS CHAUCER.
SCENE -- PHILADELPHIA.

MAN OF THE TIMES.
ACT I.
SCENE I. An Appartment in Major UPRIGHT'S.
Enter MAJOR and LYDIA. Major. I TELL you, Lydia, I Will hear no more. -- Plague
on his virtues! When did a withered, rotten tree produce good fruit? It is
impossible but the errors of the father must, in some degree, attach themselves
to the son: And I had rather (dear as you are to me) witness your obsequies,
than see you in the arms of a man, whose principles I despise. Old Screwpenny's
speculations, cheats, and frauds are related at every tea-table throughout the
United States; and shall the daughter of Major Upright, by a marriage with such
a rascal's son, bring disgrace on the fair fame of her own father?


Lydia. My dear father, you know I have always regarded you as a friend, as
well as parent: you have ever been acquainted with the secrets of my heart, and
you may rest assured, that my conduct shall never be the cause of uneasiness to
you. My acquaintance with Young Screwpenny commenced in England, whither your
kindness sent me for my education; we were often together, and frequent
intimacy produced a mutual esteem: We have since been fellow-passengers from
England, and his kind attentions to me, on shipboard, certainly have made an
impression on my heart, which will require some time to eradicate.


Major. I almost wish you had never seen England: the death of your mother,
(whose memory still demands the sigh of tenderness) and, at that time, a want
of good seminaries for education in this country, induced me to send you
thither: But, thank heaven, we can now enjoy the blessing of giving our
children a solid and useful education, without sending them to a foreign
country, where for every single lesson of utility they obtain, fifty follies
sprout up to choke its growth: -- Republicans can only be properly instructed
in republican governments. However, Lydia, I hope I shall find in you, an
exception to my general opinion.


Lydia. I hope, sir, you will believe I have sense enough to distinguish
between useful arts, and the tinsel of a modern British education. And believe
me, sir, were you acquainted with Mr. Charles Screwpenny, your prejudices
against the father would be lost in your admiration of the virtues of his son.


Major. Prejudices! What! when he cheated my noble disbanded troops out of
seven-eighths of the pay they had so hardly earned, so richly deserved, and so
patiently waited for, is it a prejudice in me to call him a rascal? -- When I
see him invariably shifting his sentiments of politics, to the opinion of the
strongest party, merely to further his mercenary views, is it a prejudice in me
to despise him? -- When I see him continually employed in baneful monopolies,
oppressions, and land speculations, distressing the poor, and bringing
disgrace, infamy, and dishonor on my country, is it a prejudice in me to hate
and detest him? No! I hope Major Upright will always be remarked for love of
virtue, and detestation of vice. But come, Lydia, should I find Young
Screwpenny the character you have described him to be, far be it from me to
oppose your happiness; however it must be on certain conditions; and such as
will prevent the disgrace such a connection will unavoidably tend to produce.


Lydia. My dear sir, I thank you -- I am sure you will admire his virtues, and
I shall be the happiest -- But, let me hope, sir, the conditions you mean to
propose will be such as are in his power to comply with.


Major. Ha! ha! ha! Never fear, my girl, if he is really virtuous, and truly
loves you, no doubt but he will comply with them.


Enter JAMES. James. If you plase, the dinner's on table, your honor!


Major. I suppose it is there, whether I please or not: -- But I despise
titles; plain sir is as great a mark of respect as I require, or a freeman
should give: -- However, when you have been in America a little longer, you will
learn our customs. Come, Lydia, I Will wait on you.


Exit with Lydia. James. Larn your customs! To be sure I shall. Ah, poor James,
to what a devil of a scrape have you brought yourself: three years to serve,
for a bit of a passage to this fine country, where to be sure the captain told
me, the streets were paved with dollars, and every branch of pine was loaded
with kegs of whisky, guggling out of their bungs, and singing 'come drink me:'
Well 'twas a devil of a lie, to be sure it was: And yet I have some few
comforts left -- there is my little Katy, as pretty a piece of Irish white and
red as the moon ever shone upon: To be sure she mended the captain's linen on
board, for which she used to get now and then a sneaker of fresh soup: Och,
devil burn such traveling; I Would rather have stump'd it here on my own two
good-looking legs; but walking might have been a little difficult, when a man,
at every step, would be over his chin in water, and I was always afraid to try.


Enter KATY. Katy. Come, James, what are you doing here? They want you to wait
at table.


James. Arrah! you're out there now: -- Didn't I hear the Major say he would wait
on his daughter himself?


Katy. No such thing: He is calling you.


James. Well then, I Am going: But, Katy -- give me one kiss, and then --


Katy. What then?


James. Why then fait, my jewel, another, another, and another.


Kisses her, she struggles, and exit ambo. SCENE II. An appartment at Old
Screwpenny's; Screwpenny discovered with Noteall, at a table, books, etc.
Screwpenny, after a pause looking over the books, speaks.
Screwp. So, Mr. Noteall, very correct, very correct: I commend your care: --
What did you say my notes sell for today?


Note. At seventy-five per cent discount, sir.


Screwp. That Is well! that is well! -- But, Mr. Noteall, it must be better: When
they are down to two and sixpence in the pound, Mr. Premium shall have
directions to buy in. The report of my want of cash, and danger of failing,
will do all, never fear. -- Have you procured the title deeds of the land I
bought yesterday of Ploughshare, the Kentucky farmer: He has my notes for sixty
thousand dollars, payable in six, twelve, and eighteen months; which shall be
years -- You understand me?


Note. Yes, sir: I received the deeds last night.


Screwp. Then go directly to my worthy friend Mr. Grub, tell him to step
immediately to the Washington's head, and enquire for Mr. Ploughshare, enter
into conversation with him, and, in a round about manner, come to the business
of my purchase of his lands; then let him insinuate that my notes, bonds,
words, or oaths are not worth a groat, and so frighten him into a wish to
dispose of my notes, when he has done which, he may say he knows a man that
will purchase them; and then carry him to Premium, who may give as far as ten
thousand for the sixty; but be sure he makes as good a bargain as he can; and
at any rate must not give more than ten thousand; not more than ten: Do You hear?


Note. I Am gone, sir: But the men employed about your new building are now in
the next room, waiting for their money; they say they have now five weeks'
wages due, and that they wont work another stroke till they are paid.


Screwp. Tell 'em I Am not at home; that you will speak to me, and get their money
for 'em.


Note. Your coachman, sir, has informed them already, that you are at home;
besides the fellow is growling for money himself.


Screwp. He growling! the rascal, has he not my notes? Good as cash -- bating
the discount: -- However, Noteall, give 'em checks on the bank.


Note. We have no money there, sir.


Screwp. Why, you blockhead, I know it, I know it; but before they can present
the checks, the bank will be shut: Save my credit, and save my money: -- Fine
maxims, fine maxims, Mr. Noteall.


Note. Well, sir, I Will try to satisfy them.


Exit. Screwp. (solus.) So far, so good: -- Who says I Am a rogue? I only take
advantage of the weakness and folly of my countrymen: they, simple people, have
given me credit; And should I not accept it? To be sure I ought: It Is a duty I
owe myself; and as for the country, of what consequence is its deplorable
state, dearness of provisions, etc. as long as my speculations can produce me
cash more than equivalent to the dearth I impose upon others? -- But there is my
son Charles; I sent him to England to learn chicanery and art; but, to my utter
disappointment, he has returned with a contempt for every thing, but what he
calls honesty, sincerity, philanthrophy, and such stuff: -- These may be
virtues, but in the present day, they will be found but poor recommendations to
either power or profit: -- How he should learn such nonsense in England I am at
a loss to account for; but, at any rate, I am determined he shall unlearn it
here. -- Enter CHARLES. -- Well, sir, where have you been idling your time?
Time is precious, Charles; when I was of your years I improved every minute.


Char. Well, sir, and so do I: -- After so long an absence from my native
shores, I find the greatest pleasure and satisfaction in contemplating the
increase of population, which has been added to our country since I left it.
Our city of Philadelphia has grown beyond my expectations: At present the
superfice strikes me as the emblem of happiness, peace, and plenty, although I
have been told, since my arrival, there is a canker preying upon its vitals.


Screwp. Ha! What canker? What do you mean? Do you wish to be a mender of
governments?


Char. No, sir; it is not the government I mean, it is private speculation, in
which every nobler faculty of the mind is absorbed, the distresses of the
poorer class of citizens neglected, and the interest of the whole country
prostituted to the emolument of an individual.


Screwp. And pray, sir, who has been filling your head with such nonsense: I
suppose you have been introduced into the spouting clubs, on the other side of
the water, where a parcel of 'prentices and fellows of no soul, meet to discuss
what they don't understand; I gave you letlers to noblemen, had you kept their
company you would have found a more amusing and profitable way of spending your
time.


Char. I am obliged to you, sir, for your recommendations; but, in the midst of
their dissipation and pleasure, I sickened with their (...) and vices, and left
them to enjoy, by themselves, that luxury, which appeared to me (...)
deprivation of rational existence.


Screwp. Well, sir, your ideas are so refined, that, I hope, by them alone you
will be able to work yourself through the world; for, depend upon it, till you
alter your sentiments, I will never put it in your power to live independent of
me. Exit.


Char. [solus.] Well, hang me, if I have not a good mind to disinherit this
father of mine: I was told he was a speculator, and I think I gave him a
tolerable rub: -- Had he wished me to have been a counterpart of himself, he
should have bred me under his own eye; but, thank my luckier fortune,
conscience is not yet lulled within me; and so, dear dad, if you are
disappointed in me, I am disappointed in you, and so our disappointment is
mutual. -- But I must haste to my amiable Lydia, she can amply repay me for the
ill-treatment of a father, who not only wishes to govern my actions but my
sentiments; if once I can make her mine, I have no doubt but industry and an
honest heart will be my support, even without the assistance of a mercenary
father. [ going, enter NOTEALL hastily.] Hah! Mr. Noteall, why in such haste?


Note. I Am in search of your father; a ship of his is just arrived from the
East Indies, richly laden with teas, silks, etc. -- she has been long expected,
and her arrival will give him infinite satisfaction.


Char. How! a ship of his? I never heard my father traded thither.


Note. Why as to that -- I Am afraid I have made a small mistake: But,
(hesitates) I suppose it can make but little difference your being acquainted
with the secret; -- you must know then, for certain purposes this vessel is
ostensibly owned by Mr. Grub.


Char. Why? What purpose can that answer?


Note. Why -- you must be secret though -- you must understand, your father has
a number of bills due, and there is such a thing as seizure for debt; now the
property being owned by another, it makes all safe, all secure, as we say: --
But I must find your father. Exit.


Char. [solus.] So, more roguery! All safe, all secure, as we say: No, no, hang
it, as they say; for sooner than I would league in such knavery, I Would trundle a
wheelbarrow for a bare existence. Exit.


SCENE III, A Hall in Screwpenny's House.
Enter WILLIAM hastily. Will. Richard! Richard! Richard!


Enter RICHARD. Rich. [surlily.] Well! what is the matter now?


Will. Why, you must get the coach ready, my master's going out.


Rich. Well, let him walk, or get the coach yourself, Mr. William, for dam'me
if I Will put a horse to, till I get my wages.


Will. Why, are you mad? You Will be turned away, and then --


Rich. And then, what? I Will sue him for what he owes me.


Will. Sue him! Why what a fool you are! What will you get by that? He Is
possessed of landed property, and can keep you out of your money, two or three
years: Your best way is to humor him; and, by some little cunning, you may, in
a lucky minute, get him to settle with you; besides, going to law is a foolish
thing at any time; a client in the hands of a lawyer, is like a half joe in the
gripe of a jew, both are sure to be well sweated before they are parted with:
Therefore, take my advice, and get the horses ready.


Rich. Well, well, I believe you are right; but its nation hard, that an
honest, hard-working man, is to be cheated out of his due by an old withered
rogue of a speculator. Exit.


Will. [solus.] True enough! And here am I, head servant to William Screwpenny,
busied from morning till night, stopping the mouths of gaping tradesmen, with
excuses for non-payment of trifling sums, that would disgrace the day-book of a
retail shopkeeper: -- Oh, here he comes. Exit.


Enter Old SCREWPENNY and NOTEALL. Screwp. Well, well, Noteall, safe arrived;
that is lucky, that is lucky: -- Be sure no hint is given that the ship is mine:
-- And, do you hear, bid Grub advertise, that my notes will be taken at the sales
of the teas -- only the Bohea mind; for the finer sort will certainly produce
ready cash; and the people will be glad to bid high for the Bohea and common
sorts, merely to get rid of my notes, which I am glad to hear depreciate very
fast.


Note. I shall give the necessary directions, sir: -- But there is a
circumstance I have this day learnt from the captain of the ship, in which your
son came passenger, with which I think it my duty to acquaint you.


Screwp. Well, what is it?


Note. Why, he informed me, that Major Upright's daughter came with him, and
that he suspects your son is very much attached to her.


Screwp. Attached to her! Zounds I Will disinherit him, the dog! Why I hate
Upright! Has he not abused me? Thwarted all my schemes? Publicly insulted me?
-- And my son to forget himself so far as to form an attachment in his family:
-- But I Will prevent him, I Will I Will -- what the devil shall I do with him? --
Ha, Noteall? -- Is he at home? -- If ever I hear of his even visiting there,
I Will disinherit him: -- Aye, I Will discard him forever: -- An undutiful rascal!
with his high-flown sentiments of honor: -- Had I ever any such sentiments --
ha, Noteall?


Note. No, sir, -- cannot say -- never observed any: -- but, perhaps, sir, the
young man is not seriously bent upon marriage: There may be some mistake in my
information.


Screwp. Mistake! Aye, like enough! It must be a mistake, or he has not a drop
of my blood in his veins; and I don't think his mother played false; for I
married her for her fortune: -- Beauty she had not.


Enter WILLIAM. Will. The coach is ready, sir.


Screwp. Very well: -- Is my son at home?


Will. No, sir, he has been gone out this half hour.


Screwp. Well, I Am going out, should he come home before I return, tell him I
want particularly to speak with him. Exeunt Omnes.


SCENE IV. A Hall in Major Upright's House: -- Moderate Knocking at the Door --
Enter JAMES, with a Bone and Potatoe in his Hand. James. Devil burn me but
it is very hard a gentleman, in this free country, cannot eat his potatoes in
peace, but some saucy fellow must disturb his ears by knocking or calling --
[knock] -- Aye, knock away; I cannot do two things at once: -- Fait these
American potatoes are almost as fine as little Ireland's, but then they have
not such a sweet smack of the sod -- [knock] -- Aye, knock till you're tired,
and then, perhaps, you will be easy. (Picks his bone leisurely.) [ Knock.] --


Enter Major UPRIGHT. Major. James, why don't you go to the door?


James. Please your hon -- sir I mean, I was thinking of being after going, as
soon as I had cleared myself of what I have got in hand.


Major. Pshaw, fool, open the door.


James. Yes, sir. [takes out his pocket handkerchief, puts the bone in it, and
wipes his hands leisurely.]


Major. Well, sir, why don't you go?


James. I Am gone, sir, I was only wiping the grease off my hands and mouth, to
look a little decent, your hon -- sir. Exit.


Major. This fellow's prolixity would almost make me think him a fool. But who
have we here?


Enter JAMES with CHARLES. James. Mr. Charles Screwpenny, sir. Exit.


Char. I hope, sir, you will not esteem this visit an intrusion; as, although I
am not personally known to you, yet your character is familiar to me: -- I had
the pleasure to arrive in the same ship with your amiable daughter, and this
visit is merely to enquire after her health.


Major. Sir, I am acquainted with the attentions you paid to her on board, and
thank you for your kindness. -- I hope, sir, you left your friends well in
England, and that your travels in that country have not only been agreeable,
but useful to you; for my part, having never been from the place of my
nativity, I know but little of England, except from books.


Char. Faith, sir, the greatest pleasure I derived from my travels, is the zest
they have given me for the charms of my native country. -- I have seen people
in England decorated with all the tinsel of distinction and honor, whose narrow
souls might have been comprised in an egg shell; whilst real merit, in a
threadbare coat, in silent anguish, picked the crumbs of penury and
wretchedness: -- I have seen great ladies riding after a fox, and noble lords
weaving lace, and exercising themselves on a wooden horse: -- I have seen their
principal city oppressed by contractors, speculators, and money lenders, and
the people caress their oppressors.


Major. You need not have traveled for the last sight.


Char. Your observation is just; but, I hope, we are not so far gone with the
disease.


Major. I believe, in proportion to the population of our country, we are
nearly upon a par: -- But, however, it is a disagreeable subject: -- My daughter
is in the next room; and, as I suppose you would not think your visit paid,
were you not to see her, if you will step this way, you may have the
opportunity.


Char. Sir, you do me pleasure. Exit ambo.


Knocking at one side, enter JAMES, opposite thereto. James. Arrah, nothing but
knocking, calling, or bawling from morning till night -- I wish the knocker was
worn out, and then 'twould save my shoes: -- But let us see who it is. [ Opens
the door. -- Enter WILLIAM.] Well, master William, and what do you want here?


Will. Pray, is Mr. Charles Screwpenny here?


James. To be sure he is, if he pleases.


Will. How if he pleases?


James. Why, you would not have him here, if he does not please


Will. Is he here or not? You Irishmen are allowed to speak twice.


James. You are an Englishman: now, and can you tell me why they are allowed to
speak twice?


Will. No.


James. Why then, Mr. William, I Will tell you: -- It Is to Englishmen alone that
we are allowed to speak twice, becaise they are so dull they cannot understand
plain English the first time


Will. But will you tell me or not, whether my young master's here?


James. To be sure I will, my jewel: -- He is here, and happier than if he was
not here.


Will. What makes him happy?


James. What makes him happy! Why the company of my sweet young mistress to be
sure: -- Och she is a fine creature, with as pretty a little fist -- to be
shure 'tisn't altogether so red, tight, and plump as my Katy's, but then to be
sure it is a pretty looking fist for all that.


Will. Well, well, tell him his father is at home, and wishes to speak to him
directly: I must run to deliver three or four messages.


Exit. James. Away with you! -- Now, shall I disturb the young Gentleman, or
not? -- Arrah, James, how would you like to be served so yourself? -- Not at
all (...). -- Why then I wont tell him a word about it. -- The young man will
certainly go home when he has nothing better to do; and his father's speeches
wont turn sour before tomorrow morning: -- No, no, James, always do by others
as you would be done by, and never spoil pleasure when you can give none. Exit.


Enter MAJOR and CHARLES. Major. Your sincerity and open candor pleases me: --
The affection you profess for my daughter would give me pleasure, and I should
approve your union, was there not a bar -- I had almost said an insuperable
objection -- to prevent it.


Char. What can that be, sir? You distress me, at the same time that I feel a
growing esteem for your sentiments. -- It Is true, I am dependent on my father
at present, and I fear he would be offended, was he to know I designed to
connect myself in your family; but I have no doubt, after I had really done so,
his indulgence to me would return.


Major. You deceive yourself -- our enmity is so rooted, that no time can
eradicate, or circumstance meliorate it: -- We detest each other, but upon
different grounds: He hates me for possessing that which he has all his life
despised -- Honesty -- that virtue, which makes the poor man great, and which,
the want of, no riches can atone for.


Char. Consider, sir, it is my father you speak of.


Major. I know it; but do not imagine I mean to insult you: -- If you are just
and noble enough to despise vice and dishonesty, their being possessed even by
a father, will not render their qualities less odious to you. Poison retains
its destructive qualities, whatever vessel contains it.


Char. But, sir, you may judge too severely of my father: -- That he has
peculiarities, I firmly believe; but I should be sorry even to entertain a
thought so much to his dishonor, as that which you have averred to be fact.


Major. I did not suppose, young man, that your sentiments, in this particular,
would be congenial with my own; but, mark me, if your heart is really virtuous,
it will soon teach you to despise the vices of your father; -- and this is my
firm resolution, That no one, who bears his name, shall ever be connected with
my family; therefore, if you marry my daughter, you must bear my name: -- You
have your choice, and so farewell. Exit.


Char. [solus.] (Pause of agitation) Well, it is past! -- Lydia, my charming
Lydia, I must resign you! -- What! renounce my father? -- Forget the author of
my being? -- Change my name -- and by so doing declare to the world I am
ashamed of it? -- Torture! -- it can never be -- the Major cannot be so cruel
-- And yet, let me not flatter myself, he seemed firmly determined in his
resolution. -- How unhappy am I! -- Here, where my fond fancy pictured
successive pleasures rising to my grasp, till my full heart should swell alone
with joy; here have I found my brightest hopes destroyed, and fading like the
transient beauties of the morn. -- Away reflection! -- I am tired of myself --
the world -- and all that now is left me, is scarcely worth the holding. [Exit.]


ACT SECOND.
SCENE V. An Appartment at Screwpenny's, Old Screwpenny discovered at
Breakfast, reading a Newspaper -- Noteall attending.
Screwp. Why, Noteall, I don't see that Grub has advertised the teas as I
directed: -- Here are fresh teas for sale, by Tobias Grub; but not a word of my
notes: -- What Is the reason of it?


Note. Cannot say, sir, I told him, verbatim, as you directed


Screwp. I don't like this business; I have some suspicions, that Grub intends
foul play; he is not so regular in his attendance upon me of late. -- Step and
ask why my directions are not observed.


Note. I will, sir. Exit.


Screwp. [solus.] That Grub has me in his power; fool that I was not to get
bonds for what I made over to him; however, it is the rascal's interest to serve
me at present. -- Enter CHARLES, musing. -- Well, sir, where was you yesterday
evening? -- I sent after you to that beggar Upright's: -- What were you doing
there? -- Tell me, sir, -- you know I hate him, -- you know he is my enemy: --
Come, sir, what do you go there for? -- Why don't you speak? -- [louder] Speak
I say!


Char. [recovering] Sir! -- I beg pardon -- I did not attend to what you said.


Screwp. Did not attend! What is the fellow distracted? -- What Is the matter
with you? -- What were you doing at Upright's last night?


Char. I went thither to pay the compliment of a visit to Miss Lydia, who came
over in the same ship with me.


Screwp. Compliment of a visit? -- I desire, sir, you will pay no more such
compliments, unless you mean me to disinherit you.


Char. There needed not that threat to prevent me! [sighs.]


Screwp. What Is that sigh for?


Char. Because, sir, I Am unhappy.


Screwp. What, you are in love, I suppose, or some such nonsense.


Char. That is not my only cause of sorrow: -- After I left Major Upright's,
yesterday evening, I happened to stroll into the Washington's head tavern,
where I was scarcely seated, when I heard your name mentioned in a very
unbecoming manner; irritated to the extreme, I seized the rascal by the throat,
who dared to take the liberty, and kicked him out of the room: returning to my
seat, an honest farmer, with whom this scoundrel had been conversing, called me
to him, and told me, that the fellow had endeavored to hurt your credit with
him: that you had bought lands of him to the amount of sixty thousand dollars,
for which you had given him bonds, and that this fellow had endeavored to
persuade him they were of no value; I immediately told him I was your son, that
I was sure your bonds were as good as cash, and I would ensure them to be paid
when due.


Screwp. You did, did you?


Char. [a little surprised] Yes, certainly, to save your honor.


Screwp. Honor! -- the virtue of fools: -- Why you have defeated one of my best
schemes -- Why, you blockhead, the worthy man you kicked out of the room was
Mr. Grub, my best friend; he went thither by my own appointment, to depreciate
my bills; all which your profound sentiments have disappointed: -- Oh, curse
your notions of honor and stuff; Where did you learn them?


Char. In a great measure, by my own experience: -- I always saw the honest
man, though unfortunate, respected by the good part of society; and dishonesty
treated by it with scorn and contempt.


Screwp. Honesty, forsooth? -- Money, money alone is honesty, honor, and every
virtue that exists. -- What! do you think I rose myself from a scrivener's
clerk, to command half the ready cash of Philadelphia, by honesty? No, no, -- I
left England young, came to this country without a second shirt, got into a
store as an under assistant (there indeed I was honest, because had I not been
so, I should have been turned out) there I was industrious, and recommended
myself, 'til I obtained the charge of a store; then began the glorious work of
gain -- I took every advantage, that is with circumspection, not to be found
out -- and when I had realized a little capital of my own, I set up for myself.
-- I was a money-lender, a broker, a store-keeper, a notary, all at one time.
-- I always watched how affairs went on in congress, and took measures
accordingly, for my own emolument. -- When the bill passed for the payment of
the military notes, I was beforehand, bought 'em up, and gained seventy-five
per cent in seven days. -- This was industry, Charles.


Char. Fatal industry! by which you have rendered yourself the object of
contempt and hatred, to the valuable part of mankind.


Screwp. Hatred, contempt! -- What care I? -- I have money; I am safe; let 'em
rail, it may be some consolation to them; and do you mind, Charles, do as I have
done, and you may be the richest man in the United States.


Char. [firmly] Sir, I had rather be the poorest, and retain a clear
conscience, than the richest, loaded with the pangs conscious guilt is sure to
inspire: -- Look into yourself, sir; Do you, can you feel happy? -- The cries
of the widow, the invalid, and the orphan must continually ring in your ears.
-- Ah, wretched father! I now most sincerely pity you, and rather than adopt
your sentiments, I Would forego your riches.


Screwp. Then forego them you shall -- Rascal! Did I beget you to be a thorn in
my side; a spur to goad me; worse than the insults I daily suffer from the
improvident and foolish. -- Hence, hence, from my sight, never appear before me
again: -- Begone, I disinherit you, I discard you, I abandon you to that
poverty you are so fond of, and may you never learn to be worldly wise enough
to make your own fortune.


Char. For the last wish I sincerely thank you, sir; that worldly wisdom, I
hope, I shall ever despise. -- Your character is now fully disclosed, and a
longer connection with you might endanger my fame, which, I trust, has hitherto
been unsullied. Farewell, you have fixed my determination, and henceforward I
will own no father, whose sentiments are not more congenial with my own.


Exit. Screwp. [solus.] (Pause.) Hah! what the devil makes him so soon
determined? -- What, will not my riches command the obedience of even my son?
-- Well, well, no matter, no matter -- if he wont do as I wish him he might as
well be out of my house as in it: -- But what will the world say? -- Oh curse
the world: -- Shall I, who have despised it so long, truckle to it now? -- No,
no, Old Screwpenny shall be notorious for only minding the main chance. Exit.


Enter WILLIAM. Will. Mr. Grub, to wait on you, sir.


Screwp. Show him up. [Exit Will.] I Am glad he is come: -- Now let me speak to
him with proper consequence. [ Enter GRUB.] Good morning to you, Mr. Grub, it is
some time since I have seen you.


Grub. Why, I have not been very well lately; between ourselves, got a touch of
my old complaint: Besides, going about a little of your business last night, I
got kicked and cuffed by a graceless varlet, who I find is your son: -- Fine
treatment this! the business prevented, and myself beat to a mummy!


Screwp. I Am very sorry for your misfortune, dear Mr. Grub, but you are
revenged -- I have disinherited the scoundrel.


Grub. Have you? -- Well now, my dear Mr. Screwpenny, that is very kind, very
kind of you indeed!


Screwp. Oh, aye, I always endeavor to give satisfaction to my friends,
especially to so dear a one as you are, Mr. Grub. -- But, I do not find you
have advertised the tea as I advised; that is, you never mentioned that my
notes would be received at the sales.


Grub. Why, between ourselves, I did not think it advisable.


Screwp. Not advisable! Why so? Sure I am the best judge how my property should
be disposed of?


Grub. Why, Mr. Screwpenny, between ourselves, there is a small mistake, which
I came here purposely to explain to you.


Screwp. Mistake? Why what mistake? -- Tell me -- What have you to do but to
obey my orders?


Grub. Hold a little, Mr. Screwpenny, you know, between ourselves, I have been
your agent this long time, and I cannot say I think myself paid for my attention
to your interest.


Screwp. Not paid? Have not I recommended you to a deal of business?


Grub. But that is not enough; I Am not content. -- And, between ourselves,
until you pay better, I must beg leave to decline doing business for you.


Screwp. Well, but Mr. Grub, do give me satisfaction about the teas.


Grub. Oh that I can very easily do; though, between ourselves, I don't know any
business you have with them.


Screwp. No business with them? -- Why, arn't they my property? -- What the
devil do you mean?


Grub. Mean? Why, between ourselves, the tea, ship, and all the concern is my
property, my own property -- Did not I buy them of you?


Screwp. Buy them of me? Oh you rascal, I Will have you hanged, throttled, shot:
-- What, do you really think to cheat me in this manner?


Grub. You had better be temperate; -- between ourselves, we are both cheats,
and I deserve some profit as well as you.


Screwp. You Will be disappointed: -- Noteall is a good witness against you: --
Take care, you may repent this conduct.


Grub. Between ourselves, you will be disappointed: Noteall is bought on my side.


Screwp. Oh, the scoundrel; he desert me; -- A fellow that I have bred up in my
own house, nurtured in my bosom, viper like, to bite the hand that fostered
him? -- But as for you, you villain, rascal, blood-hound, oh I Will be revenged
-- Dam'me, I Will be revenged.


Grub. Be cool, be temperate; consider, sir, between ourselves, the labourer is
worthy of his hire; besides, the kicks I received yesterday evening deserve
some recompense.


Screwp. Oh, you villain, would to heaven he had murdered you. -- Why the devil
cannot I choke you myself? Rascal, I will, it is only cheating the hangman. [Runs
and seizes Grub by the throat, who struggles and speaks as if choking.]


Grub. Be temperate -- do listen to reason.


Screwp. What reason, villain? -- Will you give up the ship?


Grub. No-o-o-o. [Choaking.]


Enter NOTEALL, runs hastily and parts them. Note. Why, my worthy masters,
what is the matter with ye both?


Grub. [recovering] Why, dear Mr. Noteall, between ourselves, poor Mr.
Screwpenny is a little disordered in his brain, a little touched, we'd better
retire.


Note. Aye, he looks very wild about the eyes.


Screwp. Do I, rascal? I Will be the death of that fellow yet! Runs toward Grub,
Noteall meets him, trips up his heels, and exit with Grub; Screwpenny rising in
haste, calls.


Screwp. Thieves! Murder! Villains! William! William! Richard! Where the devil
are you? Murder! [gets up] Thieves! [ Enter SERVANTS hastily.] Where Is Noteall?
Where Is that old villain, Grub?


Will. They Are just gone out of the door hastily.


Screwp. Then do you go to the devil after them. [flings a chair.]


Rich. How wild he looks. Exit Servants.


Screwp. Oh what a miserable old fellow I am -- cheated, robbed, plundered --
What the devil shall I do? -- Dam'me, I Will chew opium, and run muck, like an
Indian, but I Will be revenged. Exit.


SCENE VI. An Appartment in Major Upright's.
Enter KATY, JAMES following. James. Arrah, Katy, honey, be easy now, by my
soul I had not the least thought of offending you, at all, at all.


Katy. No, to be sure, you false man you, to put me in mind of the captain, as
you always do: Suppose I did do an odd job or two for him on board, why sure
there was no harm in that?


James. No, to be sure there was not! -- Och you pretty little rogue you -- Fait
I love you, and that makes me like to teize you: -- There Is no pleasure at all
here, to be compared to a little snug conversation with you, my jewel, faith,
you know, I was up to the tip of my nose in love with you, long before we got
into the wooden water stage, to travel here.


Katy. Yes, James, you have told me many a fib, I believe; but now I will not hear
any more, because my young lady takes on so about losing her sweetheart, and I
cannot be merry, whilst she is sad: -- If I was as she, I would not care a rap
halfpenny about him, a fellow; -- but it is no matter, all you he-people are
alike.


James. Arrah no, Katy: -- Faith you know I am constant, aye and never forsook
you; to be sure, when you were sea-sick, I felt, faith, only with looking at
you, as if I should be sick too; yet I never left you at all, but plied you
with burnt whisky, till your stomach was easy -- Didn't I?


Katy. It Is very true, James; but don't say any more about it: -- Do sing me
the song that you made about our passage from Ireland.


James. Aye, to be sure, any thing to please you, my jewel; -- but since I Have
got the salt water down my throat, devil burn me, I Have lost my voice, and, by
St. Patrick, it is lucky if I have not lost the tune too.

SONG.
I.
When we took our departure from Dublin's famed city,
For Columbia's free land, through the seas did we plow;
For eleven long weeks our hard case you might pity;
By plaguey cross winds we were blown to and fro;
But when out at sea, short allowance of water,
Our beef and our pork, than raw brine was far salter,
Joined with being quite sick, made our voices to falter,
That we never more thought to sing langolee.
II.
But when her gay shores fair Columbia presented,
And the Cape's pretty light-house rose high to our view,
Not a soul then on board to drink whisky dissented,
For we toasted our Judy's, and sang to them too:
And now before the town our gay ship did cast anchor;
With our stomachs quite lean, and our faces far lanker,
For Freedom's sweet beef and fresh greens we did hanker,
And longed safe on shore to sing langolee.
III.
But alack, to be sure, we were all disappointed,
For one grievous thing by the way, we'd forgot,
To pay for our passage, the cash we all wanted;
But though we'd forgot it, the captain had not;
So he put us all up, like lean sheep in a pen, sir,
To be sold, like poor rogues, to some fine gentlemen, sir,
Who bought us all up, and promised us then, sir,
They Would keep us three years to sing langolee.
IV.
To be sure, being sold made me feel quite down-hearted,
For I, before this, was never bought in my days,
I looked back for Dublin, from whence I departed,
But, alas! all in vain for the sod did I gaze.
But my master's kind treatment, my heart has revived, sir,
I never fed so well all the days that I Have lived, sir,
For Liberty's tree in Columbia has thrived, sir,
And the fruit it produces is Equality.

Katy. Aye, James, to be sure, we are very lucky in so good a master as the
Major.


James. Och to be sure we are: -- Why they told me bugaboo stories in little
Ireland about one thing and 'tother, to frighten little James from coming over,
but 'twas all nonsense: -- Why, there is Dermot and Patrick, and a dozen or two,
more or less, that are just as comfortable as heart could wish: -- We have no
brats of boys of lords, and honorable spindle shanked puppies, to kick us about
here; and then we have plenty of whisky and good eatables -- Do you mind, Katy,
how round and plump I Have got since I came here?


Katy. To be sure you have -- and I think I look better a great deal: -- But
see, here is my young lady coming -- do go now down the back stairs.


James. Och, to be sure I will -- but you have not paid me for my song. --
What, you wont? Why then, by the powers of Venus, I Will take my pay my own dear
self. [kisses her]


Katy. Oh, pray go, -- see my young lady's coming. -- There go. Shoves him off.


Enter LYDIA. Lydia. Pray, who was that left the room?


Katy. Nobody, please you ma'am, but James, he was helping me to put things a
little to rights, and so --


Lydia. Take care, Katy, I fear you indulge Mr. James in too many liberties. --
Reach me a book. [Sits down.]


Katy. Please you, ma'am, I Am so sorry to see you dull and melancholic: -- Sure
you cannot read now.


Lydia. Why not, pray?


Katy. Why, ma'am, I can never read myself when my head is running upon other
things, as, methinks, yours is at this present time, ma'am.


Lydia. Pray do not be so rude.


Katy. I begs pardon, ma'am, I Am sure I would not offend you 'pon any account;
but I was thinking --


Lydia. Pray, what was you thinking?


Katy. Why, ma'am, I was thinking, it was very hard, just when you thought you
were going to be happy with your lover, to be disappointed; it put me in mind,
when the ship I came in, first came in sight of America land, and all of us
were so happy to think of being near to get ashore, after our rumbustious
passage, when up come a norwester, (as the sailors called it) and kept us seven
days longer on the water; oh I thought I should have died! -- But then we got
safe ashore at last.


Lydia. I understand you; but I have no hopes of my wishes being crowned with
the same success: -- My father is determined; and I fear expects too much from
Mr. Screwpenny, when he supposes he would relinquish his name and family on my
account.


Katy. Why law, ma'am, does not the bible say, that a man shall leave father and
all, and cleave to his wife?


Lydia. Aye, but not his name.


Katy. A fig for his name! -- We women change our names very often to oblige
the men, and why shou'dn't they, now and then, oblige us by changing theirs?


Lydia. Ridiculous! -- But, Katy, I want not your advice; bring me a book, I Will
try and reconcile myself to my disappointment.


Katy goes to side, and returns. Katy. Dear ma'am, here is my master coming up
stairs, -- he will be as good as a book, I warrant, he talks so sententious, it is
as good as a sermon to hear him.


Lydia. If my father is coming, you may leave me. [Exit Katy.] Heavens! -- When
shall I recover my lost happiness? -- I cannot accuse my father as the author
of my misery; and yet, he alone is the bar to my obtaining that which appears
to me my only felicity: -- However, if rectitude of conduct insures peace of
mind, that blessing is still my own.


Enter Major UPRIGHT, Major. Well, Lydia, -- I am come to spend a few hours in
conversation with you: -- You have been dull today -- that I do not wonder at;
-- but you seem to shun me; surely I have given you no cause.


Lydia. No, my dear sir, I do not believe you ever wished to infuse pain into
the bosom of your Lydia; but our feelings are not always under our own
control: -- Truth and justice, though ever to be admired cannot always be
obeyed without a sigh; and when a sacrifice is made to their virtues, surely
that may be allowed to the disappointment of a fond inclination.


Major. You are a good philosopher, Lydia: -- But, perhaps, I have it in my
power to make you forget your uneasiness; nay more, I think my company not only
can alleviate the distresses of your mind, but raise it to rapture -- joy.


Lydia. I think not, sir: -- Time, indeed, may efface the bitterness of my
distress; but surely no power on earth could, at present, induce me to be
joyful.


Major. Don't be too certain: -- Suppose now Young Screwpenny has acceded to my
proposals?


Lydia. [reviving] Dear sir, did you say acceded? -- Has he?


Major. Why then, my child, he has -- here in this very letter. [Shews a
letter.]


Lydia. [joyfully] Then I really am overjoyed! -- I Am happy! -- [relapse] But
--


Major. But what?


Lydia. My dear father, this may be the result of his passion for me, rather
than the cool dictates of reason; he may repent his condescension after
marriage, and render me miserable.


Major. [warmly] Condescension? -- What condescension? -- To despise vice? --
Is that a condescension? -- If so, I wish all the world possessed so valuable a
qualification: -- And as to his making you miserable, leave that concern to me;
-- he dares not do it, if he were so inclined; he should find, old as I am,
that I could protect my daughter from insult: -- [recovering] But come, come, I
believe he means well, if I can judge by what he has written: -- You shall hear
-- [reads] 'Dear sir, when I last parted from you, I was overwhelmed with grief
and disappointment, I could not imagine my father so unworthy as you
represented him: -- Some circumstances, added to his own confession, have
opened my eyes to his true character; and although, as a son, I cannot but
grieve for his vices, yet duty to myself obliges me no longer to respect him as
the author of my being; considering as I do, that he had better not have been
so, than afterward to wish me, to despise all duties, sacred and moral, for
the gratification of ambition and avarice. I shall wait upon you this
afternoon, and reassure you, that, with the greatest pleasure, I accept your
proposals, with the hand of your most lovely and amiable daughter; in the mean
time, I remain your devoted, Charles Screwpenny.' -- Now, Lydia, what do you
think?


Lydia. Think! My dear sir, I am now convinced, and I am sure I can depend upon
his sentiments and honor: -- The man who can despise vice even in a father,
must, in himself, be really good.


Major. I think with you, Lydia, and feel no doubt of his virtue: -- It Is
virtue alone, which raises man to the esteem of his Creator; it is not the words
of devotion, but the actions of philanthrophy and justice, that must recommend
him to that beneficent being, who delights to make happy, those to whom he has
given existence.


Enter JAMES. James. Please you, sir, Young Mr. Screwpenny desires to see you.


Major. Show him up, James, I shall be happy to see him.


James. I will your honor -- sir I mean.


Exit. Major. The method with which this fellow shows his compliments, serves
to convince us how foolish titles are; for one cent he would give the title of
lord or honorable, to the most despicable wretch in the creation.


Enter CHARLES, and JAMES, who crosses the Stage, and exit. Char. My dear sir;
no doubt you have received my letter; I am now come to prove the truth of it.


Major. I have received your letter, and only hope that conscious worth indicted
it; -- it is a hard task for a young man to discard his father.


Char. No, sir, I see you yet suspect my principles; but, believe me, whatever
regret I may feel for the frailty of the author of my being, yet justice and
reason actuate my mind, devoid of selfish principles: -- Had I believed my
father virtuous, or even foolishly fantastical, I would not have patiently
heard his name traduced; but his words and actions have convinced me, that any
connection with him must destroy not only my public character, but rack my
private happiness.


Major. I am convinced: -- Come, young man, no longer Screwpenny, but Charles
Upright, I here give you my daughter; -- come, Lydia, you shall not change your
name; the family of the Uprights are so few, that the more they extend
themselves the better it will be for the human species. Here I join your hands,
and may heaven look down upon your union with a smile, -- Enter JAMES and KATY.
Well, what do you want?


James. Arrah, please your honor, for honor I will call you, do as you like, I
come to ask you about a little bit of my own concerns.


Major. Well, tell me at once what you want.


James. Why, you must know, your honor, as matrimony is on the carpet -- Katy
has taken a very great liking to me.


Katy. Hold your tongue, James, it is no such thing; I like you no more than one
christian ought to like another.


James. Och that is true enough, please your honor: -- And, as I was saying, she
wishes to take a claim on the body and heart of your servant, James O'Connor;
now, your honor, if you will let us marry, to be sure it will please us both,
and we'll remain your honor's faithful redemptioners, 'till we can do better --
Wont we, Katy?


Major. What, is this your wish, Katy?


Katy. I don't know, sir -- James is so pressing.


Major. I understand you, and if you think you can be happy, I will not prevent
you; -- do well; -- and if you serve out your times faithfully, I will, at the
conclusion, give you a little farm, where, by industry, you may succeed to
render yourselves respectable.


James. Now I truly thank your honor; and I am determined we will deserve your
kindness. -- Why? -- Because your honor knows poor people are flesh and blood,
and must marry, or live badly; -- to be sure human nature is human nature,
is not it, Katy? -- So give me your hand, my girl, -- never fear, lit-James
O'Connor shall do you justice; and now you are mine, why, you shall do an odd
job for me too, as well as you did for the captain -- Will Not you?


Major. Hold your tongue, James; -- whilst Major Upright has the power to
prevent it, you shall not want: -- It gives me sincere satisfaction to have
added one more to the Upright family, and as long as honesty is known and
cherished by my countrymen, I am sure that the Man of the Times will be hated
and despised, and virtue be ever crowned with success. Exeunt Omnes



