The Rev. Brother BENTLEY'S DISCOURSE, And Brother DIX'S ADDRESS; AT THE
CONSECRATION OF Washington Lodge IN ROXBURY.

A DISCOURSE, Delivered in ROXBURY, October 12, 5796; BEFORE THE GRAND LODGE OF
Free and Accepted Masons IN THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS; (THE MOST
WORSHIPFUL PAUL REVERE, ESQUIRE MASTER.) AT THE REQUEST OF THE MEMBERS OF
WASHINGTON LODGE, ON OCCASION OF THE CONSECRATION OF THE LODGE AND THE
INSTALATION OF OFFICERS.

BY THE REV. BROTHER WILLIAM BENTLEY, A. M. F. H. S.

-- SPERATA VOLUPTAS
SUAVIS AMICITIAE, QUEMVIS PERFERRE LABOREM,
SUADET. --
LUCRETIUS. A DISCOURSE.
ECCLESIASTICUS X, 20. AMONG BRETHREN, HE THAT IS CHIEF, IS HONORABLE.
IT is the laudible purpose of our institution, by the most agreeable means, to
expand our hearts for all the offices of humanity. It does not destroy, nor
even weaken the love of private interest, of kindred, nations, or opinions. It
is intended to assist a generous energy of mind, in rising to the highest
obligations of charity. It accomplishes its end, by creating a society, in
which we familiarize its special duties, by a voluntary association with all
parts of the family into which we enter. The strongest prejudices are such only
as exist in every kindred, which has a duty and affection, not directed by pure
character, but by an established, immutable, and public relation. We embrace
friends through the world. He that is first in such a family among brethren,
should be social in his disposition, open in his temper, safe in his habits,
firm in his character, and reputable in the world. To deserve this preference,
and to receive it, must be the highest honor. From the persuasion or this
truth, my Brethren, I rise with cheerfulness, in the service you have assigned
me, in bearing your public testimony to this sentiment. We are Brethren. Duties
belong to each; but different duties to all. The wisdom of the head; the
sincerity of the heart; the benevolence of the temper; the quickness of the
senses; and the organic life, in each part, form the perfection of the whole.
But all these parts have not the same office, nor the same resources. If the
head be sound, each faculty more readily finds its full employment and use. The
head, then, is the most honorable. Equal as are all friendships, with society,
we begin a necessary subordination. And as this is more perfect and happy, we
flourish and are blessed. The choice of the man then, and not of the master, is
voluntary. The man may be changed, but the Master is perpetual. He is created
by our necessity, and we owe him the full obedience of our Love. In the duties
of his office he is the soul of our institution; and while he lives in our
reverence of him, we live also. To judge of that wisdom, we may employ in the
choice, we must be sure of the character, object, manners, and form of Free
Masonry.

I. As the whole character of man is from education, under various names, so
there are institutions to assist this education. They have various objects.
They assist to devellope the faculties; to instruct in the arts; to form
manners; to promote knowledge; to preserve the affections; or to teach
religion. They arise from private choice, or from the authority of Laws. They
are adapted to private, or public ends. Some are designed to reform mankind,
others to unite them. Some to find greater resources in human nature, and some
to keep what we have already gotten. Some to separate the wise and good from
the rest of mankind, and some to promote the general good. Our own is designed
to bring all the social affections away from the cares of life; and the
partialities of private friendship, into the service of our common nature. We
prefer no man's religion. We examine no laws of any country. We speak in no
language: and take names from no party. We belong to every thing sincere and
social in the human heart. We explore the imperfection of no character, which
can be tolerated by the laws of any country. All men who have the heart to be
social, and the power to be kind, we love. The gay we do not despise. The
follies which violate no laws of life and manners, we forget. We mix our
pleasures with every innocent gaiety of the song; and we become cheerful at the
flowing bowl, and the table. We take men as we find them, disposed to live in
the happiness of each other. Such is the Character of Free Masonry.

II. But to guard our institution from abuse, we have a generous object always
before us. We chase away all envy, competition, and strife. We have our
brethren every where in the family of mankind: we therefore despise no customs,
insult no laws, and hate no country. To know our brethren is our delight; to
assist them is our glory. Our wealth, beyond our own wants, is sacred to their
use. To point out the path of life, and make it happy, is our sublime wisdom.
We cannot be friends of society, if we violate any of its laws. To be
honorable among masons, we must have honor from every social obligation. We
have too great a share in the public happiness, to separate from it. We cannot
be miserable, because every man's happiness is our own. Cheerful, we are sure
to be content; and, as far as we are able, we provide for perpetual peace.
Domestic life has its chief joys from our friendship; and industry its greatest
guards from our love. We know no man, but in his capacity for happiness; and we
have no duty to him, but to enlarge it. Such is the object of our institution.

III. We are not insensible of the liableness of our institution to abuse, and
we know that the abuses of all institutions have a character from the nature of
them. How inestimable are the advantages of religion! Of living in the love of
God! But how many fanatics and bigots, devotees and mystics, are recounted in
the history of every religion. We furnish none of these; we shun them. But,
while the passions live in our world in sad perversion, we dare not pretend,
that our brethren have not been betrayed. We pretend to nothing above human
nature. We take propensities as we find them, and we aim to render them useful.
We take the man in the gay hour, when his countenance is cheered by the
congratulations of his friends; his spirits elevated by mirth, and the song;
when fancy is sportive, and amusements are ready; and while he is exhilirated
at the feast of joy. These are scenes from which the gay will not be excluded.
They may be rendered the innocent pleasures of social life. They are not sought
with equal delight in every place. The glass is never filled in the master's
presence in some places, but at the festivals; and the song is seldom heard
among some brethren, but in the jocund hour, when the Lodge is shut. These
pleasures are indulgences, not Laws: of choice, not of obligation. And if we
sometimes exceed the bounds, which decency and good manners appoint, it is not
because we do not profess an abhorrence of every thing contrary to the purest
laws of life. We lament what we cannot correct. And in a faithful master, we
have the surest restraints upon our gayest pleasures. Our dangers are from the
activity of our spirits, and from the unbounded effusions of a cheerful hour.
Profusion waits upon the steps of jollity, and pleasure often despises
interest. A master watches over his Lodge: he commands, and he is always obeyed.

IV. THE form of the institution can be known only to the brethren. There is
nothing, which the most refined delicacy might not behold. The solemn addresses
at initiation are before the world. We publish our Constitutions, Regulations,
Instructions, and general Laws; and even our freest mirth; and from these we
may appeal to an impartial world, whether those are not good principles we
profess. We justify the use of every rite, of every form and ceremony, which
can aid the local prejudices of religion or virtue. And the discretion gives no
offense. We trust that the scene of this day will strengthen the convictions,
that there are no obligations unworthy of a good man, and that the presence of
the wise would be a desirable blessing to Free Masonry.

THE Symbols we display, have been variously interpreted. We publish them not
for curiosity, but for ceremony. They are employed not for superstition, but
for use. All constructions favorable to moral life are indulged, rather to
remove prejudices abroad, than to define their character within the Lodge. They
are free for disquisition, while they contribute to no dissension. To avoid the
charge of obscurity, we shall not enter upon any particular explanation. It is
enough, that the scrutiny of an antiquarian may report that they are the most
early emblems of wisdom, and such as may be found among all ancient nations. A
Bryant might discover the symbols of Egypt, as an Hutcheson has of Pythagoras,
as well as of the ancient mystics. They betray to the scholar no proofs of
modern times, for their invention is as old as science itself. They have been
confounded with the emblems in the mysteries of Greece, and constantly traced
to geometry and philosophy. A strong resemblance in the ancient gems has forced
itself upon the notice of the most cursory observer. It is enough, if they be
faithful in communicating their design through the world.

FROM these remarks upon Free Masonry, it may be soon apparent, how much will
depend on the Lectures of a Lodge, and consequently how much upon a faithful
Master, and Wardens. It may then be expected that every brother, who assumes an
office, by the consent of a Lodge, will sacredly attend to his charge. Every
officer ought to be a calm, friendly, and benevolent man. An extensive
knowledge of the brethren ought to be his desire, but he certainly ought to
know the character and habits of all in his own Lodge. The difference between
well governed Lodges, and all other Lodges, is the greatest to be imagined.
Nothing should be suffered which can provoke, alarm, or excite prejudice. The
office of Charity is to keep every such thing from a Lodge. Unless then the
master can rise above the distinctions of sects in religion, while he has an
established character in the public opinion; unless he is superior to parties
in the state; unless he can freely converse with all the brethren, without
regard to the competitions of private life; unless he can be indulgent to
particular manners and tempers, to customs, with which he cannot comply, and to
amusements, he cannot prefer; he will never diffuse a generous joy around him.
All hearts will not be united. All prejudices will be active. Cheerfulness will
not lean on partial kindness; nor fellowship sit with disgrace. Brethren will
not suffer their charity to be degraded by their opinions, nor by their names.

FOR voluntary associations, we require such men to hold offices, as can be
punctual, active, and ready in all the services of their station: to whom the
prosperity of the Lodge is the highest reward, and whose measure of duty, is
not from what others have done, but from a disposition to do all the good in
their power. Happy indeed will it be, if the domestic and social character of a
Master be lovely in the world, and inspire confidence in his benevolence. After
such a delineation of our character, our brethren in this vicinity will not
doubt of the nature of our advice and charge in these solemnities.

LET me then say to our Brethren of WASHINGTON LODGE; In this social
institution you have the indulgence of all the innocent passions, and all the
incentives of generous affections. You may unbend in social glee, catch the
sweet sympathy of pleasure, and share it with fullness of soul. And while you
rejoice in, you ought to urge a friendly zeal, and even an enthusiasm to
defend, a friendship you thus honorably enjoy.

TO secure a mason's heart, he ought to have a sincere temper, and the habits
of good will. Our friendship is not begun in disinterested love. We have an
interest in each other. There is too little of this love in the world, not to
induce doubts of the strength of it, in many who profess it. The little to be
found, which resembles it, agrees too well with the nature of our habits, to be
accounted for, more easily, on any other principles. Constancy, then, is a
virtue of a flourishing Lodge. It is only while we keep near the Lodge, we are
Masons.

MASONS, as brethren, ought to be careful to receive only those who appear good
men and true. What we gain from prejudice, is not sure gain. To open our arms
to the disgraced or the discontented of any society, is to degrade ourselves
and make the injured our enemies. This will give a triumph to their zeal, and
justify their invectives. He that is not at peace with all the world, cannot be
at peace with us. He that despises and violates any profession, will certainly
dishonor us.

MASONS ought not only to regard the character of men, but their dispositions.
An in-institution may be adapted to preserve virtue, which is not fit to create
it. The man who profits so little from life, as to have no lovely virtues, will
be a tax upon us. He who does not conform to the approved manners and laws of a
country, wants the first principles of friendship, and must prove a disgrace to
us.

MASONS ought also to confirm their interest in each other. As the social
principle becomes more strong from the interest we have in each other, in our
whole character, we must have the greatest interest in every thing dear to the
brethren. He that in common life can despise the most whimsical thoughts of a
brother, will never enjoy his affections. A good brother must learn to see
without any contempt, the most strange opinions living in a good heart. A Lodge
is not a place for debate, or controversy. Political questions are unknown in
it. Every thing belonging to a brother enjoys our charity.

MASONS should determine the conversation of a Lodge. The conversation that
seems to have no higher aim than to diffuse general pleasure, and ends in no
ill natured reflections, but leaves friends at parting in perfect good humor,
tends more to make men love one another, do their duty in society, and love
their Creator, than any we can adopt in such associations. Most of our duty
lies in society, and most of our virtue in contributing to make men happy in
themselves. A wise man will look around him, not to say an ill thing without
danger, but to learn how to recommend the most useful thoughts he can utter. He
will endeavor to please in the best manner with the least offense.

AND for our common interest let me say, after Lodges have received their
charters, and have been instructed, if they do not assert an independence, they
are too apt to enjoy it. They become too negligent of their representation, and
of their communications in the GRAND LODGE. Excellent members, confined to
their lovely lodges, forget that we are a band of brethren, and owe each other
the most free communications. Every brother ought to aspire after the honors
of these orderly visits; and, next to our own business, ought to be an enquiry
into the last quarterly communications. A mason would then find that he
belonged to a society more extensive than of his own neighborhood. He would
thus have the progress of the order, in his own country at least, if not
through the world, before him. In his private pleasures he would not forget the
general prosperity. We have our respective orbs; but we revolve around a common
center. And from its glory, we have life, health and fraternity.

IT should also be remembered, that the strength of Lodges is in their members.
While Lodges are open to the visits of Brethren, great care should be shown,
that due honors are given to members of Lodges. Generous liberty does not
permit a brother to make a free use of his privilege, while in no place he
welcomes a regular summons. The Temple is not finished, and no brother ceases
entirely from labor, unless privileged by particular services. To be members,
is to hold the obligation, which is indispensably necessary for the existence
of our order.

IN expenses, that method will be most happy, which keeps the funds, the
special charities, the current charges, and the entertainments, most distinct.
The last ought to fall upon those who enjoy them. They are, therefore, better
out of the Lodge than in it, for moral, as well as economical reasons.

IN the admission of members, regard ought to be paid to merit, in the kindest
exemptions from expense when the persons of merit cannot well support it. Such
men would bring a character with them, and establish it in a Lodge. It would
then be free from censure, and adorned with all the virtues of the best of men.

AND as we hold sacred the confidence of domestic life, our pleasures should
never incroach upon the hours devoted to retirement, and to our homes.

IN qualifying ourselves to fill the Offices with such virtues, we rise in the
public esteem, and enjoy the benevolent end of our institution. Our habits
become as favorable to the best services in our power toward our brethren, as
our hearts become free for the enjoyment of our social glee; and neither our
interest in the world, nor our good habits suffer from our lovely association.

LET us then cultivate the true temper of Free Masonry, and let us adorn the
character with its commendable virtues. Then in happy time we may adorn a
master's station, and we shall always possess the merit, which would justify
the appointment.

BELIEVE me, when I say, that as I love the principles of the Order, and have
seen their benefit, so I sincerely desire to see the order respectable.

A Salutatory Address, ON THE SOCIAL INFLUENCE AND MERIT OF FREE MASONRY:
DELIVERED IN PUBLIC ASSEMBLY AT THE REQUEST OF THE OFFICERS AND MEMBERS OF
WASHINGTON LODGE IN ROXBURY, AT THEIR CONSECRATION, OCTOBER 12, A. L. 5796. BY
BROTHER WILLIAM DIX, A. M.

BOSTON: WILLIAM SPOTSWOOD. 1797.

A Salutatory Address.
RESPECTED HEARERS,
WE have assembled together, at this time, to countenance an institution which
serves to extend the principles of Concord and of Virtue, and to render man
amiable and friendly to man.

WHILE in other nations are heard the clamouring tumults of Discord, and the
piteous groans of War, we are allowed under the mild auspices of Liberty and
Peace, to cultivate those arts and encourage those institutions, which
harmonize the passions and perfect the virtues of individuals, which embellish
the state of general society, and bind together in the same amities and
interests the whole family of mankind. -- To revive and expand these noble
principles, is an object dear to every human being in whose heart flows
cheerily "the milk of human kindness:" and to the venerable order of FREE and
ACCEPTED MASONS has been an endeavor, strenuous as their most active
abilities, -- and a desire, warm and animated as any Philanthropy ever formed.

WHILE this day affords an opportunity of expressing our united attachment to
the grand principles of humanity, let it prove a new motive to strengthen the
endearing ligature which binds congenial hearts. -- To my valued Brethren of
WASHINGTON LODGE, the present occasion is replete with interesting, important,
and joyous circumstances. It is the birthday of their privileges; and they are
now to receive the sanction of establishment, and the solemnity of
consecration. Cheerfully do I do mingle my felicitations with theirs.

IT is truly pleasing to see these Colonies of the friends of Wisdom and
Charity spreading themselves around. It is a renewed evidence of the
acknowledged importance, and increased reputation of our excellent society.

Right Worshipful MASTER, Respected OFFICERS, and beloved BRETHREN of
WASHINGTON LODGE! with all the sincerity of fraternal affection does my heart
proffer you its best wishes. Nor need I extend the desires of cordial regard,
for your united and individual prosperity, farther than this comprehensive
hope, that, as you have adopted the name of our MOST RENOWNED BROTHER for the
recommendatory title of your Lodge, you may adopt his virtues for the
recommendatory ornament of your lives! -- May the Lodge now consecrated, be
conspicuous for its clear light, and long honored in its enlarging sphere of
usefulness and glory!

AND surely these congratulations and wishes are reciprocated by every friend
to the social interests and happiness of mankind. Especially when they are
daily more and more convinced, that the light in which we rejoice, is not the
mimic blaze which glitters over the train of folly, but the steady luster
reflected, from those resplendent luminaries of the Masonic hemisphere, WISDOM,
TRUTH, and VIRTUE.

LET it be remembered, that on the firm basis of general Philanthropy are
erected the pillars of our institution, modelled to a perfection which no art
can excel, no marble outlive. While we admire the noble structure of the
edifice, we receive the most pleasing satisfaction and instruction in perusing
those heavenly documents which compose its arcana. We are there taught the most
solid truths, important and interesting to the welfare of mankind. Directed by
the grand principles there delineated, we approach nearer the divine plan of
the SOVEREIGN ARCHITECT; and becoming perfect masons, are rendered wiser and
better members of society. In the calm moments of reflection, when divested of
the impressions of prejudice, the world will approve the principles which
animate us; since it is their glory to call forth into action the most
benevolent and noble feelings of the heart. The salutary institutes of our
Craft are happily calculated to produce the greatest comfort to individuals and
to augment the happiness of society, by teaching us to become temperate, just,
benevolent and pious; and by directing the natural propensities of the human
soul, the love of pleasure and the love of action, to their noblest ends. Those
qualities of the mind, which are thus excited and exercised, tend immediately
to refine our feelings and dignify our natures. And over the scenes both of
retired and public life, their benign influence sheds a mild and pleasing
luster. The combined effect is allowedly conducive to the amelioration of
manners, and the improvement of social bliss.

So long as our race shall be subject to infirmity and exposed to misfortune,
friendly humanity will be deemed a virtue and a blessing; and so long as
individuals can derive advantage or pleasure from reciprocal interest and
attachment, the credit of this fraternity must increase, and Masonry continue
to deserve universal approbation.

AT the same time that the instructions and operations of the Lodge assist in
giving to the intellectual and moral faculties the Wisdom, Strength, and Beauty
which accomplish their perfection; they industriously contrive and generously
support those ingenious discoveries and useful arts which correct taste and
embellish life.

GREAT are our obligations to those venerable characters in whom first dawned
the light of Masonry; the united and increasing radiance of which, diffusing
itself over remotest climes, has been continually dispelling the noxious vapors
of gloomy superstition and the gathering clouds of threatening envy. And we
rejoice in those energetic exertions which have successfully contributed to
form a society, and bring into complete operation an establishment, whose only
aim is that of uniting, in the same softened and virtuous affections, the whole
human race.

LET no breast, then, harbor sentiments incompatible with the liberal
principles on which our association is founded: since it must be perverseness
to deny its merited honors to a Society which has risen superior, in every age,
to partiality and prejudice; and, by the testimony of its effects, silenced
objection and conciliated esteem. --

THE flowers of fancy and the figures of eloquence would be vainly lavished in
its praise. Sufficiently attractive to your eyes is the unadorned portrait. The
pencil of Truth has sketched the outline, and given

IN conclusion, my Brethren will permit me to observe, that, as we aspire to
the praise of Wisdom and Strength, so we profess ourselves the admirers of
BEAUTY, natural as well as intellectual and moral. They will expect me,
therefore, to notice our FAIR FRIENDS, whose presence honors and whose smiles
enliven us. We owe them a tribute of warmest thanks for gracing our public
assembly.

IT is to be regretted that institutions in general have excluded that lovely
sex from becoming members. We disclaim the idea of their being unequal to any
important trust or inadequate to the best purposes of society. Were they to
mingle more intimately with social, or more actively with political
institutions, much might be expected from their polished talents and beautiful
designs. If it be asked why they are not permitted to join with us, in
extending the interests of humanity, and in cultivating and improving the
friendly virtues; we would reply, that, their charms and attractions, which so
decorate the scenery of life, would become incompatible with the labors of the
Lodge; that Love, powerful Love, might so influence and triumph, that Brotherly
Affection would give way to Jealousy, Friendship to Dissimulation, and Judgment
to Passion. In the important business of our retirement, the presence of the
Fair would so intermingle a train of busy loves, as to banish every other
sentiment; and make us inattentive to every care and forgetful of every duty
which forms the object and the recommendation of our establishment. -- Admit,
ye lovely partners of our hearts and hopes, our honest apology: and be assured
that the fidelity which is inscribed upon the Mason's breast, will give
certainty to the Lover's promise, and permanency to the Husband's affection;
will render us all more worthy of your regards, and more auxiliary to your
happiness. --

BROTHERS,

RECOLLECT that a strict observance of the rules of our duty will ever secure
us from censure and reproach. While by our conduct we give no latitude for
malicious insinuations, the purity of our intentions, whatever the uncandid may
think of them, will not fail to give to our own hearts a confidence which will
support and cheer in every scene, and brighten the evening shades of mortal
existence.


