THE COLUMBIAN ORATOR: CONTAINING A VARIETY OF Original and Selected PIECES;
TOGETHER WITH RULES; CALCULATED TO IMPROVE YOUTH AND OTHERS IN THE ORNAMENTAL
AND USEFUL ART OF ELOQUENCE.

By CALEB BINGHAM, A. M. Author of The American Preceptor, Young Lady's
Accidence,

"CATO cultivated ELOQUENCE, as a necessary mean for defending THE RIGHTS OF
THE PEOPLE, and for enforcing good Counsels."

ROLLIN. Published according to Act of Congress.

Boston: Printed by MANNING and LORING; For the AUTHOR, No. 44, for DAVID WEST,
No. 56, and for JOHN WEST, No. 75, CORNHILL. MAY, 1797.

PREFACE.
NOTWITHSTANDING the multiplicity of School-Books now in use, it has been often
suggested, that a Selection, calculated particularly for Dialogue and
Declamation, would be of extensive utility in our seminaries.

The art of Oratory needs no encomium. To cultivate its rudiments, and diffuse
its spirit among the Youth of America, is the design of this Book.

Of the many pieces which this volume contains, three only are to be found in
any publication of the kind. A large proportion is entirely original. For
assistance in this part, the Author acknowledges himself indebted to several
friends, whose names he is not authorized to divulge.

The COLUMBIAN ORATOR is designed for a Second Part to the AMERICAN PRECEPTOR;
for this reason, no pieces are inserted from that book.

As no advantage could arise from a methodical arrangement, the Author has
preferred variety to system. In his choice of materials, it has been his object
to select such as should inspire the pupil with the ardor of eloquence, and the
love of virtue. He has spared no pains to render the Work, in every respect,
worthy of the generous patronage, which a liberal public have bestowed on his
former publications.

Boston, May 17, 1797.
CONTENTS.
GENERAL Instructions for Speaking Page 7 Oration on Eloquence PERKINS Page 30
Speech in Congress, 1789 WASHINGTON Page 34 Speech of a Roman General P.
EMILIUS Page 36 Exhortation on Temperance in Pleasure BLAIR Page 38 Judah's
Plea for Benjamin, before Joseph PHILO Page 41 Plea in behalf of Thomas Muir
MUIR Page 43 On the starry Heavens HERVEY Page 44 Paper, a Poem FRANKLIN Page
46 Speech before the Roman Senate CATO Page 48 Dialogue between Duellist,
Savage, and Mercury LITTLETON Page 50 Speech of an Indian Chief Page 54 On the
Creation of the World BLAIR Page 55 Lines spoken by a little Boy Page 57 Speech
in the British Parliament, 1766 PIT Page 58 Scene from the Farce of Lethe
GARRICK Page 61 Eulogy on Dr. Franklin FAUCHET Page ^4 Epilogue to Addison's
Cato Page 69 Self-Conceit, an Address by a small Boy Page 70 Dialogue between
Howard and Lester Page 7^ Christ's Crucifixion CUMBERLAND Page 74 The Wonders
of Nature HERVEY Page 77 Dialogue on Physiognomy Page 79 Oration at the
Festival of Gratitude CARNOT Page 8^ Address to the President of the United
States ADET Page 85 President's Answer WASHINGTON Page 87 The oppressive
Landlord, a Dialogue Page ^8 Speech in the British Parliament, 1770 MANSFIELD
Page 94 On the Day of Judgment DAVIES Page 97 Christ triumphant over the
apostate Angels MILTON Page ^00 Slaves in Barbary, a Drama in two Acts Page 10^
Speech in the British Parliament, 1770 PIT Page 119 Plea before a Roman Court
SOCRATES Page 122 Dialogue on Cowardice and Knavery Page 126 Speech in the
British Parliament SHERIDAN Page 130 Extract from an Oration against Catiline
CICERO Page 131 Description of the first American Congress BARLOW Page 133
Speech of a French General to his Army BUONAPARTY Page 135 Reflections over the
Grave of a Young Man HERVEY Page 1^6 Scene from the Drama of "Moses in the
Bulrushes" H. MOORE Page 137 Speech of a Roman General C. CASSIUS Page 142
Speech in the British Parliament, 1784 ERSKINE Page 144 Address to the People
of the U. States WASHINGTON Page 147 Dialogue on the Choice of Business for
Life Page 150 Speech of a French General BUONAPARTE Page 154 Speech in the
British Parliament, 1777 PIT Page 156 Dialogue between a Schoolmaster and
School-Committee Page 158 Speech in the British Parliament, 1770 PIT Page 165
On the general Judgment-Day DWIGHT Page 169 On the Works of Creation and
Providence HERVEY Page 171 Speech in the British Parliament FOX Page 172 The
Conjurer, a Dialogue Page 175 Speech in the British Parliament, 1775 PIT Page
184 Speech of the Caledonian General GALGACHUS Page 185 Modern Education, a
Dialogue Page 189 On the Existence of God, a Sermon MAXCY Page 195 The Dignity
of Human Nature BURGES Page 203 Infernal Conference CUMBERLAND Page 205 Speech
in the British Parliament, 1777 PIT Page 214 On the Day of Judgment YOUNG Page
217 The dissipated Oxford Student BURNEY Page 219 Speech in Congress, on the
British Treaty AMES Page 230 Oration on Independence, July 4, 1796 BLAKE Page
234 General description of America, a Poem Page 237 Dialogue between a Master
and Slave AIKIN Page 240 Speech in the Irish Parliament O'CONNOR Page 243 Scene
from the Tragedy of Tamerlane ROW Page 248 Speech in the British Parliament
BAR Page 252 ^^e Last Day Page 254 Dialogue on Loquacity Page 257 American
Sages BARLOW Page 261 Speech in the British Parliament, 1777 PIT Page 262
Scene from the Tragedy of Cato ADDISON Page 265 Oration, delivered at Boston,
July 4, 1794 PHILLIPS Page 268 Dialogue between a White Man and an Indian Page
269 Oration, pronounced at Boston, July 4, 1796 LATHROP Page 272 Dialogue
between Edward and Harry Page 275 David and Goliath H. MOORE Page 278 Oration
on the Powers of Eloquence Page 281
THE COLUMBIAN ORATOR, etc.
INTRODUCTION. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR SPEAKING; EXTRACTED FROM VARIOUS AUTHORS.
OF PRONUNCIATION IN GENERAL.
THE best judges among the ancients have represented Pronunciation, which they
likewise called Action, as the principal part of an orator's province; from
whence he is chiefly to expect success in the art of persuasion. When Cicero,
in the person of Crassus, has largely and elegantly discoursed upon all the
other parts of oratory, coming at last to speak of thi^ he says, "All the
former have their effect as they are pronounced. It is the action alone which
governs in speaking; without which the best orator is of no value; and is often
defeated by one, in other respects, much his inferior." And he lets us know,
that Demosthenes was of the same opinion; who, when he was asked (...) was the
principal thing in oratory, replied (...) and being asked again a second and a
(...) was next considerable, he still made (...)

And, indeed, if he had not judged this highly necessary for an orator, he
would scarcely have taken so much pains in correcting those natural defects,
under which he labored at first, in order to acquire it. For he had both a weak
voice, and likewise an impediment in his speech, so that he could not pronounce
distinctly some particular letters. The former of which defects he conquered,
partly by speaking as loud as he could upon the shore, when the sea roared and
was boisterous; and partly, by pronouncing long periods as he walked up hill;
both of which methods contributed to strengthen his voice. And he found means
to render his pronunciation more clear and articulate, by the help of some
little stones put under his tongue. Nor was he less careful in endeavoring to
gain the habit of a becoming and decent gesture; for which purpose he used to
pronounce his discourses alone before a large glass. And because he had an ill
custom of drawing up his shoulders when he spoke, to amend that, he used to
place them under a sword, which hung over him with the point downward.

Such pains did this prince of the Grecian orators take to remove those
difficulties, which would have been sufficient to discourage an inferior, and
less aspiring genius. And to how great a perfection he arrived in his action,
under all these disadvantages, by his indefatigable diligence and application,
is evident from the confession of his great adversary and rival in oratory,
Eschines; who, when he could not bear the disgrace of being wo^^ted by
Demosthenes in the cause of Ctesiphon, retired to Rhodes. And being desired by
the inhabitants, he recited to them his own oration upon that occasion; the
next day they requested of him to let them hear that of Demosthenes; which,
having pronounced in a most graceful manner, to the admiration of all who (...)
present, "How much more (says he) would you (...) ^red, if you had heard him
speak it himself!" (...) to these authorities the judgment of (...) says, that
"It is not of so much moment what our compositions are, as how they are
pronounced; since it is the manner of the delivery, by which the audience is
moved."

The truth of this sentiment of the ancients concerning the power and efficacy
of pronunciation, might be proved from many instances; but one or two may here
suffice. Hortensius, a cotemporary with Cicero, and while living, next to him
in reputation as an orator, was highly applauded for his action. But his
orations after his death, as Quintilian tells us, did not appear answerable to
his character; from whence he justly concludes, there must have been something
pleasing when he spoke, by which he gained his character, which was lost in
reading them.

But perhaps there is scarcely a more considerable instance of this than in
Cicero himself. After the death of Pompey, when Caesar had gotten the government
into his own hands, many of his acquaintance interceded with him in behalf of
their relations and friends, who had been of the contrary party in the late
wars. Among others, Cicero solicited for his friend Ligarius; which, Tubero
understanding, who owed Ligarius a grudge, opp^sed; and undertook to represent
him to Caesar as unworthy of his mercy. Caesar himself was prejudiced against
Ligarius; and therefore, when the cause was to come before him, he said, "We
may venture to hear Cicero display his eloquence; for I know the person he
pleads for to be an ill man, and my enemy."

But, however, in the course of his oration, Cicero so wrought upon his
passions, that by the frequent alteration in his countenance, the emotions of
his mind were very conspicuous. And when he came to touch upon the battle of
Pharsalia, which had given Caesar the empire of the world, he represented it in
such a moving and lively manner, that Caesar could no longer contain himself,
but was thrown into such a fit of shivering, that he dropped the papers which
he held in his hand. This was the more remarkable, because Caesar was himself
one of the greatest orators of that age; knew all the arts of address, and
avenues to the passions; and consequently was better prepared to guard against
them.

But neither his skill, nor resolution of mind, was of sufficient force against
the power of oratory; but the conqueror of the world became a conquest to the
charms of Cicero's eloquence; so that, contrary to his intention, he pardoned
Ligarius. Now that oration is still extant, and appears exceedingly well
calculated to touch the soft and tender passions and springs of the soul; but
we believe it can scarcely be discernible to any, in reading it, how it should
have had so surprising an effect; which must therefore have been chiefly owing
to the wonderful address of the speaker.

The more natural the pronunciation is, the more moving it will be; since the
perfection of art consists in its nearest resemblance to nature. And therefore
it is not without good reason, that the ancients make it one qualification of
an orator, that he be a good man; because a person of this character will make
the cause he espouses his own; and the more sensibly he is touched with it
himself, the more natural will be his action; and, of course, the more easily
will he affect others. Cicero says, "It is certain that truth (by which he
means nature) in every thing excels imitation; but if that were sufficient of
itself in action, we should have no occasion for art."

In his opinion therefore (and who was ever a better judge?) art, in this case,
as well as in many others, if well managed, will assist and improve nature. But
this is not all; for sometimes we find the force of it so great and powerful,
that, where it is wholly counterfeit, it will for the time work the same effect
as if it were founded in truth. This is well known to those who have been
conversant with the representations of the theater. In tragedies, though we are
sensible that every thing we see and hear is counterfeit; yet such is the power
of action, that we are oftentimes affected by it in the same manner as if it
were all reality.

Anger and resentment at the appearance of cruelty, concern and solicitude for
distressed virtue, rise in our breasts; and tears are extorted from us for
oppressed innocence: though at the same time, perhaps, we are ready to laugh at
ourselves for being thus decoyed. If art then has so great an influence upon
us, when supported by fancy and imagination only, how powerful must be the
effect of a just and lively representation of what we know to be true.

How agreeable it is, both to nature and reason, that a warmth of expression
and vehemence of motion should rise in proportion to the importance of the
subject and concern of the speaker, will further appear by looking back a
little into the more early and simple ages of the world For the higher we go,
the more we shall find of both. The Romans had a very great talent this way,
and the Greeks a greater. The eastern nations excelled in it, and particularly
the Hebrews.

Nothing can equal the strength and vivacity of the figures they employed in
their discourse, and the very actions they used, to express their sentiments;
such as putting ashes on their heads, and tearing their garments, and covering
themselves with sackcloth under any deep distress and sorrow of mind. And
hence, no doubt, arose those surprising effects of eloquence, which we never
experience now.

And what is said here, with respect to the action of the eastern nations, was
in a good measure customary among the Greeks and Romans; if not entirely of the
same kind, yet perhaps as vehement and expressive. They did not think language
of itself sufficient to express the height of their passions, unless enforced
by uncommon motions and gestures. Thus, when Achilles had driven the Trojans
into their city with the greatest precipitation and terror, and only Hector
ventured to ^^rry without the gates to engage him, Homer represents both king
Priam and his queen under the highest cons^ernation for the danger of their
son. And therefore, (...) order to prevail with him to come into the city and
not fight with Achilles, they not only entreat him from the walls in the most
tender and moving language imaginable; but they tear off their gray locks with
their hands, and adjure him to comply with their request.

The poet knew very well, that no words of themselves could represent those
agonies of mind he endeavored to convey, unless heightened by the idea of such
actions as were expressive of the deepest sorrow. In one of Cicero's orations,
he does not stick to argue in this manner with his adversary. "Would you talk
thus (says he) if you were serious? Would you, who are wont to display your
eloquence so warmly in the danger of others, act so coldly in your own? Where
is that concern, that ardor, which used to extort pity even from children? Here
is no emotion either of mind or body; neither the forehead struck, nor the
thigh; nor so much as a stamp of the foot. Therefore, you have been so far from
inflaming our minds, that you have scarcely kept us awake."

The ancients had persons, whose proper business it was to teach them how to
regulate and manage their voice; and others, who instructed them in the whole
art of pronunciation, both as to their voice and gestures. These latter were
generally taken from the theater, being some eminent experienced actors. But
though they made use of actors to instruct their youth in forming their speech
and gestures; yet the action of an orator was very different from that of the
theater.

Cicero very plainly represents this distinction, in the words of Crassus; when
speaking of orators, he says, "The motions of the body ought to be suited to
the expressions, not in a theatrical way, mimicking the words by particular
gesticulations; but in a manner expressive of the general sense; with a sedate
and manly inflection of the sides; not taken from the stage and actors, but
from the exercise of arms and the palestra." And Quintilian says to the same
purpose, "Every gesture and motion of the comedians is not to be imitated, nor
to the same degree." They thought the action of the theater too light and
extravagant for the imitation of an orator; and therefore, though they employed
actors to inform young persons in the first rudiments, yet they were afterward
sent to schools, designed on purpose to teach them a decent and graceful
management of their bodies.

Being thus far prepared, they were afterward sent to the schools of the
rhetoricians. And here, as their business was to cultivate their style, and
gain the whole art of eloquence, so particularly to acquire a just and accurate
pronunciation by those exercises, in which for that end they were constantly
employed. Nor, after all this pains and industry, did they yet think themselves
sufficiently qualified to take upon them the character of orators. But it was
their constant custom to get together some of their friends and acquaintance,
who were proper judges of such performances, and declaim before them in private.

The business of these persons was to make observations both on their language
and pronunciation. And they were allowed the greatest freedom to take notice of
any thing thought to be amiss, either as to inaccuracy of method, impropriety
of style, or indecency of their voice or actions. This gave them an opportunity
to correct any such defects at first, before they became habitual. What effects
might not justly be expected from such an institution? Persons trained up in
this manner, with all those advantages, joined to a good natural genius, could
not fail of making very complete orators. Though even after they came to appear
in public, they did not lay aside the custom of declaiming.

The influence of sounds, either to raise or allay our passions, is evident
from music. And certainly the harmony of a fine discourse, well and gracefully
pronounced, is as capable of moving us, if not in a way so violent and
ecstatic, yet not less powerful, and more agreeable to our rational faculties.
As persons are differently affected when they speak, so they naturally alter
the tone of their voice, though they do not attend to it. It rises, sinks, and
has various inflections given it, according to the present state and
disposition of the mind. When the mind is calm and sedate, the voice is
moderate and even; when the former is dejected with sorrow, the latter is
languid; and when that is inflamed by passion, this is elevated.

It is the orator's business, therefore, to follow nature, and to endeavor that
the tone of his voice appear natural and unaffected. And for this end, he must
take care to suit it to the nature of the subject; but still so as to be always
grave and decent. Some persons continue a discourse in such a low and drawling
manner, that they can scarcely be heard by their audience. Others again hurry
(...) in so loud and boisterous a manner as if they imagined their hearers were
deaf. But all the music and harmony of voice lies between these extremes.

Perhaps nothing is of more importance to a speaker, than a proper attention to
accent, emphasis, and cadence. Every word in our language, of more than one
syllable, has, at least, one accented syllable. This syllable ought to be
rightly known, and the word should be pronounced by the speaker in the same
manner as he would pronounce it in ordinary conversation. By emphasis, we
distinguish those words in a sentence which we esteem the most important, by
laying a greater stress of voice upon them than we do upon the others. And it
is surprising to observe how the sense of a phrase may be altered by varying
the emphasis. The following example will serve as an illustration.

This short question, "Will you ride to town today?" may be understood in four
different ways, and, consequently, may receive four different answers,
according to the placing of the emphasis.

If it be pronounced thus; Will you ride to town today? the answer may
properly be, No; I shall send my son. If thus; Will you rid^ to town today?
Answer, No; I intend to walk. Will you ride to town today? No; I shall ride
into the country. Will you ride to town today? No; but I shall tomorrow.

This shows how necessary it is that a speaker should know where to place his
emphasis. And the only rule for this is, that he study to attain a just
conception of the force and spirit of the sentiments which he delivers. There
is as great a difference between one who lays his emphasis properly, and one
who pays no regard to it, or places it wrong, as there is between one who plays
on an instrument with a masterly hand, and the most bungling performer.

Cadence is the reverse of emphasis. It is a depression or lowering of the
voice; and commonly falls upon the last syllable in a sentence. It is varied,
however, according to the sense. When a question is asked, it seldom falls upon
the last word; and many sentences require no cadence at all.

Every person, who speaks in public, should endeavor, if he can, to f^ll the
place where he speaks. But still he ought to be careful not to exceed the
natural key of his voice. If he does, it will neither be soft nor agreeable;
but either harsh and rough, or too shrill and squeaking. Besides, he will not
be able to give every syllable its full and distinct sound; which will render
what he says obscure, and difficult to be understood. He should therefore take
care to keep his voice within reach, so as to have it under management, that he
may raise or sink it, or give it any inflection he thinks proper; which it will
not be in his power to do, if he put a force upon it, and strain it beyond its
natural tone.

The like caution is to be used against the contrary extreme, that the voice be
not suffered to sink too low. This will give the speaker pain in raising it
again to its proper pitch, and be no less offensive to the hearers. The medium
between these two is a moderate and even voice. But this is not the same in
all; that which is moderate in one would be high in another. Every person
therefore must regulate it by the natural key of his own voice. A calm and
sedate voice is generally best; as a moderate sound is most pleasing to the
ear, if it be clear and distinct. But this equality of the voice must also be
accompanied with a variety; otherwise there can be no harmony; since all
harmony consists in variety.

Nothing is less pleasing than a discourse pronounced throughout in one
continued tone of the voice, without any alteration. The equality, therefore,
we are here speaking of, admits a variety of inflections and changes within the
same pitch. And when that is altered, the gradations, whether higher or lower,
should be so gentle and regular as to preserve a due proportion of the parts,
and harmony of the whole; which cannot be done, when the voice is suddenly
varied with too great a distinction. And therefore it should move from one key
to another, so as rather to glide like a gentle stream, than pour down like a
rapid torrent, as an ingenious writer has well expressed it.

But an affected variety, ill placed, is as disagreeable to a judicious
audience, as the want of it, where the subject requires it. We may find some
persons, in pronouncing a grave and plain discourse, affect as many different
tones, and variations of their voice, as if they were acting a comedy; which is
doubtless a very great impropriety. But the orator's province is not barely to
apply to the mind, but likewise to the passions; which require a great variety
of the voice, high or low, vehement or languid, according to the nature of the
passions he designs to affect. So that for an orator always to use the same
tone or degree of his voice, and expect to answer all his views by it, would be
much the same thing as if a physician should propose to cure all distempers by
one medicine. And, as a perfect monotony is always unpleasant, so it can never
be necessary in any discourse.

That some sentences ought to be pronounced faster than others is very
manifest. Gay and sprightly ideas should not only be expressed louder, but also
quicker than such as are melancholy. And when we press an opponent, the voice
should be brisk. But to hurry on in a precipitant manner without pausing, till
stopped for want of breath, is certainly a very great fault. This destroys not
only the necessary distinction between sentence and sentence, but likewise
between the several words of the same sentence; by which mean, all the grace of
speaking is lost, and in a great measure, the advantage of hearing.

Young persons are very liable to this, especially at first setting out. And it
often arises from diffidence. They are jealous of their performances, and the
success they may have in speaking, which gives them a pain till it is over; and
this puts them into a hurry of mind, which incapacitates them from governing
their voice, and keeping it under that due regulation which perhaps they
proposed to themselves before they began to speak.

And as a precipitant and hasty pronunciation is culpable, so likewise on the
other hand, it is a fault to speak too slow. This seems to argue a heaviness in
the speaker. And as he appears cool himself, he can never expect to warm his
hearers, and excite their affections. When not only every word, but every
syllable is drawn out to too great a length, the ideas do not come fast enough
to keep up the attention without much uneasiness. Now, to avoid either of the
two extremes last mentioned, the voice ought to be sedate and distinct. And in
order to render it distinct, it is necessary, not only that each word and
syllable should have its just and full sound, both as to time and accent; but
likewise that every sentence, and part of a sentence, should be separated by
its proper pause.

This is more easy to be done in reading, from the assistance of the points;
but it is no less to be attended to in speaking, if we would pronounce in a
distinct and graceful manner. For every one should speak in the same manner as
he ought to read, if he could arrive at that exactness. Now the common rule
given in pausing is, that we stop our voice at a comma till we can tell one, at
a semicolon two, at a colon three, and at a full period four. And as these
points are either accommodated to the several parts of the same sentence, as
the first three; or different sentences, as the last; this occasions the
different length of the pause, by which either the dependence of what precedes
upon that which follows, or its distinction from it is represented.

It is not in our power to give ourselves what qualities of the voice we
please; but only to make the best use we can of what nature has bestowed upon
us. However, several defects of the voice are capable of being helped by care
and proper means; as, on the other hand, the best voice may be greatly hurt by
ill management and indiscretion. Temperance is a great preservative of the
voice, and all excess is highly prejudicial to it. The voice must necessarily
suffer, if the organs of speech have not their proper tone. A strong voice is
very serviceable to an orator, because, if he want some other advantages, he
is, however, capable to make himself heard. And if at any time he is forced to
strain it, he is in less danger of its failing him before he has finished his
discourse.

But he, who has a weak voice, should be very careful not to strain it,
especially at first. He ought to begin low, and rise gradually to such a pitch
as the key of his voice will well carry him, without being obliged to sink
again afterward. Frequent inflections of the voice will likewise be some
assistance to him. But especially he should take care to speak deliberately,
and ease his voice, by allowing due time for respiration at all the proper
pauses. It is an extreme much less inconvenient for such a person rather to
speak too slow, than too fast. But this defect of a weak voice is sometimes
capable of being helped by the use of proper methods; as is evident from the
instance of Demosthenes, before mentioned.

Some persons, either from want of due care in their education at first, or
from inadvertency and negligence afterward, run into a very irregular and
confused manner of expressing their words; either by misplacing the accent,
confounding the sound of the letters, or huddling the syllables one upon
another so as to render what they say often unintelligible. Indeed, sometimes
this arises from a natural defect, as in the case of Demosthenes; who found a
method to rectify that, as well as the weakness of his voice. But in faults of
this kind, which proceed from habit, doubtless the most likely way to mend them
is to speak deliberately.

OF GESTURE.
BY this is meant, a suitable conformity of the motions of the countenance, and
several parts of the body in speaking, to the subject matter of the discourse.
It is not agreed among the learned, whether voice or gesture has the greater
influence upon us. But as the latter affects us by the eye, as the former does
by the ear, gesture in the nature of it seems to have this advantage, that it
conveys the impression more speedily to the mind; for the sight is the quickest
of all our senses. Nor is its influence less upon our passions; nay, in some
instances, it appears to act more powerfully. A cast of the eye will express
desire in as moving a manner as the softest language; and a different motion of
it, resentment.

To wring the hands, tear the hair, or strike the breast, are all strong
indications of sorrow. And he, who claps his hand to his sword, threws us into
a greater panic than one who only threatens to kill us. Nor is it in some
respects less various and extensive language. Cicero tells us, he often
diverted himself by trying this with Roscius the comedian; who could express a
sentence as many ways by his gestures, as he himself could by words. And some
dramas, called pantomimes, have been carried on wholly by mutes, who have
performed every part by gestures only, without words, in a way very
intelligible.

But with respect to oratory, gesture may very properly be called the second
part of pronunciation; in which, as the voice should be suited to the
impressions it receives from the mind, so the several motions of the body ought
to be accommodated to the various tones and inflections of the voice. When the
voice is even and moderate, little gesture is required; and nothing is more
unnatural than violent motion, in discoursing upon ordinary and familiar
subjects. The motions of the body should rise therefore in proportion to the
vehemence and energy of the expression, as the natural and genuine effect of it.

But as gesture is very different and various as to the manner of it, which
depends upon the decent conduct of several parts of the body, it will not be
amiss to consider more particularly the proper management of each of those
parts. Now all gesture is either natural, or from imitation. By natural
gesture, we mean such actions and motions of the body, as naturally accompany
our words, as these do the impressions of our mind. And these either respect
the whole body, or some particular part of it.

The speaker should not long continue standing in the same position, like a
statue, but be constantly changing, though the motion be very moderate. There
ought to be no appearance of stiffness, but a certain ease and pliableness,
naturally suiting itself to every expression; by which means, when a greater
degree of motion is necessary, it will appear less sudden and vehement: for as
the raising, sinking, and various inflections of the voice must be gradual, so
likewise should the motions of the body. It is only on some particular
occasions that a hasty vehemence and impetuosity is proper in either case.

As to the several parts of the body, the head is the most considerable. To
lift it up too high has the air of arrogance and pride; to stretch it out too
far, or throw it back, looks clownish and unmannerly: to hang it downwards on
the breast, shows an unmanly bashfulness and want of spirit: and to suffer it
to lean on either shoulder, argues both sloth and indolence. Wherefore, in calm
and sedate discourse, it ought to keep its natural state, an upright posture.
However, it should not be long without motion, nor yet always moving; but
gently turn sometimes on one side, and sometimes on the other, as occasion
requires, that the voice may be heard by all who are present; and then return
again to its natural position. It should always accompany the other actions of
the body, and turn on the same side with them; except when aversion to any
thing is expressed; which is done by stretching out the right hand, and turning
the head to the left.

But it is the countenance, that chiefly represents both the passions and
dispositions of the mind. By this we express love, hatred, joy, sorrow,
modesty, and confidence: by this we supplicate, threaten, soothe, invite,
forbid, consent, or refuse; and all this without speaking. Nay, from hence we
form a judgment not only of a person's present temper, but of his capacity and
natural disposition. And therefore it is common to say, such a one has a
"promising countenance," or that "he promises little by his countenance." It is
true, this is no certain rule of judging; nor is it in the power of any one to
alter the natural make of his countenance.

But the several parts of the face bear their part, and contribute to the
proper and decent motion of the whole. In a calm and sedate discourse, all the
features retain their natural state and situation. In sorrow, the forehead and
eyebrows lour, and the cheeks hang down. But in expressions of joy and
cheerfulness, the forehead and eyebrows are expanded, the cheeks contracted,
and the corners of the mouth drawn upwards. Anger and resentment contract the
forehead, draw the brows toge^^er, and thrust out the lips. And terror elevates
both the brows and forehead. As these are the natural signs of such passions,
the orator should endeavor to conform to them.

But as the eyes are most active and significant, it is the advice of Cicero
that the greatest care should be taken in their management. And he gives this
reason for it. "Because other parts of the countenance have but few motions;
whereas all the passions of the soul are expressed in the eyes, by so many
different actions, which cannot possibly be represented by any gestures of the
body, if the eyes are kept in a fixed posture." Common experience does in a
great measure confirm the truth of this observation. We readily guess at a
person's intention, or how he is affected to us by his eyes. And any sudden
change or emotion of the mind is presently followed by an alteration in the
look.

In speaking therefore upon pleasant and delightful subjects, the eyes are
brisk and cheerful; as, on the contrary, they sink and are languid in
delivering any thing melancholy and sorrowful. This is so agreeable to nature,
that before a person speaks, we are prepared with the expectation of one or the
other from his different aspect. So likewise in anger, a certain vehemence and
intenseness appears in the eyes, which, for want of proper words to express it
by, we endeavor to represent by metaphors taken from fire, the most violent and
rapid element; and say in such cases, the eyes sparkle, burn, or are inflamed.
In expressions of hatred or detestation, it is natural to alter the looks,
either by turning the eyes aside, or downwards.

Indeed, the eyes are sometimes turned downwards upon other occasions, as to
express modesty. And if at any time a particular object be addressed, whatever
it be, the eyes should be turned that way. And therefore Philostratus very
deservedly ridicules a certain rhetorician as guilty of a solecism in gesture,
who, upon saying, O Jupiter! turned his eyes downwards; and when he said, O
Earth! looked upward. A staring look has the appearance of giddiness and want
of thought; and to contract the eyes gives suspicion of craft and design. A
fixed look may be occasioned from intenseness of thought; but at the same time
shows a disregard to the audience; and a too quick and wandering motion of the
eyes denotes levity and wantonness. A gentle and moderate motion of the eyes
is, therefore, in common, most suitable; always directed to some of the
audience, and gradually turning from side to side with an air of respect and
modesty, and looking them decently in the face, as in common discourse. Such a
behavior will of course draw an attention.

As to the other parts of the body distinct from the head, the shoulders ought
not to be elevated; for this is not only in itself indecent; but it likewise
contracts the neck, and hinders the proper motion of the head. Nor, on the
other hand, should they be drawn down and depressed; because this occasions a
stiffness both to the neck and the whole body. Their natural posture therefore
is best, as being most easy and graceful. To shrug the shoulders has an abject
and servile air; and frequently to heave them upwards and downwards is a very
disagreeable sight. A continued motion of the arms any way, is by all means to
be avoided. Their action should generally be very moderate, and follow that of
the hands; unless in very pathetic expressions, where it may be proper to give
them a more lively spring.

Now, all bodily motion is either upward or downward, to the right or left,
forward or backward, or else circular. The hands are employed by the orator in
all these except the last. And as they ought to correspond with our
expressions, so they ought to begin and end with them. In admiration, and
addresses to heaven, they must be elevated, but never raised above the eyes;
and in speaking of things below us, they are directed downwards. Side motion
should generally begin from the left, and terminate gently on the right. In
demonstrating, addressing, and on several other occasions, they are moved
forward; and in threatening, sometimes thrown back. But when the orator speaks
of himself, his right hand should be gently laid on his breast.

The left hand should seldom move alone, but accommodate itself to the motions
of the right. In motions to the left side, the right hand should not be carried
beyond the left shoulder. In promises, and expressions of compliment, the
motion of the hands should be gentle and slow: but in exhortations and
applause, more swift. The hands should generally be open; but in expressions of
compunction and anger, they may be closed. All sinical and trifling actions of
the fingers ought to be avoided; nor should they be stretched out and expanded
in a stiff and rigid posture, but kept easy and pliable.

The gestures we have hitherto discoursed of, are such as naturally accompany
our expressions. And we believe those we have mentioned, if duly attended to,
will be found sufficient to answer all the purposes of our modern
pronunciation. The other sort of gestures above mentioned are such as arise
from imitation; as where the orator describes some action or personates another
speaking. But here great care is to be taken not to overact his part by running
into any ludicrous or theatrical mimicry. It is sufficient for him to represent
things of this nature, as may best convey the image of them in a lively manner
to the minds of the hearers; without any such changes either of his actions or
voice as are not suitable to his own character.

SOME PARTICULAR RULES FOR THE VOICE AND GESTURE.
WE shall begin with the parts of a discourse, and treat of them in their
natural order. And here the view and design of the speaker in each of them will
easily help us to see the proper manner of pronunciation. Let us suppose then a
person presenting himself before an assembly, in order to make a discourse to
them. It cannot be decent immediately to begin to speak so soon as ever he
makes his appearance. He will first settle himself, compose his countenance,
and take a respectful view of his audience. This prepares them for silence and
attention.

Persons commonly form some opinion of a speaker from their first view of him,
which prejudices them either in his favor or otherwise, as to what he says
afterward. A grave and sedate aspect inclines them to think him serious; that
he had considered his subject, and may have something to offer worth their
attention. A haughty and forbidding air occasions distaste, as it looks like
disrespect. A wandering giddy countenance argues levity. A dejected drooping
appearance is apt to raise contempt, unless where the subject is melancholy.
And a cheerful aspect is a proper prelude to a pleasant and agreeable argument.

To speak low at first has the appearance of modesty, and is best for the
voice; which, by rising gradually, will with more ease be carried to any pitch
that may be afterward necessary, without straining it. However, some variation
of the voice is always proper to give it harmony. Nay, and sometimes it is not
improper for an orator to set out with a considerable degree of warmth. We have
some few instances of this in Cicero; as in his oration for Roscius Amerinus,
where the heinousness of the charge could not but excite his indignation
against the accusers. And so likewise in that against Piso, and the two first
against Catiline, which begin in the same manner, from the resentment he had
conceived against their persons and conduct.

In the narration, the voice ought to be raised to somewhat a higher pitch.
Matters of fact should be related in a very plain and distinct manner, with a
proper stress and emphasis laid upon each circumstance, accompanied with a
suitable address and motions of the body to engage the attention of the
hearers. For there is a certain grace in telling a story, by which those who
are masters of it seldom fail to recommend themselves in conversation.

The proposition, or subject of the discourse should be delivered with a very
clear and audible voice. For if this be not plainly heard, all that follows in
proof of it cannot well be understood. And for the same reason, if it be
divided into several parts or branches, they should each be expressed very
deliberately and distinctly. But as the design here is only information, there
can be little room for gesture.

The confirmation admits of great variety both of the voice and gesture. In
reasoning, the voice is quick and pungent, and should be enforced with suitable
actions. And as descriptions likewise have often a place here, in painting out
the images of things, the orator should so endeavor to adapt both his voice,
and the motions of his body, particularly the turn of his eyes, and action of
his hands, as may best help the imagination of his hearers. Where he introduces
another person speaking, or addresses an absent person, it should be with some
degree of imitation. And in dialogue, the voice should alter with the parts.
When he diverts from his subject by any digression, his voice should be lively
and cheerful; since that is rather designed for entertainment than instruction.

In confutation, the arguments of the adverse party ought first to be repeated
in a plain and distinct manner, that the speaker may not seem to conceal, or
avoid the force of them. Unless they appear trifling and unworthy of a serious
answer; and then a facetious manner, both of expression and gesture, may be the
most proper way to confute them. For to attempt to answer, in a grave and
serious manner, what is in itself empty and ludicrous, is apt to create a
suspicion of its having more in it than it really has.

But caution should be used not to represent any argument of weight in a
ludicrous way, lest by so doing the speaker should more expose himself than his
adversary. In the conclusion, both the voice and gesture should be brisk and
sprightly; which may seem to arise from a sense of the speaker's opinion of the
goodness of his cause, and that he has offered nothing but what is agreeable to
reason and truth; as likewise from his assurance that the audience agree with
him in the same sentiment. If an enumeration of the principal arguments of the
discourse be convenient, as it sometimes is, where they are pretty numerous, or
the discourse is long, they ought to be expressed in the most clear and
forcible manner. And if there be an address to the passions, both the voice and
gesture must be suited to the nature of them.

We proceed now to the consideration of particular expressions. And what we
shall offer here, will be in relation to single words, sentences, and the
passions. Even in those sentences which are expressed in the most even and
sedate manner, there is often one or more words which require an emphasis and
distinction of the voice. Pronouns are often of this kind; as, this is the man.
And such are many words that denote the circumstances and qualities of things.
Such as heighten or magnify the idea of the thing to which they are joined,
elevate the voice; as unable, admirable, majestic, greatly, and the like. On
the contrary, those which lessen the idea, or debase it, depress the voice, or
at least protract the tone: of which sort are the words little, mean, poorly,
contemptible, with many others.

Some tropes, likewise, as metaphors and verbal figures, which consist in the
repetition of a single word, should have a particular emphasis. As when Virgil
says of the river Araxes, "It disdained a bridge." And Nisus of himself, in the
same poet, "I, I am the man;" where the repeated word is loudest. This
distinction of words, and giving them their proper emphasis, does not only
render the expression more clear and intelligible, but very much contributes to
the variation of the voice, and the preventing of a monotony.

In sentences, regard should be had to their length, and the number of their
parts, in order to distinguish them by proper pauses. The frame and structure
of the period ought likewise to be considered, that the voice may be so managed
as to give it the most musical accent. Unless there be some special reason for
the contrary, it should end louder than it begins. And this difference of tone
between the end of the former sentence and the beginning of the next, not only
helps to distinguish the sense, but adds to the harmony of the voice.

In an antithesis, or a sentence consisting of opposite parts, one contrary
must be louder than the other. As, "He is gone, but by a gainful remove, from
painful labor to quiet rest; from unquiet desire to happy contentment: from
sorrow to joy; and from transitory time to immortality." In a climax or
gradation, the voice should generally rise with it. Thus, "There is no
enjoyment of property without government; no government without a magistrate;
no magistrate without obedience; no obedience where every one acts as he
pleases." And so in other gradations of a different form; as, "Since concord
was lost, friendship was lost, fidelity was lost, liberty was lost, all was
lost."

That the passions have each of them both a different voice and action, is
evident from hence, that we know in what manner a person is affected, by the
tone of his voice, though we do not understand the sense of what he says, or
many times so much as see him; and we can often make the same judgment from his
countenance and gestures. Love and esteem are expressed in a smooth and
cheerful tone; but anger and resentment, with a rough, harsh, and interrupted
voice; for when the spirits are ruffled, the organs are moved unequally. Joy
raises and dilates the voice, as sorrow sinks and contracts it. Cicero takes
notice of a passage in an oration of Gracchus, wherein he bewails the death of
his brother, who was killed by Scipio, which in his time was thought very
moving: "Unhappy man (says he,) whither shall I betake myself? Where shall I
go? Into the capitol? that flows with my brother's blood. Shall I go home, and
behold my unhappy mother all in tears and despair?"

Though Gracchus had a very ill design in that speech, and his view was to
excite the populace against their governors, yet (as Cicero tells us) when he
came to this passage, he expressed himself in such moving accents and gestures
that he extorted tears even from his enemies. Fear occasions a tremor and
hesitation of the voice, and assurance gives it strength and firmness.
Admiration elevates the voice, and should be expressed with pomp and
magnificence. "O surprising clemency, worthy of the highest praise and greatest
encomiums, and fit to be perpetuated in lasting monuments!" This is Cicero's
compliment to Caesar, when he thought it for his purpose. And oftentimes this
passion is accompanied with an elevation both of the eyes and hands. On the
contrary, contempt sinks and protracts the voice.

All exclamations should be violent. When we address inanimate things, the
voice should be higher th^n when animated beings; and appeals to heaven must be
made in a loftier tone than those to men. These few hints for expressing the
principal passions may, if duly attended to, suffice to direct our practice in
others. Though after all, it is impossible to gain a just and decent
pronunciation of voice and gesture merely from rules, without practice and an
imitation of the best examples: which shows the wisdom of the ancients, in
training up their youth to it, by the assistance of masters, to form both their
speech and actions. But here, as has been before observed, great caution should
be used in directing our choice of an example. An affected imitation of others,
in pronunciation or gesture, especially of stage players, whose pretensions to
literature are seldom considerable, and who are generally too fond of
singularity, ought to be carefully avoided. For nothing can appear more
disgusting to persons of discernment than affectation.

PRACTICAL PIECES FOR SPEAKING; CONSISTING OF ORATIONS, ADDRESSES, EXHORTATIONS
FROM THE PULPIT, PLEADINGS AT THE BAR, SUBLIME DESCRIPTIONS, DEBATES,
DECLAMATIONS, GRAVE AND HUMOROUS DIALOGUES, POETRY, etc. VARIOUSLY INTERSPERSED.
EXTRACT FROM AN ORATION ON ELOQUENCE, PRONOUNCED AT HARVARD UNIVERSITY, ON
COMMENCEMENT DAY, 1794.
THE excellence, utility, and importance of ELOQUENCE; its origin, progress,
and present state; and its superior claim to the particular attention of
Columbia's freeborn sons, will exercise for a few moments the patience of this
learned, polite, and respected assembly.

Speech and reason are the characteristics, the glory, and the happiness of
man. These are the pillars which support the fair fabric of eloquence; the
foundation, upon which is erected the most magnificent edifice, that genius
could design, or art construct. To cultivate eloquence, then, is to improve the
noblest faculties of our nature, the richest talents with which we are
entrusted. A more convincing proof of the dignity and importance of our subject
need not, cannot be advanced.

The benevolent design and the beneficial effects of eloquence, evince its
great superiority over every other art, which ever exercised the ingenuity of
man. To instruct, to persuade, to please; these are its objects. To scatter the
clouds of ignorance and error from the atmosphere of reason; to remove the film
of prejudice from the mental eye; and thus to irradiate the benighted mind with
the cheering beams of truth, is at once the business and the glory of eloquence.

To promote the innocent and refined pleasures of the fancy and intellect; to
strip the monster vice of all his borrowed charms, and expose to view his
native deformity; to display the resistless attractions of virtue; and, in one
word, to rouse to action all the latent energies of man, in the proper and
ardent pursuit of the great end of his existence, is the orator's pleasing,
benevolent, sublime employment.

Nor let it be objected, that eloquence sometimes impedes the course of
justice, and screens the guilty from the punishment due to their crimes. Is
there any thing which is not obnoxious to abuse? Even the benign religion of
the Prince of Peace has been made the unwilling instrument of the greatest
calamities ever experienced by man. The greater the benefits which naturally
result from any thing, the more pernicious are its effects, when diverted from
its proper course. This objection to eloquence is therefore its highest
eulogium.

The orator does not succeed, as some would insinuate, by dazzling the eye of
reason with the illusive glare of his rhetorical art, nor, by silencing her
still small voice in the thunder of his declamation; for to her impartial
tribunal he refers the truth and propriety of whatever he asserts or proposes.
After fairly convincing the understanding, he may, without the imputation of
disingenuousness, proceed to address the fancy and the passions. In this way he
will more effectually transfuse into his ^earers his own sentiments, and make
every spring in the human machine cooperate in the production of the desired
effect.

The astonishing powers of eloquence are well known, at least to those who are
conversant in ancient history. Like a resistless torrent, it bears down every
obstacle, and turns even the current of opposing ignorance and prejudice into
the desired channel of active and zealous compliance. It is indisputably the
most potent art within the compass of human acquirement. An Alexander and a
Caesar could conquer a world; but to overcome the passions, to subdue the wills,
and to command at pleasure the inclinations of men, can be effected only by the
all-powerful charm of enrapturing eloquence.

Though it be more than probable, that oratory was known and cultivated in some
degree in those eastern nations, where science first began to dawn upon the
world* yet it was not till Greece became civilized and formed into distinct
governments, that it made its appearance in its native, peerless majesty. Here
we may fix the era of eloquence; here was its morn; here its meridian too; for
here it shone with splendour never since surpassed.

It is a common and a just remark, that eloquence can flourish only in the soil
of liberty. Athens was a republic, where the affairs of state were transacted
in the assembly of the whole people. This afforded to eloquence a field too
fertile to remain long uncultivated by the ingenious Athenians. Orators soon
made their appearance, who did honor to language, to Greece, to humanity.

But though the names of many have been transmitted to us, whose genius and
eloquence demand our veneration and applause; yet, like stars when the sun
appears, they are lost in the superior blaze of the incomparable Demosthenes.
His story is well known; and his example affords the greatest encouragement to
students in eloquence; as it proves, that, by art, almost in defiance of
nature, a man may attain such excellence in oratory, as shall stamp his name
with the seal of immortality. Demosthenes and the liberty of Greece together
expired; and from this period we hear very little more of Grecian eloquence.

Let us now direct our attention to that other garden of eloquence, the Roman
commonwealth. Here, as in Greece, a free government opened the list to such as
wished to dispute the palm in oratory. Numbers advance, and contend manfully
for the prize. But their glory is soon to fade; for Cicero appears; Cicero,
another name for eloquence itself. It is needles to enlarge on his character as
an orator. Suffice it to say, that if we ransack the histories of the world to
find a rival for Demosthenes, Cicero alone can be found capable of supporting a
claim to that distinguished honor.

And when did Greece or Rome present a fairer field for eloquence, than that
which now invites the culture of the enlightened citizens of Columbia? We live
in a republic, the orator's natal soil; we enjoy as much liberty, as is
consistent with the nature of man; we possess as a nation all the advantages
which climate, soil, and situation can bestow; and nothing but real merit is
here required as a qualification for the most dignified offices of state. Never
had eloquence more ample scope.

And shall we rest satisfied with only admiring, or at most with following at
an awful distance the most illustrious orators of Greece and Rome? Shall every
other useful and ornamental art speed swiftly toward perfection, while
oratory, that most sublime of all arts; that art, which could render one man
more dreadful to a tyrant, than hostile fleets and armies, is almost forgotten?
It must not, cannot be. That refinement of taste, that laudable ambition to
excel in every thing which does honor to humanity, which distinguishes the
Americans, and their free and popular government, are so many springs, which,
though not instantaneous in their operation, cannot fail in time to raise
Columbian eloquence "above all Greek, above all Roman fame."

With pleasure we descry the dawning of that bright day of eloquence, which we
have anticipated. The grand council of our nation has already evinced, that in
this respect, as in all others, our republic acknowledges no existing superior.
And we trust, that, as our sacred teachers make it their constant endeavor to
imitate the great learning, the exemplary virtue, the exalted piety, and the
extensive usefulness of the great apostle of the Gentiles, they will not fail
to resemble him in that commanding, that heavenly eloquence, which made an
avaricious, an unbeliving Felix tremble.

May Columbia always afford more than one Demosthenes, to support the sacred
cause of freedom, and to thunder terror in the ears of every transatlantic
Philip. May more than Ciceronian eloquence be ever ready to plead for injured
innocence, and suffering virtue. Warned by the fate of her predecessors, may
she escape those quicksands of vice, which have ever proved the bane of empire.
May her glory and her felicity increase with each revolving year, till the last
trump shall announce the catastrophe of nature, and time shall immerge in the
ocean of eternity.

EXTRACT FROM PRESIDENT WASHINGTON'S FIRST SPEECH IN CONGRESS, 1789.
FELLOW CITIZENS OF THE SENATE, AND OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
AMONG the vicissitudes incident to life, no event could have filled me with
greater anxieties than that of which the notification was transmitted by your
order, and received on the 14th day of the present month. On the one hand, I
was summoned by my country, whose voice I can never hear but with veneration
and love, from a retreat which I had chosen with the fondest predilection, and,
in my flattering hopes, with an immutable decision, as the asylum of my
declining years. A retreat which was rendered every day more necessary as well
as more dear to me, by the addition of habit to inclination, and of frequent
interruptions in my health to the gradual waste committed on it by time.

On the other hand, the magnitude and difficulty of the trust, to which the
voice of my country called me, being sufficient to awaken in the wisest and
most experienced of her citizens, a distrustful scrutiny into his
qualifications, could not but overwhelm with despondence one, who inheriting
inferior endowments from nature, and unpractised in the duties of civil
administration, ought to be peculiarly conscious of his own deficiencies.

In this conflict of emotions, all I dare aver is, that it has been my faithful
study to collect my duty from a just appreciation of every circumstance by
which it might be affected. All I dare hope is, that if, in executing this task
I have been too much swayed by a grateful remembrance of former instances, or
by an affectionate sensibility to this transcendent proof of the confidence of
my fellow-citizens, and have thence too little consulted my incapacity as well
as disinclination for the weighty and untried cares before me, my error will be
palliated by the motives which misled me; and its consequences be judged by my
country, with some share of the partiality in which they originated.

Such being the impressions under which I have, in obedience to the public
summons, repaired to the present station, it would be peculiarly improper to
omit in this first official act, my servent supplications to that Almighty
Being, who rules over the universe, who presides in the councils of nations,
and whose providential aids can supply every human defect, that his benediction
may consecrate to the liberties and happiness of the people of the United
States, a government instituted by themselves for these essential purposes; and
may enable every instrument employed in its administration, to execute with
success, the sunctions allotted to his charge. In tendering this homage to the
great Author of every public and private good, I assure myself that it
expresses your sentiments not less than my own; nor those of my fellow-citizens
at large, less than either.

No people can be bound to acknowledge and adore the invisible hand, which
conducts the affairs of men, more than the people of the United States. Every
step, by which they have advanced to the character of an independent nation,
seems to have been distinguished by some token of providential agency. And in
the important revolution just accomplished in the system of their united
government, the tranquil deliberations and voluntary consent of so many
distinct communities, from which the event has resulted, cannot be compared
with the means by which most governments have been established, without some
return of pious gratitude with a humble anticipation of the future blessings
which the past seem to presage. These reflections, arising out of the present
crisis, have forced themselves too strongly on my mind to be suppressed. You
will join with me, I trust, in thinking that there are none, under the
influence of which, the proceedings of a new and free government can more
auspiciously commence.

SPEECH OF PAULUS EMILIUS TO THE ROMAN PEOPLE, AS HE WAS ABOUT TAKING THE
COMMAND OF THEIR ARMY.
YOU seem to me, Romans, to have expressed more joy when Macedonia fell to my
lot, than when I was elected consul, or entered upon that office. And to me
your joy seemed to be occasioned by the hopes you conceived, that I should put
an end, worthy of the grandeur and reputation of the Roman people, to a war,
which, in your opinion, has already been of too long continuance. I have reason
to believe, that the same gods, who have occasioned Macedonia to fall to my
lot, will also assist me with their protection in conducting and terminating
this war successfully. But of this, I may venture to assure you, that I shall
do my utmost not to fall short of your expectations.

The senate has wisely regulated every thing necessary in the expedition I am
charged with; and, as I am ordered to set out immediately, I shall m^ke no
delay; and I know that my colleague Caius Licinius, out of his great zeal for
the public service, will raise and march off the troops appointed for me, with
as much ardor and expedition, as if they were for himself. I shall take care to
transmit to you, as well as to the senate, an exact account of all that passes;
and you may rely upon the certainty and truth of my letters. But I beg of you,
as a great favor, that you will not give credit to, or lay any weight, out of
credulity, upon the light reports, which are frequently spread abroad without
any author.

I perceive well, that in this war, more than in any other, whatever resolution
people may form to obviate these rumors, they will not fail to make impression,
and inspire I know not what discouragement. There are those, who in company,
and even at table, command armies, make dispositions, and prescribe all the
operations of the campaign. They know better than we, where we should encamp,
and what posts it is necessary for us to seize; at what time, and by what
defile we ought to enter Macedonia; where it is proper to have magazines; from
whence, either by sea or land, we are to bring provisions; when we are to fight
the enemy, and when lie still.

They not only prescribe what is best to do; but for deviating ever so little
from their plans, they make it a crime in their consul, and cite him before
their tribunal. But know, Romans, this is of very bad effect with your
generals. All have not the resolution and constancy of Fabius, to despise
impertinent reports. He could choose rather to suffer the people, upon such
unhappy rumors, to invade his authority, than to ruin affairs in order to
preserve their opinion, and an empty name.

I am far from believing, that generals stand in no need of advice: I think, on
the contrary, that whoever would conduct every thing alone, upon his own
opinion, and without counsel, shows more presumption than prudence. But some
may ask, How then shall we act reasonably? I answer, by not suffering any
persons to obtrude their advice upon your generals, but such as are, in the
first place, versed in the art of war, and have learned from experience what it
is to command; and in the second place, who are upon the spot; who know the
enemy; are witnesses in person to all that passes; and sharers with us in all
dangers.

If there be any one, who conceives himself capable of assisting me with his
counsels in the war you have charged me with, let him not refuse to do the
republic that service; but let him go with me into Macedonia. Ships, horses,
tents, provisions, shall all be provided for him at my charge. But if he will
not take so much trouble, and prefers the tranquillity of the city to the
dangers and fatigues of the field, let him not take upon him to hold the helm,
and continue idle in the port. The city of itself supplies sufficient matter of
discourse on other subjects; but as for these, let it be silent upon them; and
know, that we shall pay no regard to any counsels, but such as shall be given
us in the camp itself.

EXHORTATION ON TEMPERANCE IN PLEASURE.
LET me particularly exhort youth to temperance in pleasure. Let me admonish
them, to beware of that rock on which thousands, from race to race, continue to
split. The love of pleasure, natural to man in every period of his life, glows
at this age with excessive ardor. Novelty adds fresh charms, as yet, to every
gratification. The world appears to spread a continual feast; and health,
vigor, and high spirits, invite them to partake of it without restraint. In
vain we warn them of latent dangers. Religion is accused of insufferable
severity, in prohibiting enjoyment: and the old, when they offer their
admonitions, are upbraided with having forgotten that they once were young.

And yet, my friends, to what do the restraints of religion, and the counsels
of age, with respect to pleasure, amount? They may all be comprised in few
words, not to hurt yourselves, and not to hurt others, by your pursuit of
pleasure. Within these bounds, pleasure is lawful; beyond them, it becomes
criminal, because it is ruinous. Are these restraints any other, than what a
wise man would choose to impose on himself? We call you not to renounce
pleasure, but to enjoy it in safety. Instead of abridging it, we exhort you to
pursue it on an extensive plan. We propose measures for securing its
possession, and for prolonging its duration.

Consult your whole nature. Consider yourselves not only as sensitive, but as
rational beings; not only as rational, but social; not only as social, but
immortal. Whatever violates your nature, in any of these respects, cannot
afford true pleasure; any more than that which undermines an essential part of
the vital system can promote health. For the truth of this conclusion, we
appeal, not merely to the authority of religion, nor to the testimony of the
aged, but to yourselves and your own experience. We ask, whether you have not
found, that in a course of criminal excess, your pleasure was more than
compensated by succeeding pain? Whether, if not from every particular instance,
yet from every habit, at least, of unlawful gratification, there did not spring
some thorn to wound you; there did not arise some consequence to make you
repent of it in the i^^ue.

"How long then, ye simple ones! will ye love simplicity?" How long repeat the
same round of pernicious folly, and tamely expose yourselves to be caught in
the same snare? If you have any consideration, or any firmness left, avoid
temptations, for which you have found yourselves unequal, with as much care as
you would shun pestilential infection. Break off all connexions with the loose
and profligate. "When sinners entice thee, consent thou not. Look not on the
wine when it is red, when it gives its color in the cup; for at the last, it
biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an adder. Remove thy way from the
strange woman, and come not near the door of her house. Let not thine heart
decline to her ways; for her house is the way to hell. Thou go after her as
a bird hasteneth to the snare, and knows not that it is for his life."

By these unhappy excesses of irregular pleasure in youth, how many amiable
dispositions are corrupted or destroyed! How many rising capacities and powers
are suppressed! How many flattering hopes of parents and friends are totally
extinguished! Who but must drop a tear over human nature, when he beholds that
morning which arose so bright, overcast with such untimely darkness; that good
humor which once captivated all hearts; that vivacity which sparkled in every
company; those abilities which were fitted for adorning the highest station,
all sacrificed at the shrine of low sensuality; and one, who was formed for
running the fair career of life in the midst of public esteem, cut off by his
vices at the beginning of his course, or sunk, for the whole of it, into
insignificancy and contempt! These, O sinful Pleasure! are thy trophies. It is
thus, that, cooperating with the foe of God and man, thou degradest human
nature, and blastest the opening prospects of human felicity.

JUDAH'S PLEA FOR HIS BROTHER BENJAMIN, BEFORE JOSEPH IN EGYPT.
WHEN we appeared before you, Sir, the first time, we answered without reserve,
and according to the strictest truth, all the questions which you were pleased
to put to us concerning our family. We acquainted you, that we had a father,
heavily laden with years, but still more heavily with misfortunes; a father,
whose whole life had been one continued struggle with adversity. We added that
we had a brother peculiarly dear to him, as the children born toward the end
of their life generally are to old men, and who is the only one remaining of
his mother; his brother having come in early youth to a most tragical end.

You commanded us, as the proof of our veracity and innocence, to bring that
brother unto you; and your command was delivered with such threatenings, that
the terror of them accompanied us all the way back to our country, and
embittered the remainder of our journey. We reported every thing minutely to
our father, as you directed us. Resolutely and long, he refused to entrust us
with the care of that child. Love suggested a thousand causes of apprehension
upon his account. He loaded us with the bitterest reproaches for having
declared that we had another brother.

Subdued by the famine, he at length reluctantly consented; and putting his
beloved son, this unhappy youth, into our hands, conjured us by every dear,
every awful name, to guard with tenderness his precious life; and as we would
not see him expire before our eyes in anguish and despair, to bring him back in
safety. He parted with him as with a limb torn from his own body; and in an
agony of grief inexpressible, deplored the dreadful necessity which separated
him from a son, on whom all the happiness of his life depended.

How then can we appear before a father of such delicate sensibility? With what
eyes shall we dare to look upon him, unless we carry back with us this son of
his right hand, this staff of his old age, whom, alas! you have condemned to
slavery? The good old man will expire in horrors dreadful to nature, as soon as
he shall find that his son is not with us. Our enemies will insult over us
under these misfortunes, and treat us as the most infamous of parricides.

I must appear to the world, and to myself, as the perpetrato^ of that most
horrid of crimes, the murder of a father; for it was I who most urgently
pressed my father to yield. I engaged by the most solemn promises, and the most
sacred pledges, to bring the child back. Me he entrusted with the sacred
deposit, and of my hand he will require it. Have pity, I beseech you, on the
deplorable condition of an old man, stripped of his last comfort; and whose
misery will be aggravated by reflecting that he foresaw its approach, and yet
wanted resolution to prevent it.

If your just indignation must needs have a sacrifice, here I am ready, at the
price of my liberty or of my life, to expiate this young man's guilt, and to
purchase his release! Grant this request, not so much for the sake of the youth
himself, as of his absent father, who never offended you, but who venerates
your person and esteems your virtues.

Suffer us not to plead in vain for a shelter under your right hand, to which
we flee, as to an holy altar, consecrated as a refuge to the miserable. Pity an
old man, who, during the whole course of a long life, has cultivated arts
becoming a man of wisdom and probity, and who, on account of his amiable
qualities, is almost adored by the inhabitants of Syria and Canaan, though he
professes a religion, and follows a mode of living totally different from
theirs.

EXTRACT FROM THE PLEA OF THOMAS MUIR, ESQUIRE. AT HIS CELEBRATED TRIAL IN SCOTLAND.
GENTLEMEN OF THE JURY,
THIS is now perhaps the last time that I shall address my country. I have
explored the tenor of my past life. Nothing shall tear from me the record of my
departed days. The enemies of reform have scrutinized, in a manner hitherto
unexampled in Scotland, every action I may have performed, every word I may
have uttered. Of crimes, most foul and horrible, have I been accused: of
attempting to rear the standard of civil war; to plunge this land in blood, and
to cover it with desolation. At every step, as the evidence of the crown
advanced, my innocence has brightened. So far from inflaming the minds of men
to sedition and outrage, all the witnesses have concurred, that my only anxiety
was, to impress upon them the necessity of peace, of good order, and of good
morals.

What then has been my crime? Not the lending to a relation a copy of Mr.
Paine's Works; not the giving away to another a few numbers of an innocent and
constitutional publication; but for having dared to be, according to the
measure of my feeble abilities, a strenuous and active advocate for an equal
representation of the PEOPLE, in the HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE; for having dared to
attempt to accomplish a measure, by legal means, which was to diminish the
weight of their taxes, and to put an end to the profusion of their blood.

From my infancy to this moment, I have devoted myself to the cause of the
PEOPLE. It is a good cause. It will ultimately prevail. It will finally
triumph. Say then openly, in your verdict, if you do condemn me, which I
presume you will not, that it is for my attachment to this cause alone, and not
for those vain and wretched pretexts stated in the indictment, intended only to
color and disguise the real motives of my accusation. The time will come, when
men must stand or fall by their actions; when all human pageantry shall cease;
when the hearts of all shall be laid open to view.

If you regard your most important interests; if you wish that your consciences
should whisper to you words of consolation, rather than speak to you in the
terrible language of remorse, weigh well the verdict you are to pronounce.

As for me, I am careless and indifferent to my fate. I can look danger, and I
can look death in the face; for I am shielded by the consciousness of my own
rectitude. I may be condemned to languish in the recesses of a dungeon. I may
be doomed to ascend the scaffold. Nothing can deprive me of the recollection of
the past; nothing can destroy my inward peace of mind, arising from the
remembrance of having discharged my duty.

ON THE STARRY HEAVENS.
TO us who dwell on its surface, the earth is by far the most extensive orb
that our eyes can any where behold. It is also clothed with verdure;
distinguished by trees; and adorned with a variety of beautiful decorations.
Whereas, to a spectator placed on one of the planets, it wears a uniform
aspect; looks all luminous, and no larger than a spot. To beings who dwell at
still greater distances, it entirely disappears.

That which we call, alternately, the morning and evening star; as in one part
of her orbit, she rides foremo^t in the procession of night; in the other,
ushers in, and anticipates the dawn, is a planetary world; which* with the five
others, that so wonderfully vary their mystic dance, are in themselves dark
bodies, and shine only by reflection; have fields, and seas, and skies of their
own; are furnished with all accommodations for animal subsistence, and are
supposed to be abodes of intellectual life. All which, together with this our
earthly habitation, are dependent on that grand dispenser of divine
munificence, the sun; receive their light from the distribution of his rays;
derive their comfort from his divine agency.

The sun is the great axle of heaven, about which, the globe we inhabit, and
other more spacious orbs, wheel their stated courses. The sun, though seemingly
smaller than the dial it illuminates, is abundantly larger than this whole
earth; on which so many lofty mountains rise, and such vast oceans roll. A
line, extending through the center of that resplendent orb, would measure more
than eight hundred thousand miles. A girdle, formed to surround it, would
require a length of millions. Were its solid contents to be estimated, the
account would overpower our understanding, and be almost beyond the power of
language to express.

Are we startled at these reports of astronomy? Are we ready to cry out in a
transport of surprise, How mighty is the Being, who kindled such a prodigious
fire, and who keeps alive, from age to age, such an enormous mass of flame! Let
us attend our philosophic guides, and we shall be brought acquainted with
speculations more enlarged, and more amazing.

This sun, with all attendant planets, is but a very little part of the grand
machine of the universe. Every star, though in appearance, no bigger than the
diamond that glitters on a lady's ring, is really a mighty globe; like the sun
in size, and in glory; no less spacious; no less luminous than the radiant
source of our day. So that every star is not barely a world, but the center of
a magnificent system; has a retinue of worlds, irradiated by its beams, and
revolving round its attractive influence. All which are lost to our sight in
unmeasurable wilds of either.

That the stars appear like so many diminutive, and scarcely distinguishable
points, is owing to their immense, and inconceivable distance. Such a distance,
that a cannon ball, could it continue its impetuous flight, with unabating
rapidity, would not reach the nearest of those twinkling luminaries for more
than five hundred thousand years!

Can any thing be more wonderful than these observations? Yes; there are truths
far more stupendous; there are scenes far more extensive. As there is no end of
the Almighty Maker's greatness, so no imagination can set limits to his
creating hand. Could you soar beyond the moon, and pass through all the
planetary choir; could you wing your way to the highest apparent star, and take
your stand on one of those lofty pinnacles of heaven, you would there see other
skies expanded; another sun, distributing his inexhaustible beams by day; other
stars which gild the horrors of the alternate night; and other, perhaps nobler
systems, established in unknown profusion, through the boundless dimensions of
space. Nor do the dominions of the universal Sovereign terminate there. Even at
the end of this vast tour, you would find yourself advanced no further than the
suburbs of creation; arrived only at the frontiers of the great JEHOVAH's
kingdom.

PAPER, A POEM.
SOME wit of old; such wits of old there were,
Whose hints showed meaning, whose allusions, care,
By one brave stroke, to mark all human kind,
Called clear blank paper every infant mind;
When still, as opening sense her dictates wrote,
Fair virtue put a seal, or vice a blot.
The thought was happy, pertinent, and true,
Methinks a genius might the plan pursue,
I, (can you pardon my presumption?) I,
No wit, no genius, yet for once will try.
Various the papers, various wants produce,
The wants of fashion, elegance, and use.
Men are as various: and, if right I scan,
Each sort of paper represents some man.
Pray note the fop; half powder and half lace;
Nice, as a band-box were his dewlling place;
He Is the gilt paper, which apart you store,
And lock from vulgar hands in the scrutoire.
Mechanics, servants, farmers, and so forth,
Are copy paper of inferior worth;
Less prized, more useful, for your desk decreed,
Free to all pens, and prompt at every need.
The wretch, whom avarice bids to pinch and spare,
Starve, cheat, and pilfer, to enrich an heir,
Is coarse brown paper, such as pedlars choose
To wrap up wares, which better men will use.
Take next the miser's contrast, who destroys
Health, fame, and fortune, in a round of joys.
Will any paper match him? Yes, throughout,
He Is a true sinking paper, past all doubt.
The retail politician's anxious thought
Deems this side always right, and that stark naught;
He foams with censure; with applause he raves,
A dupe to rumors, and a tool of knaves;
He Will want no type his weakness to proclaim,
While such a thing as fools-cap has a name.
The hasty gentleman, whose blood runs high,
Who picks a quarrel if you step awry,
Who cannot a jest, or hint, or look endure:
What Is he? What? Touch-paper to be sure.
What are our poets, take them as they fall,
Good, bad, rich, poor, much read, not read at all?
Them and their works in the same class you will find;
They are the mere waste-paper of mankind.
Observe the maiden, innocently sweet,
She Is fair white paper, an unsullied sheet;
On which the happy man, whom fate ordains,
May write his name, and take her for his pains.
One instance more, and only one I Will bring;
It Is the great man who scorns a little thing;
Whose thoughts, whose deeds, whose maxims are his own,
Formed on the feelings of his heart alone:
True genuine royal paper is his breast;
Of all the kinds most precious, purest, best.
EXTRACT FROM CATO'S SPEECH BEFORE THE ROMAN SENATE, AFTER THE CONSPIRACY OF
CATILINE.
I HAVE often spoken before you, Fathers, with some extent, to complain of
luxury and the greediness for money, the twin vices of our corrupt citizens;
and have thereby drawn upon myself abundance of enemies. As I never spared any
fault in myself, I was not easily inclined to favor the criminal excesses of
others.

But though you paid little regard to my remonstrances, the Commonwealth has
still subsisted by its own strength; has borne itself up, notwithstanding your
neglect. It is not now the same. Our manners, good or bad, are not the
question, nor to preserve the greatness and luster of the Roman empire; but to
resolve whether all we possess and govern, well or ill, shall continue ours, or
be transferred with ourselves to enemies.

At such a time, in such a state, some talk to us of lenity and compassion. It
is long that we have lost the right names of things. The Commonwealth is in
this deplorable situation, only because we call bestowing other people's
estates, liberality, and audaciousness in perpetrating crimes, courage.

Let such men, since they will have it so, and it is become the established
mode, value themselves upon their liberality at the expense of the Allies of
the empire, and of their lenity to the robbers of the public treasury: but let
them not make a largess of our blood; and, to spare a small number of vile
wretches, expose all good men to destruction.

Do not imagine, Fathers, that it was by arms our ancestors rendered this
Commonwealth so great, from so small a beginning. If it had been so, we should
now see it much more flourishing, as we have more allies and citizens, more
horse and foot, than they had. But they had other things, that made them great,
of which no traces remain amongst us: at home, labor and industry; abroad, just
and equitable government; a constancy of soul, and an innocence of manners,
that kept them perfectly free in their councils; unrestrained either by the
remembrance of past crimes, or by craving appetites to satisfy.

For these virtues, we have luxury and avarice; or madness to squander, joined
with no less, to gain; the State is poor, and private men are rich. We admire
nothing but riches; we give ourselves up to sloth and effeminacy; we make no
distinction between the good and the bad; whilst ambition engrosses all the
rewards of virtue. Do you wonder then, that dangerous conspiracies should be
formed? Whilst you regard nothing but your private interest; whilst
voluptuousness solely employs you at home, and avidity or favor governs you
here, the Commonwealth, without defense, is exposed to the devices of any one
who thinks fit to attack it.

DIALOGUE BETWEEN THE GHOSTS OF AN ENGLISH DUELLIST, A NORTH-AMERICAN SAVAGE,
AND MERCURY.
Duellist. MERCURY, Charon's boat is on the other side of the water. Allow me,
before it returns, to have some conversation with the North-American Savage,
whom you brought hither with me. I never before saw one of that species. He
looks very grim. Pray, Sir, what is your name? I understand you speak English.


Savage. Yes, I learned it in my childhood, having been bred for some years
among the English of New York. But, before I was a man, I returned to my
valiant countrymen, the Mohawks; and having been villanously cheated by one of
yours in the sale of some ruin, I never cared to have any thing to do with them
afterward. Yet I took up the hatchet for them with the rest of my tribe in the
late war against France, and was killed while I was out upon a scalping party.
But I died very well satisfied: for my brethren were victorious; and, before I
was shot, I had gloriously scalped seven men, and five women and children. In a
former war, I had performed still greater exploits. My name is the Bloody Bear:
it was given me to express my fierceness and valor.


Duel. Bloody Bear, I respect you, and am much your humble servant. My name is
Tom Pushwell, very well known at Arthur's. I am a gentleman by my birth, and by
profession a gamester and man of honor. I have killed men in fair fighting, in
honorable single combat; but don't understand cutting the throats of women and
children.


Sav. Sir, that is our way of making war. Every nation has its customs. But by
the grimness of your countenance, and that hole in your breast, I presume you
were killed as I was, in some scalping party. How happened it that your enemy
did not take off your scalp?


Duel. Sir, I was killed in a duel. A friend of mine had lent me a sum of
money; and after two or three years, being in great want himself, he asked me
to pay him. I thought his demand, which was somewhat peremptory, an affront to
my honor, and sent him a challenge. We met in Hyde Park. The fellow could not
fence: but I was absolutely the adroitest swordsman in England. So I gave him
three or four wounds; but at last he ran upon me with such impetuosity, that he
put me out of my play, and I could not prevent him from whipping me through the
lungs. I died the next day, as a man of honor should; without any snivelling
signs of contrition or repentance: and he will follow me soon; for his surgeon
has declared his wounds to be mortal. It is said that his wife is dead of
grief, and that his family of seven children will be undone by his death. So I
am well revenged, and that is a comfort. For my part, I had no wife. I always
hated marriage: my mistress will take good care of herself, and my children are
provided for at the foundling hospital.


Sav. Mercury, I will not go in the boat with that fellow. He has murdered his
countryman: he has murdered his friend: I say positively, I will not go in the
boat with that fellow. I will swim over the river: I can swim like a duck.


Mer. Swim over the Styx! it must not be done; it is against the laws of
Pluto's empire. You must go in the boat and be quiet.


Sav. Don't tell me of laws: I am a savage: I value no laws. Talk of laws to
the Englishman: there are laws in his country; and yet you see he did not
regard them. For they could never allow him to kill his fellow-subject, in time
of peace, because he asked him to pay an honest debt. I know indeed, that the
English are a barbarous nation: but they cannot possibly be so brutal as to make
such things lawful.


Mer. You reason well against him. But how comes it that you are so offended
with murder; you, who have frequently massacred women in their sleep, and
children in the cradle?


Sav. I killed none but my enemies: I never killed my own countrymen: I never
killed my friend. Here, take my blanket, and let it come over in the boat; but
see that the murderer does not sit upon it, or touch it. If he does, I will
burn it instantly in the fire I see yonder. Farewell. I am determined to swim
over the water.


Mer. By this touch of my wand, I deprive thee of all thy strength. Swim now if
thou can.


Sav. This is a potent enchanter. Restore me my strength, and I promise to obey
thee.


Mer. I restore it; but be orderly, and do as I bid you; otherwise worse will
befall you.


Duel. Mercury, leave him to me. I Will tutor him for you. Sirrah Savage, do
thou pretend to be ashamed of my company? Do thou not know that I have kept
the best company in England?


Sav. I know thou art a scoundrel. Not pay thy debts! kill thy friend who lent
thee money for asking thee for it! Get out of my sight. I will drive thee into
the Styx.


Mer. Stop. I command thee. No violence. Talk to him calmly.


Sav. I must obey thee. Well, Sir, let me know what merit you had to introduce
you into good company? What could you do?


Duel. Sir, I gamed, as I told you. Besides, I kept a good table. I eat as well
as any man either in England or France.


Sav. Eat! did you ever eat the liver of a Frenchman, or his leg, or his
shoulder? There is fine eating for you! I have eat twenty. My table was always
well served. My wife was esteemed the best cook for the dressing of man's flesh
in all North America. You will not pretend to compare your eating with mine?


Duel. I danced very finely.


Sav. I Will dance with thee for thy ears. I can dance all day long. I can dance
the war dance with more spirit than any man of my nation. Let us see thee begin
it. How thou stand like a post! Has Mercury struck thee with his enfeebling
rod? Or art thou ashamed to let us see how awkward thou art? If he would permit
me, I would teach thee to dance in a way that thou have never yet learned. But
what else can thou do, thou bragging rascal?


Duel. O misery! must I bear all this! What can I do with this fellow? I have
neither sword nor pistol; and his shade seems to be twice as strong as mine.


Mer. You must answer his questions. It was your own desire to have a
conversation with him. He is not well bred; but he will tell you some truths
which you must necessarily hear, when you come before Rhadamanthus. He asked
you what you could do beside eating and dancing.


Duel. I sung very agreeably.


Sav. Let me hear you sing your death song, or the war whoop. I challenge you
to sing. Come, begin. The fellow is mute. Mercury, this is a liar. He has told
us nothing but lies. Let me pull out his tongue.


Duel. The lie given me! and alas! I dare not resent it! What an indelible
disgrace to the family of the Pushwells! This is indeed tormenting.


Mer. Here, Charon, take these two savages to your care. How far the barbarism
of the Mohawk will excuse his horrid acts, I leave Minos to judge. But what can
be said for the Englishman? Can we plead the custom of Duelling! A bad excuse
at the best! but here it cannot avail. The spirit that urged him to draw his
sword against his friend is not that of honor; it is the spirit of the furies;
and to them he must go.


Sav. If he is to be punished for his wickedness; turn him over to me. I
perfectly understand the art of tormenting. Sirrah, I begin my work with this
box or your ears, and will soon teach you better manners than you have yet
learned.


Duel. Oh my honor, my honor, to what infamy art thou fallen!


SPEECH OF AN INDIAN CHIEF, OF THE STOCK-BRIDGE TRIBE, TO THE MASSACHUSETTS
CONGRESS, IN THE YEAR 1775.
BROTHERS!
YOU remember, when you first came over the great waters, I was great and you
were little; very small. I then took you in for a friend, and kept you under my
arms, so that no one might injure you. Since that time we have ever been true
friends: there has never been any quarrel between us. But now our conditions
are changed. You are become great and tall. You reach to the clouds. You are
seen all round the world. I am become small; very little. I am not so high as
your knee. Now you take care of me; and I look to you for protection.

Brothers! I am sorry to hear of this great quarrel between you and Old
England. It appears that blood must soon be shed to end this quarrel. We never
till this day understood the foundation of this quarrel between you and the
country you came from. Brothers! Whenever I see your blood running, you will
soo^ ^d me about you to revenge my brothers' blood. Although I am low and very
small, I will gripe hold of your enemy's heel, that he cannot run so fast, and
so light, as if he had nothing at his heels.

Brothers! You know I am not so wise as you are, therefore I ask your advice in
what I am now going to say. I have been thinking, before you come to action, to
take a run to the westward, and feel the mind of my Indian brethren the Six
Nations, and know how they stand; whether they are on your side, or for your
enemies. If I find they are against you, I will try to turn their minds. I
think they will listen to me; for they have always looked this way for advice,
concerning all important news that comes from the rising sun. If they hearken
to me, you will not be afraid of any danger from behind you. However their
minds are affected, you shall soon know by me. Now I think I can do you more
service in this way than by marching off immediately to Boston, and staying
there. It may be a great while before blood runs. Now, as I said, you are wiser
than I, I leave this for your consideration, whether I come down immediately,
or wait till I hear some blood is spilled.

Brothers! I would not have you think by this, that we are falling back from
our engagements. We are ready to do any thing for your relief, and shall be
guided by your counsel.

Brothers! one thing I ask of you, if you send for me to fight, that you you
will let me fight in my own Indian way. I am not used to fight English fashion;
therefore you must not expect I can train like your men. Only point out to me
where your enemies keep, and that is all I shall want to know.

ON THE CREATION OF THE WORLD.
TO the ancient philosophers, creation from ^ot^ing appeared an unintelligible
idea. They ^tained the eternal existence of matter, which ^y supposed to be
modelled by the sovereign mind o^ the universe, into the form which the earth
now exhibits But there is nothing in this opinion which gives it any title to
be opposed to the authority of revelation. The doctrine of two self-existent,
independent principles, God and matter, the one active, the other passive, is a
h^pothesis which presents difficulties to human reason, at least as great as
the creation of matter from nothing. Adhering then to the testimony of
scripture, we believe, that "in the beginning God created," or from
nonexistence brought into being, "the heavens and the earth."

But though there was a period when this globe, with all that we see upon it,
did not exist, we have no reason to think, that the w^sdom and power of the
Almighty were then without exercise or employment. Boundless is the extent of
his dominion. Other globes and worlds, enlightened by other suns, may then have
occupied, they still appear to occupy, the immense regions of space. Numberless
orders of beings, to us unknown, people the wide extent of the universe, and
afford an endless variety of objects to the ruling care of the great Father of
all. At length, in the course and progress of his government, there arrived a
period, when this earth was to be called into existence. When the signal
moment, predestined from all eternity, was come, the Deity arose in his
might, and with a word created the world.

What an illustrious moment was tha^, when, from nonexistence, there sprang at
once into being this mighty globe, on which so many millions of creatures now
dwell! No preparatory measures were required. No long circuit of means was
employed. "He spoke and it was done: He commanded, and it stood fast." The
earth was, at first, "without form, and void; and darkness was on the face of
the deep." The Almighty surveyed the dark abyss; and fixed bounds to the
several divisions of nature. He said, "Let there (...) light, and there was
light."

^hen appeared the sea, and the dry land. The mountains rose; and the rivers
flowed. The sun and moon began their course in the skies. Herbs and plants
clothed the ground. The air, the earth, and the waters, were stored with their
respective inhabitants. At last, man was made after the image of God. He
appeared, walking with countenance erect; and received his Creator's
benediction, as the lord of this n^w world. The Almighty beheld his work when
it was finished, and pronounced it good. Superior beings saw with wonder this
new accession to existence. "The morning stars sang together; and all the sons
of God shouted for joy."

But, on this great work of creation, let us not merely gaze with astonishment.
Let us consider how it should affect our conduct, by presenting the divine
perfections in a light which is at once edifying and comforting to man. It
displays the Creator as supreme in power, in wisdom, and in goodness. Let us
look around, and survey this stupendous edifice, which we have been admitted to
inhabit. Let us think of the extent of the different climates and regions of
the earth; of the magnitude of the mountains, and of the expanse of the ocean.
Let us conceive that immense globe which contains them, launched at once from
the hand of the Almighty; made to revolve incessantly on its axis, that it
might produce the vicissitudes of day and night; thrown forth, at the same
time, to run its annual course in perpetual circuit through the heavens.

After such a meditation, where is the greatness where is the pride of man?
Into what total annih^^tion do we sink, before an omnipotent Being? Reverence,
and humble adoration ought spontaneously to arise. He, who fee^s no propensity
to worship and adore, is dead to all sense of grandeur and majesty: has
extinguished one of the most natural feelings of the human heart.

LINES SPOKEN AT A SCHOOL-EXHIBITION,
BY A LITTLE BOY SEVEN YEARS OLD.
YOU WOULD scarce expect one of my age,
To speak in public, on the stage;
And if I chance to fall below
Demosthenes or Cicero,
Don't view me with a critic's eye^,
But p^ss my imperfections by.
Large streams from little fountains flow;
Tall oaks from little acorns grow:
And though I now am small and young,
Of judgment weak, and feeble tongue;
Yet all great learned men, like me,
Once learned to read their A, B, C.
But why may not Columbia's soil
Rear men as great as Britain's isle;
Exceed what Greece and Rome have done,
Or any land beneath the sun?
May Not Massachusetts boast as great
As any other sister state?
Or, where is the town, go far and near,
That does not find a rival here?
Or where is the boy, but three feet high,
Who Is made improvements more than I?
These thoughts inspire my youthful mind
To be the greatest of mankind;
Great, not like Caesar, stained with blood;
But only great, as I am good.
EXTRACT FROM MR. PITT'S SPEECH IN THE BRITISH PARLIAMENT, IN THE YEAR 1766, ON
THE SUBJECT OF THE STAMP ACT.
IT is a long time, Mr. Speaker, since I have attended in parliament. When the
resolution was taken in the House to tax America, I was ill in bed. If I could
have endured to have been carried in my bed, so great was the agitation of my
mind for the consequences, that I would have solicited some kind hand to have
laid me down on this floor, to have borne my testimony against it. It is now an
act that has passed. I ^^^uld speak with decency of every act of this House;
(...) I must beg the indulgence of the House to speak of (...) freedom.

(...) a day may be soon appointed to consider the (...) the nation with
respect to America. I hope gentlemen will come to this debate with all the
temper and impartiality that his Majesty recommends, and the importance of the
subject requires. A subject of greater importance than ever engaged the
attention of this House! that subject only excepted, when, nearly a century
ago, it was the question, whether you yourselves were to be bond or free. In
the mean time, as I cannot depend upon health for any future day, such is the
nature of my infirmities, I will beg to say a few words at present, leaving the
justice, the equity, the policy, the expediency of the act to another time.

I will only speak to one point, which seems not to have been generally
understood. Some gentlemen seem to have considered it as a point of honor. If
gentlemen consider it in that light, they leave all measures of right and
wrong, to follow a delusion that may lead to destruction. It is my opinion,
that this kingdom has no right to lay a tax upon the Colonies. When in this
House we give and grant, we give and grant what is our own. But in an American
tax, wh^^ do we do? We, your Majesty's Commons of Great Britain, give and grant
to your Majesty, what? our own property? No. We give and grant to your Majesty,
the property of your Majesty's Commons of America. It is an absurdity in terms.

There is an idea in some* that the Colonies are virtually represented in this
House. I would fain know by whom an American is represented here? Is he
represented by any knight of the shire, in any county in this kingdom? Or will
you tell him that he is represented by any representative of a borough; a
borough, which perhaps no man ever saw? This is what is called the rotten part
of the Constitution. It cannot continue a century. If it does not drop, it must
be am^tated. The idea of a virtual representation of Ameri^^ in this House* is
the most contemptible idea that entered into the head of a man. It does not
descry serious ^nfu^ation.

The Commons of America, represented in their several assemblies, have ever
been in possession of the exercise of this, their constitutional right of
giving and granting their own money. They would have been slaves if they had
not enjoyed it.

A great deal has been said without doors, of the power, of the strength of
America. It is a topic which ought to be cautiously meddled with. In a good
cause, on a sound bottom, the force of this country can crush America to atoms.
I know the valor of your troops. I know the skill of your officers. There is
not a company of foot that has served in America, out of which you may not pick
a man of sufficient knowledge and experience, to make a governor of a Colony
there. But on this ground, on the Stamp Act, when so many here will think it a
crying injustice, I am one who will lift up my hands against it.

In such a cause, your success would be hazardous. America, if she fell, would
fall like the strong man. She would embrace the pillars of the State, and pull
down the constitution along with her. Is this your boasted peace? Not to sheath
the sword in its scabbard, but to sheath it in the bowels of your countrymen?
Will you quarrel with yourselves, now the whole House of Bourbon is united
against you?

The Americans have been wronged. They have been driven to madness by
injustice. Will you punish them for the madness you have occasioned? Rather let
prudence and temper come first from this side. I will undertake for America,
that she will follow the example.

Upon the whole, I will beg leave to tell the House what is really my opinion.
It is, that the Stamp Act (...) repealed absolutely, totally, and immediately.

SCENE FROM THE FARCE OF LETHE.
Enter Mr. and Mrs. TATOO, and AESOP. Mrs. Tat. WHY don't you come along, Mr.
Tatoo? what the deuce are you afraid of?


Aes. Don't be angry, young lady; the gentleman is your husband, I suppose.


Mrs. Tat. How do you know that, Sir? What, you an't all conj^rers in this
world, are you?


Aes. Your behavior to him is a sufficient proof of his condition, without the
gift of conjuration.


Mrs. Tat. Why, I was as free with him before marriage as I am now; I never was
coy or prudish in my life.


Aes. I believe you, madam, pray, how long have you been married? You seem to
be very young, madam.


Mrs. Tat. I am old enough for a husband, and have been married long enough to
be tired of one.


Aes. How long, pray?


Mrs. Tat. Why, above three months: I married Mr. Tatoo without my guardian's
consent.


Aes. If you married him with your own consent, I think you might continue your
affection a little longer.


Mrs. Tat. What signifies what you think, if I don't think so? We are quite
tired of one another, and are come to drink some of your le -- lethaly -- le
lethily, I think they call it, to forget one another, and be unmarried again.


Aes. The waters cannot divorce you, madam; and you may easily forget him
without the assistance of lethe.


Mrs. Tat. Aye! how so?


Aes. By remembering continually he is your husband ^ere are several ladies
have no other receipt. But w^ does the gentleman say to this?


Mrs. Tat. What signifies what he says? I an't so young and so foolish as that
comes to, to be directed by my husband, or to care what either he says, or you
say.


Mr. Tat. Sir, I was a drummer in a marching regiment, when I ran away with
that young lady. I immediately bought out of the corpse, and thought myself made
forever; little imagining that a poor vain fellow was purchasing fortune at the
expense of his happiness*


Aes. It Is even so, friend; fortune and felicity are at often at variance as
man and wife.


Mr. Tat. I found it so, Sir. This high life (as I thought it) did not agree
with me; I have not laughed, and scarcely slept, sin^ my advancement; and
unless your worship can alter her notions, I must even quit the blessings of a
fine lady and her portion, and, for content, have recourse to eightpence a day
and my drum again.


Aes. Pray, who has advised you to a separation?


Mrs. Tat. Several young ladies of my acquaintance; who tell me, they are not
angry at me for marrying him, but for being fond of him since I have married
him; and they say I should be as complete a fine lady as any of them, if I
would but procure a separate divorcement.


Aes. Pray, madam, will you let me know what you call a fine lady?


Mrs. Tat. Why, a fine lady, and a fine gentleman, are two of the finest things
upon earth.


Aes. I have just now had the honor of knowing what a fine gentleman is; so,
pray confine yourself to the lady.


Mrs. Tat. A fine lady, before marriage, lives with her papa and mamma, who
breed her up till she learns to despise them, and resolves to do nothing, they
bid her; this makes her such a prodigious favo^^te, that she wants for nothing.
And when once she is (...) mistress, then comes the pleasure!


Aes. Pray let us hear.


Mrs. Tat. She lies in bed all the morning, rattles about all day, and sits up
all night; she goes every where, and sees every thing; knows every body, and
loves nobody; ridicules her friends, coquets with her lovers, sets them
together by the ears, tells fibs, makes mischief, buys china, cheats at cards,
keeps a lap-dog, and hates the parson; she laughs much, talks loud, never
blushes, says what she will, does what she will, goes where she will, marries
whom she pleases, hates her husband in a month, breaks his heart in four,
becomes a widow, slips from her gallants, and begins the world again. There Is a
life for you; what do you think of a fine lady now?


Aes. As I expected. You are very young, madam, and, if you are not very
careful, your natural propensity to noise and affectation will run you headlong
into folly, extravagance, and repentance.


Mrs. Tat. What would you have me do?


Aes. Drink a large quantity of lethe to the loss of your acquaintance; and do
you, Sir, drink another, to forget this false step of your wife; for whilst you
remember her folly, you can never thoroughly regard her: and whilst you keep
good company, madam, as you call it, and follow their example, you can never
have a just regard for your husband; so both drink and be happy.


Mrs. Tat. Well, give it me whilst I am in humor, or I shall certainly change
my mind again.


Aes. Be patient till the rest of the company drink, and divert yourself in the
mean time with walking in the grove.


Mrs. Tat. Well, come along, husband, and keep me in humor, or I shall beat you
such an alar^^ as you never beat in all your life.


EXTRACT FROM THE EULOGY ON DR. FRANKLIN, PRONOUNCED BY THE ABBE FAUCHET, IN
THE NAME OF THE COMMONS OF PARIS, 1790.
A SECOND creation has taken place; the elements of society begin to combine
together; the moral universe is now seen issuing from chaos; the genius of
Liberty is awakened, and springs up; she sheds her divine light and creative
powers upon the two hemispheres. A great nation, astonished at seeing herself
free, stretches her arms from one extremity of the earth to the other, and
embraces the first nation that became so: the foundations of a new city are
created in the two worlds; brother nations hasten to inhabit it. It is the city
of mankind!

One of the first founders of this universal city was the immortal FRANKLIN,
the deliverer of America. The second founders, who accelerated this great work,
made it worthy of Europe. The legislators of France have rendered the most
solemn homage to his memory. They have said, "A friend of humanity is dead;
mankind ought to be overwhelmed with sorrow! Nations have hitherto only worn
mourning for Kings; let us assume it for a Man, and let the tears of Frenchmen
mingle with those of Americans, in order to do honor to the memory of one of
the Fathers of Liberty!"

The city of Paris, which once contained this philosopher within its walls,
which was intoxicated with the pleasure of hearing, admiring, and loving him;
of gathering from his lips the maxims of a moral legislator, and of imbibing
from the effusions of his heart a passion for the public welfare, rivals Boston
and Philadelphia, his two native cities (for in one he was born as it were a
man, and in the other a legislator) in its profound attachment to his merit and
his glory.

It has commanded this funeral solemnity, in order to perpetuate the gratitude
and the grief of this third country, which, by the courage and activity with
which it has profited of his lessons, has shown itself worthy of having him at
once for an instructor and a model.

In selecting me for the interpreter of its wishes, it has declared, that it is
less to the talents of an orator, than the patriotism of a citizen, the zeal of
a preacher of liberty, and the sensibility of a friend of men, that it has
confided this solemn function. In this point of view, I may speak with firm
confidence; for I have the public opinion, and the testimony of my own
conscience, to second my wishes. Since nothing else is wanting than freedom,
and sensibility, for that species of eloquence which this eulogium requires, I
am satisfied; for I already possess them.

My voice shall extend to France, to America, to posterity. I am now to do
justice to a great man, the founder of transatlantic freedom; I am to praise
him in the name of the mother city of French liberty. I myself also am a man; I
am a freeman; I possess the suffrages of my fellow-citizens: this is enough; my
discourse shall be immortal.

The academies, the philosophical societies, the learned associations which
have done themselves honor by inscribing the name of Franklin in their records,
can best appreciate the debt due to his genius, for having extended the power
of man over nature, and presented new and sublime ideas, in a style simple as
truth, and pure as light.

It is not the naturalist and the philosopher that the orator of the Commons of
Paris ought to describe; it is the man, who has accelerated the progress of
social order; it is the legislator, who has prepared the liberty of nations!

Franklin, in his periodical works, which had prodigious circulation on the
continent of America, laid the sacred foundations of social morality. He was no
less inimitable in the developements of the same morality, when applied to the
duties of friendship, general charity, the employment of one's time, the
happiness attendant upon good works, the necessary combination of private with
public welfare, the propriety and necessity of industry; and to that happy
state which puts us at ease with society and with ourselves. The proverbs of
"Old Henry," and "Poor Richard," are in the hands both of the learned and the
ignorant; they contain the most sublime morality, reduced to popular language
and common comprehension; and form the catechism of happiness for all mankind.

Franklin was too great a moralist, and too well acquainted with human affairs,
not to perceive that women were the arbiters of manners. He strove to perfect
their empire; and accordingly engaged them to adorn the scepter of virtue with
their graces. It is in their power to excite courage; to overthrow vice, by
means of their disdain; to kindle civism, and to light up in every heart the
holy love of our country.

His daughter, who was opulent and honored with the public esteem, helped to
manufacture and to make up the clothing for the army with her own hands; and
spread abroad a noble emulation among the female citizens, who became eager to
assist those by means of the needle and the spindle, who were serving the state
with their swords and their guns.

With the charm ever attendant upon true wisdom and the grace ever flowing from
true sentiment, this grave philosopher knew how to converse with the other sex;
to ^spire them with a taste for domestic occupations; to hold out to them the
prize attendant upon honor unaccompanied by reproach, and instill the duty of
cultivating the first precepts of education, in order to teach them to their
children; and thus to acquit the debt due to nature, and fulfill the hope of
society. It must be acknowledged, that, in his own country, he addressed
himself to minds capable of comprehending him.

Immortal females of America! I will tell it to the daughters of France, and
they only are fit to applaud you! You have attained the utmost of what your sex
is capable; you possess the beauty, the simplicity, the manners, at once
natural and pure; the primitive grace^ of the golden age. It was among you that
liberty was first to have its origin. But the empire of freedom, which is
extended to France, is about to carry your manners along with it, and produce a
revolution in morals as well as in politics.

Already our female citizens, (for they have lately become such) are not any
longer occupied with those frivolous ornaments, and vain pleasures, which were
nothing more than the amusements of slavery; they have awakened the love of
liberty in the bosoms of fathers, of brothers, and of husbands; they have
encouraged them to make the most generous sacrifices; their delicate hands have
removed the earth, dragged it along, and helped to elevate the immense
amphitheatre of the grand confederation. It is no longer the love of voluptuous
softness that attracts their regard; it is the sacred fire of patriotism.

The laws which are to reform education, and with it the national manners, are
already prepared; they will advance, they will fortify the cause of liberty by
means of their happy influence, and become the second saviors of their country!

Franklin did not omit any of the means of being useful to men, or serviceable
to society. He spoke to all conditions, to both sexes, to every age. This
amiable moralist descended, in his writings, to the most artless details; to
the most ingenuous familiarities; to the first ideas of a rural, a commercial,
and a civil life; to the dialogues of old men and children; full at once of all
the verdure and all the maturity of wisdom. In short, the prudent lessons
arising from the exposition of those obscure, happy, easy virtues, which form
so many links in the chain of a good man's life, derived immense weight from
that reputation for genius which he had acquired, by being one of the first
naturalists and greatest philosophers in the universe.

At one and the same time, he governed nature in the heavens and in the hearts
of men. Amidst the tempests of the atmosphere, he directed the thunder; amidst
the storms of society, he directed the passions. Think, Gentlemen, with what
attentive docility, with what religious respect, one must hear the voice of a
simple man, who preached up human happiness, when it was recollected that it
was the powerful voice of the same man who regulated the lightning.

He electrified the consciences, in order to extract the destructive fire of
vice, exactly in the same manner as he electrified the heavens, in order
peaceably to invite them from the terrible fire of the elements.

Venerable old man! august philosopher! legislator of the felicity of thy
country, prophet of the fraternity of the human race, what ecstatic happiness
embellished the end of thy career! From thy fortunate asylum, and in the midst
of thy brothers who enjoyed in tranquillity the fruit of thy virtues, and the
success of thy genius, thou have sung songs of deliverance. The last looks,
which thou did cast around thee, beheld America happy; France, on the other
side of the ocean, free, and a sure indication of the approaching freedom and
happiness of the world.

The United States, looking upon themselves as thy children, have bewailed the
death of the father of their republic. France, thy family by adoption, has
honored thee as the founder of her laws; and the human race has revered thee as
the universal patriarch who has formed the alliance of nature with society. Thy
remembrance belongs to all ages; thy memory to all nations; thy glory to
eternity!

EPILOGUE TO ADDISON'S CATO.
YOU see mankind the same in every age:
Heroic fortitude, tyrannic rage,
Boundless ambition, patriotic truth,
And hoary treason, and untainted youth,
Have deeply marked all periods and all climes,
The noblest virtues, and the blackest crimes.
Did Caesar, drunk with power, and madly brave,
Insatiate burn, his country to enslave?
Did he for th^s, lead forth a servile host
To spill the choicest blood that Rome could boast?
The British Caesar too has done the same,
And doomed this age to everlasting fame.
Columbia's crimsoned fields still smoke with gore;
Her bravest heroes cover all the shore:
The flower of Britain, in full martial bloom,
In this sad war, sent headlong to the tomb.
Did Rome's brave senate nobly dare to oppose
The mighty torrent, stand confessed their foes,
And boldly arm the virtuous few, and dare
The desperate horrors of unequal war?
Our senate too the same bold deed have done,
And for a Cato, armed a Washington;
A chief, in all the ways of battle skilled,
Great in the council, mighty in the field.
His martial arm and steady soul alone,
Have made thy legions shake, thy navy groan,
And thy proud empire totter to the throne.
O, what thou art, may thou forever be,
And death the lot of any chief but thee!
We Have had our Decius too; and How could say,
Health, pardon, peace, George sends America;
Yet brought destruction for the olive wreath;
For health, contagion, and for pardon, death.
Rise! then, my countrymen, for fight prepare;
Gird on your swords, and fearless rush to war.
It Is your bold task the generous strife to try;
For your grieved country nobly dare to die!
No pent-up U^ica contracts your powers;
For the whole boundless continent is ours!
SELF-CONCEIT. AN ADDRESS, SPOKEN BY A VERY SMALL BOY.
WHEN boys are exhibiting in public, the politeness or curiosity of the hearers
frequently induces them to inquire the names of the performers. To save the
trouble of answers, so far as relates to myself, my name is Charles Chatterbox.
I was born in this town; and have grown to my present enormous stature, without
any artificial help. It is true, I eat, drink, and sleep, and take as much care
of my noble self, as any young man about; but I am a monstrous great student.
There is no telling the half of what I have read.

Why, what do you think of the Arabian Tales? Truth; every word truth! There Is
the story of the lamp, and of Rook's eggs as big as a meeting house. And there
is the history of Sindbad the sailor. I have read every word of them. And I
have read Tom Thumb's Folio through, Winter Evening Tales, and Seven Champions,
and Parismus, and Parismenus, and Valentine and Orson, and Mother Bunch, and
Seven Wise Masters, and a curious book, entitled, Think well on it.

Then there is another wonderful book, containing fifty reasons why an old
bachelor was not married. The first was, that nobody would have him; and the
second was, he declared to every body, that he would not marry; and so it went
(...) stronger and stronger. Then, at the close of the ^ook, it gives an
account of his mavelous death and burial. And in the appendix, it tells about
his being ground over*, and c^^ing out as young, and as fresh, and as fair as
ever. Then, every few pages, is a picture of him to the life.

I have also read Robinson Crusoe, and Reynard the fox, and Moll Flanders; and
I have read twelve delightful novels, and Irish Rogues, and Life of Saint
Patrick, and Philip Quarle, and Conjurer Crop, and Aesop's Fables, and Laugh
and be fat, and Toby Lumpkins' Elegy on the Birth of a Child, and a Comedy or
the Death of his Brother, and an Acrostic, occasioned by a mortal sickness of
his dear wife, of which she recovered. This famous author wrote a treatise on
that Rise and Progress of Vegetation; and a whole Bod^ of Divinity he comprised
in four lines.

I have read all the works of Pero Gilpin, whose^ memory was so extraordinary,
that he never forgot^ the hours of eating and sleeping. This Pero was ^ rare
lad. Why, he could stand on his head, as if it were a real pedestal; his feet
he used for drumsticks. He was trumpeter to the foot guards in Queen Betty's
time; and if he had not blown his breath away, might have lived to this day.

Then, I have read the history of a man who married for money, and of a woman
that would wear her husband's small-clothes in spite of him; and I have read
four books of riddles and rebuses; and all that is not half a quarter.

Now what signifies reading so much if one cannot tell of it? In thinking over
these things, I am sometimes so lost in company, that I don't hear any thing
that is said, till some one pops out that witty saying, "A penny for your
thoughts." Then I say, to be sure, I was thinking of a book I had been reading.
Once, in this mood, I came very near swallowing my cup and saucer; and another
time, was upon the very point of taking down a punch-bowl, that held a gallon.
Now if I could fairly have gotten them down, they would not have hurt me a jot;
for my mind is capacious enough for a china-shop. There is no choking a man of
my reading. Why, if my mind can contain Genii and Giants, sixty feet high, and
enchanted castles, why not a punch-bowl, and a whole tea-board?

It was always conjectured that I should be a monstrous great man; and I
believe, as much as I do the Spanish war, that I shall be a perfect Brobdingnag
in time.

Well now, do you see, when I have read a book, I ^o right off into the company
of the ladies; for they are the judges whether a man knows any thing or not.
Then I bring on a subject which will show my parts to ^e best advantage; and I
always mind and says ^art thing just before I quit.

You must know, moreover, that I have learned a great deal of wit. I was the
first man who invented all that people say about cold tongues, and warm ^ngues,
and may-bees. I invented the wit of kissing the^ candlestick when a lady holds
it; as also the plays of criminal and cross-question; and above all, I invented
the wit of paying toll at bridges. In short, ladies and gentlemen, take me all
in all, I am a downright curious fellow.

HOWARD AND LEST^R. A DIALOGUE ON LEARNING AND USEFULNESS.
How. LIFE is much like a fiddle: every man plays such a tune as suits him*


Lest. The more like a fiddle, the better I lik^ it. Any thing that makes a
merry noise suits me; and the man that does not set his hours to music has a
dull time on it.


How. But, Lester, are there no serious duties in life? Ought we not to improve
our minds, and to prepare for usefulness?


Lest. Why, in the present day, a man's preparing himself for usefulness is
like carrying coals to New Castle Our country is full of useful men; ten, at
least, to where one is wanted, and all of them ten times as ready to serve the
public as the public is to be served. If every man should go to Congress that is
^it for it, the federal city would hardly hold them.


How. You mean, if all who think themselves fit for it.


Lest. No; I meant as I said.


How. Then what do you think fits a man for Congress?


Lest. Why he must be flippant and bold.


How. What good will that do him, if he is without knowledge?


Lest. O! he must have knowledge to be sure.


How. Well, must he not be a man in whom the people can trust? Must he not
understand politics? and must he not be able and willing to serve his country?


Lest. I agree to all that.


How. Then you suppose that the federal city could hardly hold all our men who
unite eloquence with confidence, knowledge with integrity, and policy with
patriotism. I fear that a counting house would give them full accommodation.


Lest. I don't go so deep into these (...) this is certain, that when the
election come (...) enough are willing to go.


H^ That, my friend, only proves that more t^ en^ ^e ignorant of themselves:
but are there no ot^ ^ys of serving the public?


(...) Yes; one may preach, if he will do it for little or nothing. He may
practice law, if he can get any body to employ him; or he may be a Doctor or an
Instructor; but I tell you the country is crowded with learned men begging
business.


How. Then you intend to prepare yourself for the ignorant herd, so that you
may not be crowded.


Lest. I have serious thoughts of it. You may take your own way, but I Will never
wear out a fine pair of eyes in preparing myself for usefulness, till this
(...) public will give me a bond to employ me when I am ready to serve them.
Till such a bond is signed, sealed and delivered, I shall set my hours to the
tune of "Jack's alive." To-day's the ship I sail in, and that will carry the
flag in spite of the combined powers of yesterdays and to-morrows.


How. Well, Lester, you can take your choice. I shall set my hours to a more
serious tune. I ask no bond of the public. If my mind is well furnished with
knowledge, and that same generous public, which has so uniformly called to her
service the discerning, should refuse my services, still I shall possess a
treasure, which, after a few years of dissipation, you would give the world to
purchase, THE RECOLLECTION OF TIME WELL SPENT.


CHRIST'S CRUCIFIXION.
-- NOW darkness fell
On all the region round; the shrouded sun
From the impen'tent earth withdrew his light:
I thirst, the Savior cried; and lifting up
(...) ^gony, My God, my God!
(...) have thou forsaken me? exclaimed.
(...) deem him not forsaken of his God!
Beware that error. 'Twas the mortal part
Of his compounded nature, breathing forth
Its last sad agony, that so complained:
Doubt not that vail of sorrow was withdrawn,
And heavenly comfort to his soul vouchsafed,
Ere thus he cried, Father! into thy hands
My spirit I commend. Then bowed his head
And died. Now Gabriel and his heavenly choir
Of minist'ring angels hovering over the cross
Received his spirit, at length from mortal pangs
And fleshly pris'n set free, and bore it thence
Upon their wings rejoicing. Then behold
A prodigy, that to the world announc'd
A new religion and dissolved the old:
The temple's sacred vail was rent in twain
From top to bottom, 'midst the attesting shocks
Of earthquake and the rending up of graves.
Now those mysterious symbols, heretofore
Curtain'd from vulgar eyes, and holiest deemed
Of holies, were displayed to public view:
The mercy-seat, with its cherubic wings
O'ershadow'd, and the golden ark beneath
Covering the testimony, now through the rent
Of that di^sever'd vail first saw the light;
A world redeemed had now no farther need
Of types and emblems, dimly shadowing forth
An angry Deity withdrawn from sight
And canopy'd in clouds. Him face to face
Now in full light revealed, the dying breath
Of his dear Son appeased, and purchased peace
And reconcilement for offending man.
Thus the partition wall, by Moses built,
By Christ was levelled, and the Gentile world
Entered the breach by their great Captain led
Up to the throne of grace, opening himself
Through his own flesh a new and living way.
Then were the oracles of God made known
To all the nations, sprinkled by the blood
Of Jesus, and baptized into his death;
So was the birthright of the elder born,
Heirs of the promise, forfeited; whilst they,
Whom sin had erst in bondage held, made free
From sin, and servants of the living God,
Now gained the gift of God, eternal life.
Soon as those signs and prodigies were seen
Of those who watched the cross, conviction smote
Their fear-struck hearts. The sun, at noon day dark;
The earth convulsive underneath their feet,
And the firm rocks, in shivered fragments rent,
Roused them at once to tremble and believe.
Then was our Lord by heathen lips confessed,
When the centurion cried, In very truth
This righteous Person was the Son of God;
The rest, in heart assenting, stood ab^sh'd,
Watching in silence the tremendous scene.
The recollection of his gracious acts,
His dying prayers and their own impious taunts
Now rose in sad review; too late they wished
The deed undo^t, and sighing smo^e their breasts.
Straight from God's presence went that angel forth,
Whose trumpet shall call up the sleeping dead
At the last day, and bade the saints arise
And come on earth to hail this promised hour,
The dayspring of salvation. Forth they came
From their dark tenements, their shadowy forms
Made visible as in their fleshly state,
And through the holy city here and there
Frequent they gleam'd, by night, by day, with fear
And wonder seen of many: holy seers,
Prophets and martyrs from the grave set free,
And the first fruits of the redeemed dead.
They, who with Christ trans^igur'd on the mount
Were seen of his disciples in a cloud
Of dazzling glory, now, in form distinct,
Mingling amidst the public haunts of men,
Struck terror to all hearts: Ezekiel there,
The captive seer, to whom on Chebar's banks
The heavens were opened and the fatal roll
H^ld forth, with dire denunciations filled,
Of lamentation, mourning and of woe,
Now falling fast on Israel's wretched race:
He too was there, Hilkiah's holy son,
With loins close girt, and glowing lips of fire
By God's own finger touched: there might be seen
The youthful prophet, Belteshazzar named
Of the Chaldees, interpreter of dreams,
Knowledge of God bestowed, in visions skilled,
And fair, and learned, and wise: the Baptist here
Girt in his hairy mantle frowning stalked,
And, pointing to his ghastly wound, exclaimed,
Ye vipers! whom my warning could not move
Timely to flee from the impending wrath
Now fallen on your heads; whom I indeed
With water, Christ has now with fire baptized:
Barren ye were of fruits, which I prescribed
Meet for repentance, and behold! the axe
Is laid to the unprofitable root
Of every sapless tree, hewn down, condemned
And cast into the fire. Lo! these are they,
These shadowy forms now floating in your sight,
These are the harbingers of ancient days,
Who witnessed the Messiah, and announc'd
His coming upon earth. Mark with what scorn
Silent they pass you by: them had ye heard,
Them had ye noted with a patient mind,
Ye had not crucified the Lord of Life:
He of these stones to Abraham shall raise up
Children, than you more worthy of his stock;
And now his winnowing fan is in his hand,
With which he will purge his floor, and having stored
The precious grain in garners, will consume
With fire unquenchable the refuse chaff.
THE WONDERS OF NATURE.
HOW mighty! how majestic! and how mysterious are nature's works! When the air
is calm, where sleep the stormy winds? In what chambers are they reposed, or in
what dungeons confined? But when He, "who holds them in his fist," is pleased
to awaken their rage, and throw open their prison doors, then, with
irresistible impetuosity, they rush forth, scattering dread, and menacing
destruction.

The atmosphere is hurled into the most tumultuous confusion. The aerial
torrent bursts its way over mountains, seas, and continents. All things feel
the dreadful shock. All things tremble before the furious blast. The forest,
vexed and torn, groans under the scourge. Her sturdy sons are strained to the
very root, and almost sweep the soil they were wont to shade. The stubborn oak,
that disdains to bend, is dashed headlong to the ground; and, with shattered
arms, with prostrate trunk, blocks up the road. While the flexile reed, that
springs up in the marsh, yielding to the gust, (as the meek and pliant temper,
to injuries, or the resigned and patient spirit, to misfortunes) eludes the
force of the storm, and survives amidst the wide-spread havoc.

For a moment, the turbulent and outrageous sky seems to be assuaged; but it
intermits i^s warmth, only to increase its strength. Soon the sounding
squadrons of the air return to the attack, and renew their ravages with
redoubled fury. The stately dome rocks amidst the wheeling clouds. The
impregnable tower totters on its basis, and threatens to overwhelm whom it was
intended to protect. The ragged rocks are rent in pieces; and even the hills,
the perpetual hills, on their deep foundations are scarcely secure. Where now
is the place of safety? when the city reels, and houses become heaps! Sleep
affrighted flies. Diversion is turned into horror. All is uproar in the
element; all is consternation among mortals; and nothing but one wide scene of
rueful devastation through the land.

The ocean swells with tremendous commotions. The ponderous waves are heaved
from their capacious bed, and almost lay bare the unfathomable deep. Flung into
the most rapid agitation, they sweep over the rocks; they lash the lofty
cliffs, and toss themselves into the clouds. Navies are rent from their
anchors; and with all their enormous load, are whirled swift as the arrow, wild
as the winds, along the vast abyss. Now they climb the rolling mountain; they
plough the frightful ridge; and seem to skim the skies. Anon they plunge into
the opening gulf; they lose the sight of day; and are lost themselves to every
eye.

How vain is the pilot's art! how impotent the mariner's strength! "They reel
to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man." Despair is in every face, and
death ^s threatening on every surge. But when Omnipotence pleases to command,
the storm is hushed to silence; the lightnings lay aside their fiery bolts, and
the billows cease to roll.

DIALOGUE ON PHYSIOGNOMY.
Enter FRANK and HENRY. Frank. IT appears strange to me that people can be so
imposed upon. There is no difficulty in judging folks by their lo^ks. I profess
to know as much of a man, at the first view, as by half a doze^ years
acquaintance.


Henry. Pray how is that done? I should wish ^ learn such an art.


Fr. Did you never read Lavater on Physiognomy*


Hen. No. What do you mean by such a hard word?


Fr. Physiognomy means a knowledge of men's hearts, thoughts, and characters,
by their looks. For instance, if you see a man, with a forehead jutting over
his eyes, like a piazza, with a pair of eyebrows, heavy like the cornice of a
house; with full eyes, and a Roman nose, depend on it he is a great scholar,
and an honest man.


Hen. It seems to me I should rather go below his nose to discover his
scholarship.


Fr. By no means: if you look for beauty, you may descend to the mouth and
chin; otherwise never go below the region of the brain.


Enter GEORGE. Geor. Well, I have been to see the man hanged. And he is gone to
the other world, with just such a great forehead and Roman nose, as you have
always been praising.


Hen. Remember, George, all signs fail in dry weather.


Geor. Now, be honest, Frank, and own that there is nothing in all this
trumpery of his. The only way to know men is by their actions. If a man commit
burglary, think you a Roman nose ought to save him from punishment?


Hen. I don't carry my notions so far as that; but it is certain that all faces
in the world are different; and equally true, that each has some marks about
it, by which one can discover the temper and character of the person.


Enter PETER. Peter. [To Frank.] Sir, I have heard of your fame from Dan to
Beersheba; that you can know a man by his face, and can tell his thoughts by
his looks. Hear^ng this, I have visited you without the ceremony of (...)
introduction.


Hen. Why, indeed, I do profess something in that ^ay.


Pet. By that forehead, nose, and those eyes of yours, one might be sure of an
acute, penetrating mind.


Hen. I see that you are not ignorant of physiognomy.


Pet. I am not; but still I am so far from being an adept in the art, that,
unless the features are very remarkable, I cannot determine with certainty. But
yours is the most striking face I ever saw. There is a certain firmness in the
lines, which lead from the outer verge to the center of the apple of your eye,
which denotes great forecast, deep thought, bright invention, and a genius for
great purposes.


Hen. You are a perfect master of the art. And to show you that I know
something of it, permit me to observe, that the form of your face denotes
frankness, truth, and honesty. Your heart is a stranger to guile, your lips, to
deceit, and your hands, to fraud.


Hen. I must confess that you have hit upon my true character; though a
different one, from what I have sustained in the view of the world.


Fr. [To Henry and George.] Now see two strong examples of the truth of
physiognomy. [While he is speaking, this Peter takes out his pocketbook, and
makes off with himself.] Now, can you conceive, that without this knowledge, I
could fathom the character of a total stranger?


Hen. Pray tell us by what marks you discovered that in his heart and lips was
no guile, and in his hands, no fraud?


Fr. Aye, leave that to me; we are not to reveal our secrets. But I will show
you a face and character, which exactly suits him. [Feels for his pocketbook
in both pockets, looks wildly and concerned.]


Geor. [Tauntingly.] Aye, "in his heart is no guile, in his lips no deceit, and
in his hands no fraud* Now we see a strong example of the power of physiognomy!"


Fr. He is a wretch! a traitor against every good sign! I Will pursue him to the
ends of the earth. [Offers to go.]


Hen. Stop a moment. His fine honest face is far enough before this time. You
have not yet discovered the worst injury he has done you.


Fr. What Is that? I had no watch, or money for him to steal.


Hen. By his deceitful lips, he has robbed you of any just conception of
yourself; he has betrayed you into a foolish belief that you are possessed of
most extraordinary genius and talents. Whereas, separate from the idle whim
about physiognomy, you have had no more pretense to genius or learning than a
common schoolboy. Learn henceforth to estimate men's hands by their deeds,
their lips, by their words, and their hearts, by their lives.


ORATION DELIVERED AT PARIS BY CITIZEN CARNOT, PRESIDENT OF THE EXECUTIVE
DIRECTORY, AT THE FESTIVAL OF GRATITUDE AND VICTORY, CELEBRATED AT THE
CHAMPDE-MARS, MAY 29, 1796.
IT is at the moment when nature is renovated, when the earth adorned with
flowers and dressed in green, promises new harvests; when all beings proclaim
in their own language, the beneficent intelligence which renovates the
universe, that the French people assemble, on this great festival, to render a
distinguished homage to those talents and virtues of the friends of the country
and humanity. What day can better unite all hearts! What citizen, what man can
be a stranger to the influence of gratitude! We exist only through an
uninterrupted course of beneficence, and our life is but a continual exchange
of services.

As soon as born, our eyes, fixed on the heavens, appear already to acknowledge
a primary benefactor. Weak, without support, the love of our parents watches
over our infancy, and provides for wants continually renewed. They direct our
first steps; their patient solicitude assists in developing our organs; we
receive from them our first ideas of what we are ourselves, and of surrounding
objects. Additional care models our hearts to affection, our minds to
knowledge, and our bodies to useful labor. It is for our happiness, that the
wise have reflected on the duties of man; that the learned have diven into the
secrets of nature* that the magistrate watches, and that the legislator
prepares in deliberation protecting laws.

Soon we are enabled to be useful. Good children, we strew flowers over the age
of our parents, and their trembling voice blesses us in their last moments.
Become parents in our turn, we prepare, in the education of our children, the
felicity of our declining years; and we thus continue in a new generation the
chain of benevolence and gratitude. Sensibility is not restricted within the
family circle; the indigent is searched for under the thatch; succors and
consolation are lavished; and the donor, at first paid for the good action by
the pleasure of having performed it, is doubly rewarded by the gratitude of the
object. Benevolence! how happy are thy votaries, and how much to be pitied, the
soul that knows thee not!

He who is a good son and a good father is also a good citizen. He loves his
country; renders with alacrity the tribute of services; he delights in
returning to his brothers the protection he has received from them. Either
magistrate or warrior, manufacturer or farmer; in the temple of the arts; in
the Senate; in the fields of glory, or the workshops of industry, he shows
himself ambitious of contributing toward the prosperity of his country, and to
deserve one day its gratit^. For there is a national gratitude for individuals.
(...) his moment a people are all assembled to express ^^eir gratitude to the
virtuous citizens who have deserved it. How agreeable is the task! How we
delight in paying you that homage; you to whom the country owes its safety, its
glory, and the foundation of its prosperity!

You, to whom France owes its political regeneration; courageous philosophers,
whose writings have planted the seeds of the revolution, corroded the fetters
of slavery, and blunted by degrees the ravings of fanaticism. You, citizens,
whose dauntless courage effected this happy revolution; founded the republic,
and contended these seven years against crime and ambition, royalism and
anarchy. You all, in a word, who labor to render France happy and flourishing;
who render it illustrious by your talents, and enrich it by your discoveries;
receive the solemn testimony of national gratitude.

Receive that testimony particularly, republican armies; you, whose glory and
successes are fresh in the recollection of all. It is you who have defended us
against ten combined kings; who have driven them from our territory; have
transferred to their dominions the scourge of war. You have not only conquered
men; you have overcome the obstacles thrown in your way by nature. You have
triumphed over fatigue, hunger, and winter. What a spectacle for the people!
what a dreadful lesson to the enemies of liberty!

A newborn republic arms its children to defend its independence; nothing can
restrain their impetuosity; traversing rivers, carrying intrenchments, climbing
rocks. Here, after a series of victories, they pushed back our limits to those
barriers that nature intended for us, and pursuing over ice the remains of
three armies, transformed an oppressed and hostile nation into a free and
allied people. There they fly to exterminate the hordes of traitors and
villains, subsidized by England; punish their thieves, and restore to the
republic brothers too long misled. Here, surmounting the Pyrenees, and
precipitating themselves from their summit; overthrowing whatever opposes their
progress, and checked only by an honorable peace; there ascending the Alps and
Appenines, they fly across the Po and Adige.

The ardor of the soldier is seconded by the genius and boldness of the chiefs.
They plan with science, and execute with energy; now displaying their forces
with calmness; then courting danger at the head of their brothers in arms. Oh
that I could here display the immense and glorious picture of their victories!
that I could name our most intrepid defenders! What a crowd of sublime images
and beloved names press upon my recollection! Immortal warriors, posterity will
not believe the multitude of your triumphs; but to us history loses all its
improbabilities.

But do we not see, even on this spot, a portion of those brave defenders?
Victors over the exterior enemies of the state, they have come to repress our
internal enemies; and preserve at home the republic which they have caused to
be respected abroad. Do we not also see those venerable warriors who have grown
gray in the service; those whom honorable wounds have obliged to seek premature
repose, and whose asylum is in sight? With what pleasure our eyes feed on this
interesting reunion. With what agreeable emotions we contemplate those
victorious brows!

Heroes who have perished for liberty, why does there remain to us nothing but
a recollection of your services? You will, however, live forever in our hearts;
your children will be dear to us; the republic will repay to them the debt they
owe to you; and we discharge here the first by proclaiming your glory and our
gratitude. Republican armies, represented here, by warriors from your ranks;
invincible phalanxes, whose trophies I observe on all sides, whose fresh
successes I foresee, come forward and receive the triumphal crowns which the
French people command me to attack to your colors.

ADDRESS OF MR. ADET, FRENCH AMBASSADOR, ON PRESENTING THE COLORS OF FRANCE TO
THE UNITED STATES, 1796.
MR. PRESIDENT,
I COME to acquit myself of a duty very dear to my heart. I come to deposit in
your hands, and in the midst of a people justly renowned for their courage, and
their love of liberty, the symbol of the triumph and of the enfranchisement of
my nation.

When she broke her chains; when she proclaimed the imprescriptible rights of
man; when, in a terrible war, she sealed with her blood the covenant made with
liberty, her own happiness was not alone the object of her glorious efforts;
her views extended also to all free people; she saw their interests blended
with her own, and doubly rejoiced in her victories, which, in assuring to her
the enjoyments of her rights, became to them new guarantees of their
independence.

These sentiments, which animated the French nation, from the dawn of their
revolution, have acquired new strength since the foundation of the republic.
France, at that time, by the form of its government assimilated to, or rather
indentified with free people, saw in them only friends and brothers. Long
accustomed to regard the American people as their most faithful allies, she has
sought to draw closer the ties already formed in the fields of America, under
the auspices of victory over the ruins of tyranny.

The National Convention, the organs of the will of the French Nation, have
more than once expressed their sentiments to the American people; but above
all, these burst forth on that august day, when the Minister of the United
States presented to the National Representation, the colors of his country,
desiring never to lose recollections as dear to Frenchmen as they must be to
Americans. The Convention ordered that these colors should be placed in the
hall of their sittings. They had experienced sensations too agreeable not to
cause them to be partaken of by their allies, and decreed that to them the
national colors should be presented.

Mr. President, I do not doubt their expectations will be fulfilled; and I am
convinced, that every citizen will receive, with a pleasing emotion, this flag,
elsewhere the terror of the enemies of liberty; here the certain pledge of
faithful friendship; especially when they recollect that it guides to combat,
men who have shared their toils, and who were prepared for liberty, by aiding
them to acquire their own.

PRESIDENT WASHINGTON'S ANSWER.
BORN, Sir, in a land of liberty; having early learned its value; having
engaged in a perilous conflict to defend it; having, in a word, devoted the
best years of my life to secure it a permanent establishment in my own country;
my anxious recollections, my sympathetic feelings, and my best wishes are
irresis^ibly excited, whenever, in any country, I see an oppressed nation
unfurl the banners of freedom. But above all, the events of the French
revolution have produced the deepest solicitude, as well as the highest
admiration. To call your nation brave, were to pronounce but common praise.
WONDERFUL PEOPLE! ages to come will read with astonishment the history of your
brilliant exploits.

I rejoice that the period of your toils and of your immense sacrifices is
approaching. I rejoice that the interesting revolutionary movements of so many
years have issued in the formation of a constitution designed to give
permanency to the great object for which you have contended. I rejoice that
liberty, which you have so long embraced with enthusiasm; liberty, of which you
have been the invincible defenders, now finds an asylum in the bosom of a
regularly organized government: a government, which, being formed to secure the
happiness of the French people, corresponds with the ardent wishes of my heart,
while it gratifies the pride of every citizen of the United States, by its
resemblance of their own. On these glorious events ^^cept, Sir, my sincere
congratulations.

In delivering to you these sentiments, I express not my own feelings only, but
those of my fellow-citizens, in relation to the commencement, the progress, and
the issue of the French revolution; and they will cordially join with me in
purest wishes to the Supreme. Being, that the citizens of our sister republic,
our magnanimous allies, may soon enjoy, in peace, that liberty, which they have
purchased at so great a price, and all the happiness which liberty ca^ ^e flow.

I recei^^, ^r, with lively sensibility, the symbol of the triumphs (...) of
the enfranchisements of your nation, the colo^ (...) France* which you have now
presented to the United States. The transaction will be announced to Congress;
and the colors will be deposited with those archives of the United States,
which are at once the evidences and the memorials of their freedom and
independence. May these be perpetual; and may the friendship of the two
republics be commensurate with their existence.

THE OPPRESSIVE LANDLORD.
Enter DON PHILIP and WIFE. Don Philip. WELL, my dear, I have warned all the
families out of my long range of buildings, and ordered them to pay double the
rent they have done, for every day they remain. From every new tenant I am
determined to have three times the sum. The present rent will never do in these
times. Our children will become beggars at this rate; and you and I shall have
to betake ourselves to hand labor, like the common herd, to earn our daily
bread.


Wife. But I fear that some of our tenants are too poor to endu^e a rent,
double to what they now pay; and I am certain it will be impossible for them
all to remove, on account of the scarcity of houses to be obtained.


Don P. That is not my look-out. It is enough for me to attend to my own
interest, not theirs.


Wife. But you will exercise a little lenity toward them, at this distressing
time. I am persuaded, my dear, that you will not turn them into the street.
Besides, it is thought by some, that they already pay a reasonable rent.


Don P. I have nothing to do with lenity. Woman, would you not have your
husband be looking out against a rainy day? What would become of you, and your
children, if I were to spend my time in studying lenity, instead of my
interest-table? I tell you, that now is the harvest time, and I am determined
to thrust in the sickle, and reap my proportion of the crop before the season's
over. The town is crowded with foreigners who are exiled from their homes, and
necessity obliges them to pay whatever price is demanded, for a shelter to
cover their heads.


Wife. Would you then profit by the necessities and misfortunes of your fellow
creatures? These exiles are entitled to our compassion, instead of experiencing
our oppression.


Don P. You talk like a poor weak woman. Did I not tell you that I had nothing
to do with other people's good or ill fortune? It is more than I can do to take
care of my own dependants. We should make fine way ahead, if you were at helm.
I believe in my conscience, that, if you possessed the keys of the strongbox,
you would squander away to the full amount of a pistareen a week upon these
poor starving runaways. I have not yet forgotten how you lavished a whole
gallon of cider upon those three miserable wretches that cleared out our well,
the day before thanksgiving* Does this look like taking a prudent care of your
family? Pray how do you read your Bible? Has not Nebuchadnezzar said, that "He
who provides not for his own household has denied the faith, and is worse than
an infidel?"


Wife. If you had studied your Bible as faithfully as you have your
^nterest-table, you would not have put Saint Paul's words into the mouth of the
king of ^abylon. Does not the same scripture say, (...) "He who (...) the poor,
and -- "

Hush, I say; one of my tenants approaches. (...) your womanish feelings; and
let not your un^ (...) ^ue betray your weakness.


Enter TENANT. Ten. Sir, I come to inform you, that I have at last been
fortunate enough to procure a shelter for my family, though an indifferent one;
and have brought you the rent of your tenement, which I quitted with reluctance
yesterday.


Don P. It is well you are out; for you would have met with trouble, if you had
remained three days longer. I had ordered my attorney to give directions to an
officer to tumble all your goods into the street, and you and your children
after them.


Ten. Then a good Providence has preserved us.


Don P. Providence has smiled upon me, I confess, in granting me such a
riddance.


Ten. I contend not with an adversary who is mantled in gold. Will you please
to count your money, and give me a discharge?


Don P. [Counts the money.] Why, man, the sum is deficient; I cannot receipt it.


Ten. It is the same, Sir, as I paid the last term.


Don P. That is very true; but did I not double the rent three days ago?


Ten. You did, indeed; but my reply was, that I was utterly unable to pay a
higher price; and as the time was so short, I thought you would not stand for
^rifles.


Don P. Trifles! If you were to receive it, I believe ^ou would not call it a
trifle; neither do I. I demand ^ne utmost farthing.


Ten. For the sake of peace, though I think your demand unjust, I will take
your receipt for this, and bring the remainder tomorrow.


Don P. Not a cent will I receive without the whole, lest by some quibble of
the law I lose the rest.


Ten. Your avaricious disposition leads ^ou to a^ contrary to your own interest.


Don P. I shall not apply to you for le^^ons (...) ^^struction. I shall conduct
my own affairs accord^ (...) my sovereign will and pleasure. Let me tell you,
(...) this impudence does not well become a man of your circumstances.


Ten. "Sir, your honored father never used me thus." Alas! he little thought in
what oppressive hands he left his large estate. Could he be permitted to
revisit the earth, his ghost would haunt your guilty soul; and, if you have any
conscience left, harrow up remorse, and awaken you to repentance.


Don P. I did not admit a tenant into my house to hear a moral lecture from him.


Ten. If you will take your money, I will quit your house with pleasure. But
before we part, give me leave to tell you, that, though your great wealth has
exalted you above yourself, and, in your own opinion, placed you beyond the
reach of poverty, the time may come when you may feel what oppression is.


Wife. I entreat you to receive the money, and be content.


Don P. A woman, who cannot be silent in her husband's presence, especially when
he is negociating important business, may take a modest hint to leave the room.
Exit Wife


Ten. If you are resolved not to receive your money I must carry it home again.
And I hope the time (...) not far distant, when I shall be out of the reach o^
your oppressive hands. Exit.


Don P. [Solus.] Every man I deal with is trying to cheat me. Mankind are by
nature all knaves. I am afraid to trust even my best friends. What an
affliction it is to have property! The poor always think that the rich are
bound to maintain them, and are never satisfied with what is done for them. My
tenants would be glad to live in my houses rent free if they could. This, I am
persuaded, they learned of ^y father; but I Will soon teach them to expect
different things. Rather than matters should go on at such loose ends, I Will
sell every building I possess, and put the money in bank. My mind is constantly
on the (...) i^ to contrive ways and means to preserve what little I possess.
It is well my father left his property to me. Had he left it to one of only
common understanding, these plotting tenants would have run away with the whole
of it.


Enter second TENANT. 2 d. Ten. Sir, I appear before you to crave your
compassion. I am the most unfortunate of all your tenants. My misfortune is, to
be obliged to remain in your house, after it is your pleasure that I should
leave it.


Don P. Tomorrow I will cure you of your misfortune; for if you cannot get out
yourself, I will help you out.


2 d. Ten. Why may I not remain? It may be for your interest as well as mine. I
have ever made you punctual payment; and stand ready now to give as much as any
other man, or as much as your conscience will suffer you to demand.


Don P. My will and pleasure is, that you depart immediately. My reasons for my
conduct I give to no man.


2 d. Ten. But, Sir, I have a claim upon your mercy. You are not insensible of
the pains I Have taken to accom^^ish what you wish. Necessity is the only reason
why I ask this favor. One special reason why you ought to grant it is, that I
am now in your service with the same salary as in years past; when your good
father was satisfied with one fourth the sum his craving son demands. I have
been, you must allow, a faithful slave to your children. They have long
received, and still receive my best instruction, without an augmentation of
reward. If you will not hear the plea of mercy, grant me justice. If you
increase your price of rent, increase my pay.


Don P. I meddle not with your affairs. Look ou^ for your pay among your
employers. I am but one among many, and promise you that I shall not be
foremost to enhance the price of instruction, while children are so numerous.
My houses are my own. I bought them with my own money; and shall dispose of
them at my own pleasure.


2 d. Ten. You speak as though you were lord of the creation, and had the world
at your command.


Don P. I am lord of my own possessions; and shall not ask my tenants how I am
to dispose of them.


2 d. Ten. Did you ever read, that "Riches take to themselves wings, and fly
away?"


Don P. I am not apprehensive that any wings are attached to what little I
possess.


2 d. Ten. Your mountain may not stand so strong as you think it does. The
cries of the fatherless and the widow, who have groaned under your oppression,
have reached the heavens, and you have reason to fear they will be answered
with vengeance on your head. Did you but believe in a future day of
retribution, as you have impiously professed, you would seriously engage in the
work of repentance and reformation; which, let me tell you, it is presumption
to neglect.


Re-enter first TENANT, with a LAWYER. 1 st. Ten. I pray you to accept your
money, and give me a discharge.


Don P. I told you, not a cent, till the whole amount was paid.


Law. That is sufficient. The law allows no force in paying debts. Every
creditor has an undoubted right to refuse his money, when offered by his
debtor, This he has done before witness. I now declare it forfeit. Keep it as
your own.


Don P. Rogues will always combine against honest men. The whole world are
endeavoring to cheat me out of my lawful earnings. My best friends have become
my worst enemies.


Law. You have no friends; nor will you ever have, so ^ong as you make an idol
of your own dear self.


Don P. My property is my best friend, and one which I trust will never forsake
me.


Cry of fire without. Enter SERVANT in haste. Ser. Sir, your long row of
buildings is all in flames!


Don P. Impossible! -- They were all to be insured tomorrow!


Ser. It is seriously true; and the roofs are now tumbling to the ground!


Don P. Then immediately call all hands, and put fire to this, and every other
building I possess; that they may all go to destruction together.


2 d. Ten. That looks something like giving wings to your riches.


Don P. If I had had one thimble full of brains, I should have got them insured
before. O horrible catastrophe! Not only wicked men and devils, but even the
elements themselves have turned against me.


Law. Compose yourself, dear Sir. Your best friend will not be so cruel as to
forsake you, at this critical moment.


Don P. Is my money safe? If that is burnt, I Will burn myself. Oh that I had
permitted my tenants to remain, that they and their property might all have
perished in the flames together!


LORD MANSFIELD'S SPEECH, IN SUPPORT OF A BILL FOR PREVENTING DELAYS OF
JUSTICE, BY REASON OF PRIVILEGE OF PARLIAMENT, 1770.
MY LORDS,
I HAVE waited with patience to hear what arguments might be urged against the
bill; but I have waited in vain; the truth is, there is no argument that can
weigh against it. The justice and expediency of the bill are such as render it
self-evident. It is a proposition of that nature, that can neither be weakened
by argument, nor entangled with sophistry.

We all know, that the very soul and e^ of trad^ are regular payments; and sad
experi^ (...) that there are men, who will not make their regular payments
without the compulsive power of the laws. The law then ought to be equally open
to all. Any exemption to particular men, or particular ranks of men, is, in a
free and commercial country, a solecism of the grossest nature.

I will not trouble your lordships with arguments for that which is
sufficiently evident without any. I shall only say a few words to some noble
lords, who foresee much inconveniency from the persons of their servants' being
liable to be arrested. One noble lord observes, that the coachman of a peer may
be arrested while he is driving his master to the House; and, consequently, he
will not be able to attend his duty in parliament. If this were actually to
happen, there are so many ways by which the member might still get to the
House, that I can hardly think the noble lord is serious in his objection.
Another noble peer said, that by this bill we might lose our most valuable and
honest servants. This I hold to be a contradiction in terms: for he can neither
be a valuable servant, nor an honest man, who gets into debt which he is
neither able nor willing to pay, till compelled by law.

If my servant, by unforeseen accidents, has run into debt, and I still wish to
retain him, I certainly would pay the debt. But upon no principle of liberal
legislation whatever, can my servant have a title to set his creditors at
defiance, while for forty shillings only, the honest tradesman may be torn from
his family, and locked up in a jail. It is monstrous injustice! I flatter
myself, however, the determination of this day will entirely put an end to all
such partial proceedings for the future, by passing into a law the bill now
under your lordships' consideration.

I come now to speak, upon what, indeed, I would have gladly avoided, had I not
been particularly pointed at for the part I have taken in this bill. It has
been said by a noble lord on my left hand, that I likewise am running the race
of popularity. If the noble lord means by popularity, that applause bestowed by
after-ages on good and virtuous actions, I have long been struggling in that
race. But if he mean that mushroom popularity, which is raised without merit
and lost without a crime, he much mistakes in his opinion.

I defy the noble lord to point out a single action of my life, where the
popularity of the times ever had the smallest influence on my determinations. I
have a more permanent and steady rule for my conduct, the dictates of my own
breast. Those who have foregone that pleasing adviser, and given up their mind
to be the slave of every popular impulse, I sincerely pity. I pity them still
more, if their vanity leads them to mistake the shouts of a mob for the trumpet
of fame. Experience might inform them, that many who have been saluted with the
huzzas of a crowd, one day, have received their execrations the next; and many,
who, by the popularity of their times, have been held up as spotless patriots,
have, nevertheless, appeared upon the historian's page, when truth has
triumphed over delusion, the assassins of liberty.

Why then the noble lord can think I am ambitious of present popularity, that
echo of folly, and shadow of renown, I am at a loss to determine. Besides, I do
not know that the bill now before your lordships will be popular. It depends
much upon the caprice of the day. It may not be popular to compel people to pay
their debts; and, in that case, the present must be a very unpopular bill. It
may not be popular neither to take away any of the privileges of parliament;
for I very well remember, and many of your lordships may remember, that not
long ago the popular cry was for the extension of privilege; and so far did
they carry it at that time, that it was said that the privilege protected
members even in criminal actions. Nay, such was the power of popular prejudices
over weak minds, that the very decisions of some of the courts were tinctured
with that doctrine.

It was undoubtedly an abominable doctrine. I thought so then, and think so
still: but nevertheless, it was a popular doctrine, and came immediately from
those who were called the friends of liberty; how deservedly, time will show.
Tru^ liberty! in my opinion, can only exist when justice is equally
administered to all; to the king, and to the beggar. Where is the justice,
then, or where is the law, that protects a member of parliament more than any
other man, from the punishment due to his crimes? The laws of this country
allow of no place, nor any employment, to be a sanctuary for crimes: and where
I have the honor to sit as judge, neither royal favor, nor popular applause
shall ever protect the guilty.

EXTRACT FROM A SERMON ON THE DAY OF JUDGMENT.
LET us endeavor to realize the majesty and terror of the universal alarm on
the final Judgment Day. When the dead are sleeping in the silent grave; when
the living are thoughtless and unapprehensive of the grand event, or intent on
other pursuits; some of them asleep in the dead of night; some of them
dissolved in sensual pleasures, eating and drinking, marrying and giving in
marriage; some of them planning or executing schemes for riches or honors; some
in the very act of sin; the generality stupid and careless about the concerns
of eternity, and the dreadful day just at hand; and a few here and there
conversing with their God, and looking for the glorious appearance of their
Lord and Savior; when the course of nature runs on uniform and regular as
usual, and infidel scoffers are taking umbrage from thence to ask, "Where is
the promise of his coming?" In short, when there are no more visible
appearances of this approaching day, than of the destruction of Sodom, on that
clear morning in (...) Lot fled away; or of the deluge, when Noah entered into
the ark: then, in that hour of unapprehensive security, then suddenly shall the
heavens open over the astonished world; then shall the alarming clangor break
over their heads like a clap of thunder in a clear sky.

Immediately the living turn their gazing eyes upon the amazing phenomenon:
some hear the long-expected sound with rapture, and lift up their heads with
joy, assured that the day of their redemption is come; while the thoughtless
world are struck with the wildest horror and consternation. In the same instant
the sound reaches all the mansions of the dead; and in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye, they are raised, and the living are changed. This call
will be as animating to all the sons of men, as that call to a single person,
"Lazarus, come forth." O what a surprise will this be to the thoughtless world!
Should this alarm burst over our heads this moment, into what a terror would it
strike many in this assembly? Such will be the terror, such the consternation,
when it actually comes to pass. Sinners will be the same timorous,
self-condemned creatures then as they are now. And then they will not be able
to stop their ears, who are deaf to all the gentler calls of the gospel now.

Then the trump of God will constrain them to hear and fear, to whom the
ministers of Christ now preach in vain. Then they must all hear; for, "all that
are in their graves," all without exception, "shall hear his voice." Now the
voice of mercy calls, reason pleads, conscience warns; but multitudes will not
hear. But this is a voice which shall, which must reach every one of the
millions of mankind, and not one of them will be able to stop his ears. Infants
and giants, kings and subjects, all ranks, all ages of mankind shall hear the
call. The living shall start and be changed, and the dead rise at the sound.
The dust that was once alive and formed a human body, whether it flies in the
air, floats in the ocean, or vegetates on earth, shall hear the new-creating
fiat. Wherever the fragments of the human frame are scattered, this
all-penetrating (...) shall reach and speak them into life. We may consider
this voice as a summons not only to dead bodies to rise, but to the souls that
once animated them, to appear and be reunited to them.

This summons shall spread through every corner of the universe; and Heaven,
Earth, and Hell, and all their inhabitants, shall hear and obey. Now methinks I
see, I hear the earth heaving, charnal houses rattling, tombs bursting, graves
opening. Now the nations under ground begin to stir. There is a noise and a
shaking among the dry bones. The dust is all alive, and in motion, and the
globe breaks and trembles, as with an earthquake, while this vast army is
working its way through, and bursting into life. The ruins of human bodies are
scattered far and wide, and have passed through many, and surprising
transformations. A limb in one country, and another in another; here the head,
and there the trunk; and the ocean rolling between.

And now, at the sound of the trumpet, they shall all be collected, wherever
they were scattered; all properly sorted and united, however they were
confused; atom to its fellow atom, bone to its fellow bone. Now methinks you
may see the air darkened with fragments of bodies, flying from country to
country, to meet and join their proper parts: -- "Scattered limbs and all
The various bones obsequious to the call,
Self-mov'd, advance; the neck perhaps to meet
The distant head, the distant legs, the feet.
Dreadful to view, see through the dusky sky
Fragments of bodies in confusion fly,
To distant regions journeying, there to claim
Deserted members, and complete the frame.
The severed head and trunk shall join once more,
Though realms now rise between, and oceans roar.
The trumpet's sound each vagrant mote shall hear,
Or fixed in earth, or if afloat in air,
Obey the signal, wafted in the wind,
And not one sleeping atom lag behind."


CHRIST TRIUMPHANT OVER THE APOSTATE ANGELS.
SO spoke the Son, and into terror changed
His countenance, too severe to be beheld;
And full of wrath bent on his enemies.
At once the Four spread out their starry wings
With dreadful shade contiguous, and the orbs
Of his fierce chariot rolled, as with the sound
Of torrent floods, or of a numerous host.
He on his impious foes right onward drove,
Gloomy as night; under his burning wheels
The steadfast empyrean shook throughout,
All but the throne itself of God. Full soon
Among them he arrived, in his right hand
Grasping ten thousand thunders, which he sent
Before him, such as in their souls infix'd
Plagues; they, astonished, all resistance lost,
All courage; down their idle weapons dropped;
Over shields, and helms, and helmed heads, he rode,
Of thrones and mighty seraphim prostrate,
That wished the mountains now might be again
Thrown on them as a shelter from his ire.
Nor less on either side tempestuous fell
His arrows, from the fourfold-visag'd Four
Distinct with eyes, and from the living wheels
Distinct alike with multitude of eyes;
One spirit in them ruled, and every eye
Glar'd lightning, and shot forth pernicious fire
Among the accursed, that withered all their strength,
And of their wonted vigor left them drained,
Exhausted, spiritless, afflicted, fallen.
Yet half his strength he put not forth, but checked
His thunder in mid volley; for he meant
Not to destroy, but root them out of Heaven.
The overthrown he raised* and as a herd
Of goats or timorous flock together thronged,
Drove them before him thunderstruck, pursued
With terrors and with furies to the bounds
And crystal wall of Heaven, which, opening wide,
Rolled inward, and a spacious gap disclosed
Into the wasteful deep; the monstrous sight
Struck them with horror backward, but far worse
Urged them behind; headlong themselves they threw
Down from the verge of Heaven; eternal wrath
Burnt after them to the bottomless pit.
Hell heard the unsufferable noise; Hell saw
Heaven running from Heaven, and would have fled
Affrighted; but strict Fate had cast too deep
Her dark foundations, and too fast had bound.
Nine days they fell; confounded Chaos roared,
And felt tenfold confusion in their fall:
Through his wild anarchy, so huge a rout
Encumbered him with ruin. Hell at last
Yawning received them whole, and on them closed;
Hell their fit habitation fraught with fire
Unquenchable, the house of woe and pain.
Disburden'd Heaven rejoiced, and soon repaired
Her mural breach, returning whence it rolled.
Sole victor from the expulsion of his foes,
Messiah his triumphal chariot turned:
To meet him all his saints, who silent stood
Eyewitnesses of his almighty acts,
With jubilee advanced; and as they went,
Shaded with branching palm, each order bright,
Sung triumph, and him sung victorious King,
Son, Heir, and Lord, to him dominion given
Worthiest to reign. He, celebrated, rode
Triumphant through mid Heaven, into the court^
And temple of his mighty Father, throned
On high; who into glory him received,
Where now he sits at the right hand of bliss.
SLAVES IN BARBARY; A DRAMA IN TWO ACTS.
PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.
HAMET, Bas^aw of Tunis. OZRO, Brothers, and Slaves in Tunis. AMANDAR,
Brothers, and Slaves in Tunis. FRANCISCO, Brother to Ozro and Amandar, sent to
redeem them. ^ID^AP, An American Captive. ^RAN, A Purchaser of Slaves. ^ANGA,
Sea Captains. ^ORTON, Sea Captains. ^EAGUE, An Irish Captive. ^HARP, An
African, and Kidnap's Slave. Officer, Auctioneer, Guards, Attendants,
Purchasers of Slaves, etc.
ACT I.
SCENE I. A Garden.
AMANDAR solus, confined with a chain. IN vain the flowers spread their gaudy
colors, and fill the air with fragrance. The sun has not a ^^eering beam for
me. All nature's smiles are frowns to him, who wears the chain of bondage.
Fifteen long months have witnessed my misfortune: what luckless winds delay
Francisco's passage?


Enter ORAN with a cane. Oran. Moping fugitive! quick to your task. [Beating
him.] I have not placed you here to mutter to the herbs and flowers: they need
the labor of your hands. Let them have it; or heavier blows shall punish your
neglect.


Aman. Then do your worst! I ask the fatal blow, to put a period to my miseries.


Oran. Your life is in my hands; but it shall be prolonged; and with your life,
I Will lengthen out your miseries.


Aman. Unfeeling tyrant! From you, I only ask the murderer's office. Speech was
designed for friendly intercourse; it ill becomes the tiger. In brutal silence,
you may te^r my flesh: add not the sting of words.


Enter OZRO. Oran. Hah! Ozro. A slave enlarged is no grateful sight to his old
master. Aside.


Ozro. I come, my brother, to end your sufferings.


Aman. Welcome! You know them to be more than man can bear.


Oran. Vile intruder! are you so soon intoxicated with your liberty? Quick,
flee this place; or stronger chains, than bound you here before, shall sober
you again.


Ozro. Talk not of chains; but rather learn to dread the hand, on which they
have been bound. I come to execute the orders of your lord and master; not to
be frightened with your threats. Amandar's injuries have reached the ^ ars of
the Bashaw; and I am sent --


Oran. Tale^bearing renegade! Well, I shall learn to husband my own property,
and give up no more slaves for Hamet's counselors. Attend your duty!


To Amandar, striking him. Ozro. Repeat that blow, and it shall cost you dear.


Oran. Caitiff! begone from hence; or even the Bashaw shall not defend you from
my indignation. Quick, leave my sight!


Ozro. Not while you have it in your power to exercise your tyranny over my
brother. But yesterday, you promised to sell Amandar for this sum: here it is,
ready counted to your hands. I demand him of you.


Oran. One half the sum would have bought him yesterday. It is my present
choice to sacrifice (...) property for my revenge. I will double his tas^ (...)
shorten his allowance, till his pride is reduced, an^ (...) becomes more
profitable, by additional severity (...) is my promise today: take i^ for your
solac^ (...)


Ozro. Monster! would you forever feast your soul on the miseries of the
unfortunate? Your word is past; recall it at the peril of your life. There is
your money. [Flinging it at his feet.] Amandar is --


Oran. When foreign ruffians, who ought to wear the chains of bondage, are
armed with swords, all right is lost: our property is given to the winds. Were
it not for what weak heads, and sickly hearts call justice, I Would feast my dogs
upon your flesh.


Ozro. Go vent your railings to the savage beasts, that prey on one another. If
you love the law that sanctions cruelty, they are your fit associates. Amandar,
you are once more restored to liberty and life. [Cutting off his bands with his
sword.]


Exeunt Amandar and Ozro. Oran. [Taking his money.] These high-bred fellows
make but poor slaves. It Is well to shift them off at any rate. I will take care
how I lay out my money for the future. Exit.


SCENE II. The Highway.
OZRO and AMANDAR. Aman. Am I deluded by a dream? or is this real? What angel
eye of pity has glanced upon us?


Ozro. I would not interrupt thy bliss, nor stir the ^regs, that the fair
surface of this draught conceals* But fortune seems to make our happiness her
sport.


Aman. Has not the Bashaw purchased our freedom? What are the conditions?


Ozro. That is for time or wild conjecture to determine. We must deliberate
what course to take.


Aman. What do thou say? let me hear the worst.


Ozro. You know the circumstances of my liber^* All had the appearance of
affability and pity in the Bashaw. He questioned particularly concerning our
situation, and seemed moved with the account I gave. I informed him, our
brother was daily expected with the gleanings of an unfortunate father's
interest to redeem us from our chains, and ^estore us to a disconsolate family.
He turned aside, as though some sudden emotion had seized his mind; then
exclaimed, "They shall be mine!" The money was paid for your ransom, and
committed to me. We are considered as his property.


Aman. What then creates suspicion? This favor has some claim upon our
gratitude. If we must err, let it be on the side of honor.


Ozro. So thought I, Amandar. These were the impressions of the moment. But
avarice often assumes the appearance of generosity: and malice, to make its
prey more sure, puts on the guise of pity. If the Bashaw's motive were our
happiness, all, but my freedom, I would pledge to pay the debt of gratitude.
But I would sooner seek the lion's den, or trust the mercy of a tiger, than
commit myself to a mercenary Turk. A father's fortune well may tempt the
hypocritic show of kindness to his sons.


Aman. This thought gives weight to your suspicion. Are our misfortunes then
the object of base speculation? This well becomes the dignity of rulers; the
honor of the prime magistrate of Tunis! to seek us out, like brutes, to buy and
sell, and fill his coffers on the ruins of our family. But stay. Is there no
room for charity? Tunis, of all the states of Barbary, is ^med for its
refinement. Every Turk is not an Oran. I think I have heard the Bashaw noted
for his humanity.


Ozro. That ruler has but an ill title to humanity, who suffers his subjects to
traffic in the dearest rights of man, and shares himself the execrated commerce.


Aman. True, my brother. But let us remember our native Venice. We have seen
the Turk sold there in open market, and exposed to all the indignities which we
have borne with Oran. Nay more* we may come nearer home, and spread the blush
on our own faces. We both have heard the story of the grateful Turk, who, by
the intercession of Francisco, was twice released from servitude. He had a
noble soul, a feeling heart. Though his virtues were discovered, and finally
rewarded by our father, we may blu^^ that they were so long unheeded by our
countrymen, and he suffered to languish in ignominious bondage.


Ozro. Your words have weight. For the sake of this noble captive, I will take
part of my censure from the Turks, and spare it for my countrymen. Though this
was done before my memory, the story paints his virtues to my mind; and had I
no other claim, I would call Francisco brother for th^^ deed.


Aman. [After a pause.] Can it be! no; it is too much to think of.


Ozro. What, Amandar?


Aman. A thought has struck my mind. Help to confirm, or to confu^e it.


Enter Guards abruptly. Ozro. [Drawing.] Who is here! Stand off!


Guards dra^. 1 st. Guard. But look, my lads! You see you are outmanned. We are
more than two to one.


Ozro. Then keep your distance, and let us know your business: else, were you
ten to one, I Would make your number less.


1 st. Guard. As to our business, we are obliged to let you know it; or I
believe your sword would not frighten us to it. It is to carry you to the
Bashaw.


Ozro. On what conditions must we go?


^ st. Guard. As to that, we shall not be nice. We have no cavalry, ye see; so
you must be content to march on ^oot. You may take the front, or center, as
suits you best. But we shall not trust you in the rear, if you show a
disposition to desert us; and, if you are inclined to be hostile, we must
secure that sword.


Ozro. I ask the terms on which we are to go; as slaves or freemen?


1 st. Guard. We don't wish to take the trouble to ^ind you. If you are not
free to go, we must quicken your march with the point of our swords. Our orders
are to return immediately.


Ozro. Keep us no longer in suspense. We now are free; and --


1 st. Guard. As to that, I believe you are a little mistaken. The Bashaw has
bought you both, and paid for you; and we shall look better to his interest
than to lose you for nothing; do you see? Come; march!


Ozro. What is the paltry price, compared with years of misery? Perhap^ you
know our destiny. If we are for sale again* tell him, we give the terms. This
place shall be the fare, and life the price.


1 st. Guard. I tell you again, we are not easily frighted. But I see you are
afraid of getting into Oran's hands again. If you choose to be obstinate, we
could easily slice you in pieces and carry you on the points of our swords. But
we don't wish to spoil you in such a manner. Besides, our master keeps no
cutthroats. Our orders were to carry you safe to the Bashaw, and neither hurt
you ourselves, or let any body else. You may wonder at this extraordinary
honor, and so do we. But he takes a liking to Christians, and is very often
doing them a good turn. I fancy something uncommon is going forward today by
this maneuver. Perhaps he is inclined to sin a little in your own way, by
drinking a few bottles of ^ine with you.


Ozro. [To Amandar.] Their honest frankness quite unarms me. I hope my
suspicions have been groundless.


Aman. Let us trust ourselves to their care. I am anxious to know the sequel.


SCENE III. Hamet's House.
Ha^^^. [Solus.] The grateful day returns, that brings to mi^d my generous
benefactors. The birthday of my happiness, my fortune, and my honor. Let it be
sacred to gratitude, and devoted to the sons of sorrow.


Enter OFFICER. Officer. Noble Sir, the sale of prisoners begins in half an
hour. Is it your pleasure to attend the auction?


Hamet. It is. Have them upon the spot; and see that they are treated with
humanity. [Exit Officer.] Ill-fated men! their lot is miserable indeed. 'Twere
almost just to rise above the laws, and give them all their freedom. Exit Hamet.


SCENE IV. The street in Tunis.
Enter CRIER, ringing his bell. At half an hour from this time! will be sold at
public auction! to the highest bidder! prisoners of all colors! sorts and
sizes! lately captured! on the Mediteranean! and brought fresh into port!
warranted free from sickness, and wounds! Also, a considerable number! a little
damaged! by musket shot! and cannon balls! and careless handling, with long
knives and broad swords! and for want of wholesome air! on easy terms for the
purchaser! Exit Crier.

ACT II.
SCENE I.
ORAN walking to the fare. Oran. [Solus.] Yes, he who frees a slave, arms an
assassin. The Bashaw may learn this to his sorrow. Let him look to that. He has
given a high price for stock, that I should have been glad to turn upon his
hands. The money will purchase two for one. mu^^ (...) Zanga's frei^^ of
prisoners will almost (...) ma^ket. The Bashaw may be as ostentatious as he
pleases of his boyish pity: thank fortune, I am ^ot so tenderhearted. No:
dominion is the right of man. The love of power is planted in his nature. But
all men cannot be kings. If there are lords, there must be slaves. And what must
be is right. Let moralizers murmur at the doctrine: their arguments are slender
threads; feeble as those, who spin them out, from lovers' dreams, and
children's notions. What is justice without power? The slave's ideal friend;
whom he would wish to break his chains; on whose credit, he would establish
universal government; then dissolve connection, and shut his partner up in
prison. Exit Oran.


SCENE II. The fare, a large square.
Enter OFFICER, with a drawn sword; ZANGA and GORTON, with swords, followed by
prisoners, p^^ioned; Sailors in the rear; AUCTIONEER, etc. SHARP, a negro,
standing by Gorton. OFFICER bringing forward sick and wounded. Auctioneer.
Here, gentlemen, is a lot we shall not differ about. For the sake of dispatch,
we will put up all the fragments together. Here are a number with broken legs,
arms, etc. and a number more with mortal ^ounds, that may get well, or may not.
That is your risk; I shall not warrant them. Upwards of a dozen: count for
yourselves. Who bids?


Enter HAM^^ and attendants; silence observed, and (...) ^ay him obeisance.
Sharp. Let a man, a planter, masser Gorton.


To Gorton. Auct. Examine for yourselves: who bids?


Oran. Four hundred sequins for the whole.


Auct. That is scarce the price of one good able-bodied slave.


Oran. They will not do me half the service at present. The greater part of
them are not able to cook their own food; much less to earn it. Yet they must
be fed; or they will die on my hands, you know. And a sick, or dead slave is
the very worst of dead stock. I Will give no more.


Hamet. These unfortunate men are the objects of compassion, not of unfeeling
sarcasm. Raise their price to five hundred, and charge them to my account.
Servants, see them removed to the hospital. Let a surgeon be employed to heal
their wounds, and restore them to health. [Prisoners bowing respectfully.]


Exeunt servants and prisoners. Sharp. Dat a good planter, masser Gorton. He
good to white man; an a he good to poor negur man.


OFFICER bringing forward a number. Auct. Here are a parcel of lads of the
first quality: superfine; the sons of noblemen. Their relations will ^ive their
weight in gold to redeem them.


1 st. Purchaser. And their country, twice their weight, rather than have them
return.


Auct. Now is the time to make your fortunes. Who bids?


Zanga. [To Gorton.] These, I suppose, are your champions, that took shelter in
the hole, with their seafaring brethren, the rats, when you fought them?


Gorton. The same.


Auct. One! two! three! Just going for -- nothing.


1 st. Purchaser. Precisely what they are valued at, at home. You know,
Captains, these men of the feminine gender, don't pass very current with us.
You would do well to exchange them for ballast, or fresh water. I will give you
one hundred sequins a piece for them.


Gorton. Strike them off! It is cheaper buying men than raising them at this
rate. One, two, three, four, five of them. Clear the hatchway!


Exeunt 1 st. purchaser and prisoners. OFFICER bringing forward three others.
Auct. Here are three ^^out, able-bodied fellows for you; well made for labor.
Who bids?


Sharp. Dat a man my masser. Pointing to Kidnap.


2 d. Purchaser. Mere bladders filled with wine. Our labor and climate will
blast them like mushrooms.


3 d. Purchaser. Let me look at their hands; they are the index of the slave. A
good hard hand is worth more than a dozen bloated cheeks and barrel bodies. Let
me see how they are put together.


Shaking them by the sh^ers. Kidnap. Stand off! base ruffian.


Officer strikes him. Sharp. Dat larn you strike poor negur. Me wish he killa
you! Aside.


Kidnap. Black imp! be silent.


Officer. This fellow is a rare piece, I Will assure you. Rather mettlesome at
present. Discipline him freely with the whip for several weeks, and he will be
as patient as a Dutch horse.


Kidnap. Severe reverse! Now, Africans, I learn to pity you. Aside.


3 d. Purchaser. What does he say?


Officer. I fancy he wishes to be excused from reading the new leaf we are
turning over for him. His dreams have been very much inclined to ta^tle, since
he has been in prison. If I may judge from them, he has been a wholesale dealer
in slaves himself; and is just beginning the hard lesson of repentance.


Gorton. Is this the man, who entertained you so agreeably in his sleep? I
should suppose he might afford a deal of amusement when awake.


Officer. He was in a very companionable mood last night. He must have thought
himself at home: poor man, I am almost sorry for his delusion. In his social
glee, he ordered six dozen of port, gave Liberty and Independence for a toast,
sung an ode to Freedom; and after fancying he had kicked over the tables,
broken all the glasses, and lay helpless on the floor, gave orders, attended by
a volley of oaths, to have fifty of his slaves whipped thirty stripes each, for
singing a liberty-song in echo to his own; and six more to be hung up by the
heels for petitioning him for a draught of milk and water, while he was
revelling with his drunken companions. Then waked up, and exclaimed, O happy
America! farewell forever! Justice! thou have overtaken me at last.


Auct. His dream^ will be a cash article. Who bids?


3 d. ^urchaser. Two hundred sequins a piece, for the three.


Hamet. Officer, forward that man: I wish to speak with him. Officer leads
Kidnap to Hamet.

From whence are you? To Kidnap.


Kidnap. From North America.


Hamet. The boasted land of liberty?


Kidnap. None more so.


Hamet. Then does she realize those scenes your fancy paints, and which your
tongue describes, when off its guard?


Kidnap. Take second-handed dreams for evidence, and judge as you please of me,
or my country.


Hamet. Your arrogance is evidence against you. Stand there in silence. Bring
here that African. [ To the officer.] Officer leads forward Sharp.

Was that man your master?


Sharp. Yes a masser. Bowing.


Hamet. Is he a kind master? Do you wish to live with him?


Sharp. No, masser planter! he get drunk! he whip me! he knock a me down! he
stamp on a me! he will kill a me dead! No! no! let a poor negur live wid a you,
masser planter; live wid a masser officer; wid a dat a man; or any udder man,
fore I go back America again; fore I live wid a masser Kidnap again.


Hamet. Fear not, honest fellow: nobody shall hurt you.


Sharp. Tank a you, masser! bress a you, good masser planter! Bowing.


Hamet. [To officer.] Deliver this man to the highest ^idder. Let misery teach
him, what he could never learn in affluence, the lesson of humanity.


[3 d. Purchaser takes off Kidnap and the other two, and returns again.] Common
sailors brought forward. Auct. Here are robust fellows for you; reduced to
discipline; hardened by toil; proof against heat and cold, wind and weather.
Now is your last opportunity. Who bids?


4 th. Purchaser. Two hundred a piece for the whole.


5 th. Purchaser. Two hundred and fifty.


Auct. Two hundred and fifty, and going. Their bare bones would be worth half
that for skeletons. But they are well strung with nerves, and covered with
hardy flesh: none of your mushrooms, grown up in the shade. Look for
yourselves: they are almost bullet proof.


Zanga. Quite, you might have said, or we should have made riddling sieves of
them.


Oran. Three hundred a piece.


Auct. Three hundred, and going. One! two! three! Strikes.


Zanga. [To Oran.] I am sorry we were obliged to cut so many of them in pieces
before we could persuade them to strike. The whole crew would furnish a fine
plantation; and you might live in the style of a West India planter.


Officer. Follow your master. Oran going; slaves following. Oran's servants
follow the slaves with whips.


Teague. [Refusing to follow.] Ship-mates, you may do as you please. I should
be glad of your dear company; but, by my shoul, I will enter no man's ship by
sea, or by land, ^ill I know the conditions, and receive a little advance pay.


Oran. Come on, my lad; or my servants shall see to your advance pay. Servant
strikes him with a whip.


Teague. [Bursting his pinions, and seizing Oran's servant.] If this is your
prompt pay, by saint Patrick! you shall have change in your own coin, my honey!
Do You see! I could tear your rigg^ng before and aft, like a hurricane. Shaking
him. Officer a^tempts to strike him with his sword; other serva^^ with their
whips.


Hamet. Forbear! his honest indignation is the effusion of humanity. Let him
speak for himself. There is something in this ingenuous tar, that moves me to
do him a kindness. Aside.


Teague. I think, an't please your honor, a poor sailor has a hard time enough
on it to encounter wind and weather, hunger and thirst, and all the other
dangers of the main sea; and when rain and storms have frowned on him for
several months, he ought to find a little sunshine in every man's face; and not
be bought and sold like dumb beasts in the market. I believe in my shoul, if
one were to get rich in a Christian country by such a vile trade, the judgments
of heaven would keep him poor as long as he lived. Ah, and if men were made to
be slaves and masters, why was not one man born with a whip in his hand and
gold spoon in his mouth; and another, with a chain on his arm, or a fetter to
his heel; aye, and without a tongue, or a pair of jaws, so long as one must not
be allowed to use them? And if I had known I were to live a dog's life in this
hard-hearted country, as I am a Christian, I would have fought ye till I died.
But, look ye! all hands upon deck; this muckle arm of mine is free; and by the
blood of my heart, it shall be torn from my body, before I will be bound once
more, it shall.


Oran. I must leave that unmanageable creature with you, Zanga; I have had too
much to do with such fellows already.


Hamet. Trust him with me. His are the inborn virtues I admire: virtues, that
ought to make the tyrant blush before him, and find him friends, wherever there
are men.


Teague. On my honest word, I am your honor's good friend and servant, so long
as I live, let the winds blow as they will. Yes, I will be any man's ^ood
friend and faithful servant, that will secure my ^^a^ty in the mean time, I
will.


Auct. Here is this honest negro lad, who has been under the benevolent
instruction of a task-master, and converted to Christianity by lectures applied
to the naked back with a rope's end, or nine-tail whip. He is bred to his
business; you will find him an excellent purchase; and he can lose nothing by
exchange of masters. Who bids?


5 th. Purchaser. Three hundred sequins.


3 d. Purchaser. Four hundred.


Officer. Follow that man; he is your master.


To Sharp. Sharp. Yes a masser. Bowing to his new master.


5 th. Purchaser. You give too much. You will raise the price of slaves above
their profit.


3 d. Purchaser. I have my reasons. He is trained to his business: I intend to
put his old master under his instruction, that he may occasionally have the
advantage of a whip-lecture from his former slave, whom he has treated so
kindly.


5 th. Purchaser. Perfectly right, Sir. Every dog must have his day. Exeunt 3
d. Purchaser and Sharp.


Zanga. [Leading forward Francisco.] This man has cost me dear; he must command
a price accordingly.


Auct. Here is the last purchase: who bids?


5 th. Purchaser. What extraordinary things can this fellow do?


Zanga. He can clip off men's heads and arms with an uncommon slight of hand.
Had it not been for his dexterity at this art, and his loud acclamations to his
crew, I should not have been repulsed three times from their deck, with the
loss of half my men.


5 th. Purchaser. This is your misfortune; not ours. Men in your way must run
the risk of losing an arm and even a head once in a while. Courage is a very
good recommendation for a sailor, or soldier; but for a slave, I would give as
much for one of your faint-hearted cowards, that you find hid in the hole in
time of action, as for half a dozen, who will meet you with a pistol at your
head.


Auct. What, does nobody bid?


Zanga. These are the marks of gratitude and honor shown to us, who expose our
lives to procure the means of ease and luxury for our countrymen. My men, whose
wounds are witnesses against him, would give a generous price to satisfy their
vengeance.


Francisco. Detested ruffian! blast not the names of gratitude and honor with
your breath. Has not my life already been enough exposed? Then let those men,
who wear the marks, my courage gave, return me wound for wound. It Is not enough
that you possess my father's fortune; the effects of an industrious l^fe,
designed to purchase from your barbarous land, two darling sons; more than his
life to him; and dearer than my own to me. Their misery is not sufficient.
Myself, the only stay of his declining years, must be forever exiled from his
sight. But I can bear the worst that malice can invent, or tyranny inflict. If
you have pity, spare it for my father; for my brothers: they have slain none of
your friends; none of your nation. I can endure my own misfortunes: theirs are
insupportable.


Hamet. Magnanimous, and dutiful son! your virtues shall be rewarded; and your
father's sorrow shall be turned to joy. You say you have two brothers, whom you
came to ransom. What are their names? Perhaps they now are free.


Francisco. Ozro and Amandar.


Hamet. Your business is accomplished. They have their liberty. Each minute I
expect them here.


Francisco. O kind reverse! Francisco, thou shall be happy.


Hamet. Francisco! did he say? Good Heavens! Can it be he! [Aside.] Art thou
Francisco?


Francisco. That is my father's name. I am Francisco the younger.


Hamet. Thou art! O my delivering angel! Do thou know thy Hamet?


Francisco. It cannot be! Sure I Am entranced.


Looking earnestly at Hamet. Hamet. Come to my arms! I am thy friend, thy
Hamet. Hamet rises. Francisco meets him pinioned.


Francisco. Thou art the same! the best of men.


Embracing. Enter OZRO and AMANDAR at a distance, attended by guards. They
advance slowly, looking at each other and at Hamet, in suspense. Hamet.
[Unloosing Francisco's pinions.] Off, shameful bands! These ill become thee!
Thy hands are worthy of a scepter. Twice thou have freed me from the chains of
bondage. Thus I, in part, discharge the debt. [Ozro and Amandar discover
Francisco and run to embrace him.]


Ozro. O Francisco!


Amandar. My brother! They embrace each other.


Francisco. Welcome to my arms again! Bounteous Heaven! thy smiles have pierced
the cloud, and changed the night to day. Next to Heaven, Hamet deserves our
thanks.


Ozro and Amandar. As first on earth he has them.


Hamet. I am the debtor. Heaven has given me a grateful heart: but it is to
you, Francisco, I owe my fortune and my honor, and have it in my power to show
my gratitude. Had it not been for you, I might till now have been a slave in
Venice.


Teague. On my life, I would live and die here all my days, if all the people
were like this same good Hamet. Aside.


Zanga. They sail so pleasantly, I must fall in with them after all. ( Aside.)
[Takes a chest, containing the money and jewels of Francisco, and carries it to
him.] Good Sir, I have been brought up to the trade of fighting; this you know,
Sir, is not an employment to soften one's heart. I have generally been obliged
to resist the current of compassion; but it sets so strong upon me now, I will
even follow its motion, as you have been pleased to lead the way. Here is this
man's money: I give up my share both in that and him too; and wish him and his
good friends a pleasant gale upon whatever course they may steer through life.


Hamet. This deed becomes thee, Zanga, and shall hereafter be rewarded.


Francisco. Zanga, thou have my thanks. Let me anticipate the joyous hour when
our aged father shall hear the transactions of this day; and express in his
name the effusions of his grateful heart, when he shall receive his sons from
you as the author of their second existence; their delivery from the heavy
chains of bondage. To Hamet.


Hamet. By untoward fortune, my father and myself were slaves in Venice. By
your intercession I was emancipated. I cheerfully procured the freedom of a
declining parent at the expense of my own. The thought of relieving him from a
burden, which his tottering age was unable to support, sweetened my toil, and
made that servitude a pleasure, which otherwise had been intolerable. But the
generosity of your family exceeded what I dared to hope. You gratuitously
restored me to liberty a second time. This was the morning of my prosperity,
the birthday of my happiness. It is by your means, I have it in my power thus
to acknowledge and discharge a sacred debt, the debt of gratitude.


Ozro. This day more than compensates for our past misfortunes.


Amandar. Henceforth we will celebrate its anniversary in grateful remembrance
of our benefactor.


Hamet. Generous brothers, enjoy your fortune, and let your father participate
your happiness. A ship shall be prepared to convey you to your native land, and
restore you to your friends. Let it be remembered, there is no luxury so
exquisite as the exercise of humanity, and no post so honorable as his, who
defends THE RIGHTS OF MAN. Exeunt omnes.


CONCLUSION OF A CELEBRATED SPEECH OF MR. PIT, IN 1770, IN SUPPORT OF A MOTION
MADE IN PARLIAMENT, TO REQUEST THE KING TO LAY BEFORE THAT BODY ALL THE PAPERS,
RELATIVE TO CERTAIN DEPREDATIONS OF THE SPANIARDS, AND LIKEWISE, TO A TREATY
WHICH HE WAS THEN NEGOCIATING WITH SPAIN.
MY LORDS,
I HAVE taken a wide circuit, and trespassed, I fear, too long upon your
patience. Yet I cannot conclude without endeavoring to bring home your thoughts
to an object more immediately interesting to us than any I have yet considered:
I mean the internal condition of this country. We may look abroad for wealth,
or triumphs, or luxury; but England, my lords, is the main stay, the last
resort of the whole empire. To this point every scheme of policy, whether
foreign or domestic, should ultimately refer.

Have any measures been taken to satisfy, or to unite the people? Are the
grievances they have so long complained of removed? or do they stand not only
unredressed, but aggravated? Is the right of free election restored to the
elective body? My lords, I myself am one of the people. I esteem that security
and independence, which is the original birthright of an Englishman, far beyond
the privileges, however splendid, which are annexed to the peerage. I myself am
by birth an English elector, and join with the freeholders of England as in a
common cause. Believe me, my lords, we mistake our real interest as much as our
duty, when we separate ourselves from the mass of the people.

Can it be expected that Englishmen will unite heartily in defense of a
government, by which they feel themselves insulted and oppressed? Restore them
to their rights; that is the true way to make them unanimous. It is not a
ceremonious recommendation from the throne, that can bring back peace and
harmony to a discontented people. That insipid annual opiate has been
administered so long, that it has lost its effect. Something substantial,
something effectual must be done.

The public credit of the nation stands next in degree to the rights of the
constitution; it calls loudly for the interposition of parliament. There is a
set of men, my lords, in the city of London, who are known to live in riot and
luxury, upon the plunder of the ignorant, the innocent, the helpless; upon that
part of the community, which stands most in need of, and best deserves the care
and protection of the legislature. To me, my lords whether they be miserable
jobbers of Exchange Alley, or the lofty Asiatic plunderers of
Leadenhall-street, they are all equally detestable. I care but little whether a
man walks on foot, or is drawn by eight or six horses. If his luxury be
supported by the plunder of his country, I despise and detest him.

My lords, while I had the honor of serving his Majesty, I never ventured to
look at the Treasury but at a distance; it is a business I am unfit for, and to
which I never could have submitted. The little I know of it has not served to
raise my opinion of what is vulgarly called the monied interest; I mean that
bloodsucker, that m^ck-worm, which calls itself the friend of government; that
pretends to serve this or that administration, and may be purchased, on the
same terms, by any administration; that advances money to government, and takes
special care of its own emoluments.

I hope, my lords, that nothing I have said will be under^^^^d to extend to the
honest, industrious tradesman, who holds the middle rank, and has given
repeated proofs, that he prefers law and liberty to gold. I love that class of
m^n. Much less would I be thought to reflect upon the fair merchant, whose
liberal commerce is the prime source of national wealth. I esteem his
occupation, and respect his character.

My lords, if the general representation, which I have had the honor to lay
before you, of the situation of public affairs, has in any measure engaged your
attention, your lordships, I am sure, will agree with me, that the season calls
for more than common prudence and vigor in the direction of your councils. The
difficulty of the crisis demands a wise, a firm, and a popular administration.
The dishonorable traffic of places has engaged us too long. Upon this subject,
my lords, I speak without interest or enmity. I have no personal objection to
any of the king's servants. I shall never be minister; certainly, not without
full power to cut away all the rotten branches of government. Yet, unconcerned
as I truly am for myself, I cannot avoid seeing some capital errors in the
distribution of the royal favor.

I know I shall be accused of attempting to revive distinctions. My lords, if
it were possible, I would abolish all distinctions. I would not wish the favors
of the crown to flow invariably in one channel. But there are some distinctions
which are inherent in the nature of things. There is a distinction between
right and wrong; between whig and tory.

When I speak of an administration, such as the necessity of the season calls
for, my views are large and comprehensive. It must be popular, that it may
begin with reputation. It must be strong within itself, that it may proceed
with vigor and decision. An administration, formed upon an exclusive system of
family connexions, or private friendships, cannot, I am convinced, be long
supported in this country.

I shall trouble your lordships with but a few words more. His Majesty tells us
in his speech, that he will call upon us for our advice, if it should be
necessary in the farther progress of this affair. It is not easy to say whether
or not the ministry are serious in this declaration; nor what is meant by the
progress of an affair, which rests upon one fixed point. Hitherto we have not
been called upon. But though we are not consulted, it is our right and duty, as
the king's great, hereditary council, to offer him our advice. The papers,
mentioned in the noble Duke's motion, will enable us to form a just and
accurate opinion of the conduct of his Majesty's servants, though not of the
actual state of their honorable negociations.

The ministry, too, seem to want advice upon some points, in which their own
safety is immediately concerned. They are now balancing between a war, which
they ought to have foreseen; but for which they have made no provision, and an
ignominious compromise. Let me warn them of their danger. If they are forced
into a war, they stand it at the hazard of their heads. If, by an ignominious
compromise, they should stain the honor of the crown, or sacrifice the rights
of the people, let them look to their consciences, and consider whether they
will be able to walk the streets in safety.

SOCRATES' DEFENSE BEFORE HIS ACCUSERS AND JUDGES.
I AM accused of corrupting the youth, and of instilling dangerous principles
into them, as well in regard to the worship of the gods, as the rulers of
government. You know, Athenians, I never made it my profession to teach; nor
can envy, however violent against me, reproach me with having ever sold my
instructions. I have an undeniable evidence for me in this respect, which is my
poverty. Always equally ready to communicate my thoughts either to the rich or
poor, and to give them entire leisure to question or answer me, I lend myself
to every one who is desirous of becoming virtuous; and if amongst those who
hear me, there are any who prove either good or bad, neither the virtues of the
one, nor the vices of the other, to which I have not contributed, are to be
ascribed to me.

My whole employment is to persuade the young and old against too much love for
the body, for riches, and all other precarious things of whatsoever nature they
be, and against too little regard for the soul which ought to be the object of
their affection. For I incessantly urge to you, that virtue does not proceed
from riches, but on the contrary, riches from virtue; and that all the other
goods of human life, as well public as private, have their source in the same
principle.

If to speak in this manner be to corrupt youth, I confess, Athenians, that I
am guilty, and deserve to be punished. If what I say be not true, it is most
easy to convict me of my falsehood. I see here a great number of my disciples:
they have only to appear. But perhaps the reserve and consideration for a
master, who has instructed them, will prevent them from declaring against me:
at least their fathers, brothers, and uncles cannot, as good relations and good
citizens, dispense with their not standing forth to demand vengeance against
the corrupter of their sons, brothers, and nephews. But these are the persons
who take upon them my defense, and interest themselves in the success of my
cause.

Pass on me what sentence you please, Athenians; but I can neither repent nor
change my conduct. I must not abandon or suspend a function, which God himself
has imposed on me, since he has charged me with the care of instructing my
fellow-citizens. If, after having faithfully kept all the ports, wherein I was
placed by our generals, the fear of death should at this time make me abandon
that in which the Divine Providence has placed me, by commanding me to pass my
life in the study of philosophy, for the instruction of myself and others; this
would be a most criminal desertion indeed, and make me highly worthy of being
cited before this tribunal, as an impious man who does not believe the gods.

Should you resolve to acquit me for the future, I should not hesitate to make
answer, Athenians, I honor and love you; but I shall choose rather to obey God
than you; and to my latest breath shall never renounce my philosophy, nor cease
to exhort and reprove you according to my custom. I am reproached with abject
fear and meanness of spirit, for being so busy in imparting my advice to every
one in private, and for having always avoided to be present in your assemblies,
to give my counsels to my country. I think I have sufficiently proved my
courage and fortitude, both in the field, where I have borne arms with you, and
in the Senate, when I alone, upon more than one occasion, opposed the violent
and cruel orders of the thirty tyrants. What is it then that has prevented me
from appearing in your assemblies? It is that demon, that voice divine, which
you have so often heard me mention, and Melitus has taken so much pains to
ridicule.

That spirit has attached itself to me from my infancy: it is a voice, which I
never hear, but when it would prevent me from persisting in something I have
resolved; for it never exhorts me to undertake any thing. It is the same being
that has always opposed me, when I would have intermeddled in the affairs of
the republic; and that with the greatest reason; for I should have been amongst
the dead long ago, had I been concerned in the measures of the state, without
effecting any thing to the advantage of myself, or our country.

Do not take it ill, I beseech you, if I speak my thoughts without disguise,
and with truth and freedom. Every man who would generously oppose a whole
people, either amongst us or elsewhere, and who inflexibly applies himself to
prevent the violation of the laws, and the practice of iniquity in a
government, will never do so long with impunity. It is absolutely necessary for
him, who would contend for justice, if he has any thoughts of living, to remain
in a private station, and never to have any share in public affairs.

For the rest, Athenians, if, in the extreme danger I now am, I do not imitate
the behavior of those, who, upon less emergencies, have implored and
supplicated their judges with tears, and have brought forth their children,
relations, and friends, it is not through pride or obstinacy, or any contempt
for you; but solely for your honor, and for that of the whole city. At my age,
and with the reputation, true or false, which I have, would it be consistent
for me, after all the lessons I have given upon the contempt of death, to be
afraid of it myself, and to belie in my last action all the principles and
sentiments of my past life?

But without speaking of my fame, which I should extremely injure by such a
conduct, I do not think it allowable to entreat a judge, nor to be absolved by
supplications: he ought to be persuaded and convinced. The judge does not sit
upon the bench to show favor by violating the laws; but to do justice in
conforming to them. He does not swear to discharge with impunity whom he
pleases; but to do justice where it is due. We ought not therefore to accustom
you to perjury, nor you to suffer yourselves to be accustomed to it; for in so
doing, both the one and the other of us equally injure justice and religion,
and both are criminals.

Do not therefore expect from me, Athenians, that I should have recourse to
means which I believe neither honest nor lawful; especially upon this occasion,
wherein I am accused of impiety by Melitus. For, if I should influence you by
my prayers, and thereby induce you to violate your oaths, it would be
undeniably evident, that I teach you not to believe in the gods; and even in
defending and justifying myself, should furnish my adversaries with arms
against me, and prove that I believe no divinity. But I am very far from such
wicked thoughts. I am more convinced of the existence of God than my accusers;
and so convinced, that I abandon myself to God and you, that you may judge of
me as you shall think it best.

DIALOGUE ON COWARDICE AND KNAVERY.
CHARACTERS.
HECTOR, An Officer cashiered for Cowardice. HAMBURGH, A fraudulent Bankrupt.
SIMON, A Pawn-Broker. TRUSTY, In Disguise, acquainted with all.
(Sitting together; some with Segars.) SCENE, A Tavern.

Enter LANDLORD. Landlord. GENTLEMEN, you all come different ways; and I s'pose
are strangers; but may be, you would like to cut and come again upon a roast turkey
with good trimmings.


Trusty* With all my heart. I Would play knife and fork even with a cutthroat over
such a supper: and I dare say, you will find none of us cowards or bankrupts in
that business.


Up start HECTOR, HAMBURGH, and SIMON. All three. [To Trusty.] Do you call me
names, Sir?


Trusty. Gentlemen, I meant no personalities.


Hector. [Puts his hand to his sword.] But you called me a coward, you rascal.


Hamb. [Takes off his coat.] You called me a bankrupt, you knave.


Simon. [Doubles his fist.] You called me cutthroat, you villain.


Trusty. I told you all, I meant no personalities: but [To Hector] pray what
are you?


Hector. A soldier, to your sorrow. Fear and tremble.


Trusty. [To Hamburgh.] Pray what are you?


Hamb. A merchant.


Trusty. [To Simon.] And what are you?


Simon. A banker.


Trusty. Then if you are such as soldiers, merchants, and bankers ought to be,
I could not mean you; otherwise you may take the words, cutthroat, bankrupt,
and coward, and divide 'em among you. And as to knave, rascal, and villain, I
return them to the right owners.


Hector. Gentlemen, stand by. I Will fight for you all. [Draws and turns to
Trusty.] I challenge you to fight me.


Land. Poh! challenge him to eat with you; the s^er's waiting.


Hect. [To Landlord.] Don't interfere, Sir: here is serious work; blood will be
spilt.


Trusty. Well, spill your own then: I have no notion of having my veins pricked.


Hector. Choose your mode of fighting instantly, or fall beneath this sword,
which has drank the blood of thousands.


Trusty. Well, if I must fight, my mode will be to use that sword five minutes
upon your body; then you shall use it upon me as long, and so we will take
turns.


Hector. You inflame my choler.


Trusty. Then unpin your collar.


Hector. I shall burst with rage.


Trusty. Then we shall have one less at table.


Hector. [Brandishes his sword.] Are you prepared for your exit?


Trusty. I am. Exit.


Hector. Now he is gone to arm himself with panoply, to meet this valorous
sword. Guard me, ye powers! who, in the day of battle, 'mid clashing swords and
all the thunder of my father Mars, have been my shield and buckler. Now I am
ready for him: why does he not return?


Land. He Is gone to supper. This is an eating house, not a fighting house.
Sheath your sword.


Hector. [Sheaths.] There, sword, smother thy rage till some dauntless
adversary shall call thee out: then seek his heart and make report of victory.


Exeunt omnes. Interval five minutes. Enter TRUSTY and LANDLORD. Land. I take
that officer-looking man to be Colonel Home, one of the bravest men in the army.


Trusty. Colonel Home and he are very different characters. That wretch was but
an ensign, and was cashiered for cowardice.


Land. Is that possible? Why he told me himself that he had alone surprised a
whole regiment and cut them to pieces; and that all the army stood in awe of
him.


Trusty. Well, you may depend on what I tell you: and the one that sits next to
him is a bankrupt, who has been guilty of every shameful practice to defraud
his creditors; and the other is a base pawn-broker, who has got all the
property of this bankrupt in his hands for concealment.


Land. You surprise me! Why that bankrupt, as you call him, was just now
telling the other, how he was afraid the late storms at sea might affect his
shipping; and the other was offering to insure them.


Enter HECTOR, HAMBURGH, and SIMON. Hector. [To Trusty.] Since my wrath is a
little abated, I am persuaded you meant no offense; but look ye, Sir, if any
man was seriously to dispute my courage, you see my sword!


Trusty. I see it.


Hector. And don't you fear it?


Trusty. No; nor its owner.


Hector. [Offers to draw.] Forbear, or "I will tell a tale will make it blush."
Hector sneaks off.


Hamb. [To Trusty.] I am not disposed, Sir, to believe that you meant me by any
expression you made, as to coward and cutthroat: they certainly don't belong
to me. And as to bankrupt, the four winds can give the lie to such a charge.


Trusty. They could give but windy testimony in your favor.


Hamb. Then I appeal to this worthy gentleman, [Speaking of Simon.] and an
honester man lives not on earth, if I have not thousands in his hands.


Simon. [Aside to Hamb.] You had better leave it to the four winds.


Hamb. [Loud and hastily.] Have I not moneys of a great amount in your hands?


Simon. Did you not take an oath, a few days since, that you had not, directly
nor indirectly, five pounds on earth?


Hamb. Yes. I had not on earth; but it was then in your coffers, and you know
it.


Simon. If your oath that you had no property cannot be relied on, why should
your word be taken, that you have?


Hamb. But I ask you, have you not my property in your hands?


Simon. Not a farthing. You are a bankrupt for thousands, and the four winds
may tell of that.


Hamb. O knavery!


Simon. O perjury!


Trusty. You are perfectly welcome to use the words I just now tossed out to
you; and it appears to me, they are a very proper currency between you.


Hamb. O that I had the money out of that wretch's hands, to give to my honest
creditors!


Simon. O that I had the character, which I have lost by my connection with you!


Trusty. I am sorry for the depravity of you both. It has led you to deceive
honest men, and to betray each other. You have now learned the value of
reputation and peace of mind, by the loss of them. Let your future days be days
of atonement. Let them be devoted* to honesty and fair dealing; and ever
remember that integrity is the only road to desirable wealth, and that the path
of virtue is alone the path of peace.


MR. SHERIDAN'S SPEECH, AGAINST MR. TAILOR.
WE have this day been honored with the counsels of a complete gradation of
lawyers. We have received the opinion of a Judge, of an Attorney General, of an
Ex-Attorney-General, and of a practicing Barrister. I agree with the learned
gentleman in his admiration of the abilities of my honorable friend, Mr. Fox.
What he has said of his quickness and of his profoundness, of his boldness and
his candor, is literally just and true, which the mental accomplishment of my
honorable friend is, on every occasion, calculated to extort even from his
adversaries.

The learned gentleman has, however, in this insidious eulogium, connected such
qualities of mind with those he has praised and venerated, as to convert his
encomiums into reproach, and his tributes of praise into censure and invective.
The boldness he has described is only craft, and his candor, hypocrisy. Upon
what ground^ does the learned gentleman connect those assemblages of great
qualities and of cardinal defects? Upon what principles either of justice or of
equity does he exult with one hand, whilst he insidiously reprobates and
destroys with the other?

If the wolf is to be feared, the learned gentleman may rest assured, it will
be the wolf in sheep's clothing, the masked pretender to patriotism. It is not
from the fang of the lion, but from the tooth of the serpent, that reptile
which insidiously steals upon the vitals of the constitution, and gnaws it to
the heart ere the mischief is suspected, that destruction is to be feared.

With regard to the acquisition of a learned gentleman, Mr. Tailor, who has
declared that he means to vote with us this day* I am sorry to acknowledge,
that from the declaration he has made at the beginning of his speech, I see no
great reason to boast of such an auxiliary. The learned gentleman, who has with
p^culiar modesty styled himself a chicken lawyer, has declared, that, thinking
us in the right with respect to the subject of this day's discussion, he shall
vote with us; but he has at the same time thought it necessary to assert, that
he has never before voted differently from the minister and his friends, and
perhaps he never shall again vote with those whom he means to support this d^^.

It is rather singular to vote with us, professedly because he finds us to be
in the right, and, in the very moment that he assigns so good a reason for
changing his side, to declare, that in all probability he never shall vote with
us again. I am sorry to find the chicken is a bird of ill omen, and that its
augury is so unpropitious to our future interests. Perhaps it would have been
as well, under these circumstances, that the chicken had not left the barn-door
of the treasury; but continued side by side with the old cock, to pick those
crumbs of comfort which would doubtless be dealt out in time, with a liberality
proportioned to the fidelity of the feathered tribe.

PART OF CICERO'S ORATION AGAINST CATILINE.
IT is now a long time, conscript fathers, that we have trod amidst the dangers
and machinations of this conspiracy: but I know not how it comes to pass, the
full maturity of all those crimes, and of this long-ripening rage and
insolence, has now broken out during the period of my consulship. Should
Catiline alone be removed from this powerful band of traitors, it may abate,
perhaps, our fears and anxieties for a while; but the danger will still remain,
and continue lurking in the veins and vitals of the republic.

For, as men, oppressed with a severe fit of illness, and laboring under the
raging heat of a fever, are often at first seemingly relieved by a draught of
cold water; but afterward find the disease return upon them with redoubled
fury; in like manner, this distemper which has seized the commonwealth, eased a
little by the punishment of this traitor, will, from his surviving associates,
soon assume new force. Wherefore, conscript fathers, let the wicked retire; let
them separate themselves from the honest; let them rendezvous in one place. In
fine, as I have often said, let a wall be between them and us: let them cease
to lay snares for the consul in his own house; to beset the tribunal of the
city praetor; to invest the senate house with armed russians, and to prepare:
fireballs and torches for burning the city: in short, let every man's
sentiments with regard to the public be inscribed on his forehead.

This I engage for, and promise, conscript fathers, that by the diligence of
the consuls, the weight of your authority, the courage and firmness of the
Roman knights, and the unanimity of all the honest, Catiline being driven from
the city, you shall behold all his treasons detected, exposed, crushed, and
punished.

With these omens, Catiline, of all prosperity to the republic, but of
destruction to thyself, and all those who have joined themselves with thee in
all kinds of parricide* go thy way then to this impious and abominable war:
whilst thou, Jupiter, whose religion was established with the foundation of
this city, whom we truly call Stator, the stay and prop of this empire, wilt
drive this man and his accomplices from thy altars and temples, from the houses
and walls of the city, from the lives and fortunes of us all; and wilt destroy
with eternal punishments, both living and dead, all the haters of good men, the
enemies of their country, the plunderers of Italy, now confederated in this
detestable league and partnership of villainy.

DESCRIPTION OF THE FIRST AMERICAN CONGRESS; FROM THE VISION OF COLUMBUS.
COLUMBUS looked; and still around them spread,
From south to north, the immeasurable shade;
At last, the central shadows burst away,
And rising regions opened on the day.
He saw, once more, bright Del'ware's silver stream,
And Penn's thronged city cast a cheerful gleam;
The dome of state, that met his eager eye,
Now heaved its arches in a loftier sky.
The bursting gates unfold: and lo, within,
A solemn train, in conscious glory, shine.
The well-known forms his eye had traced before,
In different realms along the extended shore;
Here, graced with nobler fame, and robbed in state,
They looked and moved magnificently great.
High on the foremost seat, in living light,
Majestic Randolph caught the hero's sight:
Fair on his head, the civic crown was placed,
And the first dignity his scepter graced.
He opes the cause, and points in prospect far,
Through all the toils that wait the impending war.
But, hapless sage, thy reign must soon be o^^er*
To lend thy luster, and to shine no more.
So the bright morning star, from shades of even,
Leads up the dawn, and lights the front of heaven,
Points to the waking world the sun's broad way,
Then veils his own, and shines above the day.
And see great Washington behind thee rise,
Thy following sun, to gild our morning skies;
Over shadowy climes to pour the enlivening flame,
The charms of freedom and the fire of fame.
The ascending chief adorned his splendid seat,
Like Randolph, ensign'd with a crown of state,
Where the green patriot bay beheld, with pride,
The hero's laurel springing by its side;
His sword, hung useless, on his graceful thigh,
On Britain still he cast a filial eye;
But sovereign fortitude his visage bore,
To meet their legions on the invaded shore.
Sage Franklin next arose, in awful mien,
And smiled, unruffled, over the approaching scene;
High, on his locks of age, a wreath was braced,
Palm of all arts, that ever a mortal graced;
Beneath him lies the scepter kings have borne,
And crowns and laurels from their temples torn.
Nash, Rutledge, Jefferson, in council great,
And Jay and Laurens opened the rolls of fate.
The Livingstons, fair Freedom's generous band,
The Lees, the Houstons, fathers of the land,
Over climes and kingdoms turned their ardent eyes,
Bade all the oppressed to speedy vengeance rise;
All powers of state, in their extended plan,
Rise from consent to shield the rights of man.
Bold Wolcot urged the all-important cause;
With steady hand the solemn scene he draws;
Undaunted firmness with his wisdom joined,
Nor kings nor worlds could warp his steadfast mind.
Now, graceful rising from his purple throne,
In radiant robes, immortal Hosmer shone;
Myrtles and bays his learned temples bound,
The statesman's wreath, the poet's garland crowned:
Morals and laws expand his liberal soul,
Beam from his eyes, and in his accents roll.
But ^o! an unseen hand the curtain drew,
And snatched the patriot from the hero's view;
Wrapped in the shroud of death, he sees descend
The guide of nations and the muses' friend.
Columbus dropped a tear. The angel's eye
Traced the freed spirit mounting through the sky.
Adams, enraged, a broken charter bore,
And lawless acts of ministerial power;
Some injured right in each loose leaf appears,
A king in terrors and a land in tears;
From all the guileful plots the vail he drew,
With eye retortive looked creation through:
Opened the wide range of nature's boundless plan,
Traced all the steps of liberty and man;
Crowds rose to vengeance while his accents rung,
And independence thundered from his tongue.
SPEECH OF BUONAPARTE, COMMANDER IN CHIEF OF THE FRENCH ARMY IN ITALY, TO HIS
BRETHREN IN ARMS.
SOLDIERS,
YOU are precipitated like a torrent from the heights of the Appenines; you
have overthrown and dispersed all that dared to oppose your march. Piedmont,
rescued from Austrian tyranny, is left to its natural sentiments of regard and
friendship to the French. Milan is yours; and the republican standard is
displayed throughout all Lombardy. The dukes of Parma and Modena are indebted
for their political existence only to your generosity.

The army, which so proudly menaced you, has had no other barrier than its
dissolution to oppose your invincible courage. The Po, the Tessen, the Adda,
could not retard you a single day. The vaunted bulwarks of Italy were
insufficient. You swept them with the same rapidity that you did the Appenines.
Those successes have carried joy into the bosom of your country. Your
representatives decreed a festival dedicated to your victories, and to be
celebrated throughout all the communes of the republic. Now your fathers, your
mothers, your wives, and your sisters, will rejoice in your success, and take
pride in their relation to you.

Yes, soldiers, you have done much; but more still remains for you to do. Shall
it be said of us, that we know how to conquer, but not to profit by our
victories? Shall posterity reproach us with having found a Capua in Lombardy?
But already I see you fly to arms. You are fatigued with an inactive repose.
You lament the days that are lost to your glory? Well, then, let us proceed; we
have other forced marches to make; other enemies to subdue: more laurels to
acquire, and more injuries to avenge.

Let those who have unsheathed the daggers of civil war in France; who have
basely assassinated our ministers; who have burnt our ships at Toulon; let them
tremble! the knell of vengeance has already tolled!

But to quiet the apprehensions of the people, we declare ourselves the friends
of all, and particularly of those who are the descendants of Brutus, of Scipio,
and those other great men whom we have taken for our models.

To re-establish the capitol; to replace the statues of those heroes who have
rendered it immortal; to rouse the Roman people entransed in so many ages of
slavery; this shall be the fruit of your victories. It will be an epoch for the
admiration of posterity; you will enjoy the immortal glory of changing the
aspect of affairs in the finest part of Europe. The free people of France, not
regardless of moderation, shall accord to Europe a glorious peace; but it will
indemnify itself for the sacrifices of every kind which it has been making for
six years past. You will again be restored to your fire-sides and homes; and
your fellow-citizens, pointing you out, shall say, "There goes one who belonged
to the army of Italy!"

REFLECTIONS OVER THE GRAVE OF A YOUNG MAN.
HERE lies the grief of a fond mother, and the blasted expectation of an
indulgent father. The youth grew up, like a well-watered plant; he shot deep,
rose high, and bade fair for manhood. But just as the cedar began to tower, and
promised ere long, to be the pride of the wood, and prince among the
neighboring trees, behold! the axe is laid unto the root; the fatal blow
struck* and all its branching honors tumbled to the dust. And did he fall
alone? No: the hopes of his father that begat him, and the pleasing prospects
of her that bare him, fell, and were crushed together with him.

Doubtless it would have pierced one's heart, to have beheld the tender parents
following the breathless youth to his long home. Perhaps drowned in tears, and
all overwhelmed with sorrows, they stood, like weeping statues, on this very
spot. Methinks I see the deeply-distressed mourners attending the sad
solemnity. How they wring their hands, and pour forth floods from their eyes!
Is it fancy? or ^o I really hear the passionate mother, in an agony of
affliction, taking her final leave of the darling of her soul? Dumb she
remained, while the awful obsequies were performing; dumb with grief, and
leaning upon the partner of her woes. But now the inward anguish struggles for
vent; it grows too big to be repressed. She advances to the brink of the grave.
All her soul is in her eyes. She fastens one more look upon the dear doleful
object, before the pit shuts its mouth upon him. And as she looks, she cries;
in broken accents, interrupted by many a rising sob, she cries, Farewell, my
son! my son! my only beloved! would to God I had died for thee! Farewell, my
child! and farewell all earthly happiness! I shall never more see good in the
land of the living. Attempt not to comfort me. I will go mourning all my days,
till my gray hairs come down with sorrow to the grave.

SCENE FROM THE DRAMA OF "MOSES IN THE BULRUSHES."
JOCHEBED, MIRIAM. Jochebed. WHY was my prayer accepted? why did Heaven
In anger hear me, when I asked a son?
Ye dames of Egypt! happy! happy mothers!
No tyrant robs you of your fondest hopes;
You are not doomed to see the babes you bore,
The babes you nurture, bleed before your eyes!
You taste the transports of maternal love,
And never know its anguish! Happy mothers!
How different is the lot of thy sad daughters,
O wretched Israel! Was it then for this?
Was it for this the righteous arm of God
Rescued his chosen people from the jaws
Of cruel want, by pious Joseph's care?
Joseph, the elected instrument of heaven,
Decreed to save illustrious Abram's race,
What time the famine raged in Canaan's land.
Israel, who then was spared, must perish now!
O thou mysterious Power! who have involved
Thy wise decrees in darkness, to perplex
The pride of human wisdom, to confound
The daring scrutiny, and prove the faith
Of thy presuming creatures! clear this doubt;
Teach me to trace this maze of Providence;
Why save the fathers, if the sons must perish?

Miriam. Ah me, my mother! whence these floods of grief?

Joch. My son! my son! I cannot speak the rest.
Ye who have sons can only know my fondness!
Ye who have lost them, or who fear to lose,
Can only know my pangs! None else can guess them.
A mother's sorrows cannot be conceived,
But by a mother. Wherefore am I one?

Mir. With many prayers thou did request this son,
And Heaven has granted him.

Joch. O sad estate
Of human wretchedness! So weak is man,
So ignorant and blind, that did not God
Sometimes withhold in mercy what we ask,
We should be ruined at our own request.
Too well thou know, my child, the stern decree
Of Egypt's cruel king, hard-hearted Pharaoh:
"That every male, of Hebrew mother born,
"Must die." Oh! do I live to tell it thee?
Must die a bloody death! My child, my son,
My youngest born, my darling must be slain!

Mir. The helpless innocent! and must he die?

Joch. No: if a mother's tears, a mother's prayers,
A mother's fond precautions can prevail,
He shall not die. I have a thought, my Miriam!
And sure the God of mercies, who inspired,
Will bless the secret purpose of my soul,
To save his precious life.

Mir. Hop'st thou that Pharaoh --

Joch. I have no hope in Pharaoh; much in God;
Much in the Rock of Ages.

Mir. Think, O think,
What perils thou already have incurred;
And shun the greater, which may yet remain.
Three months, three dangerous months thou have preserved
Thy infant's life, and in thy house concealed him!
Should Pharaoh know!

Joch. Oh! let the tyrant know,
And feel what he inflicts! Yes, hear me, Heaven!
Send the right aiming thunderbolts -- But hush,
My impious murmurs! Is it not thy will,
Thou infinite in mercy? Thou permitt's^
This seeming evil for some latent good.
Yes, I will laud thy grace, and bless thy goodness
For what I have, and not arraign thy wisdom
For what I fear to lose. O, I will bless thee,
That Aaron will be spared! that my firstborn
Lives safe and undisturbed! that he was given me
Before this impious persecution raged!

Mir. And yet who knows, but the fell tyrant's rage
May reach his precious life?

Joch. I fear for him,
For thee, for all. A doting parent lives
In many lives; through many a nerve she feels;
From child to child the quick affections spread,
Forever wandering, yet forever fixed.
Nor does division weaken, nor the force
Of constant operation ever exhaust
Parental love. All other passions change,
With changing circumstances; rise or fall,
Dependent on their object; claim returns;
Live on reciprocation, and expire
Unfed by hope. A mother's fondness reigns
Without a rival, and without an end.

Mir. But say what Heaven inspires, to save thy son?

Joch. Since the dear fatal morn which gave him birth,
I have revolved in my distracted mind
Each mean to save his life: and many a thought,
Which fondness prompted, prudence has opposed
As perilous and rash. With these poor hands
I Have framed a little ark of slender reeds;
With pitch and sin I have secured the sides.
In this frail cradle I intend to lay
My little helpless infant, and expose him
Upon the banks of Nile.

Mir. It Is full of danger.

Joch. It Is danger to expose, and death to keep him.

Mir. Yet, Oh reflect! Should the fierce crocodile,
The native and the tyrant of the Nile,
Seize the defenseless infant!

Joch. Oh, forbear!
Spare my fond heart. Yet not the crocodile,
Nor all the deadly monsters of the deep,
To me are half so terrible as Pharaoh,
That heathen king, that royal murderer!

Mir. Should he escape, which yet I dare not hope,
Each sea-born monster; yet the winds and waves
He cannot 'scape.

Joch. Know, God is every where;
Not to one narrow, partial spot confined;
No, not to chosen Israel. He extends
Through all the vast infinitude of space.
At his command the furious tempests rise,
The blasting of the breath of his displeasure:
He tells the world of waters when to roar;
And at his bidding, winds and seas are calm.
In Him, not in an arm of flesh I trust;
In Him, whose promise never yet has failed,
I place my confidence.

Mir. What must I do?
Command thy daughter, for thy words have waked
An holy boldness in my youthful breast.

Joch. Go then, my Miriam; go, and take the infant.
Buried in harmless slumbers, there he lies:
Let me not see him. Spare my heart that pang.
Yet sure, one little look may be indulged;
One kiss; perhaps the last. No more, my soul!
That fondness would be fatal. I should keep him.
I could not doom to death the babe I clasped:
Did ever mother kill her sleeping boy?
I dare not hazard it. The task be thine.
Oh! do not wake my child; remove him softly;
And gently lay him on the river's brink.

Mir. Did those magicians, whom the sons of Egypt
Consult, and think all-potent, join their skill,
And was it great as Egypt's sons believe;
Yet all their secret wizard arts combined,
To save this little ark of bulrushes,
Thus fearfully exposed, could not effect it.
Their spells, their incantations, and dire charms
Could not preserve it.

Joch. Know, this ark is charmed
With spells, which impious Egypt never knew.
With invocations to the living God,
I twisted every slender reed together,
And with a prayer did every ozier weave.

Mir. I go.

Joch. Yet ere thou go, observe me well.
When thou have laid him in his watery bed,
O leave him not; but at a distance wait,
And mark what Heaven's high will determines for him.
Lay him among the flags on yonder beach,
Just where the royal gardens meet the Nile.
I dare not follow him. Suspicion's eye
Would note my wild demeanor; Miriam, yes,
The mother's fondness would betray the child.
Farewel^! God of my fathers, Oh protect him!

SPEECH OF CAIUS CASSIUS TO HIS COLLECTED FORCES, AFTER THE DEATH OF CAESAR.
SOLDIERS AND FELLOW-CITIZENS,
THE unjust reproaches of our enemies we could easily disprove, if we were not,
by our numbers, and by the swords which we hold in our hands, in condition to
despise them. While Caesar led the armies of the republic against the enemies of
Rome, we took part in the same service with him; we obeyed him; we were happy
to serve under his command. But when he declared war against the commonwealth,
we became his enemies; and when he became an usurper and a tyrant, we resented,
as an injury, even the favors which he presumed to bestow upon ourselves.

Had he been to fall a sacrifice to private resentment, we should not have been
the proper actors in the execution of the sentence against him. He was willing
to have indulged us with preferments and honors; but we were not willing to
accept, as the gift of a master, what we were entitled to claim as free
citizens. We conceived, that, in presuming to confer the honors of the Roman
republic, he encroached on the prerogatives of the Roman people, and insulted
the authority of the Roman senate. Caesar cancelled the laws, and overturned the
constitution of his country; he usurped all the powers of the commonwealth, set
up a monarchy, and himself affected to be a king. This our ancestors, at the
expulsion of Tarquin, bound themselves and their posterity, by the most solemn
oaths, and by the most direful imprecations, never to endure. The same
obligation has been entailed upon us as a debt by our fathers; and we, having
faithfully paid and discharged it, have performed the oath, and averted the
consequences of failure from ourselves, and from our posterity.

In the station of soldiers, we might have committed ourselves, without
reflection, to the command of an officer, whose abilities and whose valor we
admired; but, in the character of Roman citizens, we have a far different part
to sustain. I must suppose, that I now speak to the Roman people, and to
citizens of a free republic; to men who have never learned to depend upon
others for gratifications and favors; who are not accustomed to own a superior,
but who are themselves the masters, the dispensers of fortune and of honor, and
the givers of all those dignities and powers by which Caesar himself was
exalted, and of which he assumed the entire disposal.

Recollect from whom the Scipios* the Pompeys, and even Caesar himself derived
his honors; from your ancestors, whom you now represent, and from yourselves,
to whom, according to the laws of the republic, we, who are now your leaders in
the field, address ourselves as your fellow-citizens in the commonwealth, and
as persons depending on your pleasure for the just reward and retribution of
our services. Happy in being able to restore to you what Caesar had the
presumption to appropriate to himself, the power and the dignity of your
fathers, with the supreme disposal of all the offices of trust that were
established for your safety, and for the preservation of your freedom; happy in
being able to restore to the tribunes of the Roman people the power of
protecting you, and of procuring to every Roman citizen that justice, which,
under the late usurpation of Caesar, was withheld, even from the sacred persons
of those magistrates themselves.

An usurper is the common enemy of all good citizens; but the task of removing
him could be the business only of a few. The ^enate and the Roman people, as
soon as it was proper for them to declare their judgment, pronounced their
approbation of those who were concerned in the death of Caesar, by the rewards
and the honors which they bestowed upon them; and they are now become a prey to
assassins and murderers; they bleed in the streets, in the temples, in the most
secret retreats, and in the arms of their families; or they are dispersed, and
fly wherever they hope to escape the fury of their enemies.

Many are now present before you, happy in your protection, happy in witnessing
the zeal which you entertain for the commonwealth, for the rights of your
fellow-citizens, and for your own. These respectable citizens, we trust, will
soon, by your means, be restored to a condition in which they can enjoy,
together with you, all the honors of a free people; concur with you in
bestowing, and partake with you in receiving, the rewards which are due to such
eminent services as you are now engaged to perform.

PART OF MR. ERSKINE'S SPEECH, AGAINST MR. PIT, 1784.
MR. SPEAKER,
IT becomes us to learn, not from the Minister, but from the Throne itself,
whether this country is to be governed by men, in whom the House of Commons can
confide, or whether we, the People of England's Representatives, are to be the
sport and football of any junto that may hope to rule over us, by an unseen and
unexplorable principle of government, utterly unknown to the Constitution. This
is the great question, to which every public-spirited citizen of this country
should direct his view. A question which goes very wide of the policy to be
adopted concerning India, about which very wise and very honest men, not only
might, but have, and did materially differ.

The total removal of all the executive servants of the crown, while they are
in the full enjoyment of the confidence of that House, and, indeed, without any
other visible or avowed cause of removal, than because they do enjoy that
confidence; and the appointment of others in their room, without any other
apparent ground of selection than because they enjoy it not, is, in my mind, a
most alarming and portentous attack on the public freedom; because, though no
outward form of the government is relaxed or violated by it, so as instantly to
supply the constitutional remedy of opposition, the whole spirit and energy of
the government is annihilated by it.

If the Right Honorable Gentleman retain his own opinions, and if the House
likewise retain its own, is it not evident that he came into office without the
most distant prospect of serving the public? Is it not evident that he has
brought on a struggle between executive and legislative authority, at a time
when they are pointing with equal vigor, unity, and effect, to the common
interests of the nation?

The Right Honorable Gentleman may imagine that I take pleasure in making these
observations. If so, I can assure him, upon my honor, that it is far from being
the case. So very far the contrary, that the inconveniences which the country
suffers at this moment, from the want of a settled government, are greatly
heightened to my feelings, from the reflection that they are increased by his
unguided ambition.

Our fathers were friends; and I was taught, from my infancy, to reverence the
name of Pit; an original partiality, which, instead of being diminished, was
strongly confirmed by an acquaintance with the Right Honorable Gentleman
himself, which I was cultivating with pleasure, when he was taken from his
profession into a different scene. Let him not think that I am the less his
friend, or the mean envier of his talents, because they have been too much the
topic of panegyric here already, and both I and the public are now reaping the
bitter fruits of these intemperate praises.

"It is good," said Jeremiah, "for a man to bear the yoke in his youth;" and if
the Right Honorable Gentleman had attended to this maxim, he would not, at so
early a period, have declared against a subordinate situation; but would have
lent the aid of his faculties to carry on the affairs of this country, which
wanted nothing but stability to render them glorious, instead of s^^ting up at
once for himself to be the first.

How very different has been the progress of my honorable friend who sits near
me; who was not hatched at once into a minister, by the heat of his own
ambition; but who, as it was good for him to do, in the words of the prophet,
"bore the yoke in his youth;" passed through the subordinate offices, and
matured his talents, in long and laborious oppositions; arriving, by the
natural progress of his powerful mind, to a superiority of political wisdom and
comprehension, which this House had long, with delight and satisfaction,
acknowledged.

To pluck such a man from the councils of his country in the hour of her
distresses, while he enjoyed the full confidence of the House, to give effect
to vigorous plans for her interests; and to throw every thing into confusion,
by the introduction of other men, introduced, as it should seem, for no other
purpose than to beget that confusion, is an evil, which, if we cannot rectify,
we may at least have leave to lament.

These evils are, however, imputed, by the Right Honorable Gentleman and his
colleagues, to another source; to the bill for the regulation of the East
Indies; from the mischiefs of which they had stepped forth to save the country;
a language most indecent in this House of Commons, which thought it their duty
to the public to pass it by a majority of above one hundred; but which was,
however, to be taken to be destructive and dangerous, notwithstanding that
authority; because it had been disapproved by a majority of eighteen votes in
the House of Lords. Some of their opinions I reverence as conscientious and
independent; but the majority of that small majority voted upon principles
which the forms of the House will not permit me to allude to, farther than to
say, that individual Noblemen are not always Gentlemen.

EXTRACT FROM PRESIDENT WASHINGTON'S ADDRESS TO THE PEOPLE OF THE UNITED
STATES. SEPT. 17, 1796.
FRIENDS AND FELLOW-CITIZENS,
THE period for a new election of a citizen to administer the executive
government of the United States, being not far distant; and the time actually
arrived, when your thoughts must be employed in designating the person, who is
to be clothed with that important trust, it appears to me proper, especially as
it may conduce to a more distinct expression of the public voice, that I should
now apprise you of the resolution I have formed, to decline being considered
among the number of those, out of whom a choice is to be made.

I beg you, at the same time, to do me the justice to be assured, that this
resolution has not been taken, without a strict regard to all the
considerations appertaining to the relation, which binds a dutiful citizen to
his country; and that, in withdrawing the tender of service which silence in my
situation might imply, I am influenced by no diminution of zeal for your future
interest; no deficiency of grateful respect for your past kindness; but am
supported by a full conv^ that the step is compatible with both.

The acceptance of, and continuance hitherto in the office to which your
suffrages have twice called me, have been a uniform sacrifice of inclination to
the opinion of duty, and to a deference for what appeared to be your desire. I
constantly hoped, that it would have been much earlier in my power,
consistently with motives, which I was not at liberty to disregard, to return
to that retirement from which I had been reluctantly drawn. The strength of my
inclination to do this, previous to the last election, had even led to the
preparation of an address to declare it to you; but mature reflection on the
then perplexed and critical posture of our affairs with foreign nations, and
the unanimous advice of persons entitled to my confidence, impelled me to
abandon the idea.

I rejoice, that the state of your concerns, external as well as internal, no
longer renders the pursuit of inclination incompatible with the sentiment of
duty, or propriety; and am persuaded, whatever partiality may be retained for
my services, that in the present circumstances of our country, you will not
disapprove my determination to retire.

The impressions, with which I first undertook the arduous trust, were
explained on the proper occasion. In the discharge of this trust, I will only
say, that I have with good intentions contributed toward the organization and
administration of the government, the best exertions of which a very fallible
judgment was capable. Not unconscious, in the outset, of the inferiority of my
qualifications, experience in my own eyes, perhaps still more in the eyes of
others, has strengthened the motives to diffidence of myself: and every day the
increasing weight of years admonishes me more and more, that the shade of
retirement is as necessary to me as it will be welcome. Satisfied that if any
circumstances have given peculiar value to my services, they were temporary, I
have the consolation to believe, that while choice and prudence invite me to
quit the political scene, patriotism does not forbid it.

In looking forward to the moment, which is intended to terminate the career of
my public life, my feelings do not permit me to suspend the deep acknowledgment
of that debt of gratitude which I owe to my beloved country, for the many
honors it has conferred upon me; still more for the steadfast confidence with
which it has supported me; and for the opportunities I have thence enjoyed of
manifesting my inviolable attachment, by services faithful and persevering,
though in usefulness unequal to my zeal. If benefits have resulted to our
country from these services, let it always be remembered to your praise, as an
instructive example in our annals, that under circumstances in which the
passions, agitated in every direction, were liable to mislead; amidst
appearances sometimes dubious; vicissitudes of fortune often discouraging; in
situations in which, not unfrequently, want of success has countenanced the
spirit of criticism; the constancy of your support was the essential prop of
the efforts, and a guarantee of the plans by which they were effected.

Profoundly penetrated with this idea, I shall carry it with me to my grave, as
a strong incitement to unceasing vows that Heaven may continue to you the
choicest tokens of its beneficence; that your union and brotherly affection may
be perpetual; that the free constitution, which is the work of your hands, may
be sacredly maintained; that its administration in every department may be
stamped with wisdom and virtue; that, in fine, the happiness of the people of
these States, under the auspices of liberty, may be made complete, by so
careful a preservation and so prudent a use of this blessing as will acquire to
them the glory of recommending it to the applause, the affection, and adoption
of every nation which is yet a stranger to it.

Though in reviewing the incidents of my administration, I am unconscious of
intentional error; I am nevertheless too sensible of my defects not to think it
probable that I may have committed many errors. Whatever they may be, I
fervently beseech the Almighty to avert or mitigate the evils to which they
tend. I shall also carry with me the hope that my country will never cease to
view them with indulgence; and after forty-five years of my life dedicated to
its service, with an upright zeal, the faults of incompetent abilities will be
consigned to oblivion, as myself must soon be to the mansions of rest.

Relying on its kindness in this as in other things; and actuated by that
fervent love toward it, which is so natural to a man who views in it the
native soil of himself and his progenitors for several generations, I
anticipate with pleasing expectation that retreat, in which I promise myself to
realize, without alloy, the sweet enjoyment of partaking, in the midst of my
fellow-citizens, the benign influence of good laws under a free government; the
ever favorite object of my heart, and the happy reward, as I trust, of our
mutual cares, labors, and dangers,

DIALOGUE ON THE CHOICE OF BUSINESS FOR LIFE.
Enter EDWARD, CHARLEY, and THOMAS. Edward. IT appears to me high time for us
to choose our business for life. Our academical studies will soon be completed;
and I wish to look a little forward. What say you? am I right?


Charley. It may be well for you: poor men's sons must look out for themselves.
My father is able to support me at my ease; and my mamma says she would rather
see me laid in a coffin than shut up in a study, spoiling my eyes and racking
my brains, plodding over your nonsensical minister, doctor, and lawyer books;
and I am sure she would never have me confined behind a counter, or a
merchant's desk. She intends I shall be brought up a gentleman. My mother is of
noble blood, and she don't intend that I shall disgrace it.


Edw. Pray, master Charley, who was the father of your noble-blooded mother?


Char. A gentleman, I Would have you to know.


Edw. Yes, a gentleman cobbler, to my knowledge.


Char. Aye, he followed that business, to be sure, sometimes, to stop the
clamor of the vulgar. Then poor people could not bear to see a rich man living
at his ease, or give a nobleman his title. But times are altering for the
better, my mamma says: the rich begin to govern now. We shall soon live in
style, and wear titles here as well as in England. She intends to send over and
get my coat of arms, and she hopes to add a title to them.


Edw. High style! titles! and coats of arms! fine things in America to be sure!
Well, after all, I cannot really disapprove of your mamma's plan. A lapstone, an
awl, and shoe-hammer will make a fine picture, and may appear as well in your
mother's parlour, as in her father's shop* and the title of cobbler, or
shoemaker would well become her darling Charley.


Char. I will not be insulted on account of my grandfather's employment, I Will
have you to know! I have heard my mother say, her father was grandson of an
aunt of 'squire Thorn, who once had a horse that run a race with the famous
horse of a cousin of the Duke of B^dford, of --


Edw. Quite enough! I am fully convinced of the justice of your claim to the
title of Duke, or whatever you please. About as much merit in it, I perceive,
as in your father's title to his estate. Ten thousand dollars drawn in a
lottery; already two thirds spent. A title to nobility derived from the
grandson of an aunt of 'squire Thorn, from 'squire Thorn's horse, or perhaps
from some monkey, that has been a favorite playmate with the prince of Wales.
These are to be the support of your ease and honor through life. Well, I
believe there is no need of your troubling yourself about your future
employment: that is already determined. Depend upon it* you will repent of your
folly, or scratch a poor man's head as long as you live. I advise you to set
about the former, in order to avoid the latter.


Char. I did not come to you for advice. I Will not bear your insults, or
disgrace myself with your company any longer. My parents shall teach you better
manners.


Exit Charley. Thomas. I pity the vanity and weakness of this poor lad. But
reflection and experience will teach him the fallacy of his hopes.


Edw. Poor ch^^d; he does not know that his lottery money is almost gone; that
his father's house is mortgaged for more than it is worth; and that the only
care of his parents is to keep up the appearance of present grandeur, at the
expense of future shame. Happy for us, that we are not deluded with such
deceitful hopes.


Tho. My parents were poor; not proud. They experienced the want of learning;
but were resolved their children should share the benefit of a good education.
I am the fourth son, who owe the debt of filial gratitude. All but myself are
well settled in business, and doing honor to themselves and their parents. If I
fall short of their example, I shall be most ungrateful.


Edw. I have neither father nor mother to excite my gratitude, or stimulate my
exertions. But I wish to behave in such a manner, that if my parents could look
down and observe my actions, they might approve my conduct. Of my family,
neither root nor branch remains: all have paid the deb^ of nature. They left a
name for honesty; and I esteem that higher than a pretended title to greatness.
They have left me a small farm, which, though not enough for my support, will,
with my own industry, be sufficient. For employment to pass away the winter
season, I have determined upon keeping a school for my neighbors' children.


Tho. I heartily approve of your determination. Our mother Earth rewards, with
peace and plenty, those* who cultivate her face; but loads, with anxious cares,
those, who dig her bowels for treasure. The life you contemplate is favorable
to the enjoyment of social happiness, improvement of the mind, and security of
virtue; and the task of training the tender mind is an employment* that ought
to meet the encouragement, the gratitude of every parent, and the respect of
every child.


Edw. I am pleased that you approve my choice. Will you as frankly tell me your
own?


Tho. I will: my intention is to follow the inclination of my kind parents. It
is their desire that I should be a preacher. Their other sons have taken to
other callings; and they wish to see one of their children in the desk. If
their prayers are answered, I shall be fitted for the important task. To my
youth, it appears formidable; but others, with less advantages, have succeeded,
and been blessings to society, and an honor to their profession.


Edw. You have chosen the better part. Whatever the licentious may say to the
contrary, the happiness of society must rest on the principles of virtue and
religion; and the pulpit must be the nursery, where they are cultivated.


Tho. " -- The pulpit;
And I name it, filled with solemn awe,
Must stand acknowledged, while the world shall stand,
The most important and effectual guard,
Support and ornament of virtue's cause.
There stands the messenger of truth. There stands
The legate of the skies: his theme divine,
His office sacred, his credentials clear.
By him the violated law speaks out
Its thunders, and by him, in strains as sweet
As angels use, the gospel whispers peace."
My heart glows with the subject; and if my abilities could equal my zeal, I
could at least hope to realize the sublime character, so beautifully drawn by
Cowper.


Edw. It is a laudable ambition to aim at ^minence in religion, and excellence
in virtue.


SPEECH OF BUONAPARTE, COMMANDER IN CHIEF OF THE FRENCH ARMY IN ITALY, BEFORE
HIS ATTACK ON MILAN. APRIL 26, 1796.
SOLDIERS,
YOU have in a fortnight gained six victories; taken twenty-one stands of
colors; seventy-one pieces of cannon; several strong places; conquered the
richest part of Piedmont; you have made fifteen thousand prisoners, and killed
or wounded more than ten thousand men. You had hitherto fought only for steri^e
rocks, rendered illustrious by your courage, but useless to the country; you
have equalled by your services the victorious army of Holland and the Rhine.
Deprived of every thing, you have supplied every thing. You have won battles
without cannon; made forced marches without shoes; watched without brandy, and
often without bread. The republican phalanxes, the soldiers of liberty were
alone capable of suffering what you have suffered.

Thanks be to you, soldiers. The grateful country will, in part, be indebted to
you for her prosperity; and if, when victorious at Toulon, you predicted the
immortal campaign of 1794, your present victories will be the presages of more
brilliant victories. The two armies, which attacked you with audacity, fly
disheartened before you. Men, who smiled at your misery, and rejoiced in
thought at the idea of the triumphs of your enemies, are confounded and
appalled. But it must not, soldiers, be concealed from you, that you have done
nothing, since something remains yet to be done. Neither Turin nor Milan are in
your power. The ashes of the conquerors of the Tarquins are still disgraced by
the assassins of Basseville. At the commencement of the campaign you were
destitute of every thing; now you are amply provided* (...) magazines taken
from your enemies are numerous; the artillery for the field and for besieging
is arrived.

Soldiers, the country has a right to expect great things from you; justify her
expectations. The greatest obstacles are undoubtedly overcome; but you have
still battles to fight, cities to take, rivers to pass. Is there one among you
whose courage is diminished? Is there one who would prefer returning to the
summits of the Alps and the Appenines? No^: all burn with the desire of
extending the glory of the French; to humble the proud kings who dare to
meditate putting us again in chains; to dictate a peace that shall be glorious,
and that shall indemnify the country for the immense sacrifices which she has
made. All of you burn with a desire to say on your return to your home, I
belonged to the victorious army of Italy.

Friends, I promise this conquest to you; but there is one condition which you
must swear to fulfill; it is to respect the people whom you deliver; to repress
the horrible pillage which some wretches, instigated by our enemies, had
practiced. Unless you do this, you will no longer be the friends, but the
scourges of the human race; you will no longer form the honor of the French
people. They will disavow you. Your victories, your successes, the blood of
your brethren who died in battle; all, even honor and glory will be lost. With
respect to myself; to the generals who possess your confidence, we shall blush
to command an army without discipline, and who admit no other law than that of
force.

People of Italy, the French army comes to break your chains; the French people
are the friends of all people; come with confidence to them; your property,
religion, and stoms shall be respected. We make war as gene^s enemies; and with
only to make war against the tyrants who oppress you.

MR. PITT'S SPEECH, NOV. 18, 1777, IN OPPOSITION TO LORD SUFFOLK, WHO PROPOSED
TO PARLIAMENT TO EMPLOY THE INDIANS AGAINST THE AMERICANS; AND WHO SAID, IN THE
COURSE OF THE DEBATE, THAT "THEY HAD A RIGHT TO USE ALL THE MEANS, THAT GOD AND
NATURE HAD PUT INTO THEIR HANDS, TO CONQUER AMERICA."
MY LORDS,
I AM astonished to hear such principles confessed! I am shocked to hear them
avowed in this House, or in this country! Principles, equally unconstitutional,
inhuman, and unchristian!

My lords, I did not intend to have encroached again on your attention; but I
cannot repress my indignation. I feel myself impelled by every duty. My lords,
we are called upon as members of this House, as men, as Christian men, to
protest against such notions standing near the throne, polluting the ear of
Majesty. "That God and nature put into our hands!" I know not what ideas that
lord may entertain of God and nature; but I know, that such abominable
principles are equally abhorrent to religion and humanity.

What! to attribute the sacred sanction of God and nature to the massacres of
the Indian scalping knife! to the cannibal savage, torturing, murdering,
roasting, and eating; literally, my lords, eating the mangled victims of his
barbarous battles! Such horrible notions shock every precept of religion,
divine or natural, and every generous seeling of humanity. And, my lords, they
shock every sentiment of honor; they shock me as a lover of honorable war, an^
a detester of murderous barbarity.

These abominable principles, and this more abominable avowal of them, demand
the most decisive indignation. I call upon that Right Reverend Bench, those
holy ministers of the gospel, and pious pastors of our Church: I conjure them
to join in the holy work, and vindicate the religion of their God. I appeal to
the wisdom and the law of this learned bench, to defend and support the justice
of their country. I call upon the bishops, to interpose the unsullied sanctity
of their lawn; upon the learned judges, to interpose the purity of their
^rmine, to save us from this pollution. I call upon the honor of your
lordships, to reverence the dignity of your ancestors, and to maintain your
own. I call upon the spirit and humanity of my country, to vindicate the
national character. I invoke the genius of the constitution.

From the tapestry that adorns these walls, the immortal ancestor of this noble
lord frowns with indignation at the disgrace of his country. In vain he led
your victorious fleets against the boasted armada of Spain; in vain he defended
and established the honor, the liberties, the religion, the protestant religion
of this country, against the arbitrary cruelties of popery and the inquisition,
if these more than popish cruelties and inquisitorial practices are let loose
among us; to turn forth into our settlements, among our ancient connexions,
friends, and relations, the merciless cannibal, thirsting for the blood of man,
woman, and child! to send forth the infidel savage -- against whom? against
your protestant brethren; to lay waste their country; to desolate their
dwellings, and extirpate their race and name, with these horrible hell hounds
of savage war!

Spain armed herself with bloodhounds, to extirpate the wretched natives of
America; and we improve on the inhuman example even of Spanish cruelty. We turn
loose these savage hell hounds against our brethren and countrymen in ^^erica,
of the same language, laws, liberties, and religion; endeared to us by every
tie that should sanctify humanity.

My lords, this awful subject, so important to our ^or, our constitution, and
our religion, demands the (...) and effectual inquiry. And I again call upon
your lordships, and the united powers of the state, to examine it thoroughly,
and decisively, and to stamp upon it an indelible stigma of the public
abhorrence. And I again implore those holy prelates of our religion, to do away
these iniquities from among us. Let them perform a lustration; let them purify
this House, and this country from this sin.

My lords, I am old and weak, and at present unable to say more; but my
feelings and indignation were too strong to have said less. I could not have
slept this night in my bed, nor reposed my head on my pillow, without giving
this vent to my eternal abhorrence of such preposterous and enormous principles.

DIALOGUE BETWEEN A SCHOOLMASTER, AND SCHOOL-COMMITTEE.
[ N. B. The Author is happy in believing, that the following Dialogue is
applicable to but few towns and few teachers in this country; but, so long as
there are any remaining to whom it may apply, he thinks a sufficient apology
exists for its publication.]

SCENE, a Public House, in the Town of -- Enter SCHOOLMASTER, with a pack on
his back. Schoolmaster. HOW fare you, landlord? what have you got that is good
to drink?


Landlord. I have gin, West India, genuine New England, whiskey, and cider
brandy.


Schoolm. Make us a stiff mug of sling. Put in a gill and a half of your
New England; and sweeten it well with lasses.


Land. It shall be done, Sir, to your liking.


Schoolm. Do you know of any vacancy in a school in your part of the country,
landlord?


Land. There is a vacancy in our district; and ^pect the parson, with our three
school-co^ ^oly will be at my house directly, to consult upon matters relative
to the school.


Schoolm. Well, here is the lad that will serve them as cheap as any man in
America; and I believe I may venture to say* well too; for I profess no small
share of skill in that business. I have kept school eleven winters, and have
often had matter of fifty scholars at a time. I have teach'd a child its
letters in a day, and to read in the psalter in a fortnight: and I always feel
very much ashamed, if I use more than one quire of paper in larnin a boy to
write as well as his master. As for government, I Will turn my back to no man. I
never flog my scholars; for that monstrous doctrine of whippin children, which
has been so long preached and practiced by our rigid and superstitious
forefathers, I have, long since, exploded. I have a rare knack of flattering
them into their duty. And this, according to a celebrated Doctor at
Philadelphia, whose works I have heard of, though I never read them, is the
grand criterion of school government. It is, landlord, it is the very
philosopher's stone. I am told, likewise, that this same great Doctor does not
believe that Solomon and others really meant lickin, in the proper sense of the
word, when they talked so much about using the rod, etc. He supposes, that they
meant confining them in dungeons; starving them for three or four days at a
time; and then giving them a potion of tatromattucks, and such kinds of mild
punishment. And, zounds, landlord, I believe he is above half right.


Land. [Giving the cup to the master.] Master -- What may I call your name,
Sir, if I may be so bold?


Schoolm. Ignoramus, at your service, Sir.


Land. Master Ignoramus, I am glad to se^ you. You are the very m^n we wish
for. Our committee will not h^sitate a moment to employ you, when they become
acquainted with your talents. Your sentiments on government I know will suit
our people to a (...). Our last master was a tyrant of a fellow, and
^xtravagant in his price. He grew so important* the latter part of his time,
that he had the frontery to demand ten dollars a month, and his board. And he
might truly be said to rule with a rod of iron; for he kept an ir^^wood cudgel
in his school, four feet long; and it was enough to chill one's blood to hear
the shrieks of the little innocents, which were caused by his barbarity. I have
heard my wife say, that Sue Gossip told her, that she has seen the marks of his
lashes on the back of her neighbor Rymple's son Darling, for twelve hours after
the drubbing. At least, the boy told her with his own mouth, that they might be
seen, if they would only take the trouble to strip his shirt off. And, besides,
Master Ignoramus, he was the most niggardly of all the human race. I don't
suppose that my bar-room was one dollar the richer for him, in the course of
the whole time which he tarried with us. While the young people of the town
were recreating themselves, and taking a sociable glass of an evening at my
house, the stupid blockhead was et^rnally in his chamber, poring over his musty
books. But finally he did the job for himself, and I am rejoiced. The wretch
had the dacity to box little Sammy Puney's ears at such an intolerable rate,
that his parents fear the poor child will be an idiot all the days of his life.
And all this, for nothing more, than, partly by design, and partly through mere
accident, he happened to spit in his master's face. The child being nephew to
the squire, you may well suppose, that the whole neighborhood was soon in an
uproar. The indignation of the mother, father, aunts, uncles, cousins, and
indeed the whole circle of acquaintance, was roused; and the poor fellow was
hooted out of town in less than twenty-four hours.


Schoolm. [Drinking off his liquor.] This is a rare dose. Believe me, landlord,
I have not tasted a drop before, since six o'clock this morning. [Enter Parson
and Committee Men.] Your humble s^rvant^^* ^entlemen. I understand you are in
want of a ^ol-master.


Parson. Yes, Sir; that is the occasion of our present meeting. We have been so
unfortunate as to lose one good man; and we should be very glad to find another.


1 st. Committee Man. Pray don't say unfortunate, Parson. I think we may
consider ourselves as very fortunate, in having rid the town of an extravagant
coxcomb, who was draining us of all the money we could earn, to fill his purse,
and rig himself out with fine clothes.


2 d. Com. Ten dollars a month, and board, for a man whose task is so easy, is
no small sum.


3 d. Com. I am bold to affirm, that we can procure a better man for half the
money.


Schoolm. That I believe, friend; for, though I esteem myself as good as the
best; that is to say, in the common way; yet I never ax'd but five dollars a
month in all my life.


Par. For my own part, whatever these gentlemen's opinion may be, I must tell
you, that I am much less concerned about the wages we are to give, than I am
about the character and abilities of the man with whom we entrust the education
of our children. I had much rather you had said you had received forty dollars
a month, than five.


1 st. Com. Dear Sir, you are beside yourself. You will encourage the man to
rise in his price; whereas I was in hopes he would have fallen, at least one
dollar.


Par. Before we talk any further about the price, it is necessary that we
examine the gentleman according to law, in order to satisfy ourselves of his
capability to serve us. Friend, will you be so obliging as to inform us where
you received your education, and what your pretensions are, with respect to
your profession?


Schoolm. Law, Sir! I never went to college in my life.


^ar. I did not ask you whether you had been to (...) or not. We wish to know
what education you ^ad; and whether your abilities are such, as that you can do
yourself honor in taking the charge of a common English school.


Schoolm. Gentlemen, I will give you a short history of my life. From seven, to
fifteen years of age, I went to school perhaps as much as one year. In which
time I went through Di^worth's Spelling-Book, the Psalter, the New Testament;
and could read the newspaper without spelling more than half the words. By this
time, feeling a little above the common level, I enlisted a soldier in the
army, where I continued six years; and made such proficiency in the military
art, that I was frequently talked of for a corporal. I had likewise larn'd to
write considerably, and to cipher as fur as Division. The multiplication table
I had at my tongue's end, and have not forgot it to this day. At length,
receiving a severe flogging for nothing at all, I am not ashamed to own that I
deserted, and went into one of the back settlements, and offered myself as a
teacher. I was immediately employed in that service; and, though I am obliged
to say it myself, I do assure you I soon became very famous. Since that time,
which is eleven years, I have followed the business constantly; at least, every
winter; for in the summer, it is not customary in the towns in general, to
continue a man's school. One thing I would not forget to mention; and that is,
I have traveled about the country so much, and been in the army so long (which
is allowed to be the best school in the world) that I consider myself as being
thoroughly acquainted with mankind. You will not be insensible, gentlemen, of
what great importance this last acquisition is, to one who has the care of
youth.


3 d. Com. I admire his conversation. I imagine, by this time, you have
cyphered clear through* have you not, Sir?


Schoolm. Why, as to that, I have gone so fur, that I thought I could see
through. I can tell how many min^ (...) my great grandfather was when (...) son
(...) born; how many barley corns it would (...) to measure round the world;
and how old the world will be at the end of six thousand years from the
creation.


1 st. Com. It is very strange! You must have studied hard, to learn all these
things, and that without a master too.


Schoolm. Indeed I have, Sir; and if I had time, I could tell you things
stranger still.


Par. Can you tell in what part of the world you were born; whether in the
torrid, frigid, or temperate zone?


Schoolm. I was not born in the zoon, Sir, nor in any other of the West India
Islands; but I was born in New England, in the State of New Jersey, and
Commonwealth of the United States of America.


Par. Do you know how many parts of speech there are in the English language?


Schoolm. How many speeches! Why as many as there are "stars in the sky, leaves
on the trees, or sands on the sea shore."


1 st. Com. Please to let me ask him a question, Parson. How many commandaments
are there?


Schoolm. Ten, Sir; and I knew them all before I went into the army.


2 d. Com. Can you tell when the moon changes, by the almanac?


School. No; but I Will warrant you, I could soon tell by cyphering.


3 d. Com. How many varses are there in the 119th Psalm?


Schoolm. Ah! excuse me there, if you please, Sir; I never meddle with
psalmody, or metaphysics.


Par. Will you tell me, my friend, what is the difference between the
circumference and the diameter of the globe?


Schoolm. There you are too hard for me again. I never l^rn'd the rule of
circumstance, nor geometry. I Will tell you what, gentlemen, I make no
pretensions to minister larnin, lawyer larnin, or doctor larnin; but put me
upon your clear schoolmaster larnin, and there I am even with you.


1 st. Com. I am satisfied with the gentleman. He has missed but one question,
and that was such a metatisical one, that it wou^d have puzzled a Jesuit
himself to have answered it. Gentlemen, shall the master withdraw a few
minutes, for our further consulation?


Exit master. 2 d. Com. I am much pleased with the stranger. He appears to be a
man of wonderful parts; and I shall cheerfully agree to employ him.


3 d. Com. For my part, I don't think we shall find a cheaper master; and I
move for engaging him at once.


Par. Gentlemen, how long will you be blind to your own interest? I can say
with you, that I am perfectly satisfied -- that the man is, in his profession,
emphatically what he calls himself by name, an ignoramus; and totally incapable
of instructing our children. You know not who he is, or what he is; whether he
be a thief, a liar, or a drunkard. The very terms, on which he offers himself,
ought to operate as a sufficient objection against him. I am sensible that my
vote will now be of no avail, since you are all agreed. I have been for years
striving to procure a man of abilities and morals, suitable for the employment;
and such a one I had obtained; but, alas! we were unworthy of him. We ^spersed
his character; invented a multitude of false^oods; magnified every trifling
error in his conduct; and even converted his virtues into vices. We refused ^o
give him that pecuniary reward which his services demanded; and he, knowing his
own worth, and our unworthiness, has left us forever.


1 st. Com. Come, come, Parson, it is easy for salary men to talk of
liberality, and to vote away money which they never earned; but it will not do.
The new master, I dare engage, will do as well, or better than the old one.
Landlord, call him in for his answer.


Par. I protest against your proceeding, and with myself forever from the
committee. But I must tell you, your children will reap the bitter consequences
of such injudicious proceedings. It has always been surprising to me, that
people in general are more willing to pay their money for any thing else, than
for "the one thing needful," that is, for the education of their children.
Their tailor must be a workman, their carpenter, a workman, their hairdresser,
a workman, their hostler, a workman; but the instructor of their children must
-- work cheap! Exit Parson.


Re-enter SCHOOLMASTER. 1 st. Com. We have agreed to employ you, Sir; and have
only to recommend to you, not to follow the steps of your predecessor. This is
an "age of reason;" and we do not imagine our children so stupid, as to need
the rod to quicken their ideas, or so vicious, as to require a moral lesson
from the ferule. Be gentle and accommodating, and you have nothing to fear.


Land. I Will answer for him. He Is as generous and merry a lad as I Have had in my
house this many a day.


EXTRACT FROM MR. PITT'S SPEECH, IN ANSWER TO LORD MANSFIELD, ON THE AFFAIR OF
MR. WILKIN, 1770.
MY LORDS,
THERE is one plain maxim, to which I have invariably adhered through life;
that in every question in which my liberty or my property were concerned, I
should consult and be determined by the dictates of common sense. I confess, my
lords, that I am apt to distrust the refinements of learning, because I have
seen the ablest and the most learned men equally liable to deceive themselves,
and to mislead others.

The condition of human nature would be lamentable indeed, if nothing less than
the greatest learning and talents, which fall to the share of so small a number
of men, were sufficient to direct our judgment and our conduct. But Providence
has taken better care of our happiness, and given us, in the simplicity of
common sense, a rule for our direction, by which we shall never be missed.

I confess, my lords, I had no other guide in drawing up the amendment, which I
submitted to your consideration. And before I heard the opinion of the noble
lord who spoke last, I did not conceive, that it was even within the limits of
possibility for the greatest human genius, the most subtle understanding, or
the acutest wit, so strangely to misrepresent my meaning; and to give it an
interpretation so entirely foreign from what I intended to express, and from
that sense, which the very terms of the amendment plainly and distinctly carry
with them.

If there be the smallest foundation for the censure thrown upon me by that
noble lord; if, either expressly or by the most distant implication, I have
said or insinuated any part of what the noble lord has charged me with, discard
my opinions forever; discard the motion with contempt.

My lords, I must beg the indulgence of the House. Neither will my health
permit me, nor do I pretend to be qualified, to follow that learned lord
minutely through the whole of his argument. No man is better acquainted with
his abilities and learning, nor has a greater respect for them, than I have. I
have had the pleasure of sitting with him in the other House, and always
listened to him with attention. I have not now lost a word of what he said, nor
did I ever. Upon the present question, I meet him without fear.

The evidence, which truth carries with it, is superior to all arguments; it
neither wants the support, nor dreads the opposition of the greatest abilities.
If there be a single word in the amendment to justify the interpretation, which
the noble lord has been pleased to give it, I am ready to renounce the whole.
Let it be read, my lords; let it speak for itself. In what instance does it
interfere with the privileges of the House of Commons? In what respect does it
question their jurisdiction, or suppose an authority in this House to arraign
the justice of their sentence?

I am sure that every lord who heers me, will bear me witness that I said not
one word touching the merits of the Middlesex election. Far from conveying any
opinion upon that matter in the amendment, I did not, even in discourse,
deliver my own sentiments upon it. I did not say that the House of Commons had
done either right or wrong; but when his Majesty was pleased to recommend it to
us to cultivate unanimity amongst ourselves, I thought it the duty of this
House, as the great hereditary council of the crown, to state to his Majesty
the distracted condition of his dominions, together with the events which had
destroyed unanimity among his subjects.

But, my lords, I stated those events merely as facts, without the smallest
addition either of censure or of opinion. They are facts, my lords, which I am
not only convinced are true, but which I know are indisputably true.

Do they not tell us, in so many words, that Mr. Wilkes, having been expelled,
was thereby rendered incapable of serving in that parliament? and is it not
their resolution alone, which refuses to the subject his common right? The
amendment says farther, that the electors of Middlesex are deprived of their
free choice of a representative. Is this a fact, my lords? or have I given an
unfair representation of it? Will any man presume to affirm that Colonel
Luttrell is the free choice of the electors of Middlesex? We all know the
contrary.

We all know that Mr. Wilkes (whom I mention without either praise or censure)
was the favorite of the county, and chosen, by a very great and acknowledged
majority, to represent them in parliament. If the noble lord dislikes the
manner in which these facts are stated, I shall think myself happy in being
advised by him how to alter it. I am very little anxious about terms, provided
the substances be preserved; and these are facts, my lords, which I am sure
will always retain their weight and importance, in whatever form of language
they are described.

The constitution of this country has been openly invaded in fact; and I have
heard, with horror and astonishment, that very invasion defended upon
principle. What is this mysterious power, undefined by law, unknown to the
subject; which we must not approach without awe, nor speak of without
reverence; which no man may question, and to which all men must submit? My
lords, I thought the slavish doctrine of passive obedience had long since been
exploded: and, when our kings were obliged to confess that their title to the
crown, and the rule of their government, had no other foundation than the known
laws of the land, I never expected to hear a divine right, or a divine
infallibility, attributed to any other branch of the legislature.

My lords, I beg to be understood. No man respects the House of Commons more
than I do, or would contend more strenuously than I would, to preserve to them
their just and legal authority. Within the bounds prescribed by the
constitution, that authority is necessary to the well-being of the people:
beyond that line, every exertion of power is arbitrary, is illegal; it
threatens tyranny to the people, and destruction to the State. Power without
right is the most ^^^ous and detestable object that can be offered to the human
imagination: it is not only pernicious to those who are subject to it, but
tends to its own destruction.

ON THE GENERAL JUDGMENT-DAY; FROM DWIGHT'S CONQUEST OF CANAAN.
MID these dire scenes, more awful scenes shall rise;
Sad nations quake, and trembling seize the skies.
From the dark tomb shall fearful lights ascend,
And sullen sounds the sleeping mansion rend;
Pale ghosts with terror break the dreamer's charm,
And death-like cries the listening world alarm.
Then midnight pangs shall toss the cleaving plains;
Fell famine wanton o'or unburied trains;
From crumbling mountains baleful flames aspire;
Realms sink in floods, and towns dissolve in fire;
In every blast, the spotted plague be driven,
And angry meteors blaze athwart the heaven.
Clouds of dark blood shall blot the sun's broad light,
Spread round the immense, and shroud the world in night;
With pale, and dreadful ray, the cold moon gleam;
The dim, lone stars diffuse an anguish'd beam;
Storms rock the skies; afflicted oceans roar,
And sanguine billows die the shuddering shore;
And round earth thunder, from the Almighty throne,
The voice irrevocable, IT IS DONE.
Roused on the fearful morn, shall nature hear
The trump's deep terrors rend the troubled air;
From realm to realm the sound tremendous roll;
Cleave the broad main, and shake the astonished pole;
The slumbering bones the archangel's call inspire;
Rocks sink in dust, and earth be wrapped in fire;
From realms far distant, orbs unnumber'd come,
Sail through immensity, and learn their doom:
And all you changeless stars, that, throned on high,
Reign in immortal luster round the sky,
In solemn silence shroud their living light,
And leave the world to undistinguished night.
Hark, what dread sounds descending from the pole,
Wave following wave, in swelling thunders roll!
How the tombs cleave! What awful forms arise!
What crowding nations pain the failing eyes!
From land to land behold the mountains rend;
From shore to shore the final flames ascend;
Round the dark poles with boundless terror reign,
With bend immeasurable sweep the main;
From morn's far kingdoms stretch to realms of even,
And climb and climb with solemn roar to heaven.
What smoky ruins wrap the lessening ground!
What fiery sheets sail through the vaulted round!
Poured in one mass, the lands and seas decay;
Involved the heavens, dissolving, fleet away;
The moon departs; the sun's last beams expire,
And nature's buried in the boundless fire.
Lo, from the radiance of the blessed abode
Messiah comes, in all the pomp of God!
Borne on swift winds, a storm before him flies;
Stars crown his head, and rainbows round him rise;
Beneath his feet a sun's broad terrors burn,
And cleaving darkness opes a dreadful morn:
Through boundless space careering flames are driven;
Truth's sacred hosts descend, and all the thrones of heaven.
See crowding millions, called from earth's far ends,
See hell's dark world, with fearful gloom, ascends,
In throngs incomprehensible! Around*
Worlds after worlds, from nature's farthest bound,
Called by the archangel's voice, from either pole,
Self-mov'd, with all created nations, roll.
From this great train, his eyes the just divide,
Price of his life, and being's fairest pride;
Robbed by his mighty hand, the starry throngs
From harps of transport call ecstatic songs.
Hail, heirs of endless peace! ordained to rove
Round the pure climes of everlasting love.
For you the sun first led the lucid morn;
The world was fashioned and Messiah born;
For you high heaven with fond impatience waits
Pours her fair streams, and opes her golden gates;
Each hour, with purer glory, gaily shines,
Her courts enlarges, and her air refines.
But O unhappy race! to woes consigned,
Lured by fond pleasure, and to wisdom blind,
What new Messiah shall the spirit save,
Stay the pent flames, and shut the eternal grave?
Where sleeps the music of his voice divine?
Where hides the face, that could so sweetly shine?
Now hear that slighted voice to thunder turn!
See that mild ra^e with flames of vengeance burn!
High over your heads the storm of ruin roars,
And, round the immense, no friend your fate deplores.
Lo, there to endless woe in throngs are driven,
What once were angels, and bright stars of heaven!
The world's gay pride! the king with splendour crowned!
The chief resistless, and the sage renowned!
Down, down, the millions sink; where you broad main
Heaves her dark waves, and spreads the seats of pain;
Where long, black clouds, emblaz'd with awful fire,
Pour sullen round their heads, and in dread gloom retire.
ON THE WORKS OF CREATION AND PROVIDENCE.
WHEN I contemplate those ample and magnificent structures, erected over all
the ethereal plains: when I look upon them as so many repositories of light, or
fruitful abodes of life: when I remember that there may be other orbs, vastly
more remote than those which appear to our unaided sight; orbs, whose
effulgence, though traveling ever since the creation, is not yet arrived upon
our coasts: when I stretch my thoughts to the innumerable orders of being,
which inhabit all those spacious systems; from the loftiest seraph, to the
lowest reptile; from the armies of angels which surround the Almighty's throne,
to the puny nations, which tinge with purple the surface of the plum, or mantle
the standing pool with green; how various appear the links of this immeasurable
chain! how vast the gradations in this universal scale of existence! Yet all
these, though ever so vast and various, are the work of the Creator's hand, and
are full of his presence.

He rounded in his palm those stupendous globes, which are pendulous in the
vault of heaven. He kindled those astonishingly bright fires, which fill the
firmament with a flood of glory. By Him they are suspended in fluid either, and
cannot be shaken: by Him they dispense a perpetual tide of beams, and are never
exhausted. He formed, with inexpressible nicety, that delicately fine
collection of tubes* that unknown multiplicity of subtle springs, which
organize and actuate the frame of the minutest insect.

He bids the crimson current roll; the vital movements play; and associates a
world of wonders, even in an animated point. In all these is a signal
exhibition of creating power; to all these are extended the special regards of
preserving goodness. From hence let me learn to rely on the providence, and to
revere the presence, of Supreme Majesty* Amidst that inconceivable number and
variety of beings, which swarm through the regions of creati^, not one is
overlooked, not one is neglected, by the great Omnipotent Cause of all.

SPEECH OF MR. FOX, IN THE BRITISH PARLIAMENT, ON AMERICAN AFFAIRS, 1778.
YOU have now two wars before you, of which you must choose one, for both you
cannot support. The war against America has hitherto been carried on against
her alone, unassisted by any ally whatever. Notwithstanding she stood alone,
you have been obliged uniformly to increase your exertions, and to push your
efforts to the extent of your power, without being able to bring it to an
issue; you have exerted all your force hitherto without effect, and you cannot
now divide a force, found already inadequate to its object.

My opinion is for withdrawing your forces from America entirely; for a
defensive war you can never think of there. A defensive war would ruin this
nation at any time; and in any circumstances, offensive war is pointed out as
proper for this country; our situation points it out; and the spirit of the
nation impels us to attack rather than defend. Attack France, then, for she is
your object. The nature of the wars is quite different* the war against America
is against your own countrymen; you have stopped me from saying against your
fellow subjects; that against France is against your inveterate enemy and
rival. Every blow you strike in America is against yourselves; it is against
all idea of reconciliation, and against your own interest, though you should be
able, as you never will be, to force them to submit. Every stroke against
France is of advantage to you: America must be conquered in France; France
never can be conquered in America.

The war of the Americans is a war of passion; it is of such a nature as to be
supported by the most powerful virtues, love of liberty and of their country;
and, at the same time, by those passions in (...) human heart which give
courage, strength, and perseverance to man; the spirit of revenge for the
injuries you have done them; of retaliation for the hardships you have
inflicted on them; and of opposition to the unjust powers you have exercised
over them. Every thing combines to animate them to this war, and such a war is
without end; for whatever obstinacy, enthusiasm ever inspired man with, you
will now find in America. No matter what gives birth to that enthusiasm;
whether the name of religion or of liberty, the effects are the same; it
inspires a spirit which is unconquerable, and solicitous to undergo difficulty,
danger, and hardship: and as long as there is a man in America, a being formed
such as we are, you will have him present himself against you in the field.

The war of France is a war of another sort; the war of France is a war of
interest: it was her interest which first induced her to engage in it, and it
is by that interest that she will measure its continuance. Turn your face at
once against her; attack her wherever she is exposed; crush her commerce
wherever you can; make her feel heavy and immediate distress throughout the
nation: the people will soon cry out to their government. Whilst the advantages
she promises herself are remote and uncertain, inflict present evils and
distresses upon her subjects: the people will become discontented and
clamorous; she will find it a bad bargain, having entered into this business;
and you will force her to desert any ally that brings so much trouble and
distress upon her.

What is become of the ancient spirit of this nation? Where is the national
spirit that ever did honor to this country? Have the present ministry spent
that too, with almost the last shilling of your money? Are they not ashamed of
the temporizing conduct they have used toward France? Her correspondence with
America has been clandestine. Compare that with their conduct toward Holland,
some time ago; but it is the characteristic of little minds to be exact in
little things, whilst they shrink from their rights in great ones.

The conduct of F^ce is called clandestine: look back but a year ago to a
letter from one of your Secretaries of State to Holland; "it is with surprise
and indignation" your conduct is seen, in something done by a petty governor of
an island, while they affect to call the measures of France clandestine. This
is the way that ministers support the character of the nation, and the national
honor and glory. But look again how that same Holland is spoken of today. Even
in your correspondence with her your littleness appears.

From this you may judge of your situation; from this you may know what a sta^e
you are reduced to. How will the French party in Holland exult over you, and
grow strong! She will never continue your ally, when you meanly crouch to
France, and do not dare to stir in your defense! But it is nothing
extraordinary that she should not, while you keep the ministers you have. No
power in Europe is blind; there is none blind enough to ally itself with
weakness, and become partner in bankruptcy; there is no one blind enough to
ally themselves to obstinacy, absurdity, and imbecility.

THE CONJURER, A DIALOGUE.
RICHARD and JACK. Jack. WHAT a strange man this is, Richard! Did you ever see
a conjurer before?


Richard. There was one traveled this way before your remembrance; but he
missed his figure very much. I was to have been an officer before this time,
according to his predictions; and you, Jack, were to have had a fine rich young
lady for your sister-in-law. But he was only an apprentice in the art; no more
than A, B, C, to this man.


Jack. Aye, he is master of his trade, I warrant you. I dare say, when father
comes home, he can tell him which way the thief is gone with our old Trot*
Uncle Bluster is coming over here this evening to find out who has got his
watch. The conjurer is just gone out to look at the stars. I suppose, after he
has viewed them a while, he will cast a figure in his great black-art book in
the other room, and tell in a trice what things are stolen, and where they are,
to a hair's breadth.


Rich. He must have a hawk's eye to see the stars this evening. Why don't you
know, Jack, it is cloudy out a'doors?


Jack. That Is nothing with him. He could look through the clouds with his
glass, if it was as dark as Egypt, as easy as you can look into the other room*
or, if he had a mind, he could brush away the clouds in a trice with that long
wand he carries in his hand.


R^^h. No doubt he is a great almanac maker. I Will be (...) and he could foretell
the weather to a tittle for a thousand years to come. I wish I knew the tenth
part as much about the planets as he does.


Jack. So do I. Don't you think our neighbors could hire him to keep our
school, instead of Master Think well? I believe he has fifty times as much
learning. Aunt Betty told me this afternoon, that he knew every star in the sky
as well as I do the cattle in our stable; and that he was as well acquainted
with every crook and turn in the milky-way, as I am with the road to mill. They
say he rode round to all the planets one night, in a chaise made of moonlight,
drawn by flying horses.


Conjurer. [Without in a grum hollow voice.] Hoc noxe conventio planetorum
teneter est in domus Jovum.


Rich. Hark! he is going by the window: don't you hear him talking to himself?


Jack. What a strange language he uses! He is talking to the man in the moon, I
dare say. He will go into the back room and cast a figure now: I will look
through the keyhole and see him. Exit Jack.


Rich. [Solus.] What a prodigious learned man this conjurer must be! I should
suppose he had read all the books in the world, and conversed with spirits a
hundred years, to know as much as he does.

Enter THINKWELL. I am glad to see you* Master Thinkwell. Have you heard the
rare news of the conjurer that is come to town?


Thinkwell. Yes; and I am informed he has taken up lodgings at your house
tonight. You are greatly honored to be sure.


Rich. He is a very extraordinary man, I Will assure you.


Think. So far I agree with you, Richard. I believe he is an extraordinary man,
and an extraordinary impostor too.


Rich. You are always on the side of contraries* ^n^ter Thinkwell; but every
body is not of so stu^ (...) ^aith as you. Why there is as great a stir in to
ha^ there was when Prince Edward went through it. All the ladies are as much in
the fidgets to see the conjurer, as they were to see him.


Think. It is much easier to account for these things than to justify them. We
shall always act beneath ourselves, while we look up to worthless wretches as
our superiors. Prince Edward was certainly no more than a man. This conjurer,
in my opinion, is much less: I consider him beneath contempt. I am as great a
friend to mirth as yourself; but it is really mortifying that my friends should
be so anxious to make themselves the objects of ridicule.


Rich. This is your old strain, Master Thinkwell. I know you are apt to get
round me in your arguments; but I believe the conjurer knows much more than
both of us. I might go to you to learn grammar, arithmetic, and the common
branches that are taught at school; but I shall go to him to have my fortune
told.


Think. Have patience; and time, the only true fortune tellers, will disclose
the future, without any pay, fast enough for your happiness or profit. Let me
advise you to lay out your money for more valuable commodities than such gross
imposition. Believe me, Richard, this man was never admitted into the cabinet
of futurity any more than you or I, and knows no more of the events of
tomorrow, next day, or next year, than the orang-outang.


Rich. All our neighbors think very differently. He has told Mrs. Primble where
she may find her silver spoon; and Sam Hodkins, the very day he is to be
married; and the very first moment he cast his ev^ (...) Bill Blunder's face,
he saw the scar on his (...) told him he had been wounded with an axe.


Think. Depend on it, Richard, it is all (...) ^sition. What careless lad is
there, who (...) that has not a scar on his feet?


Rich. If a man of common learning (...) is past, I don't see, for my part, why
(...) not foretell what is to come. [Knocking at the door.] Ah! Aunt Betty
Wrinkle, I know by her rap.


Enter BETTY WRINKLE. Betty. How do you do, Richard? A word with you, if you
please, cousin. [To Richard. They go to the other side of the room.] Is the
fortune tellers at your house, Richard?


Rich. He is casting a figure in the back room.


Betty. Can I see him? I wish to ask him a few questions in private.


Enter Mrs. CREDULOUS and JACK, in haste. Mrs. Credulous. Law, sister Betty! I
am glad to see you! I am half frighted out of my senses!


Betty. What is the matter, sister?


Mrs. Cred. I have been looking through the keyhole to see the conjurer. I
believe there is a spell of enchantment upon him! The room will be full of
spirits in five minutes!


Betty. O, don't be frighted, sister; if he can conjur them up, he can conjur
them down again. He will not let them hurt you. I should'nt be afraid to go right
into the room among them, not I.


Rich. If they were to come in the shape of widowers or old bachelors, perhaps
you would not.


Betty. Law, how you joke, cousin. Cuffing his ears.


Mrs. Cred. This is no jesting matter, I assure you. I could see plainly the
candle burnt blue; there was a circle of fire round his head, and it began to
smoke out of his mouth and nose.


Betty. Poh! nothing more than his breath, I dare say^ (...). And I thought I
saw the shadow of a spirit. (...) saw it too; for she looked as wild as though
(...) ^ly out of the window.


(...) (...) ell, you will not frighten me. I am determi^ (...), if he breathes
nothing but fire and smoke. (...) ^king loud in the other room.] Horum (...)
^m, veniunto!


(...) ^aw me! the very ghosts are come (...) ^g to them.


Think. They will never understand him unless he uses better Latin.


Mrs. Cred. O, good Master Thinkwell! you can talk Latin; do go and pray them,
for mercy's sake! beseech them to leave the house. Do, quick!


Think. Do compose yourself, Mrs. Credulous: there are no worse spirits here
than ignorance and folly; and they, of all others, are the most incorrigible.
If you please, I will go and turn this scape-gallows out of your house, and put
an end to your fears. Going.


Mrs. Cred. O, stop! don't think of such a thing for the world. If you should
affront him, he would raise a tempest and carry the house away in a minute.
Mercy on me! he knows what you have said now! how dark it grows! O, the wind
begins to rise! I will leave the house! we shall all be flying in the air in an
instant!


Rich. Don't be so terrified, ma'am. I don't hear any wind.


Jack. I do; and see it too. [Looking out at the window.] Dear me! how black it
is!


Betty. You are very much frighted, sister. For my part, I am not afraid of the
conjurer or any other man.


Rich. You were never quite so shy of them as they are of you.


Betty. Shy of me!


Mrs. Cred. Well, you must all take care of yourselves. I will run over to Mr.
Rector's the minister. He may save the house: he is a good man. What would I
give, if I had never seen this wicked conjurer! [Going out of the door.] Mercy!
the gr^d rises up under my feet! I can almost hear it thunder! (...) me, I
shall meet a spirit! Master Thinkwell, you (...) not apt to be frighted; do go
with me to the minister's.


Think. At your request I will. For your credit's sake, compose yourselves, and
not let this shameful affair be related abroad. Exit Thinkwell*


Betty. I Am sure I don't see any cause for all this flutteration.


Jack. I believe I was more scared than hurt. The cat, I see, has got over her
fright: she is playing in the entry as sprightly as you, aunt Betty.


Betty. Well said, Jack. [Patting his cheeks.] Do you think I could speak with
the conjurer now, Richard?


Rich. I see nothing of any spirits yet. We will venture to go and see what he
is about.


They go out of the room. SCENE changes, and discovers the Conjurer sitting at
a table and making characters in a large book. He rises, takes his wand, and
moves it slowly round a large circle, drawn on the floor, and filled with
characters. Betty. [Advancing slowly.] Law me, my heart is in my mouth! I dare
not speak to him. [She stands and looks at him, and on Richard and Jack at the
other side of the room, alternately.]


Conj. Horum charactarius in hoc circulum omnes planetorum atque eorum
inhabitantibusque recto representur; et atque genii spiritorumque.


Betty. Bless me! what a world of learning he has! I cannot understand a word he
says.


Jack. [To Richard.] That circle is full of spirits I suppose. He has made them
put on their coats of air that we might not see them.


Conj. I perceive, lady, by the mystic characters of this circle, you approach
this way to inquire into the occult mysteries of fate, and to know of me your
future destiny.


Betty. He knows my very thoughts. [Aside.] Learned Sir, be so good as to take
this, and answer me a few questions I shall ask you.


Offering him a piece of money. Conj. You must first answer me a few questions.
Your name, madam?


Betty. Elizabeth Wrinkle, at your service, Sir.


Conj. [Writing her name in his book.] Do you recollect whether the day that
Burgoyne was captured was clear or cloudy?


Betty. That was quite before my remembrance, Sir. [Looking in a glass.] I am
sure nobody could take me for more than twenty-five. Aside.


Conj. I am not to be deceived, madam.


Looking out at the window through his glass. Jack. [To Richard.] Hark! we
shall know her age now. He looks clear through time, with that glass, as easy
as you can look through a keyhole.


Betty. Good Sir, don't expose me! pray speak low.


Conj. Young men withdraw, and shut that door.

Richard and Jack leave the room. I told you I was not to be deceived. You were
born, Anno Domini, one thousand, seven hundred and --


Betty. Law me! how should he know I was born in fifty-five? The treacherous
stars must have betrayed me; not my looks, I am sure. Aside.


Conj. I tell you furthermore, the very man, whom the fates had singled out for
your husband, by the fatal destiny of the stars, was slain at the taking of
Burgoyne.


Betty. Dear me! O cruel stars, and more cruel Britons! how many husbands and
wives have ye separated! Were it not for you, I should have been married twenty
years ago. But since the fates have been so very cruel, don't you think they
will be so kind as to provide me -- you know what I mean, Mr. Conjurer.


Conj. Another husband. I will inquire.


Moving his wand round the circle. Enter Mr. CREDULOUS and BLUSTER. Betty. Law,
brother, you have come in the very nick of time. I was just going to ask the
conjurer about your horse.


Conj. By the mysterious numbers of this circle, and the hidden virtue of this
wand, I perceive you have lost a horse.


Cred. You have cast your figure right. My poor Trot has been gone ever since
the twentieth day of June.


Conj. [Moving his wand over the circle, and touching particular characters.]
Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer; that is it precisely. You are under a little
mistake, Sir; it was on the twentieth night of June.


Bluster. You are right, you are right, Mister Conjurer. The same night I had
my watch stolen.


Conj. Aries, March; Taurus, April; Gemini, May; Cancer, June. On the night of
June twentieth, precisely at twenty-three minutes past twelve, the horse was
stolen from your pasture, by a thief.


Blust. There, brother Credulous, you have it as exact as the multiplication
table.


Cred. Strange what learning will do! [Giving a piece of money to the
Conjurer.] Now, Sir, be so good as to tell me where the horse is, and how I
shall find the very thief. Rascal! I shall have you now.


To himself. Conj. [Making characters in his book.] The stars are inauspicious
at present. Mercury, the patron of thieves, bears rule to night. I shall be
able to detect him tomorrow. Hah! that is a lucky figure. Quod erat
demonstrandum. I have got a clue to the watch in spite of Mercury.


Blust. Put me in a way of finding it, and you shall be well paid. We must
secure our houses, brother Credulous, or this rogue of a Mercury will have our
very beds from under us, before morning.


Conj. It shall be forth coming immediately. [Figuring in his book.] One
hundred and twenty-seven rods northeasterly from this table, in Chinese
measure, lies a hollow tree; in that tree lies your watch.


Enter LONGSTAFF, an OFFICER, two WITNESSES, and THINKWELL. Betty. Bless me!
half the town will be here: it is time for me to go. Exit.


Blust. Mr. Longstaff, be so good as not to interrupt the conjurer. He has just
told me where my watch is, and will detect the thief with a few figures more.


Longstaff. My duty obliges me to interrupt him. We have your watch, and are
come to secure the thief. [To the Conjurer.] You have run at large, and
detr^uded the honest and ignorant long enough. By virtue of this warrant, you
are the State's prisoner.


Conj. What trick shall I try now! I am detected at last. Aside.


Cred. You must be misinformed, Mr. Longstaff. This man is so far from being a
thief, that he is a greater torment to them than their own consciences.


Long. Hear the evidence of these gentlemen, and you may alter your mind.


1 st. Witness. I suppose this watch to be yours, Mr. Bluster.


Blust. It is the very same; the chain only is changed.


1 st. Wit. I happened to overhear him talking with one of his gang last
evening. This watch, with a number of other articles, was to be hidden in a
hollow tree. This impostor, to maintain the credit of a conjurer, was to inform
the owners, on inquiry, where they were, upon their paying him for the
imposition. I have been so fortunate as to secure one of the partners in this
trade. And as I heard this gentleman, for whom you have so much regard, had
taken up lodgings at your house, I did not choose to interrupt you till there
was full proof of his guilt. The stolen goods, which he described, and we have
found, are sufficient evidence against him.


Cred. Villain! a halter is too good for your neck. May I be taught common
sense by a monkey, if ever I am duped again in such a manner.


2 d. Wit. My evidence tends rather to impeach the character of my townsmen
than this worthless fellow's. All I can say* is, that several months ago, he
traveled this road in character of a tinker; and now all our young girls, old
maids, and ignorant fellows, are running after this wise conjurer to buy the
history of their lives, which, a little while since, they were weak enough to
give him for nothing.


Think. I hope the impostor will be brought to justice, and we to our senses;
and that after paying this infatuated devotion to vice and ignorance, virtue
and true knowledge may have our more serious veneration.


Long. Gentlemen, assist me to conduct him to prison.


Exeunt omnes. EXTRACT FROM MR. PITT'S SPEECH IN THE BRITISH PARLIAMENT, JAN.
20, 1775.
WHEN your lordships look at the papers transmitted to us from America; when
you consider their decency, firmness, and wisdom, you cannot but respect their
cause, and wish to make it your own. For myself, I must declare and avow, that
in all my reading and observation, (and it has been my favorite study: I have
read Thucidydes, and have studied and admired the master-states of the world:)
I say I must declare, that, for solidity of reasoning, force of sagacity, and
wisdom of conclusion, under such a complication of difficult circumstances, no
nation, or body of men can stand in preference to the General Congress at
Philadelphia. I trust it is obvious to your lordships, that all attempts to
impose servitude upon such men, to establish, despotism over such a mighty
continental nation, must be vain, must be fatal.

We shall be forced, ultimately, to retract, let us retract while we can, not
when we must. I say we must necessarily undo these violent oppressive acts.
They MUST be repealed. You WILL repeal them. I pledge myself for it, that you
will in the end repeal them. I stake my reputation on it. I will consent to be
taken for an idiot, if they are not finally repealed.

Avoid, then, this humiliating, disgraceful necessity. With a dignity becoming
your exalted situation, make the first advances to concord, to peace and
happiness: for it is your true dignity, to act with prudence and justice. That
you should first concede, is obvious from sound and rational policy. Concession
comes with better grace, and more salutary effects from superior power; it
reconciles superiority of power with the feelings of men; and establishes solid
confidence on the foundations of affection and gratitude.

Every motive, therefore, of justice and of policy, of dignity and of prudence,
urges you to allay the ferment in America, by a removal of your troops from
Boston; by a repeal of your acts of parliament; and by demonstration of
amicable dispositions toward your colonies. On the other hand, every danger
and every hazard impend, to deter you from perseverance in your present ruinous
measures. Foreign war hanging over your heads by a slight and brittle thread:
France and Spain watching your conduct, and waiting for the maturity of your
errors; with a vigilant eye to America, and the temper of your colonies, more
than to their own concerns, be they what they may.

To conclude, my lords; if the ministers thus persevere in misadvising and
misleading the King, I will not say* that they can alienate the affections of
his subjects from his crown; but I will affirm, that they will make the crown
not worth his wearing: I will not say that the king is betrayed; but I will
pronounce, that the kingdom is undone.

SPEECH OF GALGACHUS TO THE CALEDONIAN ARMY.
COUNTRYMEN, AND FELLOW SOLDIERS,
WHEN I consider the cause, for which we have drawn our swords, and the
necessity of striking an effectual blow, before we sheath them again, I feel
joyful hopes arising in my mind, that this day an opening will be made for the
restoration of British liberty* and for shaking off the infamous yoke of Roman
slavery. Caledonia is yet free. The all-grasping power of Rome has not yet been
able to seize our liberty. But it is to be preserved only by valor.

You are not to expect to escape the ravage of the general plunderers of
mankind, by any sentiment of justice in them. When the countries which are more
accessible have been subdued, they will then force their way into those which
are harder to be overcome. And if they should conquer the dry land, over the
whole world, they will then think of carrying their arms beyond the ocean, to
see whether there be not certain unknown regions, which they may attack, and
reduce under subjection to the Roman empire.

For we see that if a country is thought to be powerful in arms, the Romans
attack it because the conquest will be glorious; if inconsiderable in the
military art, because the victory will be easy; if rich, they are drawn thither
by the hope of plunder; if poor, by the desire of fame.

The east, and the west, the south, and the north, the face of the whole earth
is the scene of their military achievements. The world is too little for their
ambition, and their avarice. Their supreme joy seems to be ravaging, fighting,
and shedding of blood; and when they have unpeopled a region, so that there are
none left alive to bear arms, they say they have given peace to that country.

Our distance from the seat of government, and our natural defense by the
surrounding ocean, render us obnoxious to their suspicions: for they know that
Britons are born with an instinctive love of liberty: and they conclude that we
must naturally be led to think of taking the advantage of our detached
situation, to disengage ourselves, one time or another, from their oppression.

Thus, my countrymen, and fellow soldiers, suspected and hated as we ever must
be by the Romans, there is no prospect of our enjoying even a tolerable state
of bondage under them. Let us, then, in the name of all that is sacred, and in
defense of all that is dear to us, resolve to exert ourselves, if not for
glory, at least for safety; if not in vindication of British honor, at least in
defense of our lives.

But, after all, who are these mighty Romans? Are they gods; or mortal men,
like ourselves? Do we not see that they fall into the same errors and
weaknesses, as others? Does not peace effeminate them? Does not abundance
debauch them? Does not wantonness enervate them? Do they not even go to excess
in the most unmanly vices? And can you imagine that they who are remarkable for
their vices are likewise remarkable for their valor? What then do we dread?
Shall I tell you the truth, my fellow soldiers? It is by means of our intestine
divisions, that the Romans have gained such great advantage over us. They turn
the misconduct of their enemies to their own praise. They boast of what they
have done, and say nothing of what we might have done, had we been so wise, as
to unite against them.

What is this formidable Roman army? Is it not composed of a mixture of people
from different countries; some more, some less capable of bearing fatigue and
hardship? They keep together while they are successful. Attack them with vigor:
distress them: you will see them more disunited than we are now. Can any one
imagine, that Gauls, Germans, and with shame I must add, Britons, who basely
lend their limbs and lives, to build up a foreign tyranny; can one imagine that
these will be longer enemies than slaves? or that such an army is held together
by sentiments of fidelity or affection? No: the only bond of union among them
is fear. And whenever terror ceases to work upon the minds of that mixed
multitude, they who now fear, will then hate their tyrannical masters.

On our side there is every possible incitement to valor. The Roman courage is
not, as ours, inflamed by the thoughts of wives and children in danger of
falling into the hands of the enemy. The Romans have not parents, as we have,
to reproach them if they should desert their infirm old age. They have no
country here to fight for. They are a motley collection of foreigners, in a
land wholly unknown to them; cut off from their native country; hemmed in by
the surrounding ocean; and given, I hope, a prey into our hands, without any
possibility of escape. Let not the sound of the Roman name affright your ears,
nor let the glare of gold or silver, upon their armor, dazzle your eyes. It is
not by gold or silver, that men are either wounded or defended; though they are
rendered a richer prey to the conquerors. Let us boldly attack this disunited
rabble. We shall find among themselves a reinforcement to our army.

And what will there be then to fear? A few half garrisoned forts; a few
municipal towns, inhabited by worn-out old men; discord universally prevailing,
occasioned by tyranny in those who command, and obstinacy in those who should
obey. On our side, an army united in the cause of their country, their wives,
their children, their aged parents, their lives. At the head of this army, I
hope I do not offend against modesty in saying there is a General ready to
exert all his abilities, such as they are, and to hazard his life in leading
you to victory, and to freedom.

I conclude, my countrymen and fellow soldiers, with putting you in mind, that
on your behavior this day depends your future enjoyment of peace and liberty,
or your subjection to a tyrannical enemy, with all its grievous consequences.
When, therefore, you come to engage, think of your ancestors, and think of your
posterity.

MODERN EDUCATION. DIALOGUE BETWEEN A PRECEPTOR OF AN ACADEMY, AND PARENT OF AN
OFFERED PUPIL.
Preceptor. I AM heartily sick of this modern mode [Solus.] of education.
Nothing but trash will suit the taste of people at this day. I am perplexed
beyond all endurance with these frequent solicitations of parents, to give
their children graceful airs, polite accomplishments, and a smattering of what
they call the fine arts; while nothing is said about teaching them the
substantial branches of literature. If they can but dance a little, fiddle a
little, flute a little, and make a handsome bow and courtesy, that is
sufficient to make them famous, in this enlightened age. Three-fourths of the
teachers of those arts, which once were esteemed most valuable, will soon be
out of employment, at this rate. For my part, I am convinced, that, if I had
been a dancing master, music master, stage player, or mounte-bank, I should
have been much more respected, and much better supported, than I am at present.


Enter PARENT. Parent. Your humble servant, Sir; are you the principal of this
Academy?


Precep. I am, at your service, Sir.


Par. I have heard much of the fame of your institution, and am desirous of
putting a son, of about twelve years of age, under your tuition. I suppose you
have masters who teach the various branches of the polite arts.


Precep. We are not inattentive to those arts, Sir; but the fame of our Academy
does not rest upon them. Useful learning is our grand object. What studies do
you wish to put your son upon?


Par. I wish him (...) be perfected in music, dancing, drawing, etc. and as he
possesses a promising genius for poetry, I would by all means have that
cultivated.


Precep. These are not all the branches, I trust, in which he is to be
instructed. You mention nothing of reading, writing, arithmetic, language, etc.
Are these to be wholly neglected?


Par. Why, as to these every-day branches, I cannot say I feel very anxious
about them. The boy reads well now; writes a decent hand; is acquainted with
the ground rules of arithmetic, and pronounces the English language genteelly.
He has been a long time under the care of Mr. Honestus, our town schoolmaster,
who has taught him all these things sufficiently. So that I think any more time
devoted to them would be wasted.


Precep. If he is such an adept that there is no room for his progressing in
those arts; yet I think, at least, there is need of practice, lest, at his age,
he should forget what he has learned.


Par. That I shall leave to your discretion. But there is one branch, of great
importance, which I have not yet mentioned, and to which I would have
particular attention paid; I mean the art of speaking. You will find him not
deficient in that respect; though perhaps it requires as much practice to make
one perfect in that, as in any art whatever. He has already learned by heart a
great number of pieces, and has acted a part in several comedies and tragedies
with much applause. It has been the custom of our master to have an exhibition
at least once a quarter; and my son has always been considered as one of his
best performers. He lately took the part of Jemmy Jumps in the farce called The
Farmer, and acted it to universal acceptance.


Precep. I must confess, Sir, that your account of your son does not appear to
me to be very flattering


Par. Why so, pray? have you not an ear for eloque^^*


Precep. Indeed I have, Si^ No man is more charmed than I am with its
enr^^^^ring sounds. N^ music rests sweeter on my ear than the melodious (...),
proceeding from the mouth of a judicious, well-instructed, and powerful orator.
But I must tell you plainly, that I am by no means pleased to see parents take
so much pains to transform their children into monkies instead of men. What
signs of oratory do you imagine you can discern in a boy, rigged out in a
fantastical dress, skipping about the stage like a baboon, in the character of
Jemmy Jumps, Betty Jumps, or any other jumper?


Par. Do you not approve of exhibitions then?


Precep. Not much, I confess, in the way they are generally conducted. A
master, who has four in a year, must necessarily rob his pupils of one quarter
of that time, which, in my opinion, might be much better employed in attending
to what would be useful for them in life.


Par. What can be more useful for a child, under such a government as ours,
than to be able to speak before an audience with a graceful ease, and a manful
dignity? My son, for aught I know, may be a member of Congress before he dies.


Precep. For that very reason I would educate him differently. I would lay the
foundation of his future same on the firm basis of the solid sciences; that he
might be able in time to do something more than a mere parrot, or an ape, who
are capable only of speaking the words, and mimicking the actions of others. He
should first be taught to read. He should likewise be taught to compose for
himself; and I would not be wanting in my endeavors to make him a speaker.


Par. Surely, Mr. Preceptor, you must be very wrong in your notions. I have
ever pursued a different ^n with my children; and there are none in the
country, though I say it myself, who are more universally caressed. I have a
daughter that has seen ^at fourteen years, who is capable of gracing the
po^^test circles. It is allo^ that she can enter, and leave a room, with as m^
ease and dignity as any lady (...) ^li^ whatever. And this is evidently owing a
(...) ^o her polite education. I boarded her a ye^^ in the capital, where she
enjoyed every possible advantage. She attended the most accomplished masters in
the ornamental branches of science; visited the genteelest families, and
frequented all the scenes of amusement. It is true, her letters are not always
written quite so accurately as could be wished; yet she dances well, plays well
on the piano-forte, and sings like a nightingale.


Precep. Does she know the art of making a good pudding? Can she darn a
stocking well? or is she capable of patching the elbows of her husband's coat,
should she ever be so lucky as to get one? If she is to remain ignorant of all
such domestic employments, as much as I value her other accomplishments, and as
much as I might be in want of a wife, I would not marry her with twice her
weight in gold.


Par. Her accomplishments will command her a husband as soon as she wishes. But
so long as a single cent of my property remains, her delicate hands shall never
be so unworthily employed.


Precep. But suppose a reverse of fortune should overtake you, what is to
become of the child; as you say she understands nothing of domestic affairs?
Will it be more honorable, do you imagine, for her to be maintained by the
charity of the people, than by her own industry?


Par. There are many ways for her to be supported. I would not have you think
she is wholly ignorant of the use of the needle, though she never employed it
in fo disgraceful a manner as that of darning stockings! or botching tattered
garments! But we will wave that subject, and attend to the other. Will you
receive the boy for the purposes before mentioned?


Precep. Why, indeed, Sir, I cannot. Though I am far from condemning altogether
your favorite branches, yet I consider them a^ subordinate, and some of them,
at least, totally use^. We devote but a small portion of our time to the
attainment of such superficial accomplishments. I would therefore recommend it
to you, to commit him to the care of those persons, who have been so successful
in the instruction of his sister.


Par. I confess I am so far convinced of the propriety of your method, that, if
you will admit him into your Academy, I will renounce all right of dictating to
you his lessons of instruction, except in one single instance; and in that I am
persuaded we shall not disagree; I mean the art of speaking.


Precep. I shall agree to that only under certain limitations. That is an art
which undoubtedly demands our solicitous attention; but it ought never to be
pursued to the injury of other studies. I am sensible that it is no less useful
to a pupil than entertaining to an audience, to exercise him occasionally on
the stage in declaiming judicious and well-written compositions, and
pronouncing such selected dialogues, as will tend to give gracefulness to his
attitude, and familiarity to his tones and gestures. But, admitting that time
could be spared from more important pursuits, I see but little good resulting
from the exhibition of whole comedies and tragedies in our academies and
schools; while much evil is to be feared, both from the immorality of the
plays, and the dissipation it introduces in society. Besides, all boys are not
calculated for orators; and though Demosthenes surmounted almost insuperable
difficulties in the acquirement of his art, it is folly to suppose that his
example is capable of universal imitation. I cannot believe it a very pleasing
entertainment to a discerning audience, to see a boy without talents, mounted
upon the rostrum, spouting forth sentences which he does not understand, and
which, perhaps, are chosen with as little judgment, as they are delivered with
propriety. But what can be more disgusting than to see innocent, and timid
females, whose excellence, in part, co^ in their modesty, and silence before
superiors, enc^^^aged to reverse the order of nature by playing the orator on a
public stage! And wha^ often enhances our disgust, and sickens all our
feelings, is, that their lips are taught to pronounce sentiments, extracted
from the very dregs of the European drama.


Par. Then it seems you do not approve of females speaking at all?


Precep. Not on a public stage, unless I wished to see them divested of half
their charms. Such masculine employments as ill become them, as the labors of
the field, or the habits of the stronger sex. I would have them taught to read
and pronounce well at school; but nature never designed them for public
orators; much less, that they should be degraded to the vile purpose of
entertaining the votaries of theatrical amusements.


Par. Why, you differ widely from many, whose pride it is to be considered as
the standards of modern taste. It does not now offend against the rules of
delicacy, for the different sexes to make exchange of garments now and then,
provided the grand object of amusement be promoted by it. I was in Boston last
week, and there I saw a beautiful young lady, rigged out from top to toe in
men's apparel, astride a gay horse, parading through the streets, for the
entertainment of the ladies and gentlemen of that polite metropolis. And none
appeared to be offended, except a few who had not attained a relish for refined
pleasures.


Precep. Yes, and I am told, that, at their theaters, it is no uncommon thing
for a woman to make her appearance, in that apparel, with a sword by her side,
strutting across the stage, and swearing ^at^s big enough to choke an Algerine
pirate; and yet (...) is so agreeable to the modern ton, that even ladies of
^^stinguished refinement are ashamed to blush at her!


Par. You have made me so far a convert to your sentiments on this subject, and
gi^en me such proofs of your superior judgment in the e^tion of youth, that I
am determined to commit my son, without any reserve, to your care and
instruction. Till you hear from me again, I am, Sir, your obedient servant.


THE EXISTENCE OF GOD, DEMONSTRATED FROM THE WORKS OF CREATION; BEING A SERMON
PREACHED AT PROVIDENCE, BY JONATHAN MAXCY, A. M. PRESIDENT OF RHODE ISLAND
COLLEGE, 1795; FROM ROMANS i.20.
[ N. B. When found expedient, the following Sermon may conveniently be divided
into three or four parts, suitable for declamations. The author of this work
did not intend at first to insert the whole; but, in attempting to make a
selection, he could find no part which he was willing to leave.]

NOTHING will more effectually guard us against vice, than a firm belief in the
existence of God. For surely if we realize that there is such a Being, we shall
naturally infer from his perfections, from the nature of his moral government,
and from our situation as rational creatures, that we are amenable at his awful
tribunal. Superior power, wisdom, and goodness, always lay ^s under restraint,
and command our veneration. These, even in a mortal, overawe us. They restrain
not only the actions, but the words and thoughts of the most vicious and
abandoned. Our happiness depends on our virtue. Our virtue depends on the
conformity of our hearts and conduct to the laws prescribed us by our
beneficent Creator.

Of what vast importance then is it to our consent as well as future felicity,
to possess in our heart^ ^eling sense, and in our understandings a clear con^,
of the existence of that Being whose power and ^ness are unbounded, whose
presence fills immensity, and whose wisdom, like a torrent of lightning,
emanates through all the dark recesses of eternal duration! How great must be
the effect of a sense of the presence of the great Creator and Governor of all
things, to whom belong the attributes, eternity, independency, perfect
holiness, inflexi^ ^tice, and inviolable veracity; complete happiness and
glorious majesty; supreme right and unbounded dominion!

A sense of accountability to God will retard the eager pursuit of vice; it
will humble the heart of the proud, it will bridle the tongue of the profane,
and snatch the knife from the hand of the assassin. A belief of the existence
of God is the true original source of all virtue, and the only foundation of
all religion, natural or revealed. Set aside this great luminous truth, erase
the conviction of it from the heart, you then place virtue and vice on the same
level; you drive afflicted innocence into despair; you add new effrontery to
the marred visage of guilt; you plant thorns in the path, and shed an
impenetrable gloom over the prospects of the righteous.

Sin has alienated the affections, and diverted the attention of men from the
great Jehovah. "Darkness has covered the earth, and gross darkness the people."
Men have worshipped the works of their own hands, and neglected the true God,
though his existence and perfections were stamped in glaring characters on all
creation. From the regularity, order, beauty, and conservation of this great
system of things, of which man makes a part; from the uniform tendency of all
its divisions to their proper ends; the existence of God shines as clearly as
the sun in the heavens. "From the things that are made," says the text, "are
seen his eternal power and Godhead."

1. Man himself is a proof of God's existence: Let us place him before us in
his full stature. We are at once impressed with the beautiful organization of
his body, with the orderly and harmonious arrangement of his members. Such is
the disposition of these, that their motion is the most easy, graceful, and
useful, that can be conceived. We are astonished to see the same simple matter
diversified into so many different substances, of different qualities, size,
and figure. If we pursue our researches through the internal ^onomy, we shall
find, that all the different opposite ^s correspond to each other with the
utmost exactness and order; that they all answer the most beneficent purposes.

This wonderful machine, the human body, is animated, cherished, and preserved,
by a spirit within; which pervades every particle, feels in every organ, warns
us of injury, and administers to our pleasures. Erect in stature, man differs
from all other animals. Though his foot is confined to the earth, yet his eye
measures the whole circuit of heaven, and in an instant takes in thousands of
worlds. His countenance is turned upward, to teach us that he is not like other
animals, limited to the earth, but looks forward to brighter scenes of
existence in the skies.

Whence came this erect, orderly, beautiful constitution of the human body? Did
it spring up from the earth, self-formed? Surely not. Earth itself is inactive
matter. That which has no motion can never produce any. Man surely could not,
as has been vainly and idly supposed, have been formed by the fortuitous
concurrence of atoms. We behold the most exact order in the constitution of the
human body. Order always involves design. Design always involves intelligence.
That intelligence, which directed the orderly formation of the human body, must
have resided in a Being whose power was adequate to the production of such an
effect.

Creation surely is the prerogative of a self-existent, uncaused Being. Finite
creatures may arrange and dispose, but they cannot create; they cannot give
life. It is a universal law through all nature, that like produces like. The
same laws most probably obtain through the whole system in which we are
connected. We have therefore no reason to suppose that angels created man.
Neither can we, without the greatest absurdity, admit, that he was formed by
himself, or by mere accident. If in the latter way, why do we never see men
formed so in the present day? Why do we never see the clods of ^^th brightening
into human flesh, and the dust un^^ our feet crawling into animated forms, and
starting up into life and intelligence?

If we even admit that either of the forementioned causes might have produced
man, yet neither of them could have preserved him in existence one moment.
There must therefore be a God uncaused, independent, and complete. The nobler
part of man clearly evinces this great truth. When we consider the boundless
desires and the inconceivable activity of the soul of man, we can refer his
origin to nothing but God. How astonishing are the reasoning faculties of man!
How surprising the power of comparing, arranging, and connecting his ideas! How
wonderful is the power of imagination! On its wings, in a moment, we can
transport ourselves to the most distant part of the universe. We can fly back,
and live the lives of all antiquity, or surmount the limits of time, and sail
along the vast range of eternity. Whence these astonishing powers, if not from
a God of infinite wisdom, goodness, and power?

2. "The invisible things of him from the creation of the world," says the
text, "are clearly seen." Let us for a moment behold our earth. With what a
delightful scene are we here presented! The diversification of its surface into
land and water, islands and lakes, springs and rivers, hills and valleys,
mountains and plains, renders it to man doubly enchanting. We are entertained
with an agreeable variety, without being disgusted by a tedious uniformity.
Every thing appears admirably formed for our profit and delight. There the
valleys are clothed in smiling green, and the plains are bending with corn.
Here is the gentle hill to delight the eye, and beyond, slow rising from the
earth, swells the huge mountain, and, with all its load of waters, rocks, and
woods, heaves itself up into the skies. Why this pleasing, vast deformity of
nature? Undoubtedly for the benefit of man. From the mountains descend streams
to fertilize the plains below, and cover them with wealth and beauty*

The earth not only produces every thing necessary to support our bodies, but
to remedy our diseases, and gratify our senses. Who covered the earth with such
a pleasing variety of fruits and flowers? Who gave them their delightful
fragrance, and painted them with such exquisite colors? Who causes the same
water to whiten in the lily, that blushes in the rose? Do not these things
indicate a Cause infinitely superior to any finite being? Do they not directly
lead us to believe the existence of God, to admire his goodness, to revere his
power, to adore his wisdom, in so happily accommodating our external
circumstances to our situation and internal constitution?

3. But how are we astonished to behold the vast ocean, rolling its immense
burden of waters! Who gave it such a configuration of particles as to render it
moveable by the least pressure, and at the same time so strong as to support
the heaviest weights? Who spread out this vast highway of all the nations
under heaven? Who gave it its regular motion? Who confined it within its
bounds? A little more ^otion would disorder the whole world! A small ^citement
on the tide would drown whole kingdom. Who restrains the proud waves, when the
tempest lifts them to the clouds? Who measured the great waters, and subjected
them to invariable laws? That great Being, "who placed the sand for the bound
thereof, by a perpetual decree that it cannot pass; and though the waves
thereof toss themselves, yet can they not prevail; though they roar, yet can
they not pass over." With reason may we believe, that from the things that are
made, are clearly seen eternal power and wisdom.

4. Passing by the numerous productions and appendages of the earth, let us
rise from it, and consider the body of air with which we are surrounded. What a
convincing proof do we here find of the existence of God! Such is the subtilty
and transparency of the air, that it receives the rays of the sun and stars,
conveying them with ^nconceivable velocity to objects on the earth, rendering
them visible, and decorating the whole surface of the globe with an agreeable
intermixture of light, shade, and colors. But still this air has a sufficient
consistency and strength to support clouds, and all the winged inhabitants. Had
it been less subtle, it would have intercepted the light. Had it been more
rarefied, it would not have supported its inhabitants, nor have afforded
sufficient moisture for the purposes of respiration. What then but infinite
wisdom could have tempered the air so nicely, as to give it sufficient strength
to support clouds for rain, to afford wind for health, and at the same time to
possess the power of conveying sound and light? How wonderful is this element!
How clearly does it discover infinite wisdom, power, and goodness!

5. But when we cast our eyes up to the firmament of heaven, we clearly see
that it declares God's handy work. Here the immense theater of God's works
opens upon us, and discloses ten thousand magnificent, splendid objects. We
dwindle to nothing in comparison with this august scene of beauty, majesty, and
glory. Who reared this vast arch over our heads? Who adorned it with so many
shining objects, placed at such immense distances from each other, regular in
their motions, invariably observing the laws to which they were originally
subjected? Who placed the sun at such a convenient distance as not to annoy,
but refresh us? Who for so many ages has caused him to rise and set at fixed
times? Whose hand directs, and whose power restrains him in his course, causing
him to produce the agreeable changes of day and night, as well as the variety
of seasons?

The order, harmony, and regularity, in the revolutions of the heavenly bodies,
are such incontestable proofs of the existence of God, that an eminent poet
well said, "An undevout astronomer is mad." In the time of Cicero, when the
knowledge of astro^my was very imperfect, he did not hesitate to declare* that
in his opinion the man who asserted the heavenly bodies were not framed and
moved by a divine understanding, was himself void of all understanding. Well
indeed is it said, that the heavens declare the glory of God.

This great Being is every where present. He exists all around us. He is not,
as we are apt to imagine, at a great distance. Wherever we turn, his image
meets our view. We see him in the earth, in the ocean, in the air, in the sun,
moon, and stars. We feel him in ourselves. He is always working round us; he
performs the greatest operations, produces the noblest effects, discovers
himself in a thousand different ways, and yet the real GOD remains unseen. All
parts of creation are equally under his inspection. Though he warms the breast
of the highest angel in heaven, yet he breathes life into the meanest insect on
earth. He lives through all his works, supporting all by the word of his power.
He shines in the verdure that clothes the plains, in the lily that delights the
vale, and in the forest that waves on the mountain. He supports the slender
reed that trembles in the bre^ze, and the sturdy oak that defies the tempest.
His p^sence cheers the inanimate creation.

Far in the wilderness, where human eye never saw, where the savage foot never
trod, there he bids the blooming forest smile, and the blushing rose open its
leaves to the morning sun. There he causes the feathered inhabitants to whistle
their wild notes to the listening trees and echoing mountains. There nature
lives in all her wanton wildness. There the ravished eye, hurrying from scene
to scene, is lost in one vast blush of beauty. From the dark stream that rolls
through the forest, the silver-scaled fish leap up, and dumbly mean the praise
of God. Though man remain silent, yet God will have praise. He regards,
observes, upholds, connects, and equals all.

The belief of his existence is not a point of mere speculation and amusement.
It is of inconceivable importance to our present, as well as future felicity.
But while we believe there is a God, we should be extremely careful to
ascertain, with as much accuracy as possible, what is his real nature. The most
prominent features of this are exhibited in that incomprehensible display of
wisdom, power, and goodness, made in the works of creation. A virtuous man
stands in a relation to God which is peculiarly delightful. The divine
perfections are all engaged in his defense. He feels powerful in God's power,
wise in his wisdom, good in his goodness.

The vicious man, on the contrary, stands in a relation to God, which is of all
things the most dreadful. He is unwilling to know that God has sufficient
wisdom to search out all his wickedness, sufficient goodness to the universe to
determine to punish that wickedness, and sufficient power to execute that
determination. A firm belief in the existence of God will heighten all the
enjoyments of life, and, by conforming our hearts to his will, will secure the
approbation of a good conscience, and inspire us with the hopes of a blessed
immortality.

Never be tempted to disbelieve the existence of God, when every thing around
you proclaims it in a language too plain not to be understood. Never cast your
eyes on creation without having your souls expanded with this sentiment, "There
is a God." When you survey this globe of earth, with all its appendages; when
you behold it inhabited by numberless ranks of creatures, all moving in their
proper spheres, all verging to their proper ends, all animated by the same
great source of life, all supported at the same great bounteous table; when you
behold not only the earth, but the ocean and the air, swarming with living
creatures, all happy in their situation; when you behold yonder sun, darting an
effulgent blaze of glory over the heavens, garnishing mighty worlds, and waking
ten thousand songs of praise; when you behold unnumbered systems diffused
through vast immensity, clothed in splendour, and rolling in majesty; when you
behold these things, your affections will rise above all the vanities of time;
your full souls will struggle with ecstasy, and your reason, passions, and
feelings, all united, will rush up to the skies, with a devout acknowledgment
of the existence, power, wisdom, and goodness of God.

Let us behold him, let us wonder, let us praise and adore. These things will
make us happy. They will wean us from vice, and attach us to virtue. As a
belief of the existence of God is a fundamental point of salvation, he who
denies it runs the greatest conceivable hazard. He resigns the satisfaction of
a good conscience, quits the hopes of a happy immortality, and exposes himself
to destruction. All this for what? for the short-lived pleasures of a riotous,
dissolute life. How wretched, when he finds his atheistical confidence totally
disappointed! Instead of his beloved sleep and insensibility, with which he so
fondly flattered himself, he will find himself still existing after death,
removed to a strange place; he will then find that there is a God, who will not
suffer his rational creatures to fall into annihilation as a refuge from the
just punishment of their crimes; he will find himself doomed to drag on a
wretched tra^^ of existence in unavailing woe and lamentation. Al^s! how
astonished will he be to find himself plunged in the abyss of ruin and
desperation! God forbid that any of us should act so unwisely as to disbelieve,
when every thing around us proclaims his existence!

THE DIGNITY OF HUMAN NATURE. EXTRACT OF AN ORATION DELIVERED AT RHODE ISLAND
COLLEGE, 1796.
GUIDED by reason, man has traveled through the abstruse regions of the
philosophic world. He has originated rules by which he can direct the ship
through the pathless ocean, and measure the comet's flight over the fields of
unlimited space. He has established society and government. He can aggregate
the profusions of every climate, and every season. He can meliorate the
severity, and remedy the imperfections, of nature herself. All these things he
can perform by the assistance of reason.

By imagination, man seems to verge toward creative power. Aided by this, he
can perform all the wonders of sculpture and painting. He can almost make the
marble speak. He can almost make the brook murmur down the painted landscape.
Often, on the pinions of imagination, he soars aloft where the eye has never
traveled; where other stars glitter on the mantle of night, and a more
effulgent sun lights up the blushes of morning. Flying from world to world, he
gazes on all the glories of creation; or, lighting on the distant margin of the
universe, darts the eye of fancy over the mighty void, where power creative
never yet has energized; where existence still sleeps in the wide abyss of
possibility.

By imagination he can travel back to the source of time; converse with the
successive generations of men, and kindle into emulation while he surveys the
monumental trophies of ancient art and glory. He can sail down the stream of
time until he lo^e^* sight of stars and sun, by wandering into those re^^^ed
parts of eternity, when the heavens and the earth shall be no more."

To these unequivocal characteristics of greatness in man, let us adduce the
testimony of nature herself. Surrounding creation subserves the wants and
proclaims the dignity of man. For him day and night visit the world. For him
the seasons walk their splendid round. For him the earth teems with riches, and
the heavens smile with beneficence.

All creation is accurately adjusted to his capacity for bliss. He tastes the
dainties of festivity, breathes the perfumes of morning, revels on the charms
of melody, and regales his eye with all the painted beauties of vision.
Whatever can please, whatever can charm, whatever can expand the soul with
ecstasy of bliss, allures and solicits his attention. All things beautiful, all
things grand, all things sublime, appear in native loveliness, and proffer man
the richest pleasures of fruition.

INFERNAL CONFERENCE.
Satan. FRIENDS and confederates, welcome! for this proof
Of your affiance, thanks. On every call,
Whether we need your counsel or your arms,
Joyful I see your ready zeal displays
Virtues, which hell itself cannot corrupt.
I mean not to declaim: the occasion told
Speaks its own import, and the time's dispatch
All waste of words forbids. God's Son on earth,
Christ, the revealed Messiah, how to oppose
Is now the question; by what force, or power;
(Temptations have been tried, I name not them;)
Or dark conspiracy, we may pull down
This Sun of Righteousness from his bright sphere,
Declare, who can. I pause for a reply.

Baal. Why thus on me, as I were worthy; me,
Lost being like yourselves; as I alone
Could compass this high argument; on me,
Least in your sapient conclave; why you point
These scrutinizing looks, I muse; and, awed
By this your expectation, fain would shrink
From the great task to silence, had you not
Over these poor faculties such full control,
As to put by all pleas, and call them forth
In heaven or earth, or hell's profound abyss,
Yours in all uses, present at all hours.
Our kingly chief has told us we are met
To combat Christ on earth. Be It so! We yet
May try our fortune in another field;
Worse fortune than in heaven befell our arms;
Worse downfall than to hell, we cannot prove.
But with the scene our action too must change:
How? to what warfare? Circumvention, fraud,
Seduction; these are earthly weapons; these
As man to man opposes, so must we
To Christ incarnate. There be some, who cry,
Hence with such dastard arts! War, open war!
I honor such bold counselors, and yield
All that I can, my praise: till one be found,
One that may rival God's own Son in power,
And miracle to miracle oppose,
More than my praise I cannot; my assent
I will not give; 'twere madness. And how war
With God? what arms may we employ against him,
Whose very prophets can call down heaven's fires
Upon our priests and altars? For myself,
What powers I had I shall not soon forget;
What I have left I know, and for your use
Shall husband as I may, not vainly risk
Where they must surely fail. The Jews pretend
That Christ colludes with Beelzebub; the Jews
As far mistake my nature as my name.
The fallacy, O peers, confutes itself,
Forged to disparage Christ, not honor me.
Oh! that I had his wonder-working powers;
I Am not that fool to turn them on myself:
No, my brave friends, I Have yet too much to lose.
Therefore no more of Beelzebub and Christ;
No league, no compact can we hold together.
What then ensues? Despair? Perish the thought!
The brave renounce it, and the wise prevent;
You are both wise and brave. Our leader says
Temptations have been tried, and tried in vain,
Himself the tempter. Who will tread that ground,
Where he was foiled? For Adam a mere toy,
An apple served; Christ is not bribed by worlds:
So much the second Man exceeds the first
In strength and glory. But though Christ himself
Will not be tempted, those who hear him may:
Jews may be urged to envy, to revenge,
To murder: a rebellious race of old!
Wist ye not what a train this preacher has,
What followers, what disciples? These are men,
Mere men, frail sons of Adam, born in sin.
Here is our hope. I leave it to your thoughts.

Moloch. My thoughts it seems are known before I speak;
War, open war is all my note. I rise
To thank the prophet, who thus reads my heart,
Where honesty should wear it, in my face;
That face from danger I did never hide;
How then from him? Nor am I by his praise
More honored than by his dissenting voice*
For whilst he counsels circumvention, fraud,
Seduction, (if my memory wrong his words
I yield it to correction) we stand off,
Wide as the poles apart. Much I had hoped,
When the great tempter failed, and in your ears
Sung his own honor's dirge, we had heard the last
Of plots and mean temptations; mean I call them,
For great names cannot sanctify mean deeds.
Satan himself knows I opposed the attempt,
Appealed, protested; my thrice honored chief
Knows it full well, and blushes for the event.
And are we now caballing how to outwit
A few poor harmless fishermen; for such
Are Christ's disciples; how to gull and cheat
Their simple hearts of honesty? Oh peers,
For shame, if not for pity, leave them that,
That beggar's virtue. And is this the theme,
The mighty theme, which now employs the thoughts
Of your immortal synod? Shame, Oh shame!
Princes, dominions, arch-angelic thrones,
Imperial lords! these were your titles once;
By these names ye were known above the stars
Shame not your ancient dignities, nor sink
Beneath the vilest of the sons of men,
Whisperers, informers, spies. If Christ be God,
Fight, as becomes you to fight, with God:
If man, and sure his birth bespeaks no more,
Why all this preparation, this consult,
These mighty machinations and cabals?
Off with your foe at once; dismiss him hence
Where all his brother prophets have been sent;
Where his precursor John is gone before;
Whose voice still echoes through this wilderness,
"Repent ye, for God's kingdom is at hand!
Prepare ye the Lord's way!" It is prepared;
It leads to death; it marshals him the road
To that oblivious bourne, whence none return.
Herod yet lives; another royal feast,
Another wanton dance, and he, for whom
So many innocents were slain, shall fall.
Once vanquished, are we therefore to despair?
In heaven, unequal battle we provoked;
Though vast our host, the million was with God.
On earth, inquire of all the nations round
Whom they will serve; with one voice they reply,
We are their gods; they feed us with their blood,
Their sons and daughters they make pass through fire
To do us grace: if their own flesh they give,
Shall they withhold to sacrifice a foe?
Twelve tribes were all Jehovah had on earth,
And ten are lost; of this small remnant, few
And wretched are the friends that league with Heaven.
And where is now Christ's promised reign on earth?
When God's own servants rise against his Son,
And those, to whom the promises were given,
Revolt from their Messiah, can we wish
Greater revenge? What need have we to tempt
Those, who have hearts rebellious as our own,
As prompt to malice, no less prone to vex
God's righteous Spirit? And let come what may,
It comes not to our loss, rather our gain.
Let God arise to vengeance; let him pour
Destruction on his temple, whose proud height
Our chief can witness, measured by his fall:
Let him not leave one stone upon another,
As his rash Son has menaced; let his wrath
Through all the inhospitable earth disperse
His scattered tribes; such ever be the fate
Of all his worshippers! May scorn, contempt,
Derision be their lot, and may their God
Never recall his curse! Are we, O peers,
To mourn for his Jerusalem? Our joy
Springs from confusion: enmity 'twixt God
And man is our best triumph. For myself,
War is my harvest; then my altars blaze
Brightest, when human victims feed the flame.

Belial. After so many peaceful ages past
Since first emerging from hell's dark abyss,
Roused by our arch-angelic chief, we sprung
Up to this middle region, and here seized
On this terrestrial globe, created first
For man, our vassal now, where, at full ease,
Lords of the elements and gods adored,
We reign and revel undisturbed of Heaven.
If God, whose jealousy be sure ill brooks
That this fair world should be so long possessed
By us his exiled angels, and his name,
Pent up in Palestine, should now arouse
His slumbering wrath, and his best strength put forth
To wrestle for lost empire, and our earth,
As we in evil hour his heaven, assail,
Who of this mighty synod but must own
The provocation warrants the retort?
If then the Maker of mankind has cause
To meditate their rescue, we no less
Have cause to oppose the attempt, and hold them fast
To their allegiance in despite of Heaven.
Much then we owe to our great leader's care,
Who, ever watchful over the public weal,
Calls us to this full council, here to meet
In grave consult how best we may repair
Past disappointments, and repel the spite
Of this new Champion, levelled at our shrines.
Great is the trouble of my thoughts, O peers,
And much perplexed am I with doubts, what name,
Nature, and office to ascribe to Christ;
In form the lowliest of the sons of men,
In miracles omnipotent as God;
Whose voice controls the stoutest of our host,
Bids the graves open and their dead come forth;
Whose very touch is health; who with a glance
Pervades each heart, absolves it or condemns;
Whose virgin birth credulity scarce owns,
And nature disavows. Praised to all time,
Immortal as himself be the renown
Of that wise spirit, who shall devise the means
By force or fraud to overthrow the power
Of this mysterious foe: what shall I say?
Priest, Prophet, King, Messiah, Son of God?
Yet how God's unity, which well we know
Endures no second, should adopt a Son,
And essence indivisible divide,
Baffles my weak conjecture. Let that pass!
To such hard doctrines I subscribe no faith:
I Will call him man inspired, and wait till death
Gives sentence of mortality upon him.
Meanwhile let circumspection on our part
Fill all the anxious interim; alarm
Rome's jealousy; stir up the captious spleen
Of the proud Pharisee; beset him round
With snares to catch him; urge the envious priests,
For envy still beneath the altar lurks;
And note the man he trusts. Mammon could tell,
Though Mammon boasts not of his own success,
How few of human mould have yet withstood
His glittering, golden lures. The sword can kill
Man's body; gold destroys his very soul.
Yet mark me well, I counsel not to tempt
The Master; poverty can do no more
Than his own mortifying penance does,
Hunger and thirst and obstinately starve,
When his mere wish could make the rock a spring,
And its hard fragments, bread. Yet sure I am
All are not Christ's in heart, who with their lips
Confess him; these are men, and therefore frail,
Frail and corruptible. And let none say,
Fear prompts this counsel; I disclaim all fear
But for the general cause. In every heart
Nature has built my altar; every sect,
Nation and language with one voice confess
Pleasure the sovereign good. The Stoic churl,
The dogged cynic snarling in his tub,
And all the ragged moralizing crew,
Are hypocrites; philosophy itself
Is but my votary beneath a cloak.
It harms not me, though every idol god
Were tumbled from his base; alike I scorn
Samson's strong nerve and Daniel's flaming zeal.
And let Christ preach his mortifying rules;
Let him go forth through all the Gentile world,
And on the ruin of our fanes erect
His church triumphant over the gates of hell,
Still, still man's heart will draw the secret sigh
For pleasures unenjoyed; the gloomy cell
And melancholy fast, the midnight prayer,
And pale contrition weeping over her lamp,
Are penances, from which the sense revolts,
Fines, that compounding superstition pays
For pleasures past, or bribes for more to come.

Satan. Enough of this vain boast,
More than enough of these voluptuous strains,
Which, though they lull the ear, disarm the soul
Of its best attribute. Not gaudy flowers
Are culled for medicine, but the humble weed.
True wisdom, ever frugal of her speech,
Gives sage advice in plain and homely words.
The sum of all our reasoning ends in this,
That nothing but the death of Christ can solve
The mystery of his nature: till he falls
Scarce can I say we stand. All voices then,
Though varying in the means, conspire his death;
Some cautiously (...) Baal; some with zeal
Precipitate as ^oloc^, whose swift th^ught
Vaults over all impediments to seize
The goal of his ambition. But, O peers,
Ours is no trivial care; direct your sight
Along the ranks of that redeemed host,
On us hangs all their safety. Night and day
My anxious thoughts are laboring in their cause;
And whilst Christ walks the earth, I take no rest;
A watchful spy forever at his side,
Noting each word and deed; sometimes I mix
With the selected Twelve that page his steps;
Of these, though some have waver'd, none is false
Save one alone, Iscariot he by name;
The taint of avar^ce has touched his heart;
I Have marked him for my own. Hear, princes, hear!
This night the priests and elders will convene
Their secret conclave: I am in their hearts,
Burning with envy, malice, and revenge,
Their only thought is how to tangle Christ,
In whom of force I own no guile is found,
But gentleness instead, and perfect truth;
A lamb in nature without spot and pure;
Fit victim therefore for their Paschal rites,
Which now are near at hand: apt is the hour,
Apt are the instruments. What now remains
But to send forth a tempter to persuade
Iscariot to betray his Master's life,
And damn himself for gold? Speak* is there one,
One in this patriot circle, whom all eyes
Point out for this emprise? Most sure there is;
Belial has well predicted of our choice:
Mammon, stand forth! on thee the election lights.

Mammon. Prince of this world! to whom these armies owe,
(Lost but for thee in everlasting night)
The glorious prospect of yon rising sun,
It Is not to evade the labor, but prevent
The failure of your hopes, that I beseech
Your wisdom to correct its cho^ce, and lodge
This arduous embassy in abler hands:
N^less, if such your will, and my compeers
Adjudge me to this service, I submit.
In me is no repugnance, no delay;
For ever what these toiling hands could do,
Or patient thoughts devise, that I have done;
Whether in heaven ordained to undermine
God's adamantine throne, or doomed to dig
The solid sulphur of hell's burning soil,
Fearless I wrought, and, were there no tongues else
To vouch my services, these sears would speak.
How many daintier spirits do I see
Fair as in heaven, and in fresh bloom of youth,
Whilst I, with shrivelled sinews cramped and scorched,
'Midst pestilential damps and fiery blasts,
Drag as you see a miserable load,
Age-struck without the last resource of death:
This for myself: no more. You're not to learn
The snares which I employ are golden snares;
These are my arts; and like the crafty slave,
Who in Rome's Circus hurls the fatal net
Over his fierce pursuer, so often times
Have I entangled the proud hearts of men,
And made their courage stoop to shameful bribes,
Paid for dishonest deeds, perjuries and plots,
That draw them off from God, who els^ had filled
His courts ere now with guests, and pe^ed heaven.
These weapons and these hands you still command;
So dear I hold the general cause at heart,
So disciplined am I in duty's school,
That reckless of all hazard I present
Myself your servant, or, if so fate wills,
Your sacrifice: for though from mortal man
Discomfiture I dread not; yet if Christ,
Whom the great tempter foiled not, shall stand forth
The champion of his followers, witness for me,
You, my brave peers, and this angelic host,
I sought not this bold height, whence if I fall,
I do but fall where Satan could not stand.

Satan. Go then;
Go, brave adventurer, go where glory calls:
Auspicious thoughts engender in my breast,
And now prophetic visions burst upon me:
I see the traitor Judas with a band
Of midnight ruffians seize his peaceful Lord:
They drag him to the bar, accuse, condemn;
He bleeds, he dies! Darkness involves the rest.
Ascend the air, brave spirit, and 'midst the shout
Of grateful myriads wing thy course to fame.

EXTRACT FROM MR. PITT'S SPEECH IN THE BRITISH PARLIAMENT, MAY 13, 1777.
MY LORDS,
THIS is a flying moment; perhaps but six weeks left to arrest the dangers that
surround us. It is difficult for government, after all that has passed, to
shake hands with defiers of the king, defiers of the parliament, defiers of the
people. I am a defier of nobody; but if an end is not put to this war, there is
an end to this kingdom. I do not trust my judgment in my present state of
health; this is the judgment of my better days; the result of forty years
attention to America. They are re^! but what are they rebels for? Surely not
for defending their unquestionable rights! What have these rebels done
heretofore! I remember when they raised four regiments on their own bottom, and
took Louisburg from the veteran troops of France.

But their excesses have been great! I do not mean their panegyric; but must
observe, in extenuation, the erroneous and infatuated counsels, which have
prevailed. The door to mercy and justice has been shut against them. But they
may still be taken up upon the grounds of their former submission. I state to
you the importance of America; it is a double market; a market of consumption,
and a market of supply. This double market for millions with naval stores, you
are giving to your hereditary rival.

America has carried you through four wars, and will now carry you to your
death, if you do not take things in time. In the sportsman's phrase, when you
have found yourselves at fault, you must try back. You have ^nsacked every
corner of lower Saxony; but forty thousand German boors never can conquer ten
times the number of British freemen. They may ravage; they cannot conquer. But
you would conquer, you say! Why, what would you conquer? the map of America? I
am ready to meet any general officer on the subject.

What will you do out of the protection of your feet? In the winter, if
together, they are starved; and if dispersed, they are taken off in detail. I
am experienced in spring hopes and vernal promises. I know what ministers throw
out; but at last will come your equinoctial disappointment. They tell you --
what? That your army will be as strong as it was last year, when it was not
strong enough. You have gained nothing in America but stations. You have been
three years teaching them the art of war. They are apt scholars; and I will
venture to tell your lordships, that the American gentry will make officers
enough, fit to command the troops of all the European powers. What you have
sent there are too many to make peace, too few to make war.

If you conquer them, what then? You cannot make them respect you: you cannot
make them wear your does. You will plant an invincible hatred in their breasts
against you. Coming from the stock they do, they can never respect you. If
ministers are founded in saying there is no sort of treaty with France, there
is still a moment left; the point of honor is still safe. France must be as
self-destroying as England, to make a treaty while you are giving her America,
at the expense of twelve millions a year. The intercourse has produced every
thing to France; and England, poor old England must pay for all.

I have at different times made different propositions, adapted to the
c^rcumstances in which they were offered. The plan contained in the former bill
is now impracticable; the present motion will tell you where you are, and what
you have now to depend upon. It may produce a respectable division in America,
and unanimity at home. It will give America an option: she has yet made no
option. You have said, Lay down your arms, and she has given you the Spartan
answer, "Come and take them."

I will get out of my bed, on Monday, to move for an immediate redress of all
their grievances, and for continuing to them the right of disposing of their
own property. This will be the herald of peace; this will open the way for
treaty; this will show that parliament is sincerely disposed. Yet still much
must be left to treaty. Should you conquer this people, you conquer under the
cannon of France; under a masked battery then ready to open. The moment a
treaty with France appears, you must declare war, though you had only five
ships of the line in England: but France will defer a treaty as long as
possible.

You are now at the mercy of every little German chancery; and the pretensions
of France will increase daily, so as to become an avowed party in either peace
or war. We have tried for unconditional submission; let us try what can be
gained by unconditional redress. Less dignity will be lost in the repeal, than
in submitting to the demands of German chanceries. We are the aggressors. We
have invaded them. We have invaded them as much as the Spanish armada invaded
England. Mercy cannot do harm; it will seat the king where he ought to be,
throned on the hearts of his people; and millions at home and abroad, now
employed in obloquy or revolt, would then pray for him.

ON THE DAY OF JUDGMENT.
AT midnight, when mankind are wrapped in peace,
And worldly fancy feeds on golden dreams;
To give more dread to man's most dreadful hour;
At midnight, it is presumed, this pomp will burst
From tenfold darkness; sudden as the spark
From smitten steel; from nitrous grain, the blaze.
Man, starting from his couch, shall sleep no more!
The day is broke, which never more shall close!
Above, around, beneath, amazement all!
Terror and glory joined in their extremes!
Our God in grandeur, and our world on fire!
All nature struggling in the pangs of death!
Do thou not hear her? Do thou not deplore
Her strong convulsions, and her final groan?
Where are we now? Ah me! the ground is gone,
On which we stood, LORENZO! while thou may,
Provide more firm support, or sink forever!
Where? how? from whence? vain hope! It is too late!
Where, where, for shelter, shall the guilty fly,
When consternation turns the good man pale?
Great day! for which all other days were made;
For which earth rose from chaos, man from earth;
And an eternity, the date of Gods,
Descended on poor earth-created man!
Great day of dread, decision, and despair!
At thought of thee, each sublunary wish
Lets go its eager grasp, and drops the world;
And catches at each reed of hope in heaven.
At thought of thee! And art thou absent then,
LORENZO! no; it is here; it is begun;
Already is begun the grand assize,
In thee, in all. Deputed conscience scales
The dread tribunal, and forestals our doom:
Forestals; and, by forestalling, proves it sure.
Why on himself should man void judgment pass?
Is idle nature laughing at her sons?
Who conscience sent, her sentence will support,
And God above assert that God in man.
Thrice happy they, who enter now the court
Heaven opens in their bosoms: but, how rare!
Ah me! that magnanimity how rare!
What hero, like the man who stands himself;
Who dares to meet his naked heart alone;
Who hears, intrepid, the full charge it brings,
Resolved to silence future murmurs there?
The coward flies; and flying is undone.
(Art thou a coward? No.) The coward flies;
Thinks, but thinks slightly; asks, but fears to know;
Asks "What is truth?" with Pilate; and retires;
Dissolves the court, and mingles with the throng;
Asylum sad! from reason, hope, and heaven!
Shall all, but man, look out with ardent eye,
For that great day; which was ordained for man?
O day of consummation! Mark supreme
(If men are wise) of human thought! nor least,
Or in the sight of angels, or their King!
Angels, whose radiant circles, height over height,
Order over order rising, blaze over blaze,
As in a theater, surround this scene,
Intent on man, and anxious for his fate:
Angels look out for thee; for thee, their Lord,
To vindicate his glory; and for thee,
Creation universal calls aloud,
To disinvolve the moral world, and give
To Nature's renovation brighter charms.
THE DISSIPATED OXFORD STUDENT, A DIALOGUE BETWEEN A BROTHER, AND HIS TWO
SISTERS.
LIONEL, LAVINIA, and CAMILLA. Lionel. HOW do you do, girls? how do you do? I
am glad to see you, upon my soul I am.


Shaking them hard by the hands. Lavinia. I thought, brother, you had been at
Dr. Marchmont's!


Lion. All in good time, my dear; I shall certainly visit the old gentleman
before long.


Lav. Gracious, Lionel! -- If my mother --


Lion. My dear little Lavinia, [Chucking her under the chin.] I have a mighty
notion of making visits at my own time and appointment, instead of my mamma's.


Lav. O Lionel! and can you just now --


Lion. Come, come, don't let us waste our precious moments in this fulsome
moralizing. If I had not luckily been hard by, I should not have known the
coast was clear. Pray where are the old folks gone tantivying?


Camilla. To Cleves.


Lion. To Cleves! What a happy escape! I was upon the point of going thither
myself. Camilla, what is the matter with thee, my little duck?


Came. Nothing -- I am only thinking -- Pray when do you go to Oxford?


Lion. Poh, poh, what do you talk of Oxford for? you are grown quite stupid,
girl. I believe you have lived too long with that old maid of a Margland. Pray
(...) does that dear creature do? I am afraid she will grow melancholy from not
seeing me so long. Is she as pretty as she used to be? I have some notion of
sending her a suitor.


Lav. O brother, is it possible you can have such spirits?


Lion. O hang it; if one is not merry when one can, what is the world good for?
Besides. I do assure you, I fretted so consumedly hard at first, that for the
life of me I can fret no longer.


Came. But why are you not at Dr. Marchmont's?


Lion. Because, my dear soul, you cannot conceive how much pleasure those old
doctors take in lecturing a youngster who is in any disgrace.


Came. Disgrace!


Lav. At all events, I beseech you to be a little careful; I would not have my
poor mother find you here for the world.


Lion. O, as to that, I defy her to desire the meeting less than I do. But
come, let us talk of something else. How go on the classics? Is my old friend,
Dr. Orkborne, as chatty and amusing as ever?


Came. My dear Lionel. I am filled with apprehension and perplexity. Why should
my mother wish not to see you? And why -- and how is it possible you can wish
not to see her?


Lion. What, don't you know it all?


Came. I only know that something is wrong; but how, what, or which way, I have
not heard.


Lion. Has not Lavinia told you, then?


Lav. No; I could be in no haste to give her so much pain.


Lion. You are a good girl enough. But how came you here, Camilla? and what is
the reason you have not seen my mother yourself?


Came. Not seen her! I have been with her this half hour.


Lion. What! and in all that time did she not tell you?


Came. She did not name you.


Lion. Is it possible! Well she is a noble creature, I must confess. I wonder
how she could ever have such a son. And I am still less like my father than I
am like her. I believe in my conscience I was changed in the cradle. Will you
own me, young ladies, if some villainous attorney or exciseman should claim me
by and by?


Came. Dear Lionel, do explain to me what has happened. You talk so wildly, that
you make me think it important and trifling twenty times in a minute.


Lion. O, a horrid business! Lavinia must tell you. I Will withdraw till she has
done. Don't despise me, Camilla. I am confounded sorry, I assure you. [Going;
and then immediately returning.] Come, upon the whole, I had better tell it you
myself; for she will make such a dismal ditty of it, that it will not be over this
half year. The sooner we have done with it the better. It will only put you out
of spirits. You must know I was in rather a bad scrape at Oxford last year --


Came. Last year! and you never told us of it before!


Lion. O, 'twas about something you would not understand; so I shall not
mention particulars now. I^ is enough for you to know, that two or three of us
wanted a little cash! Well, so -- in short, I sent a letter -- somewhat of a
threatening sort -- to old uncl^ Relvil! and --


Came. O Lionel!


Lion. O, I did not sign it. It was only begging a little money, which he can
afford to spare very well; and just telling him, if he did not send it to a
certain place which I mentioned, he would have his brains blown out.


Came. How horrible!


Lion. Poh, poh; he had only to send the m^^^^y, you know, and then his brains
might keep their p^ace. Besides, you cannot suppose there was gunpowder in the
words; though, to be sure, the letter was charged with a few vollies of oaths.
But, would you believe it! the poor old gull was fool enough actually to send
the money where he was directed.


Lav. Hold, hold, Lionel! I cannot endure to hear you speak in such disgraceful
terms of that worthy man. How could you treat that excellent uncle in such a
cruel manner! How could you find a heart to swear at so meek, so benevolent, so
indulgent --


Lion. My dear little chicken, don't be so precise and old maidish. Don't you
know it is ^ relief to a man's mind to swear a few cutting oaths now and then,
when he is in a passion? when all the time he would no more do harm to the
people he swears at, than you would, who mince out all your words as if you
were talking treason, and thought every man a spy that heard you. It is a very
innocent refreshment to a man's mind, my dear. But the difficulty is, you know
nothing of the world.


Came. Fie, brother! You know how sickly our uncle has always been, and how
easily he might be alarmed.


Lion. Why, yes, Camilla; I really think it was a very wicked trick; and I
would give half my little finger that I had not done it. But it is over now, you
know; so what signifies making the worst of it?


Came. And did he not discover you?


Lion. No; I gave him particular orders, in my letter, not to attempt any thing
of that sort; assuring him there were spies about him to watch his proceedings.
The good old simpleton took it all for gospel. So there the matter ended.
However, as ill luck would have it, about three months ago, we wanted another
sum --


Lav. And could you again --


Lion. Why, my dear, it was only taking a little of my own fortune beforehand,
for I am his heir; so we all agreed it was merely robbing myself* for we had
several consultations about it; and one of us is to be a lawyer.


Came. But you give me some pleasure here; for I had never heard that my uncle
had made you his heir.


Lion. Neither had I, my deary; but I take it for granted. Besides, our little
lawyer put it into my head. Well, we wrote again, and told the poor old soul,
for which I assure you I am heartily penitent, that, if he did not send me
double the sum, in the same manner, without delay, his house was to be set on
fire, while he and all his family were in bed and asleep. Now don't make faces
nor shruggings; for I promise you, I think already I deserve to be hung for
giving him the fright; though I would not really have hurt the hair of his head
for half his fortune. But who could have guessed that the old codger would have
bitten so readily? The money, however, came; and we thought the business all
secure, and agreed to get the same sum annually.


Came. Annually! O horrible!


Lion. Yes, my darling. You have no conception how convenient it would have
been for our extra expenses. But, unluckily, uncle grew worse, and went abroad;
and then consulted with some crab of a friend, and that friend, with some
demagogue of a magistrate, and so all is now blown. However, we had managed it
so cleverly, that it cost them nearly three months to find it out; owing* I
must confess, to poor uncle's cowardice, in not making his inquiries before the
money was carried off, and he himself beyond the sea. The other particulars
Lavinia must give you; for I have talked of it now till I have made myself
quite sick. Do tell me some diverting story to drive it a little out of my
head. But, by the way, pray what has carried the old folks to Cleves? Have they
gone to tell this sad tale to uncle Hugh, so that I might lose him too?


Lav. No; your afflicted parents are determined not to name it. They are
striving that nobody else shall know any thing of the matter, except Dr.
Marchmont.


Lion. Well, they are good souls, it must be acknowledged. I wish I deserved
them, better. I wish too it was not such plaguey dull business to be good. I
confess, girls* it wounds my conscience to think how I have afflicted my
parents, especially my poor mother, who is not so well able to bear it. But
when one is at Oxford* or in London -- your merry blades there, I cannot (...)
it, my dear sisters, your merry blades there are (...) ^ad fellows. Yet there
is such fun, such spirit, such genuine sport among them, I cannot, for my life,
keep out of the way. Besides, you have no conception, young ladies, what a
bye-word you soon become among them, if they find you flinching. But this is
little to the purpose; for you know nothing of life yet, poor things.


Lav. I would not for the world say any thing to pain you, my dear brother; but
if this is what you call life, I wish we never might know any thing of it. I
wish more, that you had been so happy as never to have known it. You pity our
ignorance, we pity your folly. How strangely infatuated you are! But yet I will
hope, that, in future, your first study will be to resist such dangerous
examples, and to shun such unworthy friends. Pray reflect one moment on the
distressing situation of your dear parents, who cannot endure your presence,
through the poignancy of grief! What labors and hardships has your poor father
encountered, to gain wherewithal to support you at the University! And what is
your return! Such, my dear brother, as will soon bring down his gray hairs with
sorrow to the grave. As for your poor mother, it is quite uncertain whether any
of us ever see her again, as your much-injured uncle has sent for her over sea
to attend him in his sickness; and tomorrow she sets out. She has left it in
solemn charge with me, to deliver you a message from her, which, if you have
any sensibility remaining, will cut you to the heart.


Lion. I know she can have said nothing worse than I expect, or than I merit.
Probe me, then, Lavinia, without delay. Keep me not in a moment's suspense. I
feel a load of guilt upon me, and begin sincerely to repent. She is acting
toward me like an angel; and if she were to command me to turn hermit, I know
I ought to obey her.


Lav. Well, then, my mother says, my dear Lionel, that the fraud you have
practiced --


Lion. The fraud! what a horrid word! Why it was a mere trick! a joke! a
frolic! just to make an old hunks open his purse-strings to his natural heir. I
am astonished at my mother! I really don't care whether I hear another syllable.


Lav. Well, then, my dear Lionel, I will wait till you are calmer: my mother, I
am sure, did not mean to irritate, but to convince.


Lion. [Striding about the room.] My mother makes no allowances. She has no
faults herself, and for that reason she thinks nobody else should have any.
Besides, how should she kn^w what it is to be a young man? and to want a little
cash, and not know how to get it?


Lav. But I am sure, if you wanted it for any proper purpose, my father would
have denied himself every thing, in order to supply you.


Lion. Yes, yes; but suppose I want it for a purpose that is not proper, how am
I to get it then?


Came. Why, then, my dear Lionel, surely you must be sensible you ought to go
without it.


Lion. Aye, that is as you giris say, who know nothing of the matter. If a young
man, when he goes into the world, were to make such a speech as that, he would
be pointed at. Besides, whom must he live with? You don't suppose he is to shut
himself up, (...) a few mu^y books, sleeping over the fire, under pretense of
study, all day long, do you? like young Melmond* who kn^ws no more of the world
than either of you?


Came. Indeed, he seems to mean amiable and modest young man, though very
romantic.


Lion. O, I dare say he does! I could have laid any wager of that. He Is just a
girl's man, just the very thing, all sentiment, and poetry, and heroics. But
we, my little dear, we lads of spirit, hold all that amazingly cheap. I assure
you, I would as soon be seen trying on a lady's cap at a glass, as poring over
a crazy old author. I warrant you think, because one is at the University, one
must be a book-worm*


Lav. Why, what else do you go there for but to study?


Lion. Every thing else in the world, my dear.


Came. But are there not sometimes young men who are scholars, without being
book-worms? Is not Edgar Mandlebert such a one?


Lion. O yes, yes; an odd thing of that sort happens now and then. Mandlebert
has spirit enough to carry it off pretty well, without being ridiculous; though
he is as deep, for his time, as ever an old fellow of a college. But then this
is no rule for others. You must not expect an Edgar Mandlebert at every turn,
my dear innocent creatures.


Lav. But Edgar has had an extraordinary education, as well as possessing
extraordinary talents and goodness; you too, my dear Lionel, to fulfill what may
be expected from you, should look back to your father, who was brought up at
the same university, and is now considered as one of the first men it has
produced. While he was respected by the learned for his application, he was
loved even by the indolent for his candor and kindness of heart. And though his
income, as you know, was very small, he never ran in debt; and by an exact but
open economy, escaped all imputation of meanness.


Lion. Yes; but all this is nothing to the purpose. My father is no more like
other men than if he had been born in another planet; and my attempting to
resemble him would be as great a joke, as if you were to dress up in Indiana's
flowers and feathers, and expect people to call you a beauty. I was born a bit
of a buck; and have no manner of natural taste for study, and poring, and
expounding, and black-letter work. I am a light, airy spark, at your service,
ladies; not quite so wise as I am merry. I am one of your eccentric geniuses;
but let that pass. My father, you know, is firm as a rock. He minds neither
wind nor weather, nor fleerer nor sneerer, nor joker nor jeerer; but his
firmness he has kept all to himself; not a whit of it do I inherit. Every wind
that blows veers me about, and gives me a new direction. But with all my
father's firmness and knowledge, I very much doubt whether he knows any thing
of real life. That is the main thing, my dear hearts. But, come, Lavinia,
finish your message.


Lav. My mother says, the fraud you have practiced, whether from wanton folly
to give pain, or from rapacious discontent to get money, she will leave without
comment; satisfied that if you have any feeling at all, its effects must bring
remorse; since it has dangerously increased the infirmities of your uncle,
driven him to a foreign land, and forced your mother to forsake her home and
family in his pursuit, unless she were willing to see you punished by the
entire disinheritance with which you are threatened. But --


Lion. O, no more! no more! I am ready to shoot myself already! My dear,
excellent mother, what do I not owe you! I had never seen, never thought of the
business in this solemn way before. I meant nothing at first but a silly joke,
and all this mischief has followed unaccountably. I assure you, I had no notion
at the beginning he would have minded the letter; and afterward, Jack Whiston
persuaded me, that the money was as good as my own, and that it was nothing but
a little cribbing from myself. I will never trust him again; I see the whole
now in its true and atrocious colors. I will devote all the means in my power
to make amends to my dear incomparable mother. But proceed, Lavinia.


Lav. But since you are permitted, said my mother, to return home, by the
forgiving temper of your father, who is himself* during the vacation, to be
your tutor, after he is sufficiently composed to admit you into his presence,
you can repay his goodness only by the most intense application to those
studies which you have hitherto neglected, and of which your neglect has been
the cause of your errors. She charges you also to ask yourself, upon what
pretext you can justify the wasting of his valuable time, however little you
may regard your own. Finally --


Lion. I never wasted his time! I never desired to have any instruction in the
vacations. It Is the most deuced thing in life to be studying so incessantly.
The waste of time is all his own affair, his own choice, not mine. Go on,
however, and open the whole of the budget.


Lav. Finally, she adjures you to consider, that if you still persevere to
consume your time in wilful negligence, to bury all thought in idle gaiety, and
to act without either reflection or principle, the career of faults which
begins but in unthinking folly, will terminate in shame, in guilt, and in ruin!
And though such a declension of all good, must involve your family in your
affliction, your disgrace will ultimately fall but where it ought; since your
own want of personal sensibility will neither ^arden nor blind any human being
beside yourself. This is all.


Lion. And enough too. I am a very wretch! I believe that, though I am sure I
cannot tell how I came so; for I never intend any harm, never think, never dream
of hurting any mortal! But as to study, I must own to you, I hate it most
deucedly. Any thing else; if my mother had but exacted any thing else, with
what joy I would have shown my obedience! If she had ordered me to be
horse-ponded, I do protest to you, I would not have demurred.


Came. How you always run into the ridiculous!


Lion. I was never so serious in my life; not that I should like to be
horse-ponded in the least, though I would submit to it by way of punishment,
and out of duty: but then, when it was done, it would be over: now the deuce of
study is, there is no end to it! And it does so little for one! one can go
through life so well without it! There is but here and there an old codger who
asks one a question that can bring it into any play. And then, a turn upon
one's heel, or looking at one's watch, or wondering at one's short memory, or
happening to forget just that one single passage, carries off the whole in two
minutes, as completely as if one had been working one's whole life to get ready
for the assault. And pray now tell me, how can it be worth one's best days,
one's gayest hours, the very flower of one's life, all to be sacrificed to
plodding over musty grammars and lexicons, merely to cut a figure just for
about two minutes, once or twice in a year?


Came. Indeed, Lionel, you appear to me a striking example of what a hard thing
it is to learn to do well, after one has been accustomed to do evil. How
volatile! how totally void of all stability! One minute you exhibit appearances
of repentance and reformation, and the next minute, all fair prospects vanish.
How I lament that you were so early exposed to a vicious world, before you had
gained sufficient strength of mind to withstand bad examples!


Lion. Forbear, Camilla. You hurt me too much. You excite those severe twinges
of remorse, which, I am obliged to own, I have never been wholly free from,
since I joined my merry companions, and began to learn the world.
Notwithstanding my gaiety, and my apparent contentment, I confess there is
something within, which constantly admonishes me of my errors, and makes me
feel unhappy: so that, if it were not for fashion's sake, I can truly say, I
could wish I were in your recluse situation; here to remain, in my once
pleasant abode, and never more mingle with the world.


Lav. Dear brother, I cannot leave you, without once more calling your
attention to your parents, your family, and your friends. Think of their
present situation. If you have no regard for your own character, your present,
or future happiness, I entreat you to have some pity for them. Let not the
tyrant Fashion bring you into abject slavery. Pardon me when I tell you, your
pretended friends are your worst enemies. They have led you into a path which
will carry you directly to inevitable rui^, unless you immediately forsake it.
That knowledge of the world, of which you so vainly boast, is infinitely worse
than the ignorance which you so much despise. Believe me, my dear brother, it
is a knowledge, which, by your own confession, never has produced you any
happiness, nor will it ever; but will guide you to wretchedness and misery.


Lion. My dear sisters, I am convinced. Your words have pierced my very soul. I
am now wretched, and I deserve to be so. I am determined from this moment to
begin my reformation, and, with the assistance of Heaven, to complete it. Never
more will I see my vile companions, who have enticed me to go such lengths in
wickedness. What do I not owe to my amiable sisters for their friendly and
seasonable advice! I will go directly to my father, and, like the prodigal son,
fall on my knees before him, beg his forgiveness, and put myself entirely under
his direction and instruction; and, so long as I live, I never will offend him
again.


Lav. May Heaven assist you in keeping your resolutions!


EXTRACT FROM A SPEECH IN CONGRESS, APRIL, 1796, ON THE SUBJECT OF THE TREATY
WITH GREAT BRITAIN.
IF any, against all these proofs which have been offered, should maintain that
the peace with the Indians will be stable without the western posts, to them I
will urge another reply. From arguments calculated to produce conviction, I
will appeal directly to the hearts of those who hear me, and ask whether it is
not already planted there? I resort especially to the convictions of the
Western gentlemen, whether, supposing no Posts and no Treaty, the settlers will
remain in security? Can they take it upon them to say, that an Indian peace,
under these circumstances, will prove firm? No, Sir, it will not be peace but a
sword; it will be no better than a lure to draw victims within the reach of the
tomahawk.

On this theme, my emotions are unutterable. If I could find words for them, if
my powers bore any proportion to my zeal, I would swell my voice to such a note
of remonstrance, it should reach every log-house beyond the mountains. I would
say to the inhabitants, Wake from your false security. Your cruel dangers, your
more cruel apprehensions are soon to be renewed. The wounds, yet unhealed, are
to be torn open again. In the day time, your path through the woods will be
ambushed. The darkness of midnight will glitter with the blaze of your
dwellings. You are a father; the blood of your sons shall fatten your
cornfield. You are a mother; the war hoop shall wake the sleep of the cradle.

On this subject you need not suspect any deception on your feelings. It is a
spectacle of horror which cannot be overdrawn. If you have nature in your
hearts, they will speak a language, compared with which, all I have said or can
say, will be poor and frigid. Will it be whispered that the treaty has made me
a new champion for the protection of the frontiers? It is known that my voice
as well as vote have been uniformly given in conformity with the ideas I have
expressed. Protection is the right of the frontiers; it is our duty to give it.

Who will accuse me of wandering out of the subject? Who will say that I
exaggerate the tendencies of our measures? Will any one answer by a sneer, that
all this is idle preaching? Will any one deny that we are bound, and I would
hope to good purpose, by the most solemn sanctions of duty for the vote we
give? Are despots alone to be reproached for unfeeling indifference to the
tears and blood of their subjects? Are republicans unresponsible? Have the
principles on which you ground the reproach upon cabinets and kings no
practical influence, no binding force? Are they merely themes of idle
declamation, introduced to decorate the morality of a newspaper essay, or to
furnish pretty topics of harangue from the windows of that State house? I trust
it is neither too presumptuous nor too late to ask, Can you put the dearest
interest of society at risk, without guilt, and without remorse?

By rejecting the posts, we light the savage fires; we bind the victims. This
day we undertake to render account to the widows and orphans whom our decision
will make, to the wretches that will be roasted at the stake, to our country,
and I do not deem it too serious to say, to conscience, and to God. We are
answerable; and if duty be any thing more than a word of imposture; if
conscience be not a bugbear, we are preparing to make ourselves as wretched as
our country.

There is no mistake in this case; there can be none. Experience has already
been the prophet of events, and the cries of our future victims have already
reached us. The western inhabitants are not a silent and uncomplaining
sacrifice. The voice of humanity issues from the shade of the wilderness. It
exclaims, that while one hand is held up to reject this treaty, the other
grasps a tomahawk. It summons our imagination to the scenes that will open. It
is no great effort of the imagination to conceive that events so near are
already begun. I can fancy that I listen to the yells of savage vengeance and
the shrieks of torture. Already they seem to sigh in the western wind; already
they mingle with every echo from the mountains.

Let me cheer the mind, weary, no doubt, and ready to despo^d on this prospect,
by presenting another, which is yet in our power to realize. Is it possible for
^ real American to look at the prosperity of this country without some desire
for its continuance, without some respect for the measures, which, many will
say, produce^* and all will confess, have preserved it? Will he not (...) some
dread that a change of system will reverse the scene? The well-grounded fears
of our citizens, in 179^* were removed by the treaty, but are not forgotten.
Then they deemed war near^y inevitable; and would no^ this adjustment have been
considered at that day as a happy escape from the calamity?

The great interest and the general desire of our people was to enjoy the
advantages of neutrality. This instrument, however misrepresented, affords
America that inestimable security. The causes of our disputes are either cut up
by the roots, or referred to a new negotiation, after the end of the European
war. This was ga^^ing every thing, because it confirmed our neutrality, by
which our citizens are gaining every thing. This alone would justify the
engagements of the government. For, when the fiery vapors of the wa^ lowered in
the skirts of our horizon, all our wishes were concentered in this one, that we
might escape the desolation of the storm. This treaty, like a rainbow on the
edge of the cloud, marked to our eyes the space where it was raging, and
afforded at the same time the sure prognostic of fair weather. If we reject it,
the vivid colors will grow pale; it will be a baleful meteor portending tempest
and war.

Let us not hesitate then to agree to the appropriation to carry it into
faithful execution. Thus we shall save the faith of our nation, secure its
peace, and diffuse the spirit of confidence and enterprise that will augment
its prosperity. The progress of wealth and improvement is wonderful, and, some
will think, too rapid. The field for exertion is fruitful and vast; and if
peace and good government should be preserved, the acquisitions of our citizens
are not so pleasing as the proofs of their industry, as the instruments of
their future success. The rewards of exertion go to augment its power. Profit
is every hour becoming capital. The vast crop of our neutrality is all seed
wheat, and is sown again, to swell, almost beyond calculation, the future
harvest of prosperity. And in this progress, what seems to be faction is found
to fall short of experience.

EXTRACT FROM AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED AT WORCESTER, (MASS.) JULY 4, 1796; BY
FRANCIS BLAKE, ESQUIRE.
IN viewing the causes which led to the event of this joyous anniversary; in
tracing the effects which have resulted to America; in searching for the
principles which impelled to the contest; in recalling the feelings which
supported us in the struggle, it cannot fail to occur to us that the causes
have not been confined to the limits of our continent; that the effects have
extended far beyond the boundaries of our nation; that the glorious example,
with electrical rapidity, has flashed across the atlantic; that, guided by the
same principles, conducted by the same feelings, the people, who so gallantly
fought and bled for the security of our lives and our liberties, are now
fighting and bleeding in defense of their own.

On this day, therefore, religiously devoted to the consecration of our
independence, it becomes us, as the votaries of freedom, as friends to the
rights of man, and bound to support them whenever invaded, to turn our
attention, with a grateful enthusiasm, to the scenes of their sufferings, their
revolt, and their victories. While exulting in the full enjoyment of peace and
tranquillity, shall not a tear for the unexampled distresses of this
magnanimous nation, check, for a moment, the emotions of our joy?

They have sworn that they will live FREE or DIE! They have solemnly sworn,
that the sword, which has been drawn in defense of their country, shall never
be returned to its scabbard, till it has secured to them victory and freedom.
Let us then breathe forth a fervent ejaculation to Heaven, that their vows may
be remembered; that the cause of our former allies may not be deserted, till
they have scourged their invaders; till they have driven them back in confusion
to the regions of terror, from whence they emerged.

While we remember with horror the continued effusion of blood, which darkened
the morning of their revolution, let us not forget that their vengeance was
roused by the champions of despotism, whose lives have since justly atoned for
the crimes they committed. While we lament the sanguinary scenes, which clouded
its progress, let it not be forgotten that they arose from the bloody manifesto
of a band of tyrants, combined for the helli^h purpose of again rivetting the
chains they had broken.

The league of Pilnitz, like the league of Satan and his angels, revolting
against the Majesty of heaven, was professedly fabricated, to arrest forever
the progress of freedom; to usurp the dominion of France, and divide the spoil
among this band of royal plunderers. Have we not heard, that the noble, the
generous, the grateful monarch of the forest, that fawned at the feet of
Androcles, when remembering his former friendship, will ever turn with fury on
his pursuers; and when robbed of his whelps, rests not till his fangs are
crimsoned in the blood of the aggressor?

Shall then the fervor of our friendship be abated, by remembering the
transitory frenzy of a people distracted with the enthusiasm of freedom, and
irritated to madness by the dreadful prospect of losing what they had enjoyed
but for a moment? Let it never be said of us, as of Rome and of Athens, that
ingratitude is the common vice of republics. Was it to the crowned monarch,
named Louis the Sixteenth, or to the people of France, that we were indebted,
for the blood and treasure that were so profusely lavished in our cause? Shall
then their services be forgotten, in the remembrance of their momentary
excesses? Or shall we refuse our most cordial concurrence in the feelings which
impel them to the present contest with the ruffian potentates of Europe?

Can we doubt, for a moment, which is the cause we are bound to support with
our sanction, when we behold the winds and the seas, those dreadful ministers
of Heaven's vengeance, commissioned to advance their progress, and deluge their
enemies? When we behold Ariel, with his attendant spirits, gently hovering over
their navies, and wafting then to victory on the bosom of the ocean; while
Neptune and Boreas have combined against the league of their oppressors, to
overwhelm in the deep these deluded followers of Pharaoh! Have we not seen them
fed, as with manna from heaven; the waters divided, and the walls of Jericho
falling before them, while the fair prospect of liberty has led them in triumph
through the wilderness, as a cloud by day, and a pillar of fire by night!

AMERICANS! Let us join in a fervent supplication, that the sacred charters of
humanity, which we have once sealed with our blood, may be forever preserved
from the deadly grasp of tyrants.

FRENCHMEN! Be firm, be undaunted in the struggle you have thus miraculously
supported. Evince to the world, now gazing with admiration at your exploits in
the field of battle, that you have virtue equal to your courage; that you are
friends to the friends of humanity; that your arms are nerved only against the
enemies of man. Let not the sacred name of LIBERTY be polluted by the frenzy of
licentious passions; but may your present glorious constitution, while it
protects your freedom from the unhallowed ravages of tyranny, remain an
unshaken bulwark against the destructive fury of faction.

TYRANTS! Turn from the impious work of blood in which your hands are imbrued,
and tremble at the desperation of your revolting subjects! Repent in sackcloth
and ashes. For behold, ye, who have been exalted up to heaven, shall, ere long,
be cast down to hell! The final period of your crimes is rapidly approaching.
The grand POLITICAL MILLENNIUM is at hand; when tyranny shall be buried in
ruins; when all nations shall be united in ONE MIGHTY REPUBLIC! When the four
angels, that stand on the four corners of the globe, shall, with one accord,
lift up their voices to heaven; proclaiming PEACE ON EARTH, AND GOOD WILL TO
ALL MEN.

GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF AMERICA. EXTRACT FROM A POEM SPOKEN AT DARTMOUTH
COLLEGE, ON COMMENCEMENT DAY, 1795.
FROM Patagonia's snow-invested wilds,
To Darien, where constant verdure smiles;
The Andes meet the morning's earliest ray,
O'erlook the clouds and check the flood of day*
In copious torrents from their western side,
Flow the vast streams of Amazonia's tide,
Roll on majestic through her boundless plain,
And swell the surface of the neighboring main.
Nor Plata less a broad, deep channel fills;
Danube and Walga by his side were rills.
But leave, my muse, this wide-extended clime,
By nature stamped with all she owns sublime.
Here she has wrought upon her largest plan,
But mourns in solitude the wrongs of man.
Here Guatemozin writhed in flames of fire,
And slaughtered millions round their prince expire*
Rise, sleeping vengeance! vindicate their cause;
And thou, stern justice, execute thy laws:
Ye Andes, strike Hesperian fraud with dread,
Burst thy volcanoes on the guilty head!
Where Cancer's sun pours down his ardent blaze,
Draws the Monsoons, and lengthens out his days,
The spacious gulp of Mexi^ ro^ls his tide,
And thronging fleets of various nations ^de.
The fertile i^les their rich luxuriance pour,
And western dainties crown the eastern shore.
But weep, humanity, the black disgrace,
And spread thy blushes over oppression's face!
Ye sons of mirth, your bowls, your richest food,
Is mingled with fraternal tears and blood.
Still groans the slave beneath his master's rod,
But nature, wronged, appeals to nature's GOD.
The sun frowns angry at the inhuman sight*
The stars, offended, redden in the night:
In western skies, drear horror gathers round,
And waking vengeance murmurs under ground;
Over all the gulf the dark'ning vapors rise,
And the black clouds sail awful round the skies.
From heaven to earth swift thunderbolts are hurled,
And storm's dread demon shakes the astonished world.
The rich plantation lies a bar^en waste,
And all the works of slavery are defaced.
Ye tyrants, own the devastation just;
It Is for your wrongs the fertile earth is cursed.
Columbia's States unfold their milder scenes,
And freedom's realms afford more pleasing themes.
From Georgia's plains, to Hudson's highest source,
The northern Andes range their varied course:
Rank above rank, they swell their growing size,
Rear their blue arches, and invade the skies.
Here spreads a forest; there a city shines;
Here swell the hills, and there a vale declines.
Here, through the meads, meand'ring rivers run;
There placid lakes reflect the full-orb'd sun.
From mountain sides perennial fountains flow,
And streams majestic bend their course below.
Here rise the groves; there opes the fertile lawn,
Fresh fragrance breathes* and Ceres waves her corn.
Along the east, where the proud billows roar,
Capacious harbors grace the winding shore:
The nation's splendour and the merchant's pride
Wafts with each gale, and floats with every tide.
From Iroquois to vast Superior's strand,
Spread the wide lakes and insulate the land.
Here growing Commerce shall unfold her sail,
Load the rich bark, and woo the inland gale.
Far to the west, where savage hordes reside,
Smooth Missisippi rolls his copious tide,
And fair Ohio weds his silver side.
Hail, happy States! thine is the blissful seat,
Where nature's gifts and art's improvements meet.
Thy temperate air breathes health; thy fertile soil,
In copious plenty, pays the laborer's toil.
Ask not for mountains of Peruvian ore,
Nor court the dust that shines on Afric's shore.
The plough explores for thee, the richest mine;
Than autumn's fruit, no goodlier ore can shine.
Over the wide plain and through the opening glade,
Flows the canal obsequious to the spade.
Commerce to wealth and knowledge turns the key,
Floats over the land and sails to every sea.
Thrice happy art! be thy white sail unfurled,
Not to corrupt, but socialize the world.
The muse prophetic views the coming day,
When federal laws beyond the line shall sway.
Where Spanish indolence inactive lies,
And every art and every virtue dies;
Where pride and avarice their empire hold,
Ignobly great and poor amid their gold,
Columbia's genius shall the mind inspire,
And fill each breast with patriotic fire.
Nor east nor western oceans shall confine
The generous flame that dignifies the mind;
Over all the earth shall freedom's banner wave,
The tyrant blast, and liberate the slave.
Plenty and peace shall spread from pole to pole,
Till earth's grand family possess one soul.
DIALOGUE BETWEEN A MASTER AND SLAVE.
Master. NOW, villain! what have you to say for this s^nd attempt to run away?
Is there any punishment that you do not deserve?


Slave. I well know that nothing I can say will avail. I submit to my fate.


Mast. But are you not a base fellow, a hardened and ungrateful rascal?


Slave. I am a slave. That is answer enough.


Mast. I am not content with that answer. I thought I discerned in you some
tokens of a mind superior to your condition. I treated you accordingly. You
have been comfortably fed and lodged, not overworked, and attended with the
most humane care when you were sick. And is this the return?


Slave. Since you condescend to talk with me, as man to man, I will reply. What
have you done, what can you do for me, that will compensate for the liberty
which you have taken away?


Mast. I did not take it away. You were a slave when I fairly purchased you.


Slave. Did I give my consent to the purchase?


Mast. You had no consent to give. You had already lost the right of disposing
of yourself.


Slave. I had lost the power, but how the right? I was treacherously kidnapped
in my own country, when following an honest occupation. I was put in chains,
sold to one of your countrymen, carried by force on board his ship, brought
hither, and exposed to sale like a beast in the market, where you bought me.
What step in all this progress of violence and injustice can give a right? Was
it in the villain who stole me, in the slave-merchant who tempted him to do so,
or in you who encouraged the slave-merchant to bring his cargo of human cattle
to cultivate your lands?


Mast. It is in the order of Providence that one man should become subservient
to another. It ever has been so, and ever will be. I found the custom, and did
not make it.


Slave. You cannot but be sensible, that the robber who puts a pistol to your
breast may make just the same plea. Providence gives him a power over your life
and property; it gave my enemies a power over my liberty. But it has also given
me legs to escape with; and what should prevent me from using them? Nay, what
should restrain me from retaliating the wrongs I have suffered, if a favorable
occasion should offer?


Mast. Gratitude; I repeat, gratitude! Have I not endeavored ever since I
possessed you to alleviate your misfortunes by kind treatment; and does that
confer no obligation? Consider how much worse your condition might have been
under another master.


Slave. You have done nothing for me more than for your working cattle. Are
they not well fed and tended? do you work them harder than your slaves? is not
the rule of treating both designed only for your own advantage? You treat both
your men and beast slaves better than some of your neighbors, because you are
more prudent and wealthy than they.


Mast. You might add, more humane too.


Slave. Humane! Does it deserve that appellation to keep your fellow-men in
forced subjection, deprived of all exercise of their free will, liable to all
the injuries that your own caprice, or the brutality of your overseers, may
heap on them, and devoted, soul and body, only to your pleasure and emolument?
Can gratitude take place between creatures in such a state, and the tyrant who
holds them in it? Look at these limbs; are they not those of a man? Think that
I have the spirit of a man too.


Mast. But it was my intention not only to make your life tolerably comfortable
at present, but to provide for you in your old age.


Slave. Alas! is a life like mine, torn from country, friends, and all I held
dear, and compelled to toil under the burning sun for a master, worth thinking
about for old age? No; the sooner it ends, the sooner I shall obtain that
relief for which my soul pants.


Mast. Is it impossible, then, to hold you by any ties but those of constraint
and severity?


Slave. It is impossible to make one, who has felt the value of freedom,
acquiesce in being a slave.


Mast. Suppose I were to restore you to your liberty, would you reckon that a
favor?


Slave. The greatest: for although it would only be undoing a wrong, I know too
well how few among mankind are capable of sacrificing interest to justice, not
to prize the exertion when it is made.


Mast. I do it, then; be free.


Slave. Now I am indeed your servant, though not your slave. And as the first
return I can make for your kindness, I will tell you freely the condition in
which you live. You are surrounded with implacable foes, who long for a safe
opportunity to revenge upon you and the other planters all the miseries they
have endured. The more generous their natures, the more indignant they feel
against that cruel injustice which has dragged them hither, and doomed them to
perpetual servitude. You can rely on no kindness on your parts to soften the
obduracy of their resentment. You have reduced them to the state of brute
beasts; and if they have not the stupidity of beasts of burden, they must have
the ferocity of beasts of prey. Superior force alone can give you security. As
soon as that fails, you are at the mercy of the merciless. Such is the social
bond between master and slave!


PART OF MR. O'CONNOR'S SPEECH IN THE IRISH HOUSE OF COMMONS, IN FAVOR OF THE
BILL FOR E^ANCIPATING THE ROMAN CATHOLICS, 1795.
IF I were to judge from the dead silence with which my speech has been
received, I should suspect that what I have said was not very palatable to some
men in this House. But I have not risked connexions, endeared to me by every
tie of blood and friendship, to support one set of men in preference to
another. I have hazarded too much, to allow the breath of calumny to taint the
objects I have had in view, from the part I have taken. Immutable principles,
on which the happiness and liberty of my countrymen depend, convey to my mind
the only substantial boon for which great sacrifices should be made.

And I here avow myself the zealous and earnest advocate for the most
unqualified emancipation of my catholic countrymen; in the hope and conviction,
that the monopoly of the rights and liberties of my country, which has hitherto
effectually withstood the efforts of a part of the people, must yield to the
unanimous will, to the decided interest, and to the general effort of a whole
united people. It is from this conviction, and it is for that transcendently
important object, that, while the noble Lord and the Right Honorable Secretary,
are offering to risk their lives and fortunes in support of a system that
militates against the liberty of my countrymen, I will risk every thing dear to
me on earth.

It is for this great object I have, I fear, more than risked connexions dearer
to me than life itself. But he must be a spiritle^^ man, and this a spiritless
nation, not to resent the baseness of a British Minister, who has raised our
hopes in order to seduce a rival to share with him the disgrace of this
accursed political crusade, and blast them afterward, that he may degrade a
competit^r to the station of a dependant. And, that he may destroy friendship
which his nature never knew, he has sported with the feelings of a whole
nation. Raising the cup with one hand to the parched lip of expectancy, he has
dashed it to the earth with the other, in all the wantonness of insult, and
with all the aggravation of contempt.

Does he imagine, that the people of this country, after he has tantalized them
with the cheering hope of present alleviation, and of future prosperity, will
tamely bear to be forced to a re-endurance of their former sufferings, and to a
re-appointment of their former spoilers? Does he, from confidence of long
success in debauching the human mind, exact from you, calling yourselves the
representatives of the people of Ireland, to reject a bill, which has received
the unanimous consent of your constituents? or does he mean to puzzle the
versatile disposition of this House, on which he has made so many successful
experiments already, by distracting you between obedience to his imperious
mandates, and obedience to the will of the people you should represent?

Or does he flatter himself, that he shall now succeed, because he has
succeeded in betraying his own country, into exchanging that peace, by which
she might have retrieved her shattered finances, for a war, in which he has
squandered twenty times a greater treasure, in the course of two years, than
with all his famed economy, he had been able to save, in the course of ten? for
a war in which the prime youth of the world have been offered up, victims to
his ambition and his schemes, as boundless and presumptuous, as ill-concerted
and ill-combined; for a war in which the plains of every nation in Europe have
been crimsoned with oceans of blood; for a war in which his country has reaped
nothing but disgrace, and which must ultimately prove her ruin?

Does he flatter himself, that he shall be enabled, Satan like, to end his
political career by involving the whole empire in a civil war, from which
nothing can accrue, but a doleful and barren conquest to the victor? I trust
the people of England are too wise and too just to attempt to force measures
upon us which they would themselves reject with disdain. I trust they have not
themselves so soon forgotten the lesson they so recently learned from America,
which should serve as a lasting example to nations, against employing force to
subdue the spirit of a people, determined to be free!

But if they should be so weak, or so wicked, as to suffer themselves to be
seduced by a man, to whose soul, duplicity and finesse are as congenial, as
ingenuousness and fair dealing is a stranger, to become the instruments of
supporting a few odious public characters in power and rapacity, against the
interest and against the sense of a whole people; if we are to be dragooned
into measures against our will, by a nation that would lose her last life, and
expend her last guinea, in resenting a similar insult, if offered to herself, I
trust she will find in the people of this country a spirit in no wise inferior
to her own.

You are at this moment at the most awful period of your lives. The Minister of
England has committed you with your country; and on this night your adoption or
rejection of this bill, must determine, in the eyes of the Irish nation, which
you represent, the Minister of England, or the people of Ireland! And, although
you are convinced, you do not represent the people of Ireland; although you are
convinced, every man of you, that you are self-created, it does not alter the
nature of the contest; it is still a contest between the Minister of England
and the people of Ireland; and the weakness of your title should only make you
the more circumspect in the exercise of your power.

Fortunately, the views of the British Minister have been detected; fortunately
the people of this country see him in his true colors. Like the desperate
gamester, who has lost his all, in the wildest schemes of aggrandizement, he
looks round for some dupe to supply him, with the further means of future
projects; and in the crafty subtleness of his soul, he fondly imagines, he has
found that easy dupe in the credulity of the Irish nation. After he has
exhausted his own country in a crusade against that phantom, political opinion,
he flatters himself he shall be enabled to resuscitate her at the expense of
yours.

As you value the peace and happiness of your country; as you value the rights
and liberties of the soil that has given you birth; and if you are not lost to
every sense of feeling for your own consequence and importance as men, I call
on you this night to make your stand. I call on you to rally round the
independence of your country, whose existence has been so artfully assailed.
Believe me, the British Minister will leave you in the lurch, when he sees that
the people of this nation are too much in earnest to be tricked out of their
rights, or the independence of their country.

What a display of legislation have we had on this night? Artificers who
neither know the foundation on which they work, the instruments they ought to
use, nor the materials required! Is it on the narrow basis of monopoly and
exclusion you would erect a temple to the growing liberty of your country? If
you will legislate; know, that on the broad basis of immutable justice only,
you can raise a lasting, beauteous temple to the liberty of your island; whose
ample base shall lodge, and whose roof shall shelter her united family from the
rankling inclemency of rejection and exclusion. Know, that reason is that
silken thread by which the lawgiver leads his people; and above all, know, that
in the knowledge of the temper of the public mind, consists the skill and the
wisdom of the legislator.

Do not imagine that the minds of your countrymen have been stationary, while
that of all Europe has been rapidly progressive; for you must be blind not to
perceive, that the whole European mind has undergone a revolution, neither
confined to this nor to that country; but as general as the great causes which
have given it birth, and still continue to feed its growth. In vain do these
men, who subsist but on the abuses of the government under which they live,
flatter themselves, that what we have seen these last six years is but the
fever of the moment, which will pass away as soon as the patient has been let
blood enough.

As well may they attempt to alter the course of nature, without altering her
laws. If they would effect a counter revolution in the European mind, they must
destroy commerce and its effects; they must abolish every trace of the
mariner's compass; they must consign every book to the flames; they must
obliterate every vestige of the invention of the press; they must destroy the
conduit of intelligence, by destroying the institution of the post office.
Then, and not till then, they and their abuses may live on, in all the security
which ignorance, superstition, and want of ^oncert in the people can bestow.

But while I would overwhelm with despair those men who have been nursed in the
lap of venality and prostitution; who have been educated in contempt and
ridicule of a love for their country; and who have grown gray in scoffing at
every thing like public spirit, let me congratulate every true friend to
mankind, that that commerce, which has begotten so much independence, will
continue to beget more; and let me congratulate every friend to the human
species, that the press, which has sent such a mass of information into the
world, will continue, with accelerated rapidity, to pour forth its treasures so
beneficial to mankind.

It is to these great causes we are indebted, that the combination of priests
and despots, which so long tyrannized over the civil and political liberty of
Europe, has been dissolved. It is to these great causes we are indebted, that
no priest, be his religion what it may, dares preach the doctrine which
inculcates the necessity of sacrificing every right and every blessing this
world can afford, as the only mean of obtaining eternal happiness in the life
to come.

This was the doctrine by which the despotism of Europe was so long supported;
this was the doctrine by which the political popery of Europe was supported;
but the doctrine and the despotism may now sleep in the same grave, until the
trumpet of ignorance, superstition, and bigotry, shall sound their resurrection.

SCENE FROM THE TRAGEDY OF TAMERLANE.
Enter OMAR and TAMERLANE. Omar. [Bowing.] HONOR and fame
Forever wait the emperor: may our Prophet
Give him ten thousand thousand days of life,
And every day like this. The captive sultan,
Fierce in his bonds, and at his face repining,
Attends your sacred will.

Tamerlane. Let him approach.
[ Enter BAJAZET and other Turkish prisoners in chains, with a guard.] When I
survey the ruins of this field,
The wild destruction, which thy fierce ambition
Has dealt among mankind; (so many widows
And helpless orphans has thy battle made,
That half our eastern world this day are mourners;)
Well may I, in behalf of heaven and earth,
Demand from thee atonement for this wrong.

Baj. Make thy demand of those that own thy power;
Know I am still beyond it; and though fortune
Has stripped me of the train and pomp of greatness,
That ourside of a king; yet still my soul,
Fixed high, and of itself alone dependent,
Is ever free and royal; and even now,
As at the head of battle, does defy thee.
I know what power the chance of war has given,
And dare thee to the use on it. This vile speeching,
This after-game of words, is what most irks me;
Spare that, and for the rest it is equal all,
Be it as it may.

Tam. Well was it for the world,
When, on their borders, neighboring princes met,
Frequent in friendly parle, by cool debates
Preventing wasteful war: such should our meeting
Have been, had thou but held in just regard
The sanctity of leagues so often sworn to.
Can thou believe thy Prophet, or, what is more,
That power supreme, which made thee and thy Prophet,
Will, with impunity, let pass that breach
Of sacred faith given to the royal Greek?

Baj. Thou pedant talker! ha! art thou a king
Possessed of sacred power, Heaven's darling attribute,
And do thou prate of leagues, and oaths, and prophets!
I hate the Greek (perdition on his name!)
As I do thee, and would have met you both,
As death does human nature, for destruction.

Tam. Causeless to hate, is not of human kind:
The savage brute, that haunts in woods remote
And desert wilds, tears not the fearful traveller;
If hunger, or some injury, provoke not.

Baj. Can a king want a cause, when empire bids
Go on? What is he born for, but ambition?
It is his hunger, it is his call of nature,
The noble appetite which will be satisfied,
And, like the food of gods, makes him immortal.

Tam. Henceforth I will not wonder we were foes,
Since souls that differ so by nature, hate,
And strong antipathy forbids their union.

Baj. The noble fire, that warms me, does indeed
Transcend thy coldness. I am pleased we differ,
Nor think alike.

Tam. No: for I think like man,
Thou like a monster, from whose baleful presence
Nature starts back; and though she fixed her stamp
On thy rough mass, and marked thee for a man,
Now, conscious of her error, she disclaims thee,
As formed for her destruction.
It Is true, I am a king, as thou have been;
Honor and glory too have been my aim;
But though I dare face death, and all the dangers
Which furious war wears in its bloody front,
Yet would I choose to fix my name by peace,
By justice, and by mercy; and to raise
My trophies on the blessings of mankind:
Nor would I buy the empire of the world
With ruin of the people whom I sway,
On forfeit of my honor.

Baj. Prophet, I thank thee.
Confusion! could thou rob me of my glory
To dress up this tame king, this preaching dervise!
Unfit for war, thou should have lived secure
In lazy peace, and with debating senates
Shared a precarious scepter; sat tamely still,
And let bold sactions canton out thy power
And wrangle for the spoils they robbed thee of;
Whilst I (O blast the power that stops my ardor)
Would, like a tempest, rush amidst the nations,
Be greatly terrible, and deal, like Alha,
My angry thunde^ on the frighted world.

Tam. The world! 'twould be too little for thy pride:
Thou would scale heaven.

Baj. I would. Away! my soul
Disdains thy conference.

Tam. Thou vain, rash thing,
That, with gigantic insolence, have dared
To lift thy wretched self above the stars,
And mate with power almighty, thou art fallen!

Baj. It Is false! I am not fallen from aught I have been!
At least my soul resolves to keep her state,
And scorns to make acquaintance with ill fortune.

Tam. Almost beneath my pity art thou fallen;
Since, while the avenging hand of Heaven is on thee,
And presses to the dust thy swelling soul,
Foolhardy, with the stronger thou contendest.
To what vast heights had thy tumultuous temper
Been hurried, if success had crowned thy wishes!
Say, what had I to expect, if thou had conquered?

Baj. Oh, glorious thought! Ye powers, I will enjoy it,
Though but in fancy; imagination shall
Make room to entertain the vast idea.
Oh! had I been the master but of yesterday,
The world, the world had felt me; and for thee,
I had used thee, as thou art to me, a dog,
The object of my scorn and mortal hatred.
I would have cag'd thee for the scorn of slaves.
I would have taught thy neck to know my weight,
And mounted from that footstool to the saddle:
'Till thou had begged to die; and even that mercy
I had denied thee. Now thou know my mind,
And question me no farther.

Tam. Well do thou teach me
What justice should exact from thee. Mankind,
With one consent, cry out for vengeance on thee;
Loudly they call to cut off this league-breaker,
This wild destroyer, from the face of earth.

Baj. Do it, and rid thy shaking soul at once
Of its worst fear.

Tam. Why slept the thunder
That should have armed the idol deity,
And given the power, ere yester sun was set,
To shake the soul of Tamerlane. Had thou an arm
To make thee feared, thou should have proved it on me,
Amidst the sweat and blood of yonder field,
When, through the tumult of the war, I sought thee,
Fenced in with nations.

Baj. Oh, blast the stars
That fated us to different scenes of slaughter!
Oh! could my sword have met thee!

Tam. Thou had then,
As now, been in my power, and held thy life
Dependent on my gift. Yes, Bajazet,
I bid thee live. So much my soul disdains
That thou should think I can fear aught but I*
Nay more; could thou forget thy brutal fierceness,
And form thyself to manhood, I would bid thee
Live and be still a king, that thou may learn
What man should be to man --
This royal tent, with such of thy domestics
As can be found, shall wait upon thy service;
Nor will I use my fortune to demand
Hard terms of peace; but such as thou may offer
With honor, I with honor may receive.

COLONEL BARRE'S SPEECH IN THE BRITISH PARLIAMENT, 1765, ON THE STAMP ACT BILL.
ON the first reading of the bill, Mr. Townsend spoke in its favor; and
concluded with the following words: "And will these Americans, children planted
by our care; nourished up by our indulgence, until they are grown to a degree
of strength and opulence; and protected by our arms; will they grudge to
contribute their mite, to relieve us from the heavy weight of that burden which
we lie under?"

On this Colonel Bar rose, and answered Mr. Townsend in the following
masterly manner.

"They planted by YOUR care!" No; your oppressions planted them in America.
They fled from your tyranny, to a then uncultivated and unhospitable country,
where they exposed themselves to almost all the hardships to which human nature
is liable; and among others, to the cruelties of a savage foe, the most subtle,
and I will take upon me to say, the most formidable of any people upon the face
of the earth; and yet, actuated by principles of true English liberty, they met
all hardships with pleasure, compared with those they suffered in their own
country, from the hands of those who should have been their friends.

"They nourished up by YOUR indulgence!" They grew by your neglect of them. As
soon as you began to care about them, that care was exercised in sending
persons to rule them, in one department and another, who were, perhaps, the
deputies of deputies to some members of this House, sent to spy out their
liberties, to misrepresent their actions, and to prey upon them; men, whose
behavior, on many occasions, has caused the blood of those sons of liberty to
recoil within them; men promoted to the highest seats of justice; some, who, to
my knowledge, were glad, by going to a foreign country, to escape being brought
to the bar of a court of justice in their own.

"They protected by YOUR arms!" They have nobly taken up arms in your defense;
have exerted a valor, amidst their constant and laborious industry, for the
defense of a country, whose frontier was drenched in blood, while its interior
parts yielded all its little savings to your emoluments.

And, believe me; remember I this day told you so, that the same spirit of
freedom, which actuated that people at first, will accompany them still. But
prudence forbids me to explain myself further. Heaven knows, I do not at this
time speak from motives of party heat; what I deliver are the genuine
sentiments of my heart.

However superior to me in general knowledge and experience the respectable
body of this House may be, yet I claim to know more of America than most of
you, having seen and been conversant in that country. The people, I believe,
are as truly loyal as any subjects the king has; but a people jealous of their
liberties, and who will vindicate them, if ever they should be violated. But
the subject is too delicate, I will say no more.

THE LAST DAY. EXTRACT FROM A MANUSCRIPT POEM.
THE day of Doom, the all-important day,
I sing; that link extreme of time, which joins
The measured chain of days, and months, and years,
To one eternal, one effulgent day:
Day to the children of the day; but night,
Eternal night, to all the sons of darkness.
The time affixed by God's decree arrives.
The Almighty spoke: heaven opened wide her gates.
The herald, Gabriel, far advanced in front,
Raised on seraphic wings, first issued forth.
Next the creation's Sire, veiled in a cloud
Of awful gloom, from which red lightnings flashed,
And rending thunders roared, passed through the gates.
At his right hand sat his eternal Son,
High raised upon a golden throne embossed
With gems, that sparkled through the cloud. Angels
And saints, the countless host of those, who hold
The realms of bliss, next in procession moved:
Nor could the wide-extended space from Aries
To the scales, that poise the hemispheres,
Contain the army of the skies.
The earth had never seen a larger host*
Than when the foe of Greece spread over the land
And sea from Hebrus to Thermopylae;
But this was small compared with what the heavens
Now saw, as earth is small compared with heaven.
The numerous stars, that hold their course along
The milky-way, and in the neighboring skies,
No sooner saw their Maker clothed in storms,
And felt his thunder shake their solid spheres,
Than trembling they retire; as when some king
Enraged frowns on his slaves, who flee his face,
Till he commands them stand and hear his will.
So had the frighted stars fled off and left
The mundane space all void, had not the trump
Of Gabriel interposed, and with a voice
More loud, than ever yet creation heard,
Impressed the mandates of all nature's God
Upon all nature's works. Ye stars! (said he)
Return, and hold your station in your orbs;
There stand and see what He on earth transacts
This day, and witness how He deals with man.
Thou sun! who from the birth of time have rolled
Thy chariot round the world, and shed thy beams
Alike on all mankind, look on and see
The equal justice of thy God to man
Outshine thy equal rays. The affrighted earth
Took the alarm of heaven: the atmosphere
Assayed to flee upon the wings of storm.
Fierce tempests beat the lofty mountains' sides,
Sweep forests down, and spread destruction over
The works of man. The troubled ocean heaves:
His surging billows mingle with the clouds:
His deepest caverns lie exposed to view.
The earth, convulsed from her deep center, heaves.
Order forsook the world: discord spread wide.
The confused elements again had joined*
The listless empire of primeval chaos,
Had not harmonic sounds assuag'd their tumult.
Spirit divine! thou soul of harmony
In heaven and earth, breathe through my lines and speak
The power of music's charms, when heavenly love
Warmed every breast of angels, seraphim,
And doubly glowed in the Almighty's Son;
Who, like a bridegroom clad in smiling youth
And robes of peace, prepared to meet his bride.
The lightnings ceased; the thunders died, when he
Complacent smiled. Gabriel, and all the choir
Of heaven, said he, hush the commoved world,
And wake the sleeping saints with sounds of peace.
His words, like melting music flowed: his face,
More radiant than the vernal morn, that smiles
The earth to joy. The trump of Gabriel led
The choral song: unnumber'd harps of gold,
And voices sweet joined the melodious sound.
Discord, that late had moved the elements
To war, and 'gan to invade the spheres,
Was hushed to sleep. Quick changed the scene,
From raging discord, universal storm,
To soothing sounds, and universal calm.
The sun, from blackest clouds, unveiled his face,
And shone with double radiance on the earth.
The fixed stars had ceased to shed their beams,
And trembling, hid in sable darkness, stood;
But now, enraptured with symphonious sounds,
They dart their genial rays, and fill their orbs
With pleasing light, and soul-reviving warmth.
But thou, O Earth, most felt the pleasing change.
-- Fierce storms were mute.
Old ocean heard, and smoothed his tempest face;
And spring-like beauty smiled on all the earth.
Poets have sung of Orpheus' potent lyre;
Eurydice, forced from the bands of death,
Of bending trees and moving rocks obsequious
To the sound. But now whole worlds obey.
Death could not hold his victims in the tomb.
Thou monarch of the grave, resign the just!
"Awake! ye saints, from your long night of sleep,
Adorned with ever-blooming youth and robes
Of heavenly innocence. Salute the morn
Of everlasting day." Thus sung the choir.
Death's dreary mansions heard with sad dismay.
In the mid regions of eternal night,
There sits the ghastly monarch on his throne.
Substantial darkness fills the broad domain:
Heart-chilling vapors rise from noxious lakes.
His servants, War, Intemp'rance, Plague, Revenge,
Consumption, wrinkled Age, groan discord round
His throne, and offer up their loathsome fumes
Of putrid corpse, contagion, dead'ning blasts;
Sweet incense to their king; or run before
His gristly steed, when he rides over the earth,
And crops with chilling hand the bloom of life.
Here reigns the awful monarch of the dead,
When the full sounds spread through his darksome realms,
His heart appalled, he trembles on his throne:
His iron nerves relax: his scepter falls.
The saints released, their dreary mansions leave:
But O how changed!
No cumb'rous load of grosser elements,
But pure aerial forms their souls possess;
Forms, like the glorious body of their Lord,
Glowing with beauty and immortal bloom.
A DIALOGUE ON LOQUACITY.
Enter STEPHEN. Stephen. LADIES and gentlemen, you have probably heard of
Foot, the comedian: if not, it is out of my power to tell you any thing about
him, except this; he had but one leg, and his name was Samuel. Or, to speak
more poetically, one leg he had, and Samuel was his name. This Foot wrote a
farce, called the Alderman; in which he attempted to ridicule a well-fed
magistrate of the city of London. This last, hearing of the intended affront,
called upon the player, and threatened him severely for his presumption. Sir,
says Foot, it is my business to take off people. You shall see how well I can
take myself off. So out of the room he went, as though to prepare. The Alderman
sat waiting, and waiting, and waiting, and -- I have forgotten the rest of the
story; but it ended very comically. So I must request of you, to muster up your
wit, and each one end the story to his own liking. You are all wondering what
this story leads to. Why, I Will tell you; Foote's farce was called the Alderman,
ours is called the Medley; his was written according to rule, ours is composed
at loose ends. Yet loose as it is, you will find it made up, like all other
pieces, of nouns, pronouns, verbs, participles, adverbs, conjunctions,
articles, adjectives, prepositions, and interjections. Now, words are very
harmless things; though I confess that much depends upon the manner of putting
them together. The only thing to be settled is, that, if you should dislike the
arrangement, you will please to alter it, till it suits you.


Enter TRUMAN. Truman. What are you prating about, at such a rate?


Steph. I am speaking of Sam Foot, and prepositions, and adverbs, and many
other great characters.


True. Now, don't you know, that your unruly tongue will be the ruin of you? Did
you ever see a man who was foaming and frothing at the mouth as you are, that
ever said any thing to the purpose? You ought always to think before you speak,
and to consider well to whom you speak, and the place and time of speaking.


Steph. Pray who taught you all this worldly wisdom?


True. My own experience, Sir; which is said to be the best schoolmaster in the
world, and ought to teach it to every man of common sense.


Steph. Then, do not imagine that you possess any great secret. "Keep your
tongue between your teeth" is an old proverb, rusted and crusted over, till
nobody can tell what it was first made of. Prudence, indeed, teaches the same.
So prudence may teach a merchant to keep his vessels in port for fear of a
storm at sea. But "nothing venture, nothing have" is my proverb. Now, suppose
all the world should adopt this prudence, what a multitude of mutes we should
have! There would be an end of news, lawsuits, politics, and society. I tell
you, Sir, that busy tongues are like main springs; they set every thing in
motion.


True. But where is a man's dignity, all this time, while his tongue is running
at random, without a single thought to guide it?


Steph. His dignity! that indeed! Out upon parole, where it ought to be. A
man's dignity! as though we came into the world to support dignity, and by an
affected distance, to make our friends feel their inferiority. I consider men
like coins, which because stamped with men's heads, pass for more than they are
worth. And when the world is willing to treat a man better than he deserves,
there is a meanness in endeavoring to extort more from them.


True. But shall a man speak without thinking? Did you ever read the old
proverb, "Think twice, before you speak once?"


Steph. Yes, and a vile one it is. If a man speak from the impulse of the
moment, he will speak the meaning of his heart; and will probably speak the
truth. But if he mind your musty proverb, there will be more pros and cons in
his head, more hams and haws in his delivery, than there are letters in his
sentences. To your sly, subtle, thinking fellows, we owe all the lies,
cheating, hypocrisy, and double-dealing there is in the world.


Steph. But you know that every subject has its sides; and we ought to examine,
reflect, analyze, sift, consider, and determine, before we have a right to
speak; for the world are entitled to the best of our thoughts. What would you
think of a tradesman, who should send home your coat, boots, or hat, half
finished? You might think him a very honest hearted fellow; but you would never
employ him again.


True. Now, was there any need of bringing in tailors, cobblers, and hatters, to
help you out? They have nothing to do with this subject. But you don't
understand me. I say, if you would never employ such workmen a second time, why
should you justify a man for turning out his thoughts half finished? The mind
labors as actually in thinking upon, and maturing a subject, as the body does
in the field, or on the shop-board. And, if the farmer knows when his grain is
ready for the sickle, and the mechanic, when his work is ready for his
customer, the man, who is used to thinking, knows when he is master of his
subject, and the proper time to communicate his thoughts with ease to himself
and advantage to others.


Steph. All that is escaping the subject. None of your figures, when the very
original is before you. You talk about a man's mind, just as if it were a piece
of ground, capable of bearing flax and hemp. You have fairly brought forward a
shop-board, and mounted your tailor upon it! Now I have no notion of any
cross-legged work in my inner man. In fact, I don't understand all this process
of thinking. My knowledge upon all subjects is very near the root of my tongue,
and I feel great relief, when it gets near the tip.


True. Depend on it, that thousands have lost fame and even life by too great
freedom of speech. Treasons, murders, and robberies, have been generally
discovered by the imprudent boasting of the perpetrators.


Steph. Depend on it, that our world has suffered far more by silent, than by
prattling knaves. Suppose every man were to speak all his thoughts, relate all
his actions, declare all his purposes* would the world be in danger of crimes?
No; be assured, that magistrates, bailiffs, thief-takers, prisons, halters, and
gallows, all owe their dignity to the co^^rivance of your sly, plodding mutes.


True. You have let off from the tip of your tongue a picked company of
dignified substantives; but take notice that my doctrine does not extend to the
midnight silence of robbers; but to a due caution and reserve in conveying our
thoughts to the world. And this I hope ever to observe. And if you determine on
a different course, rest assured, that the consequences will not be very
pleasant. Exit.


Steph. Consequences! That Is counting chickens before they are hatched. Dignity
of human nature! Pretty words! just fit to be ranked with the honor of thieves,
and the courage of modern duellists.


AMERICAN SAGES.
SEE on you dark'ning height bold Franklin tread,
Heaven's awful thunders rolling over his head;
Colvolving clouds the billowy skies deform,
And sorky flames emblaze the black'ning storm.
See the descending streams around him burn,
Glance on his rod, and with his guidance turn;
He bids conflicting heavens their blasts expire,
Curbs the fierce blaze, and holds the imprisoned fire.
No more, when folding storms the vault overspread,
The livid glare shall strike thy race with dread;
Nor towers nor temples, shudd'ring with the sound,
Sink in the flames, and spread destruction round.
His daring toils, the threatening blasts that wait,
Shall teach mankind to ward the bolts of fate;
The pointed steel o'er-top the ascending spire,
And lead over trembling walls the harmless fire;
In his glad fame while distant worlds rejoice,
Far as the lightnings shine, or thunders raise their voice.
See the sage Rittenhouse, with ardent eye,
Lift the long tube, and pierce the starry sky:
^ear in his view the circling systems roll,
And broader splendors gild the central pole.
He marks what laws the eccentric wand'rers bind,
Copies creation in his forming mind,
And bids, beneath his hand, in semblance rise,
With mimic orbs, the labors of the skies.
There wondering crowds, with raptured eye, behold
The spangled heavens their mystic maze unfold;
While each glad sage his splendid hal^ shall grace,
With all the spheres that cleave the etherial space*
To guide the sailor in his wandering way,
See Godfrey's toils reverse the beams of day.
His lifted quadrant to the eye displays
From adverse skies the counteracting rays:
And marks, as devious sails be wilder'd roll,
Each nice gradation from the steadfast pole.
EXTRACT FROM MR. PITT'S SPEECH, NOV. 18, 1777, ON AMERICAN AFFAIRS.
I RISE, my lords, to declare my sentiments on this most solemn and serious
subject. It has imposed a load upon my mind, which, I fear, nothing can remove;
but which impels me to endeavor its alleviation, by a free and unreserved
communication of my sentiments. In the first part of the address* I have the
honor of heartily concurring with the noble Earl who moved it. No man feels
sincerer joy than I do; none can offer more genuine congratulation on every
accession of strength to the Protestant succession: I therefore join in every
congratulation on the birth of another princess, and the happy recovery of her
Majesty.

But I must stop here; my courtly complaisance will carry me no farther. I will
not join in congratulation on misfortune and disgrace. I cannot concur in a
blind and servile address, which approves, and endeavors to sanctify, the
monstrous measures that have heaped disgrace and misfortune upon us; that have
broug^^ ruin to our doors. This, my lords, is a perilous and tremendous moment!
It is not a time for adulation* The smoothness of flattery cannot now avail;
cannot save us in this rugged and awful crisis. It is now necessary to instruct
the throne in the language of truth. We must dispel the delusion and the
darkness which envelop it; and d^splay, in its full danger and true colors, the
ruin that is brought to our doors.

And who is the minister; where is the minister, who has dared to suggest to
the throne the contrary, unconstitutional language, this day delivered from it?
The accustomed language from the throne has been application to Parliament for
advice, and a reliance on its constitutional advice and assistance. As it is
the right of Parliament to give, so it is the duty of the crown to ask it. But
on this day, and in this extreme momentous exigency, no reliance is reposed on
our constitutional counsels! no advice is asked from the sober and enlightened
care of Parliament! But the crown, from itself, and by itself, declares an
unalterable determination to pursue measures. And what measures, my lords? The
measures that have produced the imminent perils that threaten us; the measures
that have brought ruin to our doors.

Can the Minister of the day now presume to expect a continuance of support, in
this ruinous infatuation? Can Parliament be so dead to its dignity and its
duty, as to be thus deluded into the loss of the one, and the violation of the
other? To give an unlimited credit and support for the perseverance in
measures, which have reduced this late flourishing empire to ruin and contempt!
"But yesterday, and England might have stood against the world: now none so
poor to do her reverence." I use the words of a poet; but though it be poetry,
it is no fiction. It is a shameful truth, that not only the power and strength
of this country are wasting away and expiring; but her well-earned glories, her
true honors, and substantial dignity, are sacrificed.

France, my lords, has insulted you; she has encouraged and sustained America;
and whether America be wrong or right, the dignity of this country ought to
spurn at the officious insult of French interference. The ministers and
ambassadors of those who are called rebels and enemies, are in Paris; in Paris
they transact the reciprocal interests of America and France. Can there be a
more mortifying insult? Can even our ministers sustain a more humiliating
disgrace? Do they dare to resent it? Do they presume even to hint a vindication
of their honor, and the dignity of the State, by requiring the dismissal of the
plenipotentiaries of America? Such is the degradation to which they have
reduced the glories of England!

The people, whom they affect to call contemptible rebels, but whose growing
power has at last obtained the name of enemies; the people with whom they have
engaged this country in war, and against whom they now command our implicit
support in every measure of desperate hostility: this people, despised as
rebels, or acknowledged as enemies, are abetted against you; supplied with
every military store; their interests consulted, and their ambassadors
entertained, by your inveterate enemy! and our ministers dare not interpose
with dignity or effect. Is this the honor of a great kingdom? Is this the
indignant spirit of England, who, but yesterday, gave law to the House of
Bourbon? My lords, the dignity of nations demands a decisive conduct in a
situation like this.

This ruinous and ignominious situation, where we cannot act with success, nor
suffer with honor, calls upon us to remonstrate in the strongest and loudest
language of truth, to rescue the ear of Majesty from the delusions which
surround it. The desperate state of our arms abroad is in part known. No man
thinks more highly of them than I do. I love and honor the English troops* I
know they can achieve any thing except impossibilities: and I know that the
conquest of English America is an impossibility. You cannot, I ventu^^ to say
it, you CANNOT conquer America.

Your armies, last war, effected every thing that could be effected; and what
was it? It cost a numerous army, under the command of a most able general, now
a noble lord in this House, a long and laborious campaign, to expel five
thousand Frenchmen from French America. My lords, you CANNOT conquer America.
What is your present situation there? We do not know the worst; but we know,
that in three campaigns we have done nothing, and suffered much. We shall soon
know, and in any event, have reason to lament, what may have happened since.

As to conquest, therefore, my lords, I repeat, it is impossible. You may swell
every expense, and every effort, still more extravagantly; pile and accumulate
every assistance you can buy or borrow; traffic and barter with every little
pitiful German prince, who sells his subjects to the shambles of a foreign
power* your efforts are forever vain and impotent; doubly so from this
mercenary aid on which you rely. For it irritates, to an incurable resentment,
the minds of your enemies, to overrun them with the mercenary sons of rapine
and plunder; devoting them and their possessions to the rapacity of hireling
cruelty! If I were an American, as I am an Englishman, while a foreign troop
remained in my country, I NEVER would lay down my arms; NEVER, NEVER, NEVER.

SCENE FROM THE TRAGEDY OF CATO.
CATO, LUCIUS, and SEMPRONIUS. Cato. FATHERS, we once again are met in council:
Cesar's approach has summoned us together,
And Rome attends her fate from our resolves.
How shall we treat this bold aspiring man?
Success still follows him, and backs his crimes:
Pharsalia gave him Rome, Egypt has since
Received his yoke, and the whole Nile is Cesar's.
Why should I mention Juba's overthrow,
And Scipio's death? Numidia's burning sands
Still smoke with blood. It Is time we should decree
What course to take. Our foe advances on us,
And envies us even Lybia's sultry deserts.
Fathers, pronounce your thoughts; are they still fixed
To hold it out, and fight it to the last?
Or are your hearts subdued at length, and wrought
By time and ill success to a submission?
Sempronius, speak.

Sempronius. My voice is still for war.
Heavens! can a Roman senate long debate
Which of the two to choose, slavery or death!
No; let us rise at once, gird on our swords,
And at the head of our remaining troops,
Attack the foe, break through the thick array
Of his thronged legions, and charge home upon him.
Perhaps some arm, more lucky than the rest,
May reach his heart, and free the world from bondage.
Rise, fathers, rise! it is Rome demands your help;
Rise, and revenge her slaughtered citizens,
Or share their fate! The corpse of half her senate
Manure the fields of Thessaly, while we
Sit here delib'rating in cold debates,
If we shall sacrifice our lives to honor,
Or wear them out in servitude and chains.
Rouse up, for shame! our brothers of Pharsalia
Point at their wounds, and cry aloud, to battle!
Great Pompey's shade complains that we are slow,
And Scipio's ghost walks unrevenged among us.

Cato. Let not a torrent of impetuous zeal
Transport thee thus beyond the bounds of reason.
True fortitude is seen in great exploits
That justice warrants, and that wisdom guides.
All else is towering frenzy and distraction.
Are not the lives of th^se who draw the sword
In Rome's defense entrusted to our care?
Should we thus lead them to the field of slaughter,
Might not the impartial world with reason say,
We lavished at our deaths the blood of thousands,
To grace our fall, and make our ruin glorious?
Lucius, we next would know what is your opinion?

Luc. My thoughts, I must confess, are turned on peace*
Already have our quarrels filled the world
With widows, and with orphans. Scythia mourns
Our guilty wars, and earth's remotest regions
Lie half unpeopled by the feuds of Rome.
It Is time to sheath the sword, and spare mankind.
It is not Caesar, but the gods, my fathers;
The gods declare against us; repel
Our vain attempts. To urge the foe to battle,
Prompted by blind revenge, and wild despair,
Were to refuse the awards of Providence,
And not to rest in Heaven's determination.
Already have we shown our love to Rome;
Now let us show submission to the gods.
We took up arms, not to revenge ourselves,
But free the common wealth; when this end fails,
Arms have no farther use: our country's cause,
That drew (...) swords, now wrests them from our hands,
And bids us not delight in Roman blood,
Unprofitably shed. What men could do,
Is done already. Heaven and earth will witness,
If Rome must fall, that we are innocent.

Cato. Let us appear nor rash nor diffident;
Immod'rate valor swells into a fault;
And fear, admitted into public councils,
Betrays like treason. Let us shun them both.
Fathers, I cannot see that our affairs
Are grown thus desperate: we have bulwarks round us:
Within our walls are troops inured to toil
In Afric's heats, and seasoned to the sun:
Numidia's spacious kingdom lies behind us,
Ready to rise at its young prince's call.
While there is hope, do not distrust the gods;
But wait at least till Cesar's near approach
Force us to yield. 'Twill never be too late
To sue for chains, and own a conqueror.
Why should Rome fall a moment ere her time?
No, let us draw our term of freedom out
In its full length, and spin it to the last;
So shall we gain still one day's liberty:
And let me perish; but in Cato's judgment,
A day, an hour of virtuous liberty,
Is worth a whole eternity in bondage.

EXTRACT FROM AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT BOSTON, JULY 4, 1794, IN COMMEMORATION
OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.
AMERICANS! you have a country vast in extent, and embracing all the varieties
of the most salubrious climes: held not by charters wrested from unwilling
kings, but the bountiful gift of the Author of nature. The exuberance of your
population is daily divesting the gloomy wilderness of its rude attire, and
splendid cities rise to cheer the dreary desert. You have a government
deservedly celebrated as "giving the sanctions of law to the precepts of
reason;" presenting, instead of the rank luxuriance of natural licentiousness,
the corrected sweets of civil liberty. You have fought the battles of freedom,
and enkindled that sacred flame which now glows with vivid fervor through the
greatest empire in Europe.

We indulge the sanguine hope, that her equal laws and virtuous conduct will
hereafter afford examples of imitation to all surrounding nations. That the
blissful period will soon arrive when man shall be elevated to his primitive
character; when illuminated reason and regulated liberty shall once more
exhibit him in the image of his Maker; when all the inhabitants of the globe
shall be freemen and fellow-citizens, and patriotism itself be lost in
universal philanthropy. Then shall volumes of incense incessantly roll from
altars inscribed to liberty. Then shall the innumerable varieties of the human
race unitedly "worship in her sacred temple, whose pillars shall rest on the
remotest corners of the earth, and whose arch will be the vault of heaven."

DIALOGUE BETWEEN A WHITE INHABITANT OF THE UNITED STATES AND AN INDIAN.
White Man. YOUR friends, the inhabitants of the United States, wish to bury
the tomahawk and live in peace with the Indian tribes.


Indian. Justice is the parent of peace. The Indians love war only as they love
justice. Let us enjoy our rights, and be content with yours, and we will hang
the tomahawk and scapling-knife upon the tree of peace, and sit down together
under its branches.


W. Man. This is what we desire, and what is your interest as well as ours to
promote. We have often made leagues with you; they have been as often broken.
If ju^ were your guide, and peace your desire, they would be better regarded.


Ind. The white men are robbers. We do not choose to be at peace with robbers;
it is more to our honor to be at war with them.


W. Man. It is in our power to punish the aggressors; we have more warriors
than the Indians; but we choose to employ arguments rather than force.


Ind. I have heard the arguments of White Men: they are a fair bait; but their
intentions are a bearded hook. You call us brothers, but you treat us as
beasts; you wish to trade with us* that you may cheat us; you would give us
peace, but you would take our lands, and leave us nothing worth fighting for.


W. Man. The White Men want your lands; but they are willing to pay for them.
The great Parent has given the earth to all men in common to improve for their
sustenance. He delights in the numbers of his children. If any have a superior
claim, it must be those, who, by their arts and industry, can support the
greatest number on the smallest territory.


Ind. This is the way you talk; you act differently. You have good on your
tongue, but bad in your heart. I have been among White Men. I know as much
about them as you do about Red Men. What would your people say, if poor men
should go to a rich man, and tell him, the great Parent has given the ear^^ to
all men in common; we have not land enough; (...) have more than you need; he
delights in the num^ of his children; your great farm supports but few; by our
superior arts and industry, it would support many; you may move to one corner
of your land; that is sufficient for you; we will take the rest. We will live
together as brothers, if you will be at peace with us; if not, we have more
warriors than you; it is in our power to punish the aggressors? Should you call
this just? no! no!


W. Man. Surely not.


Ind. Then justice among White Men and Red Men is different: will you show me
the difference? I thought justice was our friend as well as yours.


W. Man. We are governed by laws that protect our property, and punish the
disturbers of peace.


Ind. Then by what law do you encroach upon our property, and disturb our
peace? If you consider us as your brothers, your laws ought to protect us as
well as yourselves.


W. Man. Our ways of living are different from yours. We have many employments
and much property: your manners are simple, your possessions small; our laws,
of course, will not apply to your circumstances.


Ind. I know you have many laws on paper, and some that ought to make the paper
blush. We have but few; they are founded in justice, and written on the heart.
They teach us to treat a stranger as our friend; to open our doors and spread
our tables to the needy. If a white man come among us, our heart is in our
hand; all we have is his; yet you call us savages! But that must mean something
better than civilized, if you are civilized.


W. Man. We do not impeach your hospitality, nor censure your humanity in many
instances; but how can you justify your promiscuous slaughter of the innocent
and guilty, your cruel massacres of helpless wives and children, who never
injured you?


Ind. If a man provoke me to fight with him, I will break his head if I can: if
he is stronger than I, then I must be content to break his arm or his finger.
When the war-hoop is sounded, and we take up the tomahawk, our hearts are one;
our cause is common; the wives and children of our enemies are our enemies
also; they have the same blood, and we have the same thirst for it. If you wish
your wives and children should escape our vengeance, be honest and friendly in
your dealings with us; if they have ruffians for their protectors, they must
not expect safety.


W. Man. We have both the same claim from each other; friendship and justice
are all we require. Our ideas on these subjects are different; perhaps they
will never agree. On one side, ferocity will not be dictated by humanity, nor
stubbornness by reason; on the other, knowledge is not disposed to be advised
by ignorance, nor power to stoop to weakness.


Ind. I believe we shall not make peace by our talks. If the contention is, Who
has the most humanity, let him who made us judge. We have no pretensions to
superior knowledge; we ask, Who knows best how to use what they have? If we
contend for power, our arms must decide: the leaves must wither on the tree of
peace; we shall cut it down with the battle-axe, and stain the green grass that
grows under it with your blood.


W. Man. You know the blessings of peace, and the calamities of war. If you
wish to live secure in your wig wams, and to rove the forest unmolested,
cultivate our friendship. Break not into our houses in the defenseless hours of
sleep. Let no more of our innocent friends be dragged from their protectors and
driven into the inhospitable wilderness; or what is still more inhuman, fall
victims to your unrelenting barbarity! If you prefer war, we shall drive its
horrors into your own settlements. The sword shall destroy your friends, and
the fire consume your dwellings.


Ind. We love peace; we love our friends; we love all men, as much as you. When
your fathers came over the big water, we treated them as brothers: they had
nothing: peace and plenty were among us. All the land was ours, from the east
to the west water; from the mountains of snow in the north, to the burning path
of the sun in the south. They were made welcome to our land and to all we
possessed. To talk like White Men, they were beggars and we their benefactors:
they were tenants at will, and we their landlords. But we nourished a viper in
our bosoms. You have poisoned us by your luxury; spread contention among us by
your subtlety, and death by your treachery. The Indians have but two
predominant passions, friendship and revenge. Deal with us as friends, and you
may fish in our rivers or hunt in our forests. Treat us not like servants; we
shall never own you as masters. If you provoke us, our vengeance will pursue
you. We shall drink your blood; you may spill ours. We had rather die in
honorable war, than live in dishonorable peace.


EXTRACT FROM AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED AT BOSTON, JULY 4, 1796.
THAT the best way for a great empire to tax her colonies is to confer benefits
upon them, and, that no rulers have a right to levy contributions upon the
property, or exact the services of their subjects, without their own, or the
consent of their immediate representatives, were principles never recognized by
the ministry and parliament of Great Britain. Fatally enamoured of their
selfish systems of policy, and obstinately determined ^o effect the execution
of their nefarious purposes, they were deaf to the suggestions of reason and
the demands of justice. The frantic, though transient energy of intoxicated
rage was exhibited in their every act, and blackened and distorted the features
of their national character.

On the contrary, Americans had but one object in view, for in Independence are
concentrated and condensed every blessing that makes life desirable, every
right and every privilege which can tend to the happiness or secure the native
dignity of man. In the attainment of Independence, were all their passions,
their des^res, and their powers engaged. The intrepidity and magnanimity of
their armies; the wisdom and inflexible firmness of their Congress; the ardency
of their patriotism; their unrepining patience, when assailed by dangers and
perplexed with aggravated misfortunes, have long and deservedly employed the
pen of panegyric and the tongue of eulogy.

Through the whole revolutionary conflict, a consistency and systematic
regularity were preserved, equally honorable as extraordinary. The unity of
design and classically correct arrangement of the series of incidents which
completed the Epic story of American Independence, were so wonderful, so well
wrought, that political Hypercriticism was abashed at the mighty production,
and forced to join her sister Envy, in applauding the glorious composition.

It is my pleasing duty, my fellow-citizens, to felicitate you on the
establishment of our national sovereignty; and among the various subjects for
congratulation and rejoicing, this is not the most unimportant, that Heaven has
spared so many veterans in the art of war; so many ^ages, who are versed in the
best politics of peace; men, who are able to instruct and to govern, and whose
faithful services, whose unremitted exer^^ons to promote the public prosperity,
entitle them to our firmest confidence and warmest gratitude. Uniting in the
celebration of this anniversary, I am happy to behold many of the illustrious
remnant of that band of patriots, who, despising danger and death, determined
to be free, or gloriously perish in the cause. Their countenances beam
inexpressible delight! our joys are increased by their presence; our raptures
are heightened by their participation. The feelings which inspired them in the
"times which tried men's souls," are communicated to our bosoms. We catch the
divine spirit which impelled them to bid defiance to the congregated host of
despots. We swear to preserve the blessings they toiled to gain, which they
obtained by the incessant labors of eight distressful years; to transmit to our
posterity, our rights undiminished, our honor unt^^nished, and our freedom
unimpaired.

On the last page of Fate's eventful volume, with the raptured ken of prophecy,
I behold Columbia's name recorded; her future honors and happiness inscribed.
In the same important book the approaching end of Tyranny and the triumph of
Right and Justice are written in indelible characters. The struggle will soon
be over; the tottering thrones of despots will quickly fall, and bury their
proud incumbents in their massy ruins!

Then Peace on earth shall hold her easy sway,
And man forget his brother man to s^ay.
To martial arts, shall milder arts succeed;
Who blesses most, shall gain the immortal meed.
The eye of Pity shall be pained no more,
With Vict'ry's crimson banners stained with gore.
Thou glorious era, come! Hail, blessed time!
When full-orb'd Freedom shall unclouded shine,
When the chaste Muses, cherished by her rays,
In olive groves shall tune their sweetest lays;
When bounteous Ceres shall direct her car,
Over fields now blasted by the fires of war;
And angels view, with joy and wonder joined,
The golden age returned to bless mankind!
DIALOGUE BETWEEN EDWARD AND HARRY*
[EDWARD, alone, reading.] Enter HARRY, with an important air. Harry. HOW are
you, Ned?


Edward. What, is it you, brother Harry? Were it not for the small part of your
face, that appears between your fore-top and your cravat, I should never know
you.


Har. My appearance is a little altered, to be sure; but I hope you will allow
it is for the better.


Edw. I wish I could. I perceive, that some how or other, you are completely
metamorphosed from a plain country lad, to a Boston buck, beau, or fop: which
is the current word in your ^ying town dialect, to express such a thing as
yourself?


Har. Ah, either of them will do. The young ladies sometimes call me Tippy
Harry; that suits my ear the best.


Edw. That, I suppose, means a little fop, (...) as I should express it, a
fopee, who is obliged to stand ti^ toe to reach a lady her fan.


Har. One of your clownish blunders, Ne^ (...) means an airy young gentleman,
dressed out in co^ bon ton from head to foot, like myself.


Edw. "An airy young gentleman, dressed (...) complete bo^ ton, etc. etc." This
definition may be (...) service to me; I will try to remember it. You always
possessed one quality of a gentleman, a large (...) good humor: I hope you will
not be angry, (...) if I am a little inquisitive.


Har. Do, Ned, leave off using that old-fashion^ word: I Would rather you would do
any thing to me than brother me at this rate. If you should come to Boston,
dressed as you are now, with your clumsy shoes, coarse stockings, great small
clothes, homespun coat, and your old rusty go-to-mill hat, and shake hands
with me, in your awkward way, and then to complete the whole, should call me
brother, I should be thunderstruck! For my credit's sake, I should swear it was
some crazy straggler, I had seen in the country, and given a few coppers to
keep him from starving. I would hide behind the counter, or lie rolled up in a
piece of broadcloth a week, rather than be caught in such a scrape.


Edw. An airy young gentleman, indeed! would swear to half a dozen lies, hide
behind the counter, and roll yourself up in a piece of broadcloth like a
silkworm, to save your credit! You have improved much beyond my expectations,
Tippy Harry! This sounds better in your refined ear than brother Harry, I
suppose.


Harry. Yes it does, Ned, I Will assure you: that is your sort! You begin to come
on a little. Now I Will tell you how it is, Ned; if you would take your old musty
library here, and lay it all on the fire together, and burn all your old
fashioned clothes with it, and then go to Boston --


Edward. What, without any clothes, Harry?


Harry. Why, I think I should about as lief be seen with you stark naked, as
with your coarse, narrow-backed, short-waisted coat. But as I was saying
before, then p^^ yourself under the care of a tailor, barber, shoemaker, and a
dancing master; keep a store of English goods about three months, go to the
Theater a dozen nights, chat with our Boston Tippies, have a few high goes, and
freeze and thaw two or three times, for you are monstrously stiff; I say, after
all this, I believe, Ned, you would make a very clever fellow.


Edward. The freezing and thawing is a kind of discipline I should not so
readily comply with. I have heard of several of your clever fellows, and ladies
of your sort, who were found frozen in old barns, and behind board fences; but
I never knew they were so fortunate as to thaw again. Now, Harry, I will be
serious with you. Your airy young gentleman, in my opinion, is a very insipid
character; far beneath my ambition. A few materials from behind the counter,
the tailor's needle and shears, the barber's puff and pomatum, a little
sheep-skin modified by the shoemaker, and what is the most insignificant of
all, a little supple, puny machine, that in plain English, I should call a
naked fool; to strut about the streets with all this finery; carry it to the
theater, or dancing school; and teach it to say a few pretty things by rote;
these make the gentlemen of your sort. Mine is composed of quite different
materials.


Har. Pray let me know what they are? homespun, I dare say. I am superfine,
you see, from head to foot.


Edw. Yes, Harry, you have blundered into one just observation. In the first
place, I would lay up a good store of knowledge, homespun from my own
reflections, reading and observation; not the second-handed smattering of the
most ignorant of all beings who use a tongue. The tailor's, barber's, and
dancing-master's bill should not show an inventory of all I possessed. They may
make my clothes, dress my hair, and teach me how to bow; but there must be
something more to command the bow of respect from people of sense, the judges
of real merit. In short, I would be a gentleman farmer; too well informed to be
influenced by your railing newspaper politics; too much delighted with the
bleating and playing of the flocks in my own pasture, to read the head of
Theatricals, or be amused with any drove of stage players, that have infested
our country from Charleston to Portsmouth. And I should be much more proud of
raising one likely calf, than as many of the most insipid of all animals,
called Tippies, as could stand in every shop in Cornhill.


DAVID AND GOLIATH.
Goliath. WHERE is the mighty man of war, who dares
Accept the challenge of Philistia's chief?
What victor-king, what general drenched in blood,
Claims this high privilege? What are his rights?
What proud credentials does the boaster bring,
To prove his claim? What cities laid in ashes,
What ruined provinces, what slaughtered realms,
What heads of heroes, and what hearts of kings,
In battle killed, or at his altars slain,
Has he to boast? Is his bright armoury
Thick set with spears, and swords, and coats of mail,
Of vanquished nations, by his single arm
Subdued? Where is the mortal man so bold,
So much a wretch, so out of love with life,
To dare the weight of this uplifted spear,
Which never fell innoxious? Yet I swear,
I grudge the glory to his parting soul
To fall by this right hand. 'Twill sweeten death,
To know he had the honor to contend
With the dread son of Anak. Latest time
From blank oblivion shall retrieve his name,
Who dared to perish in unequal fight
With Gath's triumphant champion. Come, advance!
Philistia's Gods to Israel's. Sound, my herald,
Sound for the battle straight!

David. Behold thy foe!

Gol. I see him not.

Dav. Behold him here!

Gol. Say, where?
Direct my sight. I do not war with boys.

Dav. I stand prepared; thy single arm to mine.

Gol. Why, this is mockery, Minion! it may chance
To cost thee dear. Sport not with things above thee:
But tell me who, of all this numerous host,
Expects his death from me? Which is the man,
Whom Israel sends to meet my bold defiance?

Dav. The election of my sovereign falls on me.

Gol. On thee! on thee! By Dagon, it is too much!
Thou curled Minion! thou a nation's champion!
'Twould move my mirth at any other time;
But trifling's out of tune. Begone, light boy!
And tempt me not too far.

Dav. I do defy thee,
Thou foul idolater! Have thou not scorned
The armies of the living God I serve?
By me he will avenge upon thy head
Thy nation's sins and thine. Armed with his name,
Unshrinking, I dare meet the stoutest foe
That ever bathed his hostile spear in blood.

Gol. Indeed! it is wondrous well! Now, by my Gods,
The stripling plays the orator! Vain boy!
Keep close to that same bloodless war of words,
And thou shall still be safe. Tongue-valiant warrior!
Where is thy sylvan crook, with garlands hung,
Of idle field-flowers? Where thy wanton harp.
Thou dainty-finger'd hero? Better strike
Its note lascivious, or the lulling lute
Touch softly, than provoke the trumpet's rage.
I will not stain the honor of my spear
With thy inglorious blood. Shall that fair cheek
Be scarr'd with wounds unseemly? Rather go,
And hold fond dalliance with the Syrian maids;
To wanton measures dance; and let them braid
The bright luxuriance of thy golden hair;
They, for their lost Adonis, may mistake*
Thy dainty form.

Dav. Peace, thou unhallowed ra^ler!
O tell it not in Gath, nor let the sound
Reach Askelon, how once your slaughtered lords,
By mighty Samson found one common grave:
When his broad shoulder the firm pillars heaved.
And to its base the tottering fabric shook.

Gol. Insulting boy! perhaps thou have not heard
The infamy of that inglorious day,
When your weak hosts at Eben-ezer pitched
Their quick-abandon'd tents. Then, when your ark,
Your talisman, your charm, your boasted pledge
Of safety and success, was tamely lost!
And yet not tamely, since by me 'twas won.
When with this good right-arm, I thinn'd your ranks,
And bravely crushed, beneath a single blow,
The chosen guardians of this vaulted shrine,
Hophni and Phineas. The famed ark itself,
I bore to Ashdod.

Dav. I remember too,
Since thou provok'st the unwelcome truth, how all
Your blushing priests beheld their idols' shame;
When prostrate Dagon fell before the ark,
And your frail god was shivered. Then Philistia,
Idolatrous Philistia flew for succor
To Israel's help, and all her smitten nobles
Confessed the Lord was God, and the blessed ark,
Gladly, with reverential awe restored!

Gol. By Ashdod's sane thou lie. Now will I meet thee,
Thou insect warrior! since thou dare me thus!
Already I behold thy mangled limbs,
Dissever'd each from each, ere long to feed
The fierce, blood-snuffing vulture. Mark me well!
Around my spear I Will twist thy shining locks,
And toss in air thy head all gash'd with wounds;
Thy lips, yet quivering with the dire convulsion
Of recent death! Art thou not terrified?

Dav. No.
True courage is not moved by breath of words;
But the rash bravery of boiling blood,
Impetuous, knows no settled principle.
A feverish tide, it has its ebb^ and flows,
As spirits rise or fall, as wine inflames,
O^ circumstances change. But inborn courage,
The generous child of Fortitude and Faith,
Holds its firm empire in the constant soul;
And, like the steadfast pole star, never once
From the same fixed and faithful point declines.

Gol. The curses of Philistia's Gods be on thee!
This fine-drawn speech is meant to lengthen out
That little life thy words pretend to scorn.

Dav. Ha! say thou so? Come on then! Mark us well.
Thou come to me with sword, and spear, and shield!
In the dread name of Israel's God, I come;
The living Lord of Hosts, whom thou defy'st!
Yet though no shield I bring; no arms except
These five smooth stones I gathered from the brook,
With such a simple sling as shepherds use;
Yet all exposed, defenseless as I am,
The God I serve shall give thee up a prey
To my victorious arm. This day I mean
To make the uncircumcised tribes confess
There is a God in Israel. I will give thee,
Spite of thy vaunted strength and giant bulk,
To glut the carrion kites. Nor thee alone;
The mangled carcasses of your thick hosts,
Shall spread the plains of Elah: till Philistia,
Through all her trembling tents and flying bands,
Shall own that Judah's God is God indeed!
I dare thee to the trial!

Gol. Follow me.
In this good spear I trust.

Dav. I trust in Heaven!
The God of battles stimulates my arm,
And fires my soul with ardor, not its own.

AN ORATION ON THE POWERS OF ELOQUENCE, WRITTEN FOR AN EXHIBITION OF A SCHOOL
IN BOSTON, 1791.
AMIDST the profusion of interesting and brilliant objects in this assembly,
should the speaker be able to engage the attention of a few eyes, and a few
ears, he will esteem his reception flattering. To another is allotted the
pleasing task of closing the evening, with remarks on Female Education. See
American Preceptor, p. 47.
It is mine to recommend the POWERS OF ELOQUENCE, and to show the influence
which it justly challenges, over the senses, passions, and understandings of
mankind.

Eloquence consists in a capacity of expressing, by the voice, attitude,
gesture, and countenance the emotions of the heart. To this art, Demosthenes
and Cicero owe their immortality; by this, the late Earl of Chatham gained his
celebrity; and to this, are the great politicians, now in Europe, indebted for
their distinction. Eloquent men begin to be heard with attention in our
Congress; pulpit orators gain crowds, and eloquent lawyers gain causes.

When the enlightened Statesman is discussing the interests of a country, on
which are grafted his fortune, fame, and life, he must be eloquent. When the
general harangues a brave soldiery, at the eve of a battle, on which depend
their liberties and lives* he must be eloquent. When the compassionate lawyer,
without hope of reward, advocates the cause of the suffering widow, or injured
orphan, he must be eloquent.

But when true Eloquence is introduced into the sacred desk, how elevated is
the subject of the passion on the cross! With what animating zeal can the
preacher call on h^s hearers, to open a high way for their God! With what
rapture can he burst from the gloom of types and figures, into the brightness
of that everlasting Gospel which brought life and immortality to light! With
what heaven-taught joy can ^e hail the Star in the east! and with what
semblance of reality may he lead the imaginations of his audience to a sight of
the babe in the manger! If he feel such subjects, he must be eloquent and
irresistible.

May we now look back and trace the progress and influence of Eloquence on
different subjects, and at various periods? How do we feel its power, when we
hear David expressing the appearing of the Highest! "He bowed the heavens also,
and came down, and darkness was under his feet; he rode upon a cherub, and did
fly, and he was seen upon the wings of the wind."

Who can hear, without emotion, the sublime eloquence of the prophet Isaiah,
when he announces the future glory of the Church? "Violence shall no more be
heard in thy land; wasting nor destruction within thy borders: but thou shall
call thy walls, Salvation, and thy gates Praise."

But in what language has the prophet Habakkuk described the majesty of the
Creator? "Before him went the pestilence, and burning coals went forth at his
feet: he stood, and measured the earth: he beheld, and drove asunder the
nations: the everlasting mountains were scattered: the perpetual hills did bow:
his ways are everlasting." Let us pass in respectful silence the eloquence of
him, who "spoke, as never man spoke."

But our attention is immediately arrested by the defense of Paul before
Agrippa; in which he describes a light from heaven, above the brightness of the
midday sun; when he declares his conversion, and commission to be a minister,
and a witness of those things, which he had seen, and of those things, in which
the Savior would appear unto him. "Whereupon," says he, "O king Agrippa, I was
not disobedient unto the heavenly vision."

Nor can we fail to mention that eloquence, which made Felix tremble on his
throne. Nor can we read, unmoved, Paul's solemn account of the resurrection;
when, "In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, the dead shall be raised, and
we shall be changed." But when we come to the vision on the Isle of Patmos,
where the glory of heaven was unveiled to a man of God, we are lost in the
majesty and sublimity of the description of things, which must be hereafter;
and must close the sacred scriptures, convinced of the irresistible Powers of
Eloquence, when employed upon divine subjects.

Among themes less interesting, is there one, on which these powers have been
unsuccessfully employed? We read how the eloquence of one man governed all
hearts in Greece, and how astonishing was its effect from the immortal Orator
of Rome. All civilized nations can furnish facts and arguments on this subject.
Wherever arts and sciences have found a residence, oratory has been a sure
attendant.

I am obliged to pass, with regret, the characters of D'Espremenil, Mirabeau,
Burke, Fox, Flood, and Grattan, who, within our own days, have made the Senates
of three different kingdoms ring with their eloquence. With greater reluctance
mu^t I pass the memorable time, when all the senses, passions, and almost
breath of five thousand people were suspended at the admirable eloquence of
Sheridan, while he described the cruelties of Hastings on the banks of the
Ganges; when with unfeeling madness that despot reddened the waters with the
blood of mothers and their infants, and made even the river blush for the honor
of the British name.

With pleasure I bring my subject to the scenes of my native country; and here
could, with the enthusiasm of Columbus in his vision, present before you the
lofty Andes, the majestic Missisippi, the beautiful Ohio, the falls of Niagara,
and the lakes of the north. I might take a view of this country, extending
through the five zones, comprehending all the climates, and producing all the
varieties of the earth.

Our ears have heard what wonders have been wrought in United America. Our eyes
see its present happy situation. After many toils and convulsions, we at length
find ourselves safe on the top of Nebo, and our Moses yet alive at the head of
our rulers. Hence we look forward to the flattering prospects of futurity. Our
orators and poets have announced blessed things in the latter days. Our
prophets have taught us to expect the reality of golden dreams. The leaves of
our future history are gilded, and the pages are left to be filled up, with the
actions of a long list of unambitious Cesars.

We are told, that on this our native spot of earth, slavish government and
slavish hierarchies shall cease; that here, the old prophecies shall be
verified; that here shall be the last, universal empire on earth, the empire of
reason and virtue; under which the gospel of peace shall have free course and
be glorified; that here the wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard
with the kid, and that nation shall no more lift up sword against nation.

When the philosopher of the east foresaw the beauty and excellence of this
western continent, its immense rivers, lakes, and mountains; cities rising from
the midst of desolation; "men like trees walking," where once were the haunts
of savage beasts; arts and manners improving; the rose budding in the desert,
and the flowers of the garden in the solitary place, rich indeed was the
prospect. But his visions have become our realities. We live to enjoy
blessings, more numerous than Columbus could count.

We see schools, academies, and colleges, opening their treasures to every
family; and are taught, that religion, liberty, and science, are constellations
in the heavens, which, amidst the revolution of empires, visit, in succession,
all the kingdoms and people of the earth. We see one half of the world involved
in darkness, and oblivious sleep; while the other is enjoying the blessings of
day, and of vigilant industry.

The day of American glory has at length dawned. No more shall meteors of the
air, and insects with gilded wings, lead astray the benighted traveller, nor
the bleaking buzzards of the night tr^umph over the bird of Jove. Prejudice,
ignorance, and tyranny, are flying on the wings of the wind. While this day is
ours, let us be up and doing.

May I now introduce my subject within these walls? And here, how extensive is
the theme for my feeble powers of Eloquence! yet may I employ them, in
suggesting the motives which your sons and daughters have to cultivate their
minds. Gratitude to their parents; your patronage; their own ambition; their
prospects of future profit, usefulness, and honest fame, are among the first.

But highly important is rendered this morning of life and privilege to us,
from a consideration, that we are born in the best of countries, at the best of
times. While some of the human race are suffering the extreme heats of burning
zones, and others are freezing beyond the influence of benignant rays, we live
in a climate, temperate, salubrious, and healthful. While some inherit from
their parents poverty and slavery, we are the heirs of private, public, and
social benefits.

Our eyes have been opened in a country, where the Father of mercies has been
pleased to condense his blessings. On us beams the sun of Science: ours is the
hemisphere of Freedom: here are enjoyed THE RIGHTS OF MAN; and upon us shine,
with ceaseless splendour, the rays of the STAR OF BETHLEHEM.

Blessed in the dispensations of nature, providence, and grace, on us depends a
faithful improvement of our numerous talents. Early taught the shortness and
value of life, and the importance of improving each hour of youth, while we
have leisure, and the assistance of instructors, we early learn to be diligent.
Observing, that with our parents, the shadows of the evening begin to lengthen,
and that soon the wheel will cease to turn round at the cistern; that soon they
must leave us, and that we must fill their places, we learn to be ambitious and
emulous to excel. But beyond these, we have, with all other children of the
universe, an argument still higher to improve these precious days. We live not
only for ourselves, for our parents, friends, and country; but for the G^ver of
life: we live for immortality. Young as we are, and just entered the bark of
being; yet like you, we are on a boundless ocean, and an eternal voyage.

As ELOQUENCE is my theme, perhaps I may be indulged in dwelling for the few
remaining moments, on this last most interesting subject. While enjoying the
blessings of health, and the festivities of youth, we stand on this bridge of
life, careless of the rapid currents of yesterdays and to-morrows; yet
reflection teaches that the hour is rapidly hastening, when "the cloud-capt
towers; the gorgeous palaces; the solemn temples; yea, the great globe itself,
with all which it inherits, shall dissolve, and like the baseless fabric of a
vision, leave not a wreck behind." We shall survive.

Though the loss of parents and friends; though the frequent infirmities and
vicissitudes of life, teach us gloomily to reflect, that "An angel's arm cannot
snatch us from the grave;" yet a sure prospect of a resurrection to ceaseless
life, bids us say with triumph, "Legions of angels cannot confine us there." We
look back on the ages which have passed, and see the millions of men, who,
since the days of Adam, have been laid in the dust. We see nine hundred and
fifty millions of rational beings, now in full life, who must in a few years,
be cold and in death; and in every day of our lives, no less than eighty-six
thousand of the human race, are laid in the grave. What oceans of tears have
been shed by surviving friends!

How have mourning, lamentation, and woe been heard not ^^ly in Rama, but
throughout every quarter of the ^^habited earth! We contemplate the time, when
th^^e bodies of ours, now full of life and motion, shall be cold. We elevate
our thoughts to that scene, when the elements shall melt with fervent heat;
when the sun shall be darkened, and the moon no more give light: when the stars
of heaven shall fall from their places, and all nature be tumbling into ruins.

Then the trump of God shall sound; then shall he, who once said, "Lazarus,
come forth," descend from heaven, with a mighty shout. Then, shall the dead
hear the voice of the Son of God; then shall they ^^^st the bands of death, and
rise, never to sleep again. Then shall this mo^tal put on immortality, and
death be swallowed up of life.

We shall be present at this august resurrection! Soon shall we cease to see
the blue canopy of the day, and the starred curtain of the night; to hear the
rolling of the thunder, or see the lightning of the heavens; scenes, which now
impress us with awe and delight. We look round creation, and see all living
nature, below our rank, dissolving to dust; never to revive. We see the flowers
of spring die, and the leaves of autumn fade; never to resume their beauty and
verdure. But contemplating the soul of man, we are led to the language of the
poet, "See truth, love, and mercy in triumph descending,
And nature all glowing in Eden's first bloom,
On the cold cheek of death smiles and roses are blending,
And beauty immortal awakes from the tomb."


This subject, itself so full of Eloquence, is also full of instruction and
argument. Whatever elevates the dignity of our natures, and extends our views,
teaches us to live; daily to improve our minds; daily to better our hearts. May
ELOQUENCE ever be improved in the cause of learning and virtue; ever employed
in addressing important truths to the mind, in a most forcible and expressive
manner.

May the daughters of America wear their charms, as attendants on their virtue,
the satel^^^ (...) their innocence, and the ornament of their sex. May her sons
early learn the principles of honor, ho^^sty, diligence, and patriotism; and
when called to leave the^^ happy seats, where care is a stranger, and where
lear^ing is a free gift, be prepared for the burden and he^^ of the day, and
ever prove as a munition of rocks to their country.

END.

