GLAD TIDINGS TO Perishing Sinners: OR, THE GENUINE GOSPEL A COMPLETE WARRANT
FOR THE UNGODLY TO BELIEVE IN JESUS.

By Rev. ABRAHAM BOOTH.

Nothing is requisite, in order to a participation of Christ and his Benefits,
but a grant from God.

MR. J. HERVEY. God justifies the UNGODLY. This is that expression which has
stirred up so much wrath among many, and on account whereof some seem to be
much displeased with the Apostle himself.

DR. J. OWEN. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY STEPHEN C. USTICK; Sold at No. 79, North
Third Street. 1797.

PREFACE.
THAT the subject here discussed is of sufficient importance to demand serious
attention, whether the principle defended be true or false, must be admitted by
every competent judge; because of its intimate connection with the doctrine of
justification before God: for that has ever been considered, by our most
eminent Protestant writers, both Lutherans and Calvinists, as an article of the
greatest moment. Thus, for instance, Dr. JOHN OWEN: In my judgment, LUTHER
spoke the truth when he said, To lose the article of Justification, would at
once be the loss of the whole Christian faith. And I wish he had not been a
true prophet, when he foretold that, in the following ages, the doctrine hereof
would be again obscured Doctrine of Justification. General Considertions, p.
103. Glasgow, 1760. Thus, also, that celebrated foreigner, WITSIUS: Diffundit
se Justificationis doctrina per totum theologiae corpus, et prout fundamenta
hic, vel been, vel male, jacta sunt, eo uni versum aedisicium vel solidius
augustiusque ascendit, vel male statuminatum foedam minitatur ruinam. O^ron.
Foed. Lib. III. Cap. viii. 1.
. -- The leading principle maintained in this Publication, is closely connected
also, with Christian experience, with devotional practice, and with general
obedience to God. The better that principle is understood, and the more its
practical influence is felt; the more benign will its genuine tendency appear,
with regard to peace of conscience, and liberty in devotional duties; to the
habitual exercise of holy affections, and a course of conformity to the divine
commands. It is, by the Author at least, considered in this light.

That prudence and caution are necessary, however, in stating and defending the
sentiment here adopted, the Writer presumes, will be acknowledged: because it
is a kind of middle point, between Arminianism, and Antinomianism -- between
seeking acceptance with God, as it were, by the works of the law Romans ix. 32.
; and renouncing obedience to the divine precepts, as if they had lost their
obliging power, or as if our personal obedience were of no importance in any
respect. The former of which is pernicious legality; the latter, destructive
licentiousness. Whether the Writer have handled the subject with all that
wisdom and care, which its delicacy and importance demand, he dares not assert:
but, with sincerity he can declare, that the discussion of it has been attended
with much thought, and with frequent prayer.

Though the Author detest the real principles of what is properly called
Antinomianism; though, many years ago, in the most public manner, he labored
to explode those pernicious principles See The Death of Legal Hope, the Life of
Evangelical Obedience, Sect. VII. Edit. 3d.
; and though, in the present Performance, he have endeavored to guard against
being misunderstood; yet he is not without suspicion, that some of his readers
will be ready to consider the main position defended, as having a licentious
cast. But, should that be the case, he is prepared for it, so as to be neither
offended, nor surprised. Nay, while fully persuaded that there is no just
ground for such a conclusion, he will consider it as a presumption in favor of
the point maintained. Because it is evident, that the doctrine of grace, as
preached and recorded by Paul, was treated in a similar manner Romans iii. 8, 31.
vi. 1, 2, 3, 15. ix. 14 -- 24.
. He has long been of opinion, that whoever exhibits the true glory of divine
grace, and the high importance of Christian duty, according to the apostolic
pattern; will be considered by many as an Antinomian, and by some as an
Arminian. Does a minister of the gospel display the absolute freeness, the
infinite riches, and the allsufficiency of that grace which is revealed in
Jesus Christ, as an immediate ground of encouragement for the vilest of sinners
to confide in him? the doctrine will be stigmatized by multitudes, as
manifestly licentious. Does he, as ministerial duty requires, warmly insist,
that, be the professed articles of any one's theological creed ever so
scriptural; yet, if he be not habitually mindful of the divine precepts; if he
keep not the example of Christ in view; if his heart have not an heavenly turn;
he is a stranger to the power of evangelical truth, and unworthy to be called a
Christian? his preaching will be offensive to the mere formalist; be censured
as uncharitable; and reproached, by some, as detestably legal.

The grand principle here defended, is far from being novel; it having been
adopted by many Protestant writers of high reputation in the churches of
Christ: from some of whom, and especially from Dr. JOHN OWEN, a number of
quotations appear in the following work. To the producing of which quotations
the Author was induced, partly for the sake of that argument which they
contain, in proof of his main point; and partly to evince, that the sentiments
here maintained have been espoused by persons of the first eminence, among
professed Christians of Calvinistic principles.

That the number of quotations, from the most respectable Calvinistic authors,
with regard to the leading position, might have been greatly increased; every
one, much acquainted with their theological writings, must acknowledge. Mr.
DAVID WILSON, when vindicating various Writers, denominated POPULAR PREACHERS,
against the attacks of gross misrepresentation, of illiberal censure, and of
sarcastical contempt; in speaking relative to the main subject of the following
pages, says: They [the Popular Preachers] were very ready to acknowledge, that
those who are most punctual in the external performance of religious duties,
are frequently in a far more dangerous condition than publicans and harlots, or
those who lead the most wicked and flagitious lives; because, through the
corruption of their own hearts, all their duties, religious services,
endeavors and seize, are too often made subservient to the gratification
of their pride, and the cherishing of those presumptuous hopes and imaginations
whereby they are hardened in their opposition to the true grace of God
manifested in the gospel. And they were equally ready to own, that the
sovereign mercy of God, with regard to believers at first conversion, does
still prevent every good action, motion, or qualification in them; every thing
that can be supposed to have the least tendency to qualify them for the divine
approbation -- They affirmed, that the foundation of a sinner's confidence and
comfort lies, not in any good works performed by him; in any consciousness of
his own sincerity; or any experience of a gracious and sanctifying work of the
divine Spirit upon his own soul; but wholly without him, in the promises and
testimony of God in the gospel -- To maintain, that sinners are justified
freely, through the righteousness of Christ imputed, and apprehended by faith
alone; and yet assert, that no man has a sufficient warrant to rely upon that
righteousness alone for justification -- as exhibited in the word of the
gospel, till he is first conscious of his own godliness and sincerity; is in
effect to affirm, that though sinners in general must be justified freely by
grace, through the imputed righteousness; yet no sinner in particular ought, or
has any warrant to believe, that he is, or ever can be justified in that
manner, or without a righteousness of his own; or, at least, something in and
about himself, upon which he may with safety bottom an assurance of the divine
favor, and his own justification and salvation Palaemon's Creed Reviewed and
Examined, Vol. I. p, 195.196. Vol. II. p. 102, 100.
.

Though the Author be fully persuaded, that a denial of the position
maintained, is inconsistent with the genuine gospel, and with those principles
on which every truly pious man proceeds in his prayers, respecting acceptance
with God; yet he is far from concluding, that no one is a real disciple of
Christ, who does not explicitly avow that position. For he has learned, from
experience and observation, that persons will sometimes dispute against a
particular sentiment, the truth of which is habitually implied in their
prayers, and its importance tacitly acknowledged in their own experience. To
this effect is the following language of Dr. OWEN, respecting certain opposers
of the doctrine of justification merely by grace, through an imputed
righteousness: I doubt they oftentimes dispute themselves beyond what they can
well abide by, when they return home unto a sedate meditation of the state of
things between God and their own souls -- I had rather learn what some men
really judge about their own justification, from their prayers, than their
writings. Nor do I remember, that I did ever hear any good man in his prayers,
use any expressions about justification, pardon of sin, and righteousness
before God, wherein any plea, from any thing in ourselves, was introduced, or
made use of -- Whereas we may, and ought, to represent unto God in our
supplications, our faith, or what it is that we believe herein; I much
question, whether some men can find in their hearts to pray over and plead
before him, all the arguments and distinctions they make use of to prove the
interest of our works and obedience in our justification before him; or enter
into judgment with him, upon the conclusions which they make from them -- I
judge no men upon the expressions that fall from them in polemical writings;
wherein, on many occasions, they do affront their own experience, and
contradict their own prayers -- To believe the doctrine of [justification by
the imputed righteousness of Christ,] or not to believe it, as thus or thus
explained, is one thing; and to enjoy the thing, or not enjoy it is another. I
no way doubt, but that many men do receive more grace from God, than they
understand, or will own; and have a greater efficacy of it in them, than they
will believe Doctrine of Justification, p. 8, 19, 20, 62, 278, 279. Glasgow
Edit.
.

That no plausible reasons may be advanced, in opposition to his main thesis,
the Author does not suppose. But, as the writer just quoted observes; It is a
known rule, That a truth, well established and confirmed, is not to be
questioned, much less relinquished, on every entangling sophism, though it
should appear insoluble Ut supra, p. 457.
.

Goodman's Fields, LONDON, May 17, 1796.
CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTION Page 13 CHAPTER I. The genuine gospel a complete warrant for the
most ungodly person to believe in Jesus. Page 27 CHAPTER II. No degree of
holiness previously necessary, to warrant our believing in Jesus Christ. Page
81 CHAPTER III. Objections answered. Page 137 CHAPTER IV. The salutary and
practical tendencies of the principle maintained. Page 203
GLAD TIDINGS TO Perishing Sinners, etc.
INTRODUCTION.
WHETHER any holy disposition in the heart of a sinner be previously necessary
to warrant his believing in Jesus Christ? Or, whether, for that purpose, the
gospel itself, detached from every consideration of a preparatory sanctifying
influence, be completely sufficient? are questions on which the ministers of
religion, and the professors of godliness, are greatly divided. The former
sentiment is charged, by some, with Arminian legality: the latter, by
multitudes, with Antinomian licentiousness. That is discarded, as fostering
pharisaical pride, as veiling the glory of sovereign grace, and as corrupting
the gospel of Jesus Christ. This is detested, as encouraging presumptuous hope,
as inimical to true virtue, and as averse to Supreme authority, expressing
itself in divine law. So opposite are the views of professed Christians,
relative to this momentous article of our enquiry!

After much thought on the subject, I cannot but conclude, however, That the
genuine gospel is a complete warrant for the most ungodly person to believe in
Jesus; and that no degree of holiness is necessary for that purpose. This
position, though treated by great numbers as a licentious principle, and as
pregnant with dangerous consequences, I consider as a capital article of
revealed truth, and as essential to the genuine gospel. I adopt it, as
expressing an important fact, in which the perfection of our Lord's vicarious
work, the honor of divine grace, and the peace of distressed consciences, are
deeply concerned: to the proof and illustration of which, the following pages
are devoted.

To prevent mistakes it is proper to be observed, that, by an holy disposition
is not meant, a speculative knowledge of religious duty; a conviction of
spiritual danger; or a desire of immortal happiness: for these, though they
accompany, do none of them come under the notion of an holy disposition. These
may all exist, more or less, in the minds, the consciences, and the hearts of
sinners, without any principle of true sanctity. But, by an holy disposition is
intended, a bias of the will, a propensity of the heart, or a tendency of the
affections, in favor of divine authority, and of conformity to the divine
image. -- By believing in Jesus Christ, I do not mean a firm persuasion of his
being the promised Messiah, and that the Christian religion is from God, though
that persuasion be presupposed; nor a mere assent to any particular
proposition, however true, or important; nor yet an assurance of personal
interest in Christ, as the only Savior of sinners: but relying upon him as
revealed in the doctrine of grace, for pardon, peace, and every spiritual
blessing.

Again: The question is not, whether sanctifying influence, and real holiness,
be previously necessary to final felicity? for that is admitted in its fullest
sense. Partly, because without holiness no one shall see the Lord; and partly,
because without holiness, intellectual happiness is impossible, -- Neither is
the inquiry, Whether a pious turn of heart be necessary to communion with God,
in the performance of devotional services? for that communion, on the part of a
Christian, is nothing else but the exercise of holy affections toward God, as
manifesting himself in Jesus Christ. -- Nor, whether an holy tendency in the
will be necessary, as an evidence of our having already believed in Jesus? for
that is cheerfully granted. -- Nor, yet, whether a divine influence, attending
evangelical truth, be necessary to a sinner's believing in Christ? for that is
an important article of the Christian faith. -- But the question to be
discussed, is; Whether the Gospel itself be a complete warrant for the most
ungodly person to believe in Jesus, without any holy disposition being
necessary for that purpose?

By the term gospel I here intend, the doctrine of salvation by grace, through
Jesus Christ: which doctrine is, in the most emphatical sense, good news, or
glad tidings; agreeable to the natural import of the word (...), as used by the
Evangelists and Apostles. Relative to which particular, I will here introduce a
few extracts from Dr. GEORGE CAMPBELL. Thus, that learned Author: This term,
((...)) agreeably to its etymology, from (...) been and (...) nuncium, always
in classical use, where it occurs but rarely, denotes either good news, or the
reward given to the bearer of good news -- The Greek verb (...), when first
used by the Evangelists, -- conveyed to their countrymen only one and the same
idea, which is precisely what the phrase to bring good tidings conveys to us.
The appropriation of the word to the religious institution called the gospel,
is of later date, and has gradually arisen out of the former usage. When
etymology and use perfectly coincide, we cannot be too literal in our
interpretations; when they differ, which does not seldom happen, the latter is
to be followed, and not the former -- The first meaning of the word ((...))
then in the New Testament, especially in the Gospels, is, as has been observed,
good news; a signification which, though always implied, is not always what is
chiefly intended: and therefore the word cannot, without a sacrifice of
propriety, be uniformly so rendered. The name, from being expressive of an
eminent quality in the dispensation introduced by the Messiah, and from being
most frequently applied to it, came gradually to serve as a name for the
dispensation itself. When it is thus employed, it is in our tongue properly
rendered gospel -- This [literal and primitive] sense ought to be retained in
the version, when the word, (...) is construed with a noun serving to limit or
explain its nature; as (...), the good news of peace; (...), the good news of
the reign. It was observed, on the explanation of the word (...), that the
Christian economy was foretold under the denomination of the reign of God, and
the reign of Heaven; and I may add, in the typical language of the Psalms, the
reign of David -- (...), is the good news of the favor of God: (...), the good
news of your salvation. The words in the common version, the gospel of your
salvation, are mere words, and convey no meaning to English ears. The word
always may, and commonly should, be rendered good news, and not gospel, -- when
it is construed with (...), I proclaim or publish -- (The word) (...), rendered
to preach, is derived from (...), rendered preacher; whence also (...),
rendered a preaching. The primitive (...) signifies properly both herald and
common crier -- The verb (...) is accordingly to cry, publish, or proclaim
authoritatively, or by commission from another, and the noun (...) is the thing
published or proclaimed -- The verb (...) occurs in the New Testament about
five and twenty times, always in nearly the same sense: I proclaim, praedico,
palam annuncio -- This may be called the primitive sense of the word; and in
this sense it will be found to be oftenest employed in the New Testament --
Though announcing publicly the reign of the Messiah, comes always under the
denomination, (...), no moral instructions, or doctrinal explanations, given
either by our Lord, or by his Apostles, are ever, either in the Gospels, or in
the Acts, so denominated -- Let it be also observed that, in all the quotations
in the Gospels, from the ancient Prophets, neither the word (...), nor any of
its conjugates, is applied to any of them beside Jonah. What is quoted from the
rest, is said to have been spoken, or foretold, or prophesied, but never
preached. Jonah's prophecy to the Ninevites, on the contrary, is but twice
quoted; and it is in both places called (...), rendered preaching, properly
cry, or proclamation -- It was a real proclamation which God required him to
make through the streets of Nineveh The four Gospels, Vol. I. Dissertat. V.
Part i. 1, 8, 10, 11, 16. Part V. 2, 7, 8.
.

The gospel then, is good news, or glad tidings. It is that most interesting
part of sacred Scripture which is, by inspired writers, denominated THE TRUTH
-- the word of the kingdom -- the word of God's grace -- the word of
reconciliation -- the word of righteousness -- the word of life -- the word of
salvation -- glad tidings of the kingdom, or of the reign -- glad tidings of
Christ -- glad tidings of the grace of God -- glad tidings of peace -- glad
tidings of salvation -- the doctrine of God our Savior -- the glorious glad
tidings of Christ -- and the glorious glad tidings of the blessed God Gal. iii.
1. Matt. xiii. 19. Acts xx. 32. 2 Cor. v. 19. Heb. v. 13. Philip ii. 16. Acts
xiii. 26. Matt. iv. 23. Romans i. 1, 16. Acts xx. 24. Ephesians. vi. 15 i. 13. 2 Cor.
iv. 4. 1 Timothy i. 11. Titus ii. 10.
. -- It is also denominated, The word of faith -- the faith once delivered to
the saints -- the most holy faith -- and the faith in Christ Romans x. 8. Jude
3.20. Acts xxiv. 24.
. -- The publication of the gospel, by the Apostles, is called, Preaching, or
proclaiming Christ -- proclaiming Christ crucified -- preaching the cross --
proclaiming peace, by Jesus Christ -- proclaiming forgiveness of sins, through
Jesus Christ -- proclaiming the unsearchable riches of Christ -- bringing glad
tidings of peace -- and bringing glad tidings of good things Acts viii. 5. 1
Cor. i. 18, 23. Acts x. 36. xiii. 38. Ephesians. iii. 8. Romans x. 15.
. -- Such is the gospel, and such the preaching of it, as represented by the
inspired writers! all which unite in the general notion of JOYFUL NEWS.

Let us now see how an ancient ecclesiastical author describes it. Thus
CHRYSOSTOM speaks, as quoted and translated by Mr. HERVEY. The gospel
comprehends, a discharge from punishment; a remission of sins; the gift of
righteousness; the endowment of sanctification; redemption from every evil; the
adoption of sons; the inheritance of heaven; and a most endeared, a conjugal
relation to the infinitely majestic Son of God. All these divinely precious
privileges preached, presented, vouchsafed, to the foolish, to the disobedient,
to enemies Thereon and Aspasio, Vol. III. p. 321. Edit. 5th.
. -- 'The gospel,' says LUTHER, is the doctrine concerning the incarnate Son of
God, who was given to us, without our deserts, for peace and salvation. It is
the word of salvation, the word of grace, the word of comfort, and the word of
joy Loci Communes, Class II. Loc. xiv. p. 69. Londini, 1651.
.

The gospel, then, properly and strictly so called, is the doctrine of divine
grace. As such, it is contradistinguished to the precepts and prohibitions of
divine law, which are the doctrine of human duty. But, relative to this
distinction, and the contrasted light in which the law and the gospel are
placed by it, the following quotation from WITSIUS may not be improper. Thus
that eminent writer: The law, here, denotes that part of the divine Word which
consists of precepts and prohibitions; with the promise of a reward to be
conferred on those who obey, and a threatening of punishment on the
disobedient. The gospel signifies the doctrine of grace, and of complete
salvation in Jesus Christ, which elect sinners shall receive by faith. Every
prescription, therefore, of virtues and of duties; all exhortations and
dehortations; all reproofs and threatenings; all promises, likewise, of reward
to perfect obedience, belong to the law. To the gospel pertains every thing
that can minister hope of salvation to sinful man: that is, the doctrine of the
Person, the offices, the states, the benefits of Jesus Christ; and all promises
to which are annexed the pardon of sin, and the possession of grace and of
glory, to be obtained by faith in Christ. This is the most strict notion of
each word; to which, through the whole of this disputation, regard must be paid
-- If we understand the word gospel strictly, as it is the formula of the
Testament of Grace, which consists of mere promises, or an absolute exhibition
of salvation in Christ; then, properly speaking, it prescribes nothing as duty;
requires nothing; commands nothing: no, not even believe, trust, hope in the
Lord, and such like. But it reports, declares, and signifies to us, what God in
Christ promises; what he will do, and is about to perform. All prescription of
duty belongs to the law; as, after others, the venerable VOETIUS has
excellently well proved. This must by all means be held, if, with all the
Reformed, we would steadily defend the perfection of the law, as including all
virtues, and all the duties of holiness Animadvers. Iren. C. xv. 1, 9.
. -- This distinction between the law and the gospel, strictly understood,
appearing to be both just and important, is regarded in the following pages.

Still further, however, to confirm and illustrate the necessity of keeping
this distinction in view, it may be observed; that the law of God originated in
his relation to men, as moral agents; and in his necessary dominion over them,
of which it is a natural expression: but the gospel, in his royal, supreme
prerogative; it being the result of his mere, sovereign pleasure. The former
considers them as rational creatures that are bound to obey: the latter, as
guilty creatures, who deserve to suffer. The precepts of divine law are the
language of stern authority: the doctrines of the gospel are the voice of
condescending mercy. In that, justice unsheaths the sword, and demands
vengeance: in this, mercy exhibits pardon, and proclaims peace. Divine law, is
the awful ministration of death 2 Cor. iii. 7.
, as the desert of sin: the everlasting gospel is the good news of life, as the
effect of boundless grace. That, by a righteous charge of guilt, and of
deserved ruin, stops the mouth Romans iii. 19.
: this, by proclaiming a free pardon, opens the lips in gratitude and praise.
God, in the law, addresses men agreeably to their personal deserts, their
character, and their state: in the gospel, according to the riches of his own
grace, the diversity of their spiritual wants, and the vicarious work of Jesus
Christ. In divine law, the Most High exhibits himself, as invested with
absolute dominion, as flaming with eternal purity, and as unchangeably
abhorrent of moral evil: in the gospel, as condemning sin in the flesh of his
own incarnate Son Romans viii. 3.
; as pardoning iniquity, in its greatly diversified forms; as justifying the
ungodly; as the JUST God and the SAVIOR Exodus xxxiv. 6, 7. Romans iv. 5. Isaiah
xiv. 21.
.

Hence it appears, that, in addressing sinners, respecting their immortal
concerns, neither the announcing of danger, nor the enforcing of duty, is
publishing the gospel, properly so called. Because it is admitted by all, who
are conversant in these things, that (...), gospel, denotes glad tidings. Such
is its natural and proper, its delightful and emphatical meaning. It is most
commonly employed, in the New Testament, with an immediate reference to the
grace of God, and the work of Christ, as they appear in the salvation of
sinners. Very seldom is it used by the Apostles, to denote the Christian system
at large; but, with a few exceptions, in its grand, appropriate, and emphatical
sense, for that part of revealed truth which respects the blessings of
salvation, by mere grace, through Jesus Christ. Preaching the gospel,
therefore, is proclaiming glad tidings of salvation for the guilty, the
unworthy, and the perishing.

Now, the terms law, precepts, commands, exhortations, threatenings, and others
of a similar kind, are expressions of an extremely different meaning, from that
of the word gospel. To assert, therefore, the authority of God in his laws,
whether moral or positive; to describe the awful situation of unregenerate
sinners? to warn them of their extreme danger; to inculcate, for suitable
purposes, an impartial regard to all the divine precepts; and to insist, that
an habitual want of obedience to the known commands of Christ, leaves a person
destitute of evidence that he either loves him, or believes in him; though of
essential importance, in the course of a public ministry, ought never to be
considered, strictly speaking, as preaching the gospel. It may be all true; it
may be all proper; it may be all necessary in its place; and yet, not having
the nature of glad tidings in it, be very different from the gospel.

The word gospel, having long been commonly used without any determinate
meaning; except, either a denoting the Christian system, or some doctrine, or
precept, pertaining to Christianity; and having become, by modern use, a kind
of technical term in divinity; is applied, in the most promiscuous manner, to
all sorts of religious doctrine, that are considered by their abettorn as
warranted in the sacred writings. The public minister, and the private
professor, whatever their theological creed may be; are equally pleased with
concluding, that the one preaches, and the other hears, the gospel: though,
frequently, neither of them have any fixed or distinct notion under the term;
and even though their views of Christianity render it nearly akin to Deism. It
were to be wished, therefore, either that, instead of the old Saxon word
gospel, the expressions glad tidings had been used in our vulgar translation of
the New Testament; or that the former term were universally understood in its
original sense, as denoting good news. For, were that the case, it is highly
probable, there would be more knowledge, and less of self-deception; relative
to this momentous affair.

CHAPTER I. THE GENUINE GOSPEL A COMPLETE WARRANT FOR THE MOST UNGODLY PERSON
TO BELIEVE IN JESUS.
TO prove this position, a great number of passages might be extracted from the
sacred Records; a variety of which, as being more directly to the purpose, and
expressing kindred ideas, I will here produce under the following arrangement
of particulars.

The condescending and gracious characters which Christ bears. The Mediator
between God and men -- The Surety of a better testament -- A great High Priest
-- The good Shepherd -- The Savior 1 Timothy ii. 5. Heb. vii. 22. iv. 14. John x.
11. 2 Timothy i. 10.
.

The great and merciful design of our Lord in becoming incarnate. The Father
sent the Son to be the Savior of the world -- The Son of man is come to seek
and to save -- He shall save his people 1 John iv. 14. Luke xix. 10. Matt. i.
21.
.

The character and state of those whom our Lord came to save. Sinners -- the
ungodly -- enemies to God -- the dead in sin -- the children of wrath -- the
accursed -- the lost 1 Timothy i. 15. Romans v. 5, 8, 10. Ephesians. ii, 1, 3. Gal. iii.
10, 13. Luke xix. 10.
.

The work which Christ performed, the sufferings he underwent, and the benefits
to sinners thence resulting. He has made him to be sin for us, who knew no
sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him -- He was wounded
for our transgressions; he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of
our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed. All we like sheep
have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way; and the Lord has
laid on him the iniquity of us all -- Christ our passover is sacrificed for us
-- Christ died for our sins -- We have redemption through his blood, even the
forgiveness of sins -- Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being
made a curse for us -- Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through
faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that
are past, through the forbearance of God: to declare, I say, at this time, his
righteousness; that he might be just, and the justifier of him which believes
in Jesus -- When we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his
Son -- Christ has once suffered for sins, the Just for the unjust, that he
might bring us to God -- Being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved
from wrath through him -- By the obedience of One shall many be made righteous
-- Jesus, who, of God, is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption 2 Cor. v. 21. Isa. liii. 5, 6. 1 Pet. ii. 24. 1
Cor. v. 7. xv. 3. Col. i. 14. Gal. iii. 13. Romans iii. 25, 26. v. 10. 1 Pet.
iii. 18. Romans v. 9, 19. 1 Cor. i. 30.
.

This testimony of God, respecting the gracious characters which Christ bears;
the merciful design of his appearance in the world; the state of those whom he
came to save; and the work which he performed for that purpose; very strongly
encourages the guilty, the ungodly, and the altogether unworthy, to believe in
Jesus. For, as it is manifest that he did not assume his condescending and
mediatorial characters, come into the world, and expire on a cross, to save the
innocent, or the righteous, but sinners -- the ungodly -- the justly accursed;
so individuals of that description must be the only persons with whom, as a
Savior from eternal ruin, he has any concern.

The allsufficiency of Christ, of his work, and of divine grace, to save the
most ungodly wretch that lives. This is his name whereby he shall be called,
JEHOVAH OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS -- The MIGHTY GOD -- Look unto Me, and be ye saved,
all the ends of the earth: for I am God; and there is none else -- Neither is
there salvation in any other; for there is none other name under heaven given
among men whereby we must be saved -- How much more shall the blood of Christ,
who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your
conscience from dead works to serve the living God? -- If through the offense
of one many be dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, which
is by one man, Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many -- The judgment was by one
to condemnation; but the free gift is of many offenses unto justification. For
if by one man's offense death reigned by one; much more they which receive
abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by
one, Jesus Christ -- He is able to save them to the UTTERMOST that come unto
God by him -- The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses from all sin --
Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be
red like crimson, they shall be as wool -- All manner of sin and blasphemy
[except the blasphemy against the Holy Spirit,] shall be forgiven unto men --
Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died; yea rather, that is risen
again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for
us -- He entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal
redemption for us -- By one offering he has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified -- Ye are complete in Him, which is the Head of all principality and
power Jer. xxiii. 6. Isa. ix. 6. xiv. 22. Acts iv. 12. Heb. ix. 14. Romans v. 15,
16, 17. Heb. vii. 25. 1 John i. 7. Isa. i. 18. Matt. xii. 31. Romans viii. 34.
Heb. ix. 12. x. 14. Col. ii. 10.
.

Who, now, that maturely considers these infallible attestations to the dignity
of our Lord's Person, the perfection of his obedience, the depth of his penal
sufferings, the vicarious nature of his whole work, and the exuberance of
divine grace; can doubt the sufficiency, either of Christ or of grace, to save
the most vile and miserable of men? Or who, being satisfied of that fact, can
forbear to view it as a delightful and powerful encouragement, for the ungodly
to believe in Jesus?

Preventing mercy, and the free pardon of enormous offenders. I was found of
them that sought me not; I was made manifest unto them that asked not after me
-- The Gentiles, which followed not after righteousness, have ((...)) received
righteousness, even the righteousness which is of faith -- There was a man
named Zaccheus, who was the chief among the publicans, and he was rich. And he
sought to see Jesus who he was; and he could not for the press, because he was
little of stature. And he ran before, and climbed up into a sycamo e tree to
see him: for he was to pass that way. And when Jesus came to the place, he
looked up, and saw him, and said unto him, Zaccheus, make haste, and come down;
for today I must abide at thy house. And he made haste, and came down, and
received him joyfully -- But thou have not called upon me, O Jacob; but thou
have been weary of me, O Israel. Thou have not brought me the small cattle of
thy burnt offerings; neither have thou honored me with thy sacrifices. I have
not caused thee to serve with an offering, nor wearied thee with incense. Thou
have bought me no sweet cane with money, neither have thou filled me with the
fat of thy sacrifices: but thou have made me to serve with thy sins, thou have
wearied me with thine iniquities. I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy
transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins -- For the
iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth, and smote him: I hid me, and was
wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of his heart. I have seen his ways,
and will heal him: I will lead him also, and restore comforts unto him, and to
his mourners Romans x. 20. ix. 30. Luke. xix 2 -- 6. Isa. xliii. 22 -- 25. lvii.
17.18.
.

What a wonderful exhibition is here, of sovereign, free, and all sufficient
mercy! It extends to the most carnal and covetous, the most ungrateful and
worthless of men. It precedes every good motion of their wills, and every
virtuous affection of their hearts. It waits, neither for any reformation of
exterior conduct, nor the least melioration of internal character. It finds
them under the power of strong disaffection to God, and with the gain of
extortion in their iniquitous hands. Fraught with every spiritual blessing for
those who deserve to perish, it pardons their crimson crimes, and softens their
obdurate hearts. It gives a new turn to their wills, and elevates their
affections to holy objects. It fills them with spiritual comfort, directs their
feet into the way of righteousness, and makes them new creatures. Such divinely
gracious declarations, and well authenticated facts, must, therefore, warrant
the most ungodly person to regard this unparalleled mercy, and to believe in
Jesus Christ.

The sovereignty, the riches, and the plenitude of divine goodness, revealed to
sinners under the notions of love, of mercy, and of grace. I will have mercy on
whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have
compassion -- Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight -- I beseech
thee show me thy glory. And he said, I will make all my goodness pass before
thee; and will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy on
whom I will show mercy -- And Jehovah passed by before him, and proclaimed,
JEHOVAH, JEHOVAH GOD, MERCIFUL AND GRACIOUS, LONGSUFFERING, ABUNDANT IN
GOODNESS AND TRUTH; KEEPING MERCY FOR THOUSANDS, FORGIVING INIQUITY, AND
TRANSGRESSION, AND SIN -- Therefore will the Lord wait, that he may be gracious
unto you, and therefore will he be exalted, that he may have mercy upon you --
God is love. -- Behold, what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us!
-- God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life -- Herein is
love! not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the
propitiation for our sins -- He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him
up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? -- God
COMMENDS his love toward us, in that, while we were yet SINNERS, Christ died
for us -- How excellent is thy loving kindness, O God! therefore the children
of men put their trust under the shadow of thy wings -- We have redemption
through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his
grace -- God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us --
According to his abundant mercy -- They who receive abundance of grace -- Where
sin abounded, grace did MUCH MORE ABOUND: that as sin has reigned unto death,
even so might grace REIGN, through righteousness, unto eternal life, by Jesus
Christ our Lord -- The grace of our Lord was EXCEEDING ABUNDANT -- To the
praise of the glory of his grace -- That, in the ages to come, he might show
the EXCEEDING RICHES of his grace Romans ix. 15. Exodus xxxiii. 18, 19. xxxiv. 6,
7. John iii. 16. 1 John iv. 10. Romans viii. 32. v. 8. Psalm xxxvi. 7. Ephesians. i. 7.
ii. 4. 1 Pet. i. 3. Romans v. 17, 20, 21. 1 Timothy i. 14. Ephesians. i. 6. ii. 7.
.

With what an air of supreme authority, and of absolute dominion, does THE
ETERNAL here speak! He manifestly considers himself as acting quite in
character, when exercising, or withholding mercy, according to his own
sovereign pleasure. He neither does, nor can, consider himself as a debtor to
any man. The whole of our species, being immersed in guilt, and obnoxious to
ruin, equally lie at divine mercy, for all their happiness and all their hope.
-- But, while maintaining the dignity of his character, and the supremacy of
his own will, in the bestowment of spiritual blessings on guilty creatures; he
reveals his goodness in the most encouraging manner: which goodness, expressed
under the different notions of love, of mercy, and of grace, he represents as
an essential part of that divine glory which, to the ancient Jewish church, was
denoted by the sublimest of all names, JEHOVAH. His LOVE is here described and
celebrated, as ardent -- excellent -- wonderful: nay, he himself seems to
delight in its peerless excellence; for he not only manifests, but RECOMMENDS
it, in the death of his own Son, to sinners. His MERCY, as rich -- plenteous --
abundant. His GRACE as rich -- exceedingly rich -- abundant -- superabundant --
exceedingly abundant -- and reigning. Surely, then, his love, his mercy, and
his grace, being thus revealed in sacred Scripture, and thus commended to
sinful, miserable, unworthy creatures; the ungodly must be completely
authorized to believe in Jesus. For what are this inference, and the preceding
premises, taken together, but saying with David; How excellent is thy loving
kindness, O God! THEREFORE the children of men put their trust under the shadow
of thy wings?

The sparing and pardoning mercy of God, beyond all parallel, and all praise.
My people are bent to backsliding from me: though they called them to the Most
High, none at all would exalt him. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall
I deliver thee, Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as
Zeboim? Mine heart is turned within me; my repentings are kindled together. I
will not execute the sierceness of mine anger; I will not return to destroy
Ephraim: FOR I AM GOD, AND NOT MAN -- Scarcely for a righteous man will one
die: yet per-adventure, for a good man some would even dare to die. But God
COMMENDS his love toward us, in that, while we were yet SINNERS, Christ died
for us -- Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts:
and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our
God, for he will ABUNDANTLY PARDON. For my thoughts are not your thoughts,
neither are your ways my ways, says the Lord. For as the heavens are higher
than the earth, so are MY ways higher than YOUR ways, and MY thoughts than YOUR
thoughts -- Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes
by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retains not his anger
for ever, because he DELIGHTS in mercy. He will turn again, he will have
compassion upon us; he will subdue our iniquities; and thou will cast all their
sins into the depths of the sea Hosea xi. 7, 8, 9. Romans v. 7, 8. Isa. lv. 7, 8,
9. Micah vii. 18, 19.
.

So numerous are our offenses, and so violent our provocations, that, were not
the blessed God equally superior to us in goodness, as he is in power; and in
pardoning mercy, as he is in wisdom; we could not have the least ground of
hope. Among men, when a breach of private friendship has taken place, the
aggressor, being conscious of the injury which he has done, is commonly very
backward to admit, that the aggrieved party has any benevolence for him. Thus
it is with sinners, when their consciences are awakened, in regard to God.
Extremely backward they are to admit, that there is forgiveness with God, for
such aggravated crimes as theirs. To relieve the distressed soul, by obviating
this very common and pressing difficulty, the Great Sovereign condescends, in
the passages before us, tacitly to admit, that, were he like us, neither
pardoning nor sparing mercy would ever be exercised toward any of Adam's
offspring. But he is GOD, and not MAN. His thoughts, relative to pardoning
mercy, are not our thoughts; nor his ways, respecting that important affair,
like our ways. Offenses, comparable to a debt of only fifty pence, are often
with difficulty forgiven by us; while he, through the blood of atonement,
freely obliterates a debt of ten thousand talents. Among mortals, it is an
instance of love extremely rare, that any one should lay down his life, even
for a good man, or a public benefactor; but God recommends his love to us, in
that, while we were yet sinners, and his enemies, he sent his own Son to die
for us. Far from regulating the manifestations of his compassion, according to
the puny instances of human kindness; he not only blesses, but astonishes, by
the displays of his matchless favor to sinners. -- Yes, God is LOVE; and,
therefore, he delights in mercy. What, then, could be more encouraging; or
what, by necessary consequence, could more strongly authorize, a guilty,
ungodly, perishing wretch, to rely on the Lord Jesus, in whom this boundless
mercy is manifested?

On this delightful and important subject, Dr. OWEN expresses himself as
follows: This forgiveness that is with God, is such as becomes him; such as is
suitable to his greatness, goodness, and all other excellencies of his nature;
such as that therein he will be known to be GOD. What he says concerning some
of the works of his Providence, be still, and know that I am GOD; may be much
more said concerning this great effect of his grace; Still your souls, and know
that he is GOD. It is not like that narrow, difficult, halving, and manacled
forgiveness that is found among men, when any such thing is found amongst them.
But it is full, free, bottomless, boundless, absolute; such as becomes his
nature and excellencies. It is, in a word, forgiveness that is with GOD, and by
the exercise whereof he will be known so to be -- God himself does really
separate and distinguish his forgiveness from any thing that our thoughts and
imaginations can reach unto; and that because it is his, and like himself. It
is an object for faith alone; which can rest in that which it cannot
comprehend. It is never safer, than when it is, as it were, overwhelmed with
infiniteness -- Were not forgiveness in God somewhat beyond what men could
imagine, no flesh could be saved. This himself expresses, Isaiah lv. 7, 8, 9.
They are, as is plain in the context, thoughts of forgiveness, and ways of
pardon, whereof he speaks. These, our apprehensions come short of: we know
little, or nothing, of the infinite largeness of his heart in this matter. He
that he speaks of, is an impiously wicked man, and a man of deceit, and
perverse wickedness. He whose design and course is nothing but a lie, sin, and
iniquity. Such an one as we would have little or no hopes of; that we would
scarce think it worth our while to deal withal about a hopeless conversion; or
can scarce find in our hearts to pray for him; but are ready to give him up, as
one profligate and desparate. But let him turn to the Lord, and he shall obtain
forgiveness. But how can this be? Is it possible there can be mercy for such an
one? Yes; for the Lord will multiply to pardon. He has forgiveness with him to
outdo all the multiplied sins of any that turn unto him, and seek for it. But
this is very hard, very difficult for us to apprehend. This is not the way and
manner of men: we deal not thus with profligate offenders against us. True,
says God: but your ways are not my ways. I do not act in this manner like unto
you; nor as you are accustomed to do -- For the most part, when we come to deal
with God about forgiveness, we hang in every briar of disputing, quarrelsome
unbelief. This or that circumstance, or aggravation; this or that unparalleled
particular, bereaves us of our confidence. Want of due consideration of Him
with whom we have to do, measuring Him by that line of our own imaginations,
bringing Him down to our thoughts and our ways, is the cause of all our
disquietments. Because we find it hard to forgive our pence, we think he cannot
forgive talents. But he has provided to obviate such thoughts in us, (Hosea
xi. 9.) I will not execute the fierceness of my wrath; I will not return to
destroy Ephraim; FOR I AM GOD, AND NOT MAN. Our satisfaction in this matter, is
to be taken from his nature. Were He a man, or as the sons of men, it were
impossible that, upon such and so many provocations, he should turn away from
the fierceness of his anger. But he is God. This gives an infiniteness, and an
inconceivable boundlessness, to the forgiveness that is with him; and exalts it
above all our thoughts and ways On the Hundred and Thirtieth Psalm, p. 220,
221, 222.
.

Thus Mr. CHARNOCK, with reference to this particular: That fear that Adam had,
when, frighted at the voice of God, he hid himself among the trees of the
garden, has remained in part with his posterity, when they reflect upon their
crimes. We measure the nature of God by the qualities of our own; and because
we are not forward to remit men's offenses against us, we are apt to imagine
that God has not clemency enough to pardon the faults committed against him.
Hence it is that persons, deeply humbled under a sense of the curses of the
law, are ready to lick up the dust under the feet of Christ, and beholding an
absolute necessity of him, are with much ado brought to believe. Though the
design of God in setting out Christ for a propitiation be declared to them, the
sufficiency of his merit, the acceptance of it by God, the fruits others have
found of it, that the design of Christ's coming was to ease those in that
condition; yet they are hardly induced to lay aside those jealousies they have
of God -- When men are soundly convinced of the nature and evil of sin, they
become vile in their own eyes. Their sin galls them; the law terrifies them;
the notions of God's justice are awakened in them, and lie close to them. They
are sensible of the degenerateness and rebellion of their nature: they think
God cannot but hate them, and they expect from him only the severity of a
judge: and when evangelical mercy is declared, it seems incredible to them,
because it exceeds their nature and dispositions. The greatness of the mercy
proffered makes them stagger: they believe not God to be so merciful, because
they cannot be so; (for in all conditions of men, it is natural to limit God
according to their own petty dimensions; and not elevate their thoughts to his,
but judge of his thoughts by theirs:) and although his mercy is above the mercy
of a creature, we are apt to think his nature as incapable of a largeness as
our own. Since man has become vain in his imaginations, he is apt to measure
divine things according to those principles which are in his own fancy. Hence
God calls to men, to forsake their thoughts, their disparaging conceptions of
him; since his thoughts were different from theirs, as much as the heavens from
the earth. (Isaiah lv. 7, 8.) He had higher thoughts of good to them, than
either they had for themselves, or could think God had for them Works, Vol. II.
p. 457, 468.
.

The promises of the New Covenant are spiritual, and expressed in the absolute,
or unconditional form. This is the covenant that I will make with the house of
Israel after those days, says the Lord; I will put my laws into their mind,
and write them in their hearts: and I will be to them a God, and they shall be
to me a people: and they shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every man
his brother, saying, Know the Lord; for all shall know me, from the least to
the greatest. For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins
and their iniquities will I remember no more Heb. viii. 10, 11, 12. Jer. xxxi.
31 -- 34.
.

This Covenant provides for all its objects those two capital blessings,
justification and sanctification: with which glorification is, by divine
constitution, inseparably connected Romans viii. 29, 30.
. Well might the Apostle speak of the covenants of PROMISE Ephesians. ii. 12.
: for the language of this foedral engagement is that of mere grace, and all in
the form of absolute promises. I will, and they shall, is Jehovah's mode of
speaking, on this momentous occasion. All the covenantees, it is here
ascertained, shall be rendered both wise and holy, in order to their being
happy. But the promised wisdom and holiness, it is very observable, are plainly
represented as flowing from that mercy which pardons the guilty. A free, full,
and everlasting forgiveness, though the last particular mentioned, is
nevertheless introduced in such a manner as evidently shows, that it should be
first sought, at the hand of sovereign mercy -- sought by sinners, not as
already possessing any degree of sanctity, but in order to it. I will put my
laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts -- All shall know me --
FOR I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their
iniquities will I remember no more. This is perfectly agreeable to that
delightful and comprehensive saying; There is forgiveness with Thee, THAT THOU
MAY BE FEARED. -- Now, this divine Covenant including the grand principles
of evangelical truth; containing all the blessings which perishing sinners
want; and exhibiting those blessings in unconditional promises, or as matter of
mere grace; it seems not only natural, but necessary to conclude, That the
ungodly are completely warranted by this gracious constitution, to believe in
Him, who bears the character of its Mediator and Surety Heb. vii. 22. viii. 6.
.

Mr. JAMES HERVEY, after having produced the language of the New Covenant,
proceeds thus: Where are your conditions in this draught? Where are any terms
required of impotent man? Is it not all promise, from the beginning to the end?
That repentance, and that faith, for whose conditionality you plead, are they
not both comprehended in this heavenly deed? and comprehended under the form of
blessings vouchsafed, not of tasks enjoined? Does the contract run in this
manner? I require and command. Or in this strain? I grant and bestow. The Lord
says, I will put my laws; I will write them. The work shall not be laid on my
creatures, but done by myself. They shall be my people, and I will remember
their sins no more. What? provided they perform such and such duties. I read no
such clause. I see no such proviso. All is absolutely free; dependent on no
performance of ours; but flowing from sovereign, supreme, selfinfluenced
goodness Eleven Letters to Mr. J. WESLEV, p. 170, 171. See also, p. 172, 174,
175, 176.
. -- Thus Dr. OWEN: The Covenant of God is not suspended on our will, or on any
conditions to be performed by us; but has all its virtue and effect, from the
authority, the fidelity, and the grace of God himself. For it is an absolute
promise of grace; nor is there any condition of the Covenant, which is not
contained in the promise itself Theologoumena, L. III. C. i. 6. Brem. Vide
WITSII Oecon. Foed. L. III. C. i. 8 -- 18. Acta Synod. Dordrech. Pars III. p.
312.
.

Gracious proclamations. Ho! every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters,
and he that has no money: yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and
without price. Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and
your labor for that which satisfies not? Hearkeh diligently unto me, and eat
ye that which is good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness. Incline
your ear, and come unto me: hear, and your soul shall live: and I will make an
everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David -- Wisdom has
builded her house, she has hewn out her seven pillars: she has killed her
beasts; she has mingled her wine; she has also furnished her table. She has
sent forth her maidens; she cries upon the highest places of the city, Whosoever
is simple, let him turn in hither! As for him that wants understanding, she
says to him, Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have mingled
-- Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst let him come unto me and
drink Isa. lv. 1, 2, 3. Prove. ix. 1 -- 5.
.

Now the proof of my position becomes more strong, and more evident. For here
we have direct, loud, and solemn addresses, to guilty and miserable creatures
that are perishing in their sins -- addresses, in the form of proclamations,
from the Father of mercies, and the God of all grace, to the foolish, the
starving, and those that have no money; but, like the Prodigal, are feeding on
swinish husks, and perishing with hunger. These are the patentees in the
heavenly grant: for to them the proclamation is, Ho! every one that thirsts,
come ye to the waters; and he that has no money: yea, come to my richly
furnished table, there gratuitously to feed on royal dainties, which are the
provisions of my grace. -- It is not easy to conceive of any proclamation from
the Court of Heaven, that could have been more happily adapted to remove
discouragement from a desponding mind; or to obviate doubts, respecting the
ungodly being warranted to believe in Jesus Christ.

Kind invitations, winning persuasions, and importunate entreaties. Look unto
Me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth -- Come unto Me, all ye that
labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest -- The Spirit and the
bride say, Come: and let him that hears say, Come: and let him that is
athirst come: and whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely --
Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the city, and bring in hither the
poor, and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind -- Go out into the highways
and hedges, and compel them to come in -- We persuade men -- We are ambassadors
for Christ, as though GOD DID BESEECH YOU by us; we PRAY you in Christ's stead,
Be ye reconciled to God. For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no
sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him Isa. xlv. 22. Matt.
xi. 28. Rev. xxii. 17. Luke xiv. 21, 23. 2 Cor. v. 11, 20, 21.
.

In these divine testimonies we behold, what the Psalmist calls, The MAVELOUS
loving kindness of God Psalm xvii. 7. xxxi. 21.
. For here we have, not only the most gracious and reiterated invitations, but
the most attractive persuasions, and the most earnest solicitations -- of whom?
Why, of those who are far from a state of sanctity: being blind to their
spiritual interests; strongly disaffected to God; absolutely incapable of
providing for their own happiness, not being able either to work, or walk; the
most wretched of mankind; and little better than a nuisance to civil society.
For what purposes? To accept of rest, in Christ, for their souls: to be
reconciled to God: and to be guests at a royal banquet. -- Yes, here we have,
not only the Apostles of Christ, but Christ himself; and, in his Ambassadors,
even the divine FATHER; inviting, persuading, entreating the polluted,
impoverished, perishing wretches, to regard the vicarious work of Jesus, as the
only ground of their justification; and the plentiful provisions of divine
grace, as containing all they want for their complete happiness. These
invitations, therefore, may be justly considered as a direct and perfect
warrant, for sinners of every nation, and of every character, who are indulged
with the joyful news, to believe in Jesus.

The perfect readiness, and the sacred pleasure, with which the Father of
mercies receives returning profligates. He arose and came to his Father. But
when he was yet a great way off, his Father saw him, and had compassion, and
ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him. And the son said unto him, Father, I
have sinned against heaven and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called
thy son. But the Father said to his servants, Bring forth the best robe, and
put it on him; and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet: and bring
hither the fatted calf, and kill it; and let us eat, and be merry. For this my
son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found. And they began to
be merry Luke xv. 20 -- 24.
.

What an admirable description of divine, paternal mercy; and how agreeable to
the gracious import of those delightful passages that were last reviewed! The
parable which contains this exquisitely tender and charming representation of
pardoning mercy and free acceptance, was designed by our Lord to vindicate his
own conduct against the objections of scribes and Pharisees; to rebuke the
pride of selfrighteous confidence; to encourage persons of the most profligate
characters to apply for mercy; and to assure them that, in so doing, they shall
not be disappointed. Disappointed! no: for, be their transgressions ever so
many, or their demerits ever so great, our Lord represents the divine Father,
as compassionately meeting each profligate upon his return; as embracing him,
with parental affection; as passing an act of oblivion upon all his enormous
offenses; as investing him with the robe of righteousness; as adorning him with
the beauties of holiness; and as admitting him into the celestial family: all
which is done, without one unbraiding word, and with supreme delight. -- The
Prodigal came, says Mr. HERVEY, with no recommendation, either of dress, of
person, or of character. None but his nakedness, his misery, and an
acknowledgement of vileness; which had every aggravating, not one extenuating
circumstance. Yet he was received -- received with indulgence -- received with
caresses -- and, without staying to provide any handsome apparel of his own,
was clothed with that best robe, the robe of a Savior's righteousness Thereon
and Aspasio, Vol. III. p. 312, 313.
. Such is divine compassion! Such that forgiveness which is with God! and such
encouragement is there for the most notorious profligates to believe in Jesus!

Blessings, requested by saints, and bestowed by the Lord, for his own sake --
for the sake of his goodness, of his mercy, and of his name. For his own sake,
I, even I, am he, that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake -- For
mine own sake, even for mine OWN sake, will I do it Isa xliii ^^ xl^iii ^
. -- For the sake of his goodness. According to thy mercy remember thou me, for
thy goodness sake, O Lord (...)
! -- For the sake of his mercy. For thy great mercies' sake thou did not
utterly consume them, nor forsake them -- Redeem us for thy mercies' sake! --
Save me, for thy mercies' sake (...)
. -- For the sake of his Name. Do not abhor us, for thy Name's sake; do not
disgrace the throne of thy glory! -- I had pity, for my holy Name -- I do not
this for your sakes, O house of Israel, but for my holy Name's sake -- For my
Name's sake will I defer mine anger, and for my praise will I refrain from
thee, that I cut thee not off -- I will sanctify my great Name, -- when I have
been sanctified in you -- For thy Name's sake, O Lord, pardon my iniquity; for
it is great -- Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy Name -- Do
thou for me, O God the Lord, for thy Name's sake -- O Lord, though our
iniquities testify against us, do thou it for thy Name's sake! -- For thy
Name's sake, lead me and guide me -- He leads me in the paths of
righteousness, for his Name's sake -- Quicken me, O Lord, for thy Name's sake
-- He saved them for his Name's sake -- The Lord will not forsake his people,
for his great Name's sake Jer. xiv. 21. Ezekiel. xxxvi. 21, 22. Isa. xlviii. 9.
Ezekiel. xxxvi. 23. Ps. xxv. 11. lxxix. 9. cix. 21. Jer. xiv. 7. Ps. xxxi. 3.
xxiii. 3. cxliii. 11. cvi. 8. 1 Samuel xii. 22. See also Josh. vii. 9. Exek. xx.
9, 14, 22, 44.
.

It is hence apparent, that God, in the bestowment of blessings on the children
of men, is not influenced by the purity of their hearts, the piety of their
lives, or the worthiness of their characters; but by a regard to his own
eternal perfection; to the supreme excellence of his own revealed Name; and to
the everlasting honor of his own immense goodness. No: the blessings of
salvation, on whomsoever conferred, are never to be considered as
distinguishing worth, and rewarding merit; but as designed to display the
riches of divine mercy, and the glory of the divine character, by relieving the
wretched, and saving the unworthy. -- Now, the Divine Majesty having revealed
himself as exercising mercy, and granting spiritual blessings, for his own
sake; the polluted, ungodly, and perishing sinner is completely warranted to
rely on that mercy, as manifested in the atonement, for pardon, acceptance, and
peace, independent of every other consideration. This perfectly suits, not only
the apostate state of man, but the peerless majesty of God. For as he is
possessed of boundless Being; as all creatures received their existence from
his power, and are entirely dependent on his pleasure; and as the sum total of
all created existence is but an atom, in comparison with him; so he acts
perfectly agreeable to his own character, in making himself the ultimate end of
his whole conduct, and in all things consulting his own glory.

The passages here produced, being all extracted from the Old Testament, are
quite suitable to that revelation which God made of himself under the Jewish
Economy; and to the import of his name JEHOVAH, by which he made himself known
to the chosen tribes. For that Name was, in a peculiar manner, his OWN Exodus
vi. 2, 3. Psalm lxxxiii. 18.
: by which he was distinguished, as the only Object of Israel's worship and as
their King, from all the Deities and Sovereigns of the ancient Heathens. This
most August Name, together with its glorious import, he proclaimed to Moses in
the most solemn and commanding manner Exodus xxxiii. 18, 19. xxxiv. 5 -- 8.
: to which Name, and its comprehensive significancy, reference is apparently
had in many of the texts just adduced. Moses, on a very sorrowful occasion,
regarded it, as affording the most powerful plea with God, on the behalf of
Israel, when they had greatly offended, and were threatened with extermination
Numb. xiv. 17 -- 20.
. Joshua, too, has recourse to the same sublime Character, in pleading the
cause of Israel at his Maker's footstool, when they were under the tokens of
divine anger Josh. vii. ^.
. The sacred import of this Name was, to the ancient saints, like a strong
tower Prove. xviii. 10.
, or an impregnable fortress, for the encouragement and confidence which they
derived from it. Really to understand the fruitful significancy of it, was
always attended with confidence in the God of Israel. For it is written, They
that know thy Name will put their trust in thee Ps. ix. 10.
. -- Now, if the revealed character of God, under the Old Economy, was
pregnant with encouragement for miserable sinners to rely on his mercy for
pardon and salvation; it cannot be supposed that evangelical truth, under the
Christian system, is less favorable to the cause of human hope. -- Relative to
the name JEHOVAH, Dr. OWEN says: To be known by this Name; to be honored,
feared, believed as that declares him, is the great glory of God. And shall
this fail us? Can we be deceived trusting in it, or expecting that we shall
find him to be what his Name declares? God forbid Or cxxx Psalm, p. 199.
!

Spiritual blessings absolutely free and irrevocable gifts. Being justified
freely, by his grace -- The grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is by
one man, Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many -- The free gift is of many
offenses unto justification -- They which receive abundance of grace, and of
the gift of righteousness -- By the righteousness of One, the free gift came
upon all men unto justification of life -- The things that are freely given to
us of God -- Wine and milk, without money, and without price -- The gift of God
is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord -- He that spared not his own
Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely
give us all things -- Thou have received gifts for men; yea, for the rebellious
also -- The gifts and calling of God are without repentance Romans iii. 24. v.
15, 16, 17, 18. 1 Cor. ii. 12. Isa. lv. 1. Romans vi. 23. viii. 32. Ps. lxviii.
18. Romans xi. 29.
.

How admirably adapted is the Economy of Redemption to our apostate state! Are
we miserable? God is merciful. Are we unworthy? God is gracious. Are we, to the
last degree, impoverished? God is immensely bountiful. The spiritual blessings
which he confers, are absolutely free gifts: and gifts, we know, are not
purchased, but bestowed: not obtained upon conditions to be performed, but
received as matter of mere favor. The blessings of divine grace were not
intended to recognize moral worth, but to relieve the indigent; not designed to
indicate holy qualities in the receiver, but to display generosity in the
giver. -- When we reflect on the personal dignity of Christ, as the Son of God;
on the unchangeable interest he had in his Father's love; and on the Father
delivering him up to an execrable death for mere sinners; we cease to wonder
that, with Him, he freely bestows all spiritual blessings, without any regard
to worthiness in them on whom they are conferred. Because the gift of Christ
himself is the grand evidence of God's love to sinners; incomparably greater
than that of authorizing the ungodly to believe in Jesus, or than that of his
giving heaven to saints.

Divine love, mercy, and grace, directly opposed to works and worthiness of
every kind, and of every degree. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but
that he loved us -- It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but
of God that shows mercy -- Not of works, but of him that calls -- To him
that works is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt. But to him that
works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is
counted for righteousness. Even as David also describes the blessedness of the
man, unto whom the Lord imputes righteousness without works -- Therefore it is
of faith, that it might be by grace; to the end the promise might be sure to
all the seed -- By grace ye are saved, through faith; and that not of
yourselves: it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any man should boast --
Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he
saved us -- Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not
according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was
given us in Christ Jesus before the world began -- If by grace, then it is no
more of works: otherwise grace is no more grace: But if it be of works, then it
is no more grace: otherwise work is no more work 1 John iv. 10. Romans ix. 16,
11. iv. 5, 6, 16. Ephesians. ii. 8, 9. Titus iii. 5. 2 Timothy i. 9. Romans xi. 6.
.

This opposition between divine mercy, and human works; the grace of God, and
the worthiness of man; is very observable, and extremely important. For the
contrasted view that is here given of these particulars, is far from being an
incidental thing. We do not find it, in the Apostolic Writings, once or twice
only; and that with reference to articles of comparatively small consequence;
but, in many places, in an argumentative manner, and relative to blessings of
the highest moment. The sentiment, therefore, which is conveyed by this
contrasted form of expression, is to be considered as a grand principle of the
apostolic doctrine; and this mode of speaking, as the current language of
Inspiration, relative to those capital blessings, election, conversion, pardon,
and justification.

Now, respecting the objects of God's eternal choice, their conversion to
Christ, their complete forgiveness, and their perfect acceptance with the Most
Holy; the reasonings of Paul, where this kind of language is used, plainly
show, that his design was entirely to exclude, not only all merit strictly so
called, but all comparative worthiness. Yes, he intended to prove, that God, in
the bestowment of these blessings, has not the least regard to personal
holiness, or moral worth, in the favored objects of his kindness; but
considers them as equally unworthy with those who finally perish. Nay, in the
last of these instructive passages the Apostle proves, professedly and in a
formal manner, that grace and works, or divine favor and comparative human
worthiness, are so opposite one to another, that it is impossible for them to
concur in procuring the same blessings. So that whosoever considers himself as
distinguished from others, by virtuous habits or pious performances, and thence
derives encouragement to look for acceptance with God through the imputed
righteousness of Christ, confounds the most opposite ideas relating to an
affair of the highest moment; rejects the determination of Paul; and must be
miserably disappointed. -- I said, COMPARATIVE human worthiness: for that is
all which the nature of the case admits. Because worthiness of divine
blessings, in a strict, legal, absolute sense, and especially as to apostate
creatures, is impossible. Consequently, the gospel, in which this contrast
between grace and works is thus frequently formed, must be considered as
authorizing the ungodly to believe in Jesus.

Divine fidelity engaged, that none of those who believe in Christ shall be
disappointed. Whosoever believes in him shall not perish, but have eternal
life -- He that believes on the Son has everlasting life -- Him that comes
to me I will in no wise cast out -- I will give him rest -- Whosoever lives
and believes in me shall never die -- He that believes and is baptized, shall
be saved -- Whosoever believes on him shall not be ashamed John iii. 15, 16,
36. vi. 37. Matt. xi. 28. John xi. 26. Mark xvi. 16. Romans ix. 33.
.

That divine fidelity is here pledged, for the everlasting security of all who
really believe in Jesus, will not be disputed by those that maturely consider
the gracious declarations, and revere the sacred Writings. It is equally clear,
that these passages exhibit the Lord Redeemer as free for miserable sinners, of
every nation, and of every character, to whom the glad tidings come. For the
language is not, He that is disposed to keep the divine commands -- He that has
performed conditions -- Whoever is comparatively worthy -- and believes in
Christ: but, He that believes -- Whosoever believes. Consequently, this
exhibition of Christ, and that assurance of complete salvation to all that
believe in him, attest the fact for which I contend.

Acts and precedents of divine mercy, in pardoning the greatest offenses, and
in saving the vilest of sinners. Neither fornicators, nor idolators, nor
adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor
thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall
inherit the kingdom of God. And SUCH ((...)) were some of you: but ye are
washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord
Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God -- We ourselves also were sometime foolish,
disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and
envy, hateful and hating one another. But when ((...)) the kindness and love of
God our Savior toward man appeared; not by works of righteousness which we
have done, but according to his mercy he saved us -- Dead in trespasses and
sins; wherein, in time past, ye walked according to the course of this world,
according to the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now works in
the children of disobedience: among whom we all had our conversation in time
past in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the
mind; and were by nature the children of wrath, even as others. But God, who is
rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead
in sin, has quickened us together with Christ, (by grace ye are saved;) and
has raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in
Christ Jesus: THAT IN THE AGES TO COME he might show the exceeding riches of
his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus -- I was there a
blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious BEZA here exclaims, Behold, what
preparatory deserts the Apostle produces!
; but I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief. And the grace
of our Lord was exceeding abundant with faith and love which is in Christ
Jesus. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief. Howbeit, for
this cause I obtained mercy, THAT IN ME THE CHIEF ((...)) Jesus Christ might
show forth all long-suffering, FOR A PATTERN TO THEM WHICH SHOULD HEREAFTER
BELIEVE IN HIM TO LIFE EVERLASTING 1 Cor. vi. 9, 10, 11. Titus iii. 3, 4, 5.
Ephesians. ii. 1 -- 7. 1 Timothy i. 13 -- 16.
.

That these instances of saving mercy were entered on divine record, as acts
and precedents of the Court of Heaven; and, under that very notion, are to be
regarded by sinners in all future ages, the texts themselves inform us. Now, as
these authenticated facts display the riches of reigning grace, in saving some
of the most abominable characters that ever lived; and as these instances of
superabounding, sovereign mercy to profligate, impious wretches, were intended
by Jesus Christ as a pattern of his own procedure in following times; they must
be considered as warranting the most detestably vile to believe in our Almighty
Savior. For it is not easy to conceive of more flagitious characters, than
some of those that are here specified. Yet they were encouraged to believe in
Jesus. On him they relied, and were not disappointed. -- Did but those
profligates who, by a course of enormous offenses, are sunk into a kind of
hardened despair, understand the design of these acts and precedents, they
would no longer say, with some in the Prophet, There is no hope: no; for we
have loved strangers, and after them will we go Jer. ii. 25.
. For the plenitude of that revealed provision which sovereign mercy has made
to relieve the chief of sinners, is, as one observes, A firm bottom of comfort
against the guilt of the most bloody and crimson sins. Because free grace is
not tied to any rules: it may do what it pleases Dr. SPURSTOWE's Wells of
Salvation, p. 51.
, consistently with the rights of justice.

Do the inspired writers teach, that awful judgments, inflicted on the
rebellious Israelites, were committed to sacred record for our admonition 1
Cor. x. 11.
, and to guard us against sin? they also inform us, that the justification of
Abraham by faith, and without works, was recorded for our instruction Romans iv.
23, 24.
, respecting that capital blessing of divine grace. Nay, Paul assures us, that
whatever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning: that we,
through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures, MIGHT HAVE HOPE Romans xv. 4.
. On this ground, therefore, we may safely conclude, that the numerous
particular instances of divine forgiveness, which stand recorded in holy
Scripture, were intended to encourage hope in the guilty breast, and to produce
reformation in the profligate life. Have we, for example, undoubted reason to
conclude, that perfect pardon was graciously granted, to Lot for his
drunkenness and incest -- to David, for his adultery and murder -- to Manasseh,
for his outrageous and monstrous wickedness -- to publicans and prostitutes,
for their extortion and impurity -- to Peter, for denying his Lord with
imprecations and perjury -- to a crucified robber and ruffian, for his obduracy
and blasphemy, of which he was guilty but a little before he expired on a
gibbet -- to any of the Jews, for the unparalleled crime of crucifying Messiah,
the Son of God -- to Saul of Tarsus, for blaspheming Christ and murdering the
saints -- and to the Philippian Jailor, for his persecution and intentional
selfmurder Genesis xix. 31 -- 38 2 Samuel xii. 2 Chronicles. xxxiii. Matt. xxi. 31. 32.
Luke vii. 29, 32 -- 50. Matt. xxvii. 74. Mark xiv. 71. Matt. xxvii. 44. Mark
xv. 32. Luke xxiii. 39 -- 43. xxiii. 34. xxiv. 47. Acts ii. 41. iv. 4. Acts ix.
1. xxii. 4. xxvi. 10, 11. xvi. 27 -- 34.
? -- all these facts proclaim in our ears, THERE IS FORGIVENESS WITH GOD, THAT
HE MAY BE FEARED! Their language, to the most impious and abandoned, is, Let
the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him
return to the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he
will ABUNDANTLY PARDON. -- I will conclude this particular in the following
words of Dr. OWEN: I may safely say, that there is no sin, no degree of sin, no
aggravating circumstance of sin, no kind of continuance in sin, (the only sin
excepted) but that there are those in heaven who have been guilty of them On
the cxxx Psalm, p. 147.
.

The riches of pardoning mercy, and the benefits of saving grace, are the joy,
the glory, and the song, of believers on earth, and of the beatified in heaven.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits! Who forgiveth all
thine iniquities, who heals all thy diseases -- I have blotted out as a thick
cloud thy transgressions, and as a cloud thy sins: return unto me; for I have
redeemed thee. Sing, O ye heavens, for the Lord has done it: shout, ye lower
parts of the earth,: break forth into singing, ye mountains, O forest, and
every tree therein: for the Lord has redeemed Jacob, and glorified himself in
Israel -- I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my
God. For he has clothed me with the garments of salvation, he has covered me
with the robe of righteousness -- Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons
iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage! --
God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ --
We joy in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ -- Rejoice in the Lord always: and
again I say, Rejoice -- Of Him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto
us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption: that,
according as it is written, He that glories, let him glory in the Lord --
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his
abundant mercy has begotten us again to a lively hope -- They sung a new song,
saying, Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open the seals thereof: for
thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every
kindred, and people, and tongue -- Joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that
repents -- There is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner
that repents Psalm ciii. 2, 3. Isa. xliv. 22, 23. lxi. 10. Micah vii. 18.
Gal. vi. 14. Romans v. 11. Philip. iv. 4. 1 Cor. i. 30, 31. 1 Pet. i. 3. Rev. v.
9. Luke xv. 7, 10.
.

That the grant of complete pardon, and the enjoyment of spiritual peace; the
hope of everlasting happipiness, and the eternal fruition of heaven; should
excite joy, and produce praise, there is no reason to wonder: especially, when
the blessedness included in these incomparable benefits is considered as the
fruit of mere sovereign favor, through the blood of Jesus Christ; which is
manifestly the case here. But, in proportion as the forgiveness of our sins,
and the acceptance of our persons, are considered as depending on conditions
performed, or on qualifications obtained, by us; there is reason of joy in our
own exertions and worthiness Romans iv. 9.
: which is diametrically contrary to the apostolic doctrine of salvation by
grace Romans iii. 27. 1 Cor. iv. 7. Ephesians. ii. 5 -- 9.
. For the language of every real believer is, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us,
but unto thy Name give glory, for thy mercy, and for thy truth's sake Psalm
cxv. 1.
. The gratitude? therefore, the joy, and the exultation of scriptural saints,
for spiritual blessings, infer the point for which I am pleading.

The eternal design of God, in the work of salvation by Jesus Christ, was to
manifest, exalt, and for ever to glorify his own grace, in rendering the
unworthy everlastingly happy. For my Name's sake will I defer mine anger, and
for my praise will I refrain from thee, that I cut thee not off -- Help us, O
God of our salvation, for the glory of thy Name -- Having predestined us to
the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good
pleasure of his will, TO THE PRAISE OF THE GLORY OF HIS GRACE -- In whom also
we have obtained an inheritance -- that we should be to the praise of his glory
-- Ye were sealed with that Holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our
inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise
of his glory Isa. xlviii. 9. Psalm lxxix. 9. Ephesians. i. 5, 6, 11 -- 14.
.

As, in that most wonderful of all works, REDEMPTION, the design of God was to
manifest, illustrate, glorify, his own grace; as the glad tidings of salvation
by Jesus Christ reveal that grace, in connection with its design; and as no
doctrine deserves the name of gospel, which does not exhibit the grace of God,
as abounding, reigning, glorious -- worthy of everlasting admiration and
praise; the genuine gospel must be considered as encouraging, inviting,
warranting, the most ungodly to believe in Jesus. For divine grace, in
election, redemption, regeneration, and justification, has no concern with any
besides the absolutely unworthy. To this its very nature, and the design of God
in dispensing the blessings proceeding from it, are completely adapted. Its
very nature. For it is not merely grace, though as such it must be sovereign;
but it is grace with a GLORY around it -- The GLORY of his grace, is the
language of Paul. Now, an essential part of its most shining, illustrious,
glorious qualities must consist, in its being absolutely free, and infinitely
rich. The former, as to its objects; the latter, as to its benefits: and both,
as providing for the altogether vile. The design of God in dispensing the
blessings proceeding from it. This was, we are here expressly informed, not,
ultimately, our happiness, though that be a great design; much less the
rewarding of human worth; but his own PRAISE -- the praise of his own GLORY --
and the praise of the glory of his GRACE.

'If there be any pardon with God,' says Dr. OWEN, it is such as becomes him to
give. When he pardons, he will abundantly pardon. Go with your
half-forgiveness, limited, conditional pardons, with reserves and limitations
unto the sons of men: it may be, it may become them; it is like themselves.
That of God is absolute and perfect; before which our sins are as a cloud
before the East wind, and the rising sun. Hence he is said to do this work,
with his whole heart and with his whole soul -- This forgiveness is in or with
God, not only so as that we may apply ourselves unto it, if we will, for which
he will not be offended with us; but so, also, as that he has placed his great
glory in the declaration and communication of it: nor can we honor him more,
than by coming to him to be made partakers of it, and so to receive it from
him. For the most part, we are, as it were, ready, rather to steal forgiveness
from God, than to receive from him, as one that gives it freely and largely. We
take it up, and lay it down, as though we would be glad to have it, so God did
not, as it were, see us take it: for we are afraid he is not willing we should
have it indeed. We would steal this fire from heaven, and have a share in God's
treasures and riches, almost without his consent. At least, we think we have it
from him aegre, with much difficulty; that it is rarely given, and scarcely
obtained. That he gives it out with a kind of unwilling willingness; as we
sometimes give alms without cheerfulness: and that he loses so much by us, as
he gives out in pardon. We are apt to think, that we are very willing to have
forgiveness; but that God is unwilling to bestow it; and that, because he seems
to be a looser by it, and to forego the glory of inflicting punishment for our
sins; which, of all things, we suppose, he is most loath to part withal. And
this is the very nature of unbelief. But, indeed, things are quite otherwise.
He has, in this matter, through the Lord Christ, ordered all things, in his
dealings with sinners, to the praise of the glory of his grace. His design, in
the whole mystery of the gospel, is to make his grace glorious, or to exalt
pardoning mercy. The great fruit and product of his grace is forgiveness; the
forgiveness of sinners. This God will render himself glorious in, and by. All
the praise, glory, and worship, that he designs from any in this world, is to
redound unto him by the way of this grace, as we have proved at large before On
the Hundred and Thirtieth Psalm, p. 225, 226.
.

God condescends to represent himself as taking sublime delight, in the
exercise of pardoning mercy, in bestowing the blessings of grace, and in making
his people completely happy. He delights in mercy -- Yea, I will rejoice over
them to do them good, and I will plant them in this land assuredly, with my
whole heart, and with my whole soul -- It [the bestowment of spiritual
blessings] shall be to the Lord for a name, for an everlasting sign that shall
not be cut off -- As the bridegroom rejoiceth over the bride, so shall thy God
rejoice over thee -- I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people -- I
will cleanse them from all their iniquity whereby they have sinned against me;
and I will pardon all their iniquities whereby they have sinned, and whereby
they have transgressed against me. And it shall be to me a name of joy, a
praise, and an honor, before all the nations of the earth, which shall hear
all the good that I do unto them -- The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is
mighty: he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy: he will rest in his
love, he will joy over thee with singing -- The Father said to his servants,
Bring -- hither the fatted calf, and kill it; and let us eat, and be merry. For
this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found. And they
began to be merry -- It was meet that we should make merry, and be glad: for
this thy brother was dead, and is alive again; was lost, and is found Micah
vii. 18. Jer. xxxii. 41. Isa. lv. 13. lxii. 5. lxv. 19. Jer. xxxiii. 8, 9.
Zeph. iii. 17. Luke xv. 22, 23, 24, 32.
.

Is the Father of mercies represented as having engaged, by two immutable
things, for the final security of his people, in order that they who flee for
refuge to the hope set before us might have strong consolation Heb. vi. 13 --
18.
? it is in allusion to the most solemn assurances which men can give of their
fidelity one to another. So here, in condescension to the weakness of our
capacities, and in allusion to our modes of expressing the most lively
sensations of joy, he exhibits himself as possessing human affections, and
speaks as if his own unchangeable felicity were increased, by liberally
dispensing spiritual blessings, and by rendering the wretched completely happy.
This, as observed under a former particular, is expressive of mavelous loving
kindness; and most strongly adapted to show, that the needy, the ungodly, the
perishing sinner, has no reason to suspect the glorious God of reluctance to
bestow the blessings of grace. No: he gives with a liberal heart, and a
bountiful hand. To pardon freely; graciously to confer spiritual benefits; and,
if I may so speak, to do it with divine delight; are a conduct worthy of his
character, as denominated LOVE; and for the honor of our Lord's mediation.
Because love delights in the happiness of its objects; and Christ is glorified
in the salvation of those who are justly condemned. Surely then, the genuine
gospel must warrant the ungodly to believe in Jesus, by whom the character, the
counsels, and the perfections of God, are made known to sinners.

As the preceding, with similar particulars, constitute that comprehensive and
gracious message which is called THE GOSPEL; we must now consider, To whom, by
divine command, these glad tidings were sent -- The state and character of
those to whom the Apostles proclaimed the joyful news -- And their immediate
design in making the gracious proclamation.

To whom, by divine command, these glad tidings were sent. Go ye, and teach all
nations -- Go ye into all the world, and proclaim the glad tidings to every
creature -- Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to
rise from the dead the third day: and that repentance and remission of sins
should be preached in his name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem Matt.
xxviii. 18. Mark xvi. 15. Luke xxiv. 47.
.

After our Lord's resurrection from the dead, his commission to the Apostles,
for preaching the gospel, was extensive as the human species. The middle wall
of partition, between Jews and Gentiles, being demolished, those first
ministers of Christ were not only permitted, but required, as Providence gave
opportunity, to proclaim the glad tidings wherever they came, without any
exception of nation, of rank, or of character. Yes, the prerogatives connected
with carnal descent from Abraham, the Covenant made at Sinai, and the Mosaic
Economy, being all abolished; those Ambassadors of Heaven were commanded to
publish pardon, and proclaim peace, through Jesus Christ, among all nations,
beginning at Jerusalem.

The state and character of those to whom the Apostles proclaimed the joyful
news. When they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful;
but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened.
Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools; and changed the glory of
the incorruptible God, into an image made like to corruptible man, and to
birds, and fourfooted beasts, and creeping things. Wherefore God also gave them
up to uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonor their own
bodies between themselves: who changed the truth of God into a lie, and
worshipped and served the creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for
ever. Amen -- And even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge,
God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not
convenient; being filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness,
covetousness, maliciousness; full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity;
whisperers, backbiters, haters of God, despiteful, proud, boasters, inventors
of evil things, disobedient to parents, without understanding,
covenant-breakers, without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful: who,
knowing the judgment of God, that they which do such things are worthy of
death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them -- We have
before proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under sin. As it is
written, There is none righteous, no not one; there is none that understands,
there is none that seeks after God. They are all gone out of the way, they
are together become unprofitable; there is none that does good, no not one.
Their throat is an open sepulcher; with their tongues they have used deceit;
the poison of asps is under their lips: Whose mouth is full of cursing and
bitterness; their feet are swift to shed blood: destruction and misery are in
their ways; and the way of peace they have not known: there is no fear of God
before their eyes Romans i. 21 -- 32. iii. 9 -- 18.
.

What a melancholy moral portrait is this! How strong the coloring, and how
dark the shades! Jews and Gentiles, without difference, are here described, as
bearing characters the most detestable; and as being in a state the most awful.
Yet this description comes from the hand of one, whose heart was fraught with
benevolence to his own species, especially to his countrymen; and from a pencil
which could not give an exaggerated representation. Of such characters, in the
estimate of Heaven, did the nations consist, when the Apostles, as ministers of
divine truth, received their high commission. Yes, to a world thus desperately
degenerate, and thus lying in wickedness, were those Ambassadors of Christ sent
with tidings of salvation. To this abominably wicked world they exhibited the
crucified Jesus; preaching pardon, and announcing peace, through his atoning
blood. For, if pardon be not published, if peace be not proclaimed in the name
of Jesus, the gospel, strictly speaking, is not preached. As, therefore, it is
hard to conceive of characters more hateful, of persons more criminal, or of a
state more awful, (except in the case of judicial blindness, or of blasphemy
against the Holy Spirit;) than those here described; the ministers of Christ,
if they would act agreeably to our Lord's commission, and to the apostolic
pattern, must proclaim glad tidings to the vilest of men.

Their immediate design in making the gracious proclamation to such impious and
profligate characters. Preach the gospel to every creature. He that believes
and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believes not shall be damned. --
Many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his disciples, which are
not written in this book; but these are written, that ye might believe that
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life
through his name -- The revelation of the mystery, which was kept secret since
the world began, but now is made manifest, and by the Scriptures of the
Prophets, according to the commandment of the everlasting God, made known to
all nations for the obedience of faith -- That the Gentiles by my mouth should
hear the word of the gospel and believe -- Our testimony among you was believed
-- Many of them that heard the word believed -- So we preach, and so ye
believed Mark xvi. 15, 16. John xx. 31. Romans xvi. 25, 26. Acts xv. 7. 2 Thessalonians.
i. 10. Acts iv. 4. 1 Cor. xv. 11. See also Acts xviii. 8. Romans i. 15, 16. x.
16. Luke xxiv. 25. Acts viii. 12. 1 Cor. iii. 5. Heb. iv. 2.
.

Here we have the position to be confirmed, in very nearly the express language
of inspiration. For the Apostles were commanded to proclaim the glad tidings of
salvation. Christ, his work, and the grace revealed by him, constitute the
substance of those glad tidings, which were to be published in all nations, and
to every creature. The nations were in the most deplorable state of of
ignorance, of depravity, and of wickedness. To them, however, the joyful
proclamation was made, that it might be credited by individuals, without
exception; and it was by the divinely gracious report Romans x. 17.
that says came. But the facts revealed in that report could not be really
believed, without relying on Jesus Christ as the only and allsufficient
Savior. Consequently, the genuine gospel is a complete warrant for the most
ungodly to believe in Jesus.

Let us epitomize the preceding particulars, and bring them into one view.
Here, then, we have, The condescending characters which our Lord bears -- His
design, in coming into the world: which was to save sinners, even the most
wretched and worthless -- The work which Christ performed, the sufferings he
underwent, and the benefits to sinners thence resulting -- The allsufficiency
of his work, to save the most guilty and vile -- Preventing mercy, and the free
pardon of enormous offenders -- The sovereignty, the riches, and the plenitude
of divine grace -- The sparing and pardoning mercy of God, beyond all parallel
and all praise -- The promises of the New Covenant unconditional -- The most
gracious proclamations to those who are starving -- The kindest invitations,
the most winning persuasions, and the most pressing entreaties, of those that
are perishing, to regard the provision which grace has made for the utterly
destitute -- The perfect readiness, and the sacred pleasure, with which the
Father of mercies receives returning profligates -- Blessings requested by
saints, and bestowed by the Lord, for his own sake -- for the sake of his
goodness, of his mercy, and of his Name -- Spiritual blessings absolutely free
and irrevocable gifts -- Divine love, mercy, and grace, directly opposed to
works and worthiness of every kind, and of every degree -- Divine fidelity
engaged, that none of those who believe in Christ shall be disappointed -- Acts
and precedents of divine mercy, in pardoning the greatest offenses, and in
saving the vilest of sinners -- The riches of pardoning mercy, and the benefits
of saving grace, are the joy, the glory, and the song, of believers on earth,
and of the blessed in heaven -- The eternal design of God, in the work of
salvation by Jesus Christ, was to manifest, exalt, and for ever to glorify his
own grace, in rendering the unworthy everlastingly happy -- God condescends to
represent himself as taking sublime delight, in the exercise of pardoning
mercy, in bestowing the blessings of grace, and in exalting his people to
complete felicity -- These wonderful facts, and gracious truths, with others of
a similar kind, constitute that gospel which the Apostles, in pursuance of
divine command, proclaimed to both Jews and Gentiles -- The nations were then
extremely impious, profligate, and wicked -- And, finally, the gracious
proclamation was made to the wicked world that it might be credited, by sinners
of every character, in all nations; and that, believing in Jesus Christ, they
might receive pardon, enjoy peace, perform obedience, and have everlasting life.

By this abstract of evangelical truth it must, I think, appear, to every
intelligent and impartial reader, that if the testimony of God to an apostate,
guilty, and wretched world, concerning his incarnate Son, and relative to the
riches of his own grace, be not a sufficient warrant for the most ungodly
person upon earth to believe in Jesus; it is not easy to conceive of any divine
declarations which could have been made, that would have authorized any of
those whom the Scriptures call sinners, or the guilty in a perishing condition,
to believe in Christ

Leaving my reader to consider the foregoing paragraphs in their connection one
with another, I shall only add; If the gospel be not a complete warrant for the
most ungodly to believe in Jesus, it must be either because the grace revealed
in it is not equal to their wants; or because they are tacitly forbidden, while
destitute of holiness, to treat him as the Savior. Not the former: for the
grace revealed is rich, abundant, exceedingly abundant, and allsufficient. Not
the latter; for the ungodly, as we have already seen, so far from being
prohibited, are invited to Christ, and earnestly entreated, by a consideration
of his vicarious death, to be reconciled to God Isa. xlv. 22. lv. 1. Matt. xi.
28. 2 Cor. v. 20.
. -- If the gospel did not warrant the ungodly to believe in Jesus, it could
not have answered its name -- it could not have been glad tidings, to a world
so extremely degenerate, corrupt, and criminal, as all the nations were, when
the Apostles received their divine commission to proclaim salvation to Jews and
Gentiles, without exception, through Jesus Christ. -- If the gospel do not
authorize the most ungodly to believe in Jesus, it seems impossible for them to
credit the gracious report under its natural and proper character: it being
denominated THE GLAD TIDINGS, because it reveals a Savior for sinners that are
in a PERISHING state. But, of all the sinners on earth, those only are in a
PERISHING state, who are entirely destitute of true godliness; for the word of
Infallibility frequently represents the godly, as in a state of salvation Matt.
v. 3, 4, 8. John v. 24. vi. 40, 54. x. 27, 28, 29. Romans xiii. 11. Ephesians. ii. 5,
8. Philip. i. 6.
. Nor is the gospel itself really believed, any further than the Savior
exhibited by it is the object of our dependence.

CHAPTER II. NO DEGREE OF HOLINESS PREVIOUSLY NECESSARY, TO WARRANT OUR
BELIEVING IN JESUS CHRIST.
WHEN a sinner is burdened with guilt, and filled with apprehensions of eternal
ruin, his language is, ' What shall I do to be saved? or, How shall I escape
the wrath to come? Being ignorant of that righteousness which the gospel
reveals for the justification of the ungodly, he labors to obtain acceptance
with God by his own efforts: till, being better acquainted with the purity of
the law, the holiness of God, and the corruption of his own heart, he despairs
of being justified by the works of the law.

To a person thus convinced of sin, and apprehensive of danger, one should
suppose the glad tidings of sovereign grace, and the doctrine of complete
salvation by Jesus Christ for the chief of sinners, would be embraced with all
possible readiness. Experience and observation prove, however, that awakened
sinners are frequently backward to receive encouragement from the glorious
gospel. This arises, not from any defect in the grace it proclaims, or in the
salvation it brings; not because the alarmed sinner is under any necessity, or
in any distress, for which it does not reveal complete relief; but because he
does not behold the glory of that grace which reigns triumphantly in it, and
the design of God in making the rich provision. He wants to find himself some
way distinguished from others, as a proper object of mercy, by holy tempers and
sanctified affections. This is his grand embarrassment. In other words he
considers himself as not sufficiently humbled, under a sense of sin; as not
having a suitable ahhorrence of it; and as not possessing those fervent
breathings after holiness, which, as he supposes, are necessary before he can
be warranted to believe in Jesus, with a well grounded hope of success See my
Reign of Grace, Chap. iv. p. 84, 85. Edit. 4th.
-- Thus the sinner, though oppressed with guilt, and earnestly desirous of
salvation, opposes the designs of divine grace, by ardently seeking for holy
qualifications, and personal worthiness, as prerequisite to faith in Jesus
Christ! But, that no degree of holiness is previously necessary, to warrant our
believing in the Lord Redeemer, I shall in the following paragraphs endeavor
to prove.

Under what consideration, then, is any degree of holiness in the heart of a
sinner necessary, before he believe in Jesus? As constituting part of his
justifying rigteousness? This cannot be, without admitting, that acceptance
with God is, in some degree, by our own righteousness. -- As the stipulated
condition of acceptance with Christ? If so, a sinner, on performing that
condition, may claim Christ, and all spiritual blessings in him, as matter of
pactitional debt. For, as Dr. OWEN says, where one thing is the condition of
another, that other thing must follow the fulfilling of that condition:
otherwise the condition of it, it is not Doctrine of Justification, Chap. I. p.
124. Glasgow, 1760.
. Yes, whether the condition prescribed be greater or less, the punctual
performance of it must give a legal title to all the blessings annexed to that
condition: which, in the case before us, would be to obtain justification by
the works of the law. -- As the qualification for obtaining an interest in
Christ, or a participation of his benefits? But, necessary as a pious turn of
heart is, to evince that we are partakers of Christ; it is not either an holy
disposition, or faith itself, by which we obtain an interest in the blessings
of our Lord's mediatorial work. No; that exalted privilege is not obtained by
us, but freely granted of God, in the decree of election John xvii. 2, 6, 9,
11, 24. Ephesians. i. 3 -- 7.
. For the substitution of Christ, and the whole of his vicarious work, very
strongly imply, that all the elect were interested in him before they possessed
either faith, or holiness. Nay, genuine faith, and real sanctity, ought ever to
be considered, not as the cause, but as the fruits and evidences, of that
interest. Ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep -- He has chosen us
in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without
blame before him in love John x. 26. Ephesians. i. 4.
. Besides, were any degree of holiness the requisite qualilification for an
interest in Christ, it must be equally so respecting justification by him:
which, again, brings us us to the works of the law, as being remotely the
procuring cause of our justification before God. -- As a stimulus, urging an
application to Jesus Christ? But, friendly as every holy disposition in the
heart of a converted sinner is, to communion with Christ, and to general
happiness; no principal of sanctity can, with propriety, be considered as a
requisite motive to our first believing in him. Because holiness, in the whole
of its nature, is as manifestly spiritual health, as depravity and guilt are
moral disease Ps. ciii. 3. Isa. liii. 5. Ps. vi. 24. 1 Pet. ii. 24. Hosea xiv.
4.
: and every sinner, in his first believing on Christ, regards him as the great
Physician -- as the Lord that heals Mat. ix. 12. Mark ii. 17. Luke v. 31.
Exodus xv. 26.
. But is it usual for either health, or the commencement of it, rather than
disease, and the danger attending, to excite an ardent desire after a skilful
and compassionate physician? -- As characterising the only persons to whom, by
divine authority, the gospel can be addressed? Then the Apostles must be
considered as having preached salvation in the name of Jesus, to the church
only; not at all to the world: whereas their commission was, as we have already
seen, Proclaim the glad tidings to EVERY CREATURE. -- As necessary to preserve
the sinner, after he believes in Jesus, from abusing revealed mercy? But, as I
perceive no scriptural evidence of any one really believing in Christ, and yet,
in the general course of his conduct, abusing divine mercy; so we have the most
express, infallible information, that the grace of God which brings salvation
teaches to deny ungodliness; that faith in Jesus works by love to God and man;
that faith without works is dead, and no better than that of devils. -- But let
us examine the subject more at large.

Every holy disposition is, to a certain degree, true holiness. On supposition,
therefore, that it be necessary for a sinner to possess any measure of real
sanctity, in order to warrant his reliance on Christ; it may be justly
demanded, What* mortal shall determine the requisite quantum? Or who shall say,
Thus much is necessary, and no more? Nor, consistently with the doctrine of
justification entirely by an imputed righteousness, and merely in a way of
grace, is it easy to say, as appears by the preceding induction of particulars,
for what purpose it can be necessary.

An holy disposition, in any case, or in the least degree, is a disposition to
universal and perfect holiness. For as there cannot be the least holiness,
where there is no sincere affection for God; so, all holiness radically
consists in love to him, as revealed in Jesus Christ. Consequently, if the
contrary of our position be true, no sinner can warrantably believe in Jesus,
until he be cordially disposed to perform all the divine precepts, and have the
root of perfect holiness in him. But, were any minister of the word, when
speaking of Jesus Christ as the Savior of sinners, expressly to say; You, and
you only, who are heartily disposed perfectly to keep the law, are warranted to
believe in Christ; it would, I presume, be esteemed a strange kind of gospel,
and little short of an insult on the distressed conscience.

As we cannot conceive of holiness existing in any creature, that is entirely
destitute of love to God; nor of God being loved by any creature, that does not
know him; so, neither will the Scriptures permit us to conclude, that any of
Adam's degenerate offspring ever knew and loved the true God, except as
revealed in the Mediator. Nor will the Bible warrant our supposing, that
sinners ever love the Supreme; or that they cordially approve the true
character of God; before they believe in Christ, as exhibited in the gospel.
There is forgiveness with Thee, that thou may be feared -- We love Him,
because he first loved us. For though he deserve the profoundest reverence, and
the warmest affection, for what he is in himself; it is as manifesting his
glory in Jesus Christ, that we either sincerely love, or truly revere him.

If, by an awakened sinner, it be admitted as a fact, and believed as a
doctrine, that no one is authorized to depend on Christ for pardon and peace,
until possessed of an holy disposition; he must necessarily be more solicitous
to find evidence of that important requisite existing in his heart, than to
understand and believe what the gospel says concerning Christ. For such a
persuasion must unavoidably direct his attention to the virtuous inclinations
he desires to feel, and the righteous works he wishes to perform; rather than
to the riches of revealed mercy, and to the all sufficiency of the Redeemer's
work. This mode of proceeding must, therefore, while it fosters his legal
pride, embarrass his pained conscience: which effects are equally foreign from
the genius of evangelical doctrine, and from the nature of true faith.

Our Lord, not being the Savior of man, as man; or of man, as holy; but of
man, as depraved, guilty, and condemned; it apparently follows, from the nature
of the case, that if Christ, under his graciously saving character, ever be
regarded at all, in a way of dependence; the sinner must, in his first
application to him, consider himself as totally base and worthless. But, did he
possess the least degree of true sanctity, that would be a false estimate of
his own character. For holiness is no other than intellectual beauty, moral
worth, and spiritual excellence. It is that by which angels are principally
distinguished from devils: and, consequently, any degree of it must constitute
a most important difference, in state and character, between them that possess
it, and those who are entirely unholy.

According to the sentiment here opposed, no one is authorized to believe in
Jesus, until he is born of God: for such only, have any degree of real
holiness. Be the conscience of a sinner, therefore, ever so much burdened with
guilt, he must have some evidence of his being a new creature, before he can
consider the gospel as exhibiting any relief, or as revealing a Savior in whom
he may confide. Consequently, if, while possessed of these views, and acting
consistently with them, he were to believe in Jesus; it must be under the
notion of his being already a child of God, and of his possessing true
holiness. -- But, were any man, professing faith in Christ, expressly to
declare, That it was under the notion of his previously possessing a new heart,
or a sincere love to holiness, that he first believed in Jesus Christ; even
though his exterior conduct were ever so regular, many of those who deny the
position for which I plead, would be ready to suspect him of selfdeception. For
they, I presume, would be very apprehensive, that his notions were
selfrighteous, and his hope delusive. But if, previous to believing in Christ,
and in order to warrant a dependence upon him, there must be an holy turn of
heart; why should the person supposed fall under a suspicion so harsh? If it be
a fact, that none but those who are previously born of God, and sincerely
disposed to keep his commands, are encouraged, by the gospel, to believe in
Jesus Christ; it cannot be either unlawful, or improper, from them, under that
very character and consideration, to place their first reliance upon him.
Because it is acting consistently, by applying the principle to practice.
Whereas, for persons to maintain, that some degree of holiness is previously
necessary to warrant our believing in Christ; who, nevertheless, in their first
application to him, consider themselves as in danger of eternal ruin, and
absolutely unworthy, are inconsistent.

The principle against which I contend implies, that sinners must be cordially
reconciled to the true character of God, as revealed in the Mediator, before
they rely on Christ, and before they believe the gospel. But this is contrary
to the apostolic doctrine. For, as it is by the gospel only, that the true
character of God is made known to men; so the grand mean of reconciling the
hearts of sinners to God, is the doctrine of our Lord's vicarious work. This we
are taught, by the following admirable passage: All things are of God, who has
reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and has given to us the ministry of
reconciliation: To wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them; and has committed unto us
the word of reconciliation. Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though
God did beseech The following criticism is, I think, worthy of notice; and is
laid before the judicious reader for his determination. The pronoun you is not
in the Greek. The Apostle is not here urging the believing Corinthians to be
reconciled to God; for he considered them as already reconciled: but he is
setting before them the apostolic message to the world at large, as appears
from the foregoing Verse; and therefore the supplement ought to be men, or the
world. Mr. MACLEAN'S Christ's Commission to the Apostles, p. 85.
, by us: we pray The following criticism is, I think, worthy of notice; and is
laid before the judicious reader for his determination. The pronoun you is not
in the Greek. The Apostle is not here urging the believing Corinthians to be
reconciled to God; for he considered them as already reconciled: but he is
setting before them the apostolic message to the world at large, as appears
from the foregoing Verse; and therefore the supplement ought to be men, or the
world. Mr. MACLEAN'S Christ's Commission to the Apostles, p. 85.
, in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. FOR he has made him to be sin
for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him
2 Cor. v. 18 -- 21.
. Agreeable to which view of the delightful words, is the following language of
Dr. OWEN: The great work of them who are Ambassadors for Christ, to beseech
men, in his stead, to be reconciled unto God; is to reveal the will and love of
the Father, in making him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him Recommendatory Preface to Mr. EVRE'S Free
Justification of a Sinner.
. Thus also Mr. CHARNOCK: The reconciliation here spoken of, was the matter of
the Apostles' discourses and sermons; and the great argument they used to
convert the world to God Works, Vol. II. p. 170. Edition 1690.
.

The gospel, strictly so called, is the doctrine of reconciliation to God, as a
righteous governor, by the death of his own incarnate Son; and it is through
believing the testimony of God respecting the death of Christ, that the hearts
of sinners are first reconciled to God, as appearing under his true character.
For, faithful and gracious as that divine testimony is, it can have no such
influence on the will, any further than it is believed. -- Remarkable is that
saying; If, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his
Son, much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life Romans v. 10.
. Let us review the admirable declaration. Reconciled WHEN WE WERE ENEMIES.
Consequently, while yet in our sins, in unregeneracy, and in spiritual death.
Reconciled to GOD; as a righteous governor; as maintaining the rights of
eternal justice, and the honors of the holy law. Reconciled to God BY THE
DEATH OF HIS SON; he being made sin, and made a curse for us 2 Cor. v. 21. Gal.
iii. 13.
. In his vicarious death, sin being condemned Romans viii. 3.
and punished, the Most High solemnly sanctified his great name Ezekiel. xxxvi. 23.
; or, in the most emphatical manner, declared himself, his government, and his
method of saving sinners, to be supremely holy. Much more BEING RECONCILED.
This is contrasted with, when we were ENEMIES. The testimony of God concerning
the death of Christ, being, through the divine influence, understood and
believed; the reconciliation made by the blood of Jesus, between God as a just
sovereign, and us as guilty subjects of his dominion, is received Romans v. 10.
(...).
; the revealed character of God is approved; and we are cordially reconciled to
him. We shall be saved by his life: that life which, as our high priest in the
heavenly sanctuary, he ever lives to make intercession for us Heb. vii. 25.
. Our divinely gracious Jesus devotes his life, though in a different way, the
second time for the happiness of his people. Having expiated their guilt on the
cross, by which he reconciled them to God when they were enemies; and they, in
the prevailing turn of their hearts, being reconciled to the character, the
grace, the dominion of God; he lives, as a priest on his throne Zech. vi. 12,
13.
to intercede for them, and subdue their enemies; to superintend all their
concerns, and to secure their final felicity.

Admitting the sentiment against which I militate, no one either does or can
believe on Jesus Christ, until possessed of substantial reason to consider
himself as free from condemnation, and as an heir of immortal happiness: for,
that such is the state of each regenerate person -- of every one distinguished
and adorned by true holiness, is plain from the tenor of divine Revelation. To
be a child of God, by regeneration; to have pious affection toward God, and a
cordial inclination to keep his commands; are, in the estimate of Scripture,
evidences of a safe state, and ascertain everlasting felicity to all that are
so distinguished 1 John iii. 1.2.
. Yet, on the hypothesis opposed, such must be our state and character, before
we are warranted to believe in Jesus!

That this is a just representation of the case, appears from the writings of
an Author who strenuously maintains the reverse of that for which I plead. Thus
he speaks: A hearty submission to, and acquiescence and delight, in the law of
God, rightly understood, and so a true hatred of sin, must take place in order
to any degree of true approbation of the gospel, and faith and trust in Christ
-- The sinner who comes to Christ for salvation, comes as a true penitent; and
that repentance -- is necessary to this faith. -- Now, that delight in the law
of God, rightly understood; a true hatred of sin, and real penitence, are
evidences of regeneration, and of genuine holiness, will scarcely be denied. It
is equally clear, admitting the doctrine of final perseverance, that persons of
such a character are safe, as to eternity: and yet, according to our Author,
such must every one be, before he may dare to believe in Jesus! -- Afterward,
however, which proves my assertion, the very same Gentleman reasons in the
following manner. That men are naturally destitute of every degree of that
which has the nature of true holiness, is most evident from Scripture; in that
the promises of salvation are every where made to them who exercise the least
degree of this, or of that which is opposite to sin: and such have the
character of good and holy persons, in distinction from others. Now, if the
least degree of goodness intitles a man to salvation, and denominates him a
good man; then all men are naturally, wholly, without any degree of this, and
so wholly corrupt; for all men are represented as naturally in a state of
condemnation, and wholly destitute of that which is necessary in order to their
salvation Mr. S. HOPKINS'S Two Discourses, p. 23, 24, 106. Bennington, 1793.
.

Were any measure of holiness previously necessary, to warrant our believing in
Jesus Christ; pardon of sin, and peace with our offended Sovereign, should be
exhibited in a gospel ministry, as before observed, to none but those who are
already born of God: because none but they possess the least degree of genuine
sanctity. Nay, the gospel should be preached to regenerate persons, as such; no
other being authorized to rely on Jesus, as revealed in in it. But, would this
answer the gracious designs of our Lord's command, Preach the gospel to every
creature? Preaching the gospel is, as already observed, proclaiming glad
tidings to guilty, depraved, and ruined creatures -- tidings of pardon, of
peace, and of salvation, through Jesus Christ. Preaching the gospel, is
preaching Christ himself, or bearing a public testimony to his gracious
gracious character, and perfect work. Preaching the gospel, therefore, is
proclaiming salvation by sovereign grace -- is exhibiting Jesus, not as willing
to supply the deficiencies in upright characters; nor, merely, as granting
assistance to persons already in the way to heaven; but, as the only, the all
sufficient, the absolutely free Savior of the condemned, the worthless, the
lost.

Again: Did the Apostles preach Jesus Christ, or did they proclaim pardon and
peace through his blood, to those only whom they considered as really penitent,
and as having an holy turn of heart? The reverse is a fact: for, as we have
before seen, they were commissioned to proclaim glad tidings to the profligate,
impious, and wicked world. Those, however, who are truly penitent, and
possessed of real holiness, are not of the world, but of God; being manifestly
called out of their natural state. -- When Paul was preaching to his Jewish
brethren, of whom he had a painful suspicion that, while they wondered at his
testimony, they would reject it and perish in their unbelief -- even those
Jews, who afterward are said to be filled with envy, to contradict and
blaspheme; his language was, Be it known unto YOU therefore, men and brethren,
that through this illustrious Jesus is preached unto YOU the forgiveness of
sins: and by him all that believe are justified from all things, from which ye
could not be justified by the law of Moses Acts xiii. 38, 39, 40, 41, 45, 46,
50.
. Now, as it would be a dangerous mistake to suppose, that Paul declared the
sins of those ungodly Jews to be already forgiven, and their persons justified;
so it would be inconsistent with the nature of his gracious declaration to
imagine, that he did not consider them as authorized, by his infallible
testimony, immediately to believe in Christ for pardon and acceptance with God.
-- I will add, is it supposable that Paul and Silas considered the Philippian
jailor as born of God, and possessed of true holiness, when, in answer to his
important query, they said; Believe on the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved?
There is not, that I perceive, the least reason for any supposition of that
kind See Reign of grace, Chap. V.
.

As it was under the character of a priest, that Christ expiated guilt, and
made reconciliation; so, when a sinner first applies to him, though it be for
the blessings of salvation in general, yet his eye is principally fixed on
pardon and peace. Justifying faith, says Dr. OWEN, respects Christ in his
priestly office alone, as he was the surety of the Covenant, with what he did
in the discharge thereof. The consideration of his other offices is not
excluded, but it is not formally comprised in the object of faith as justifying
On Justification, Chap. III.
. -- Thus also Mr. CHARNOCK: When the venom of sin begins to work in the
conscience, and the thunder of the law alarms it to judgment, and the
punishment due to sin is presented in the horrors of it; the question
immediately is, Whether there be any remedy, and where? How forgiveness of sin
is to be attained? The only remedy is proposed in Christ, and Christ as a
sacrifice. It is not Christ risen, or ascended, or exalted: not Christ, only as
the Son of God, or the head of angels: not Christ, as the creator of the world,
or by whom all things consist: but Christ, as answering the terms of the first
Covenant; as disarming justice; and this he did, as a sacrifice. By this he
bore the curse; by this he broke down the partition wall; by this he joined
apostate man and an offended God. This is that true faith pitcheth on, daily
revolves, and daily applies to. This is the first object of the soul, Christ
made sin; Christ bearing the punishment; Christ substituted in the room of the
offender -- This is that which pacifies God; and only that which pacifies God
can pacify the Conscience Works, Vol. II. p. 549.
.

Is it congruous, then, to suppose, that a criminal, when seeking pardon of sin
and peace for his conscience, must necessarily apply for them under the notion
of his previously possessing a pious turn of heart? Yet, whoever is persuaded,
that any degree of holiness is absolutely necessary to warrant his believing in
Jesus, cannot but regard the atonement, if, consistently with his principles,
he ever do regard it, under the notion of his being possessed of the requisite
sanctity. -- Were the atonement of Christ entirely rejected, and were he
revealed as willing to assist only the weak, but well disposed, in saving
themselves; then, indeed, it might be esteemed rational to conclude, that
whoever is authorized to depend on him for help, must be well qualified, by
holy inclinations and strenuous exertions. But, for those who consider the
death of Christ as vicarious and expiatory; or as constituting the only ground
of hope for pardon and peace; to maintain, the necessity of holiness as
warranting our dependence on that very death, is extremely inconsistent. For,
according to the sentiment opposed, though the death of Jesus be, confessedly,
an atonement; and though, by the very nature of the case, it could be intended
for none but the guilty; yet, before any of that criminal character be
permitted to regard it with affiance, they must be holy.

As no one can be thoroughly persuaded, that, in order to faith in Christ for
pardon and acceptance, an holy disposition is absolutely necessary, without
being anxiously concerned to obtain the important requisite; so, no sooner does
he consider himself as possessing that requisite, than it becomes to him the
primary source of peace. Yes, his first encouragement and hope arise, -- not
from the atonement of Christ; not from revealed mercy; nor from the testimony
of God concerning his incarnate Son, and the work performed by him; -- but,
from the change which has taken place in his own heart; from the holy tendency
of his will; from the difference which subsists between himself and others,
that are altogether unworthy. Conscious that some degree of moral worth
attaches to his character, and considering this as previously necessary to
warrant a sinner's dependence on Christ; his first hope is derived, not from
divine grace, as revealed in the gospel; but from his own holiness, as required
by the LAW: which is directly contrary to the grand principles of evangelical
truth.

Our Lord says, As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must
the Son of man be lifted up: that whosoever believes in him should not perish,
but have eternal life John iii. 14, 15.
. Now here, it is evident, our divine Instructor teaches us to consider the
dying state of the Israelites, that were bitten by the fiery serpents, as an
emblem of our perishing condition by sin: the brazen serpent, elevated on a
pole, as a type of himself expiring on the cross: the looking of wounded
Israelites to the brazen serpent, as emblematical of condemned sinners
depending on his own death; and the perfect recovery obtained, by viewing the
artificial serpent, as emblematical of that salvation which is through faith in
his atoning blood. To this, perhaps, there may be an allusion, when Jehovah
says; Look unto ME, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth Isa. xlv. 22.
Faith in Christ crucified, says Dr. OWEN, is a looking unto him, (Isa. xlv. 22.
lxv. 1.) answering their looking unto the brazen serpent, who were stung with
fiery serpents. John iii. 14, 15. On Justification. General Considerations.
. We may infer, however, that as the wounded Israelites, without any
preparative, except a sense of danger be so denominated, were authorized to
look at the brazen serpent, with an expectation of complete recovery; so
sinners, while destitute of every holy qualification, and as impelled by an
apprehension of eternal ruin, are warranted to believe in Jesus Christ, with
hope of complete salvation.

Very emphatical is the language, and exceedingly rich is the grace which
appears, in the following passage. When we were yet without strength, in due
time Christ died for the ungodly. For scarcely for a righteous man will one
die: yet peradventure for a good man some would even dare to die. But God
commends his love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died
for us Romans v. 6, 7, 8.
. -- In the work of redemption by Jesus our Lord, there are two particulars on
account of which the love of God to men is principally celebrated by the
inspired Writers: which particulars are, the sending of his only begotten SON,
and the delivering him up to death for SINNERS John iii. 16. Matt. xxi. 37.
Romans viii. 32. 1 John. iii. 16.
. It is to the latter of these that Paul directs our attention, in the text
before us. Here we have a mode of expression that is very uncommon; and,
considering of whom the Apostle speaks, it is truly wonderful; God COMMENDS
his love! He exhibits its brightest beauties; he presents to our view its most
winning attractives; he displays it in the most surprising and charming point
of light. As if he should say; Such is MY love! So free, so fervent, so
fruitful of benefits, and so becoming my infinite excellence, that I consider
the manifestation of it, as the chief glory of all my ways respecting the sons
of men! to whom I RECOMMEND it, in a peculiar manner, as the eternal source of
their happiness, and as the principal subject of their delightful meditation.
-- God commends his love TOWARD US. Wonderful saying! That reasonable
creatures ought ever to consider divine benevolence as the fountain of their
felicity, is plain to every thinking person: but that the Most High should
speak of RECOMMENDING his love, even though it were to angels, is truly
amazing! How much more wonderful, then, to hear him speak of commending his
love to MEN -- to polluted mortals -- to criminals, who deserve perdition!

But how, or in what way, does the Supreme commend his own philanthropy? Not by
passing an act of indemnity in favor of those who loathe sin, and love
holiness. Not by justifying those who have performed qualifying conditions, and
by giving heaven to saints. Nor does he recommend his love to men, in pardoning
their offenses, accepting their persons, and bestowing immortal happiness upon
them, by the mere exertion of his royal prerogative and supreme dominion. No:
respecting these particulars, the admirable text is entirely silent. But it was
by sending his OWN SON, and by giving him up to death for us, when we were yet
WITHOUT STRENGTH, to perform any thing truly good; while we were YET SINNERS,
or entirely destitute of every amiable quality; and while we were absolutely
UNGODLY in the turn of our hearts, and the course of our lives. In other words,
a detestable compound of depravity and guilt, of weakness and unworthiness. Of
such a nature is that apostate state in which we were, when God commended his
love to us, by the gift of his incarnate Son; and by Jesus falling a victim, in
our stead to eternal justice!

Again: It is worthy of observation, that Paul does not say, God commends his
mercy, or his grace; but, which is yet more emphatical, delightful, and
wonderful, his LOVE. It deserves also to be remarked, that the Father's giving
or sending of his own Son, and the voluntary death of Jesus for us, are most
commonly ascribed to the LOVE, not the mercy or the grace, of the Father, and
of the Son John iii. 16. 1 John iii. 16. iv. 9, 10. Gal. ii. 20. Ephesians. v. 2, 25.
Rev. i. 5.
: but the blessings bestowed for the sake of Christ, are more commonly
represented as flowing from grace or mercy. -- Mercy, grace, and love, are
different modifications of goodness; which may be thus distinguished. Mercy, is
goodness to the miserable; grace, is goodness to the unworthy; and love, is
goodness delighting in the happiness of its objects. When God has completely
delivered his people from all the penal effects of their apostasy, they will no
longer be the objects of his goodness, under the strict notion of mercy;
because mercy has regard to misery. When they are perfectly free from all the
unworthiness attending depravity and guilt, they will no longer be the objects
of divine goodness, under the apostolic notion of grace Romans iii. 24. iv. 4.
ix. 5, 6. Ephesians. ii. 5 -- 9.
: for grace, in the writings of Paul, respects the unworthiness of a sinful
creature. But saints will ever be the blessed objects of divine goodness, under
the delightful notion of LOVE. Holy angels are the objects of divine goodness
under the notion of love; but not of mercy, or of grace, in the apostolic sense
of those terms, when used respecting sinners.

Relative to this distinction, Dr. GOODWIN says; Love is a desire to
communicate good, the chiefest good, unto the creature; but mercy, it is to
pull the creature out of a depth of misery -- So that mercy superaddeth this to
love, that it respects the creature in misery. Parents, they love their
children, simply as they are their children; but if they be fallen into misery,
then love works in a way of pity -- It is not mercy only, -- but [the Apostle]
also mentions love; -- because that mercy only respects misery, as I said
before: it goes no further, simply as mercy, than the relieving those that are
in misery -- Mercy causes a king to pardon a traitor: but if he shall take
this traitor and advance him to the highest dignity, place him with him in the
throne, as it were; this must needs be from love too; this is superadding, in
that respect, unto mercy -- God's love, it is the greatest thing of all the
rest; it is more than all his benefits. The love of Christ was more than his
sufferings; and his sufferings were more than his benefits: and the love of
God, it is more than all his gifts, yet he has given great things to us, and
done great things for us. Amor est primum donum; his love is the first gift, as
one well says: in the gift of which all things else are yours. The gift of his
Son, it was a great gift; but it was founded in his love. He so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son. Though we, being sinners, need
mercy, (that is the next thing we want) and therefore we look to it, O mercy,
mercy! because we apprehend ourselves in misery: but do you look beyond mercy,
and look to love; which is a greater thing to you than mercy; raises and
enlarges mercy; and, when mercy has done with you, will do more, or as much
for you as mercy has done, and guides mercy -- Love is a desire to
communicate good unto us -- Mercy respects us as we are fallen into sin and
misery -- And then that of Grace, -- it adds but this, a freeness unto both.
Love and mercy freely bestowed, that is called grace, in either On Ephesians. ii. 4,
5, 6. Works, Vol. I. Part II. p. 129, 130, 132, 138.
.

Mr. CHARNOCK, thus: Love is a perfection of a higher strain than mercy: mercy
may be prevalent, where love is absent -- This [goodness of God] under the name
of his love, is rendered [or given as] the sole cause of the redeeming death of
the Son: it was to COMMEND his love with the highest gloss, and in so singular
a manner that had not its parallel in nature, nor in all his other works, and
reaches, in the brightness of it, beyond the manifested extent of any other
attribute. It must be only a miraculous goodness that induced him to expose the
life of his Son to those difficulties in the world, and death upon the cross,
for the freedom of sordid rebels. His great end was, to give such a
demonstration of the liberality of his nature as might be attractive to his
creature, remove its shakings and tremblings, and encourage its approaches to
him. It is in this he would not only manifest his love, but assume the Name of
LOVE. By this name the Holy Ghost calls him in relation to this good will
manifested in his Son: God is LOVE. In this is manifested the love of God
toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we
might live through him. He would take the Name he never expressed himself in
before. He was JEHOVAH, in regard of the truth of his promise: so he expressed
himself of old. He is GOODNESS, in regard of the grandeur of his affection in
the mission of his Son: and therefore he would be known by the name of LOVE
now, in the days of the gospel Works, Vol. II. p. 333. Vol. I. Discourse on the
Goodness of God.
.

If, then, the highest demonstration of divine favor; that which, in the
estimate of God himself, is the grand recommendation of his love to men;
consist in his giving Jesus to die for us while we were yet sinners, ungodly,
and without strength; we may safely conclude, that the sentiment opposed cannot
be to the praise of the glory of his grace. For, how incongruous it is to
suppose, that though the blessed God recommend his love to us, considered as
mere sinners; and though it is in Christ only, as dying for mere sinners, that
the admirably glorious properties of divine love are to be seen; yet, before
those very sinners for whom Christ died, and to whom God recommends his love,
are permitted to believe in Jesus, and to behold the wonderful excellencies of
that amazing love, they must have some degree of spiritual strength -- they
must become godly -- they must be real saints! for all these ideas attach to
every one that possesses the least measure of true holiness. God, in the death
of Jesus, recommends his love to sinners, or the ungodly; yet they must cease
to be such before they regard it! -- Should any persons of so base a character
presume to approach the dying Jesus as their only hope, the ungracious genius
of that principle against which I contend cries in their ears, Procul o, procul
este profani: Hence, far hence, O ye profane!

Had the glorious God been represented as recommending his love to the
penitent, the upright, the virtuous; we might have concluded, that none but
persons of those amiable characters were authorized to regard Christ with
dependence, and with expectation. But, had that been the case, the love of God
to us could not, with propriety, have been so contrasted, as it is here, with
the love of one man to another. For sinners love those that love them Luke vi.
32.
; and the Apostle admits, that, for a good man, some one perhaps may even dare
to die. Besides, on that supposition, the divine Father might have been viewed,
and would certainly have been considered by distressed souls, as commending his
love to rectitude, to virtue, to holiness, rather than to sinners; and the
absolutely unworthy would have had no ground of hope. -- Whereas, if Christ
died for us while we were yet sinners; and if God, by that very fact, more than
by any other effect of divine goodness, commend his love to us; we ought,
surely, to consider the eternal Father as recomcommending the crucified Jesus
to us, while we are yet sinners -- recommending him, as an all sufficient
Savior for the most guilty; as perfectly suitable to the circumstances of the
most needy; and as completely free for the most unworthy. Thus he is revealed
in the glad tidings: and what is believing in Jesus, but relying upon him, or
treating him, according to this view of his character? God himself, in the
death of Christ, commending his love to mere sinners; the ungodly must be
warranted thankfully to regard that recommendation, and to believe in the Son
of God.

Christ is made sanctification to all that are truly converted 1 Cor. i. 30.
. Every holy disposition, therefore, in the heart of a sinner must be received
from him. Ought we, then, to support the affirmative of what is opposed, to
consider our Lord as actually made sanctification to any sinner, who is not
authorized to believe in him? or imagine that an ungodly person must receive
holiness from Jesus Christ, in order to warrant his dependence upon him? So to
do, would confound the state of believers with that of unbelievers; would
invert the order of things in the method of grace, and be attended with various
absurdities. -- Does the Most Holy sanctify any sinner? it is as the God of
peace 1 Thessalonians. v. 23.
: but he bears that delightful character, only as reconciling the world to
himself by the death of Christ. For, as Mr. CHARNOCK observes, God only
sanctifies as a God of peace -- Would we be perfect in every good work; would
we do the will of God; would we have every thing welpleasing in his sight
wrought in us? then we should go to him as a God of peace Heb. xiii. 20, 21.
Works, Vol. II. p. 222.
. -- 'Sanctification,' says Dr. OWEN, is a fruit and effect of that peace with
[God,] which he has made and prepared for us, by Jesus Christ. For he was in
Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, destroying the enmity which entered
by sin, and laying the foundation of eternal peace. From hence it is, that he
will sanctify us, or make us holy; without a respect whereunto he would no more
do so, than he will sanctify again the angels that have sinned; for whom there
is no peace made, nor atonement Discourse concerning the Holy Spirit* B. IV.
Chap. I. 8.
. -- Must it not be necessary, then, for sinners to regard the atonement of
Christ as all sufficient, in which the divine Father appears under that
gracious character, the God of peace; in order to a well-grounded expectation
of ever possessing the least degree of true holiness?

Coming to Christ, and believing on him, are the same thing; as appears from
the words of our Lord himself. He that COMES to me, shall never hunger; and he
that believes on me, shall never thirst John vi. 35.
. Now, the Scripture informs us, that the wrath of God, or the curse of the
law, abides on him who believes not in Christ John iii. 36.
. But will the Bible authorize our supposing, that any one possessed of true
holiness is under the wrath of God? Yet that is evidently implied in the
hypothesis here opposed, when compared with the awful declaration just produced.

Our Lord says, As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in
the vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me John xv. 4.
. According to the phraseology of Scripture, to be in Christ, most commonly
denotes vital union with him, acceptance before God, and complete freedom from
condemnation 2 Cor. v. 17. Ephesians. i. 6. Romans viii. 1.
. Privileges, these, which are not enjoyed by unbelievers. No; there must be
faith in the blood of Jesus Romans iii. 25.
, before any one can be justly considered as thus united to him, and thus
accepted of God. -- If, notwithstanding, the reverse of what I maintain be
true, there not only may, but there absolutely MUST be the fruits of
righteousness, before there can be vital union with Christ: nay, before a
sinner can be permitted to regard the gospel, as revealing a Savior in whom he
may confide. Because, in whomsoever an holy disposition is implanted, it will,
more or less, exert itself in pious affections, and righteous conduct: which
must be considered in the light of spiritual fruit. -- I said, vital union;
like that of a living branch to a flourishing vine. For, so far as I have
observed, it is allowed by all who are conversant in these affairs, that,
previous to believing in Jesus Christ, there is no such union between him and
any sinner.

The Scriptures teach us to consider all unbelievers as in a state of enmity to
God, and of spiritual death. To the unbelieving, we are also informed, nothing
is pure; but even their mind and conscience are defiled Titus i. 15.
. The affirmative, however, of what I deny, supposes that sinners must be alive
to God -- the friends of God -- and have some degree of spiritual purity,
before they obtain permission to believe in Jesus. For I think it is
demonstrable, that he in whose heart any holy disposition resides, is neither
under the dominion of disaffection to God, nor in spiritual death, nor
destitute of spiritual purity.

Under whatever characters Christ is represented as considering his people,
with reference to their legal and moral state. when he gave himself a ransom
for them; under the very same characters are unconverted persons warranted to
believe in him. For we cannot suppose, without absurdity, that Christ died for
men under one character, and that they must depend upon his death under
another. Now it is plain, from the Records of Inspiration, that those whom
Christ came to save, and for whom he died, were considered by him, as guilty --
as ungodly -- as enemies to God -- as extremely depraved -- as the chief of
sinners -- as justly condemned -- and as lost 1 Timothy i. 15. Romans v. 6, 8, 9,
10. John iii. 3, 5. Titus iii. 3. Gal. iii. 10, 13. Luke xix. 10.
. Consequently, such being their native characters, and such their awful state,
they must believe in him at first, not as qualified persons, but as perishing
wretches; not as adorned with the beauties of holiness, but as loathsome with
the pollution of hell. How strange, how incongruous, the following position:
Christ came, and expired on a cross, PROFESSEDLY to save sinners -- the ungodly
-- the enemies of God, and so on; yet, before any of them can warrantably
believe in him for salvation, they must be under the influence of a pious
disposition -- they must possess a principle of universal holiness! In other
words, they must cease to be, in a scriptural sense, those characters which
Christ intended to relieve, when he gave himself a ransom for many -- when he
was made sin, and made a curse; before they are authorized to place the least
confidence in him!

I said, in a SCRIPTURAL sense: because they who possess the least degree of
true holiness, are not, either in the Old or the New Testament, denominated,
absolutely, sinners, the ungodly, the lost, and so on; but the reverse. Yes,
notwithstanding their numerous and criminal imperfections, with regard to
inherent holiness and personal obedience; they are characterised, Those that
know the Lord -- fear the Lord -- love the Lord -- serve the Lord: the
righteous -- the upright -- the perfect: disciples, believers, faithful
brethren, sons of God, saints, and so on. For every one that possesses any
measure of real holiness, is born of God; and is, therefore, denominated
according to his new state, even while he perceives abundant reason for daily
abasement before God Job. i. 1, 8. ix. 20, 21, 30, 31. xl. 4. xlii. 5, 6. Ps.
cxxx. 3, 4. cxliii. 2. Prove. xxiv. 16. Romans vii. 15. -- viii. 1, 2. 1 John i.
8, 9, 10.
.

It was the design of our Lord, in his admirable parable of the Prodigal, and
in that of the Publican Luke xv. 11 -- 32. xviii. 10 -- 14.
, to inform us, Under what character, or under what consideration of ourselves,
we must apply to God for pardon, for peace, and for salvation. What, then, are
the most prominent features of those two parabolical persons, when viewed as
coming to God for acceptance? The Prodigal appears as a ragged, filthy,
starving wretch; who, impelled by mere necessity, returns to his Father,
without any recommendation of person, or of character; and as deserving to be
for ever exheridated. The Publican, smitten with a sense of enormous guilt; far
from considering himself as possessing any holy disposition; and harrassed with
apprehensions of eternal ruin; appears as a criminal who deserves to be damned,
and who dares not lift up his eyes to heaven, even when he cries for mercy
through an atonement. Surely, then, these characters, and the scope of these
parables, are far from teaching, that sinners must have some degree of holiness
before they be authorized to believe in Jesus. -- Nay, in the parable of the
Pharisee and the Publican, our Lord so describes the former as to show, that
whoever approaches God, with a view to justification before him, under any
other character than that of a miserable sinner; or as encouraged by any other
consideration, than that of mercy revealed in the atonement; is chargeable with
selfrighteous pride, and sure to meet with a fatal disappointment.

I said, with a view to JUSTIFICATION before God: for this is the single point
under consideration. Because it was that for which our Lord represents the
Pharisee and Publican, as addressing the Most High; and because it is that
which an awakened sinner principally seeks, in his first application to Jesus
Christ. -- Has a person believed through grace? has he already received the
atonement? and is he approaching the throne of divine mercy for a fresh
application of pardon, with reference to the imperfection of his duties, the
daily operation of his corruptions, and the backslidings of which he is
conscious? Or, does he apply for larger measures of sanctifying influence? he
may come to God as one of his disobedient children, or as a feeble and very
imperfect follower of Jesus Christ, crying, Abba, Father. Nay, when lamenting
over his indwelling depravity and actual transgressions, he may even say; God,
I thank thee, that I am not as other men, that are profligates in their
conduct; that are dead in sin; or that are seeking to establish their own
righteousness. For the Pharisee, in this parable, is not censured, merely
because he thanked God for the difference which subsisted between himself, and
the profligate part of the world; but because he placed that difference to the
account of his justification before God. In that respect, the chaste lady, and
the vile prostitute; the most virtuous characters, and the greatest
profligates, are completely on a level; having only one common ground of hope
-- the vicarious obedience of Jesus Christ.

It must, I think, be granted, that when a sinner first believes in Jesus, he
is concerned chiefly about pardon and acceptance with God. But, if so, the
spirit of those instructive parables to which I advert, absolutely forbids our
supposing, that any degree of holiness is required of a sinner, to warrant his
dependence on Christ. We will, however, for the sake of argument, admit the
contrary. We will suppose that a sinner, under a persuasion of his possessing
some degree of true sanctity, applies to the glorious Jesus; and that he
addresses God in prayer, for justification, agreeably to this view of himself.
What, then, will be the spirit of his address at the throne of Eternal Majesty?
Must it not, either expressly or implicitly, be as follows? God, I thank thee,
that I am not as the multitude of other men! Once, indeed, I lived in
disobedience, and loved sin: but now it is otherwise, as to the turn of my
heart, and the course of my life. Having a pious disposition, my will is under
an holy bias; which leads me to revere thy authority, and to keep thy commands.
Thus possessing the requisite divinely prescribed to all those that would
acceptably believe in Jesus, and through his merits obtain justification; I
cannot doubt, either of acceptance with thee, or of admission into thy eternal
kingdom. -- This, or something similar, is the genuine language of every one
who, in his devotional addresses relative to justification, proceeds on that
ungracious principle which I oppose! There is reason to think, however, that
many who warmly dispute for the principle, entirely desert it in prayer; and
would even be shocked to hear a religious address to the Deity, respecting
justification, formed upon it. -- But, if the principle in question be an
article of divine truth, it must be of great importance: for it enters deeply
into the doctrine of justification. Why should it not, then, by all that
embrace it, be avowed in their solemn prayers for pardon and acceptance,
especially by those who, with the Pharisee, consider themselves as possessing
the requisite holiness? Why does it not make a conspicuous appearance in their
devotional practice? To scruple the propriety of such an avowal, is an implicit
condemnation of the principle itself.

Remarkably pertinent, relative to this particular, is the following language
of Dr. OWEN. The Pharisee ascribes all that he did to God. God, I thank thee:
although he did all [he mentions,] yet he owned the aid and assistance of God,
by his grace, in it all. He esteemed himself much to differ from other men, but
he ascribed it not unto himself that so he did. All the righteousness and
holiness which he laid claim unto, he ascribed unto the benignity and goodness
of God. Wherefore he neither pleaded any merit in his works, nor any works
performed in his own strength, without the aid of grace. All that he pretends
is, that by the grace of God he had fulfilled the condition of the Covenant,
and thereon expected to be justified. And whatever words men shall be pleased
to make use of in their vocal prayers, God interprets their minds according to
what they trust in, as unto their justification before him. And if some men
will be true to their own principles, this [prayer of the Pharisee] is the
prayer which, mutatis, mutandis, they ought to make. Doctrine of Justification,
Chap. XVII.
.

Paul, when proving the doctrine of justification by an imputed righteousness,
and when adducing the case of Abraham as quite in point, thus interrogates and
replies; How was it (the Patriarch's faith, or that in which he believed) then
reckoned? When he was in circumcision? Or in uncircumcision? Not in
circumcision, but in uncircumcision Romans iv. 10.
. The Apostle's design in these queries and answers was to evince, that
justification before God is of mere grace, by an imputed righteousness; and
that no duty performed by us, nor any holiness wrought in us, has the least
influence in procuring that inestimable blessing. Adopting the inspired
Writer's manner of speaking, I may, therefore, interrogate and answer thus:
How, then, is the vicarious obedience of Christ imputed to a sinner? When he is
possessed of true holiness? Or when he is considered as ungodly? Not when in
the former, but while in the latter state: for the text is express, He that
justifies the ungodly Romans iv. 5.
. Consequently, no degree of holiness is previously necessary to warrant our
believing in Jesus Christ: because it would be absurd to consider any person as
ungodly, who possesses the least measure of real holiness.

They who are in health need not a physician, but they that are sick; is a
maxim of common sense, as well as of Scripture. Now Christ is the physician of
souls, whose disease consists in depravity and guilt. To suppose, therefore,
that sinners must possess any measure of true holiness, before they are
warranted to believe in Jesus; is equally incongruous as to maintain, that a
patient must be in a convalescent state, before he can, with propriety, apply
to a physician. For, I presume it must be admitted, that when any sinner
becomes possessed of holy inclinations, he is, in a moral sense, convalescent.
His recovery is begun: and taking the doctrine of perseverance for granted,
certain to be completed. But is it congruous to suppose, that any sinner should
have substantial reason to conclude upon his own final happiness, as the
sentiment opposed implies, before he be authorized to believe in Jesus Christ?

The Scripture teaches, that real holiness is the fruit of evangelical truth
understood and received Matt. xiii. 23. John xvii. 17, 19. Ephesians. iv. 24. Gr.
. But the sentiment against which I contend implies, either, that the gospel
may be received, without relying on Christ; or, that holiness may exist in the
heart of a sinner, who does not believe the truth: neither of which can be
supported by the word of God. Not the former: for the genuine gospel is the
testimony of God concerning Christ. It is a revelation, and an exhibition, of
his Person and offices; of his grace and work Gal. iii. 1.
. He therefore, who receives the gospel, or admits the glad tidings into his
heart Romans vi. 17. x. 10. Acts viii. 37.
; receives Christ himself John i. 11, 12. Col. ii. 6.
, who is the substance of those joyful tidings. -- Not the latter: for while a
person disbelieves that which, by way of eminence, is called THE TRUTH, he
remains disaffected to God, and virtually makes him a liar 1 John v. 10.
. It may be safely concluded, therefore, that such an one has no holiness in
him.

The most remarkably gracious proclamations and invitations to sinners, that
stand recorded by the inspired pen, may here be pleaded. PROCLAMATIONS: Ho,
every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money!
Come ye, buy, and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and without
price! and so on. Jesus stood and cried saying, If any man thirst, let him come
unto me and drink! -- Wisdom has builded her house, she has hewn out her
seven pillars: she has killed her beasts; she has mingled her wine; she has
also furnished her table. She has sent forth her maidens: she cries upon the
highest places of the city, Whosoever is simple, let him turn in hither: as for him
that wants understanding, she says to him, Come, eat of my bread, and drink
of the wine which I have mingled Isa. lv. 1, 2, 3. John vii. 37. Prove. ix. 1 --
5.
. -- INVITATIONS: Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the city, and
bring in hither the poor, and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind -- Go out
into the highways and hedges, and compel them to come in -- Come unto me all ye
that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest -- The Spirit and the
bride say, Come: and let him that hears say, Come: and whosoever will, let
him take of the water of life freely Luke xiv. 21, 23. Matt. xi. 28. Rev. xxii.
17.
. -- To these proclamations and invitations, that gracious PROMISE may be
annexed; Him that comes to Me, I will in no wise cast out John vi. 3^.
.

On reviewing the divinely gracious proclamations, invitations, and promise,
just adduced, we observe the following descriptive characters: Every one that
thirsts after happiness, and seeks it -- not in Christ, and in the enjoyment
of spiritual blessings provided by sovereign mercy; but, in the pursuit of
sensual gratifications, of temporal riches, of secular honors, of
philosophical acquisitions, of superstitious observances, or of acceptance with
God by his own righteousness; which are not bread, and cannot satisfy Vide
VITRINGAM in Jesaiam, 55, 1, 2, 3. Mr. HERVEY'S Thereon and Aspasio, Vol. III.
p. 338. Mr. T. BOSTON'S Works, p. 227, 845.
. -- He that has no money; no recommending qualification, or moral worth --
The simple, and those that are void of understanding; the ignorant and wicked
-- The poor, the maimed, the lame, and the blind; mere mendicants, that are in
the streets and lanes of the city -- Those, in the country, that are in the
highways, and under the hedges; travelers, without exception, and the most
miserable vagrants -- Those, finally, that are burdened with guilt, and have
sought relief, in methods of their own devising, but have not found it.

We further observe, with surprise and joy, that our divine Lord, far from
overlooking these outcasts of society and refuse of mankind, gives the
following order to his ministering servants; Compel them, by forcible arguments
and winning persuasion, to come in, and be guests at my table. Or, as it is
elegantly expressed by an evangelical writer; The messengers are sent, not to
the mansion-houses of the rich, or the palaces of the mighty; but to the
highways and hedges: where misery mourns, and poverty pines, and baseness hides
her head HERVEY, Thereon and Aspasio, Vol. III. p. 311.
. -- Nay, the SUPREME LORD himself, as it were in person, condescends to
address the guilty, the impoverished, the perishing creatures; and his language
is, Ho, every one! be his iniquities ever so many, his depravity ever so great,
or his guilt ever so enormous. Come to the waters; to the source of supplies,
where plenty is provided for the use of those that are starving. Come and take
freely, of the wine, and the milk, and the water of life -- of all the
blessings provided by grace, for the relief of spiritual indigence, for the
peace of distressed consciences, and for the healing of diseased souls. Come,
come, yea COME! Think not that your poverty and rags, your crimes and your
guilt, prohibit access to the storehouse of spiritual blessings, or forbid
expectation of being relieved by reigning grace. For I solemnly assure you,
that all the benefits of sovereign mercy were intended, only for the guilty --
the depraved -- the utterly destitute: -- for those only, who have nothing but
the revelation of my grace, to keep them from despair now; nor any thing
besides the provisions of that grace, to preserve them from damnation
hereafter. Whoever, therefore, on the credit of my royal proclamation, or on
the fidelity of my irrevocable promise, applies for relief, shall not, upon any
consideration of his past provocations, or of his present pollution, be
rejected. Rejected! nothing less. For, to the praise of the glory of my grace,
he shall find acceptance, and have salvation.

To maintain that a sinner, before he can warrantably believe in Jesus, must
have some degree of holiness, is contrary to the apostolic doctrine of
justification before God. To this particular I have, indeed, repeatedly
adverted: but it is of so much importance, as to deserve a more distinct
consideration. The principle, then, is inconsistent with the apostolic doctrine
of justification by mere grace; with the character of those whom God justifies;
and is adapted to encourage boasting.

It is inconsistent with justification by MERE GRACE. Relative to this affair,
the language of Inspiration is, Being justified freely by his grace, through
the redemption that is in Jesus Christ Romans iii. 24.
. No words, equally few, could more strongly express the most perfectly
gratuitous justification of a sinner, than these, FREELY, by his GRACE; and it
is an axiom with Paul, That whatever blessing is of GRACE, it is not of works;
otherwise grace is no more grace: and that, whatever blessing is of WORKS, it
is not of grace; otherwise work is no more work Romans xi. 6.
. -- Nor ought it here to be objected, either, That the sentiment censured
respects, not exterior conduct, but the state of the heart: or, That the
holiness intended is an effect of divine grace. Not the former: for what is
exterior conduct, respecting the affairs of religion, in which the heart is not
right with God? It may satisfy the person himself; it may please his
neighbors; it may be hypocrisy; but it is not righteousness. -- Not the
latter: for the Pharisee in the parable, even when pleading his own
righteousness for justification, thanked God for preserving and assisting grace
Luke xviii. 11.
. -- 'No words can be found out,' says Dr. OWEN, to free our justification
before God from all respect unto any thing in ourselves, but only what is added
expressly as the means of its participation on our part, through faith in his
blood, more emphatical than those here used by the Apostle Romans iii, 24
, FREELY by his GRACE. And with whom this is not admitted as exclusive of all
works or obedience of our own; of all conditions, preparations, and merit; I
shall despair of ever expressing my conceptions about it intelligibly unto them
Doctrine Of Justification, Chap. VI.
.

With the CHARACTER of those whom God justifies. Thus it is described by the
Apostle: To him that works, the reward is not reckoned of grace, but of debt.
But to him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly,
his faith is counted for righteousness Romans iv. 4, 5.
. He that works not -- the ungodly: such is the character of him that
believes in Jesus, and whom God graciously justifies! But if the mere sinner be
not authorized to believe in Jesus; if any degree of holiness be previously
necessary to faith in him; I do not perceive how it can be considered as a
fact, that God justifies him who works not, or any that are ungodly. Let us
again hear Dr. OWEN, expressing himself as follows; To say, he who works not,
is justified through believing; is to say, that his works, whatever they be,
have no influence into his justification; nor has God, in justifying him, any
respect unto them. Wherefore he alone who works not is the subject of
justification; the person to be justified. That is, God considers no man's
works, no man's duties of obedience, in his justification; seeing we are
justified freely by his grace. And when God affirms expressly, that he
justifies him who works not, and that freely by his grace; I cannot
understand what place our works, or duties, of obedience, can have in our
justification. For why should we trouble ourselves to invent of what
consideration they may be, in our justification before God, when he himself
affirms that they are of none at all? Neither are the words capable of any
evading interpretation. He that works not, IS he that works not, let men
say what they please, and distinguish as long as they will. And it is a
boldness not to be justified, for any to rise up in opposition to such express
divine testimonies, however they may be harnessed with philosophical notions
and arguings; which are but as thorns and briars which the word of God will
pass through and consume.

But the Apostle further adds, in the description of the subject of
justification, that God justifies the UNGODLY. This is that expression which
has stirred up so much wrath among many, and on account whereof some seem to
be much displeased with the Apostle himself. If any other person dare but say,
that God justifies the UNGODLY; he is presently reflected on as one that, by
his doctrine, would overthrow the necessity of godliness, holiness, obedience,
or good works. For what need can there be of any of them, if God justifies the
ungodly? Howbeit, this is a periphrasis of God, that he is he who justifies
the UNGODLY. This is his prerogative and property. As such he will be believed
and worshipped; which adds weight and emphasis unto the expression: and we must
not forego this testimony of the Holy Ghost, let men be as angry as they
please. But the difference is about the meaning of the words. If so, it may be
allowed without mutual offense, though we should mistake their proper sense.
Only it must be granted, that God justifies the ungodly. That is, say some,
those who formerly were ungodly; not such who continue ungodly when they are
justified: and this is most true. All that are justified, were before ungodly:
and all that are justified, are at the same instant made godly. But the
question is, Whether they are godly or ungodly, antecedently, in any moment of
time, unto their justification? If they are considered as godly, and are so
indeed, then the Apostle's words are not true, that God justifies the ungodly:
for the contradictory proposition is true, God justifies none but the godly.
Wherefore, although in, and with, the justification of a sinner, he is made
godly; for he is endowed with that faith which purifieth the heart, and is a
vital principle of all obedience, and the conscience is purged from dead works
by the blood of Christ; yet, antecedently unto his justification, he is
ungodly, and considered as ungodly; as one who works not; as one whose duties
and obedience contribute nothing to his justification. As he works not, all
works are excluded from being the cause; and as he is ungodly, from being the
condition, of his justification -- Not this, or that sort of works; not this,
or that manner of the performance of them; not this, or that kind of interest
in our justification; but all works of what sort soever, and however performed,
are excluded from any kind of consideration in our justification, as our works
or duties of obedience.

It will be said, That our personal obedience is by none asserted to be the
righteousness whereby we are justified before God, in the same MANNER as it was
under the Covenant of works. But the argument speaks, not as unto the manner,
or way, whereby it is so; but to the thing itself. If it be so in any way or
manner, under what qualifications soever, we are under that Covenant still. If
it be of works any way, it is not of grace at all -- All is now resolved into
the merit of Christ, upon the account whereof alone, our own personal
righteousness is accepted before God unto our justification. The question is
not, On what account, nor for what reason, it is so accepted; but whether it
be, or no: seeing its so being is effectually constitutive of a Covenant of
works Doctrine of Justification, Chap. XVIII, XIII.
.

The sentiment is adapted to encourage boasting. This, however, is directly
contrary to the apostolic doctrine. For Paul assures us, that, by God's method
of justifying sinners, all boasting, even in comparative worthiness, is
entirely, and for ever excluded. Thus he interrogates and determines: Being
justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus
-- Where is boasting, then? It is excluded. By what law? Of works? Nay: but by
the law of faith -- By grace are ye saved, through faith; and that not of
yourselves; it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any man should boast Romans
iii. 24, 27. Ephesians. ii, 8, 9.
. According to the doctrine of Paul, a justified sinner, with reference to the
moment preceding his justification, has no more ground to think well of his
personal qualifications, or to applaud his own exertions, relative to that
affair; than his unhappy neighbor has, who is dying under a curse, and sinking
into final ruin. -- But, admitting that any degree of holiness be necessary to
warrant a sinner's dependence on Christ, it must be so to justification through
faith in his blood: because it is in virtue of personal sanctity that he is
qualified for believing; and, consequently, for the imputation of our Lord's
vicarious obedience to him. His own righteousness being thus essentially
necessary, must share in the honor of his justification. Surely, then, whoever
is thus prepared for the benefit of an imputed righteousness, must have, in
comparison with others that are not so qualified, cause of boasting.

For, as Dr. OWEN argues, If we are in any sense justified [by our personal
righteousness] in the sight of God, we have whereof to boast before him. We may
not have so absolutely, and with respect to merit; yet we have so
comparatively, and in respect of others, who cannot make the same plea for
their justification. But all boasting is excluded: and it will not relieve, to
say, That this personal righteousness is of the free grace and gift of God unto
some, and not unto others; for we must plead it as our duty, and not as God's
grace -- Boasting is excluded. Apparent it is from hence, and from what [the
Apostle] affirms concerning Abraham Romans iv. 2.
, that a great part, at least, of the controversy he had about justification,
was, Whether it did admit of any (...), or (...), in those that are justified?
-- Boasting, in our language, is the name of a vice, and is never taken in a
good sense. But (...), or (...), the words used by the Apostle, are of an
indifferent signification; and, as they are applied, may denote a virtue, as
well as a vice. So they do, Heb. iii. 6 See also Romans xv. 17. 1 Cor, i. 31.
Gal. vi. 14. with many other places.
. But always, and in all places, they respect something that is peculiar in, or
unto, whom they are ascribed. Wherever any thing is ascribed unto one, and not
unto another, with respect unto any good end, there is a fundamentum (...), a
foundation for boasting. All this, says the Apostle, in the matter of our
justification, is utterly excluded. But wherever respect is had unto any
condition, or qualification, in one more than another, especially if it be of
works; it gives a ground of boasting, as he affirms, Romans iv. 2. And it
appears, from comparing that Verse with this, [Rom. iii. 27.] that wherever
there is any influence of our own works into our justification, there is a
ground of boasting. But, in evangelical justication, no such boasting in any
kind can be admitted. Wherefore, there is no place for works, in our
justification before God: for if there were, it is impossible but a (...), [
boasting,] in one kind or other, before God or man, must be admitted Doctrine
of Justification, Chap. VI.
. -- I have enlarged the more on this particular, that the reader may perceive
how nearly the principle opposed relates to the doctrine of justification; and
how much this capital doctrine is corrupted by that principle.

Once more: Supposing it necessary for every sinner to possess more, or less,
of true holiness, before he be authorized to believe in Christ; it is hard to
conceive how any one ever can believe in him. This, perhaps, may appear by the
following considerations. Whoever believes in Jesus, relies on him as redeeming
sinners from the curse of the law, and the damnation of hell. No one,
therefore, depends upon him, till convinced of sin, and apprehensive of danger.
Now, as nothing but sin exposes men to present condemnation, and sinal ruin; so
it is that only which renders them filthy, and vile, and worthless. The more
any one, therefore, feels his want of deliverance from the wrath to come; the
more keenly sensible he must be of his complicated guilt, his great baseness,
and his absolute unworthiness, in the fight of God. While, consequently, he is
persuaded, that some degree of holiness is previously necessary to warrant his
reliance on Jesus Christ; he must either labor to reform his life, to amend
his heart, and to obtain some righteousness of his own, as the pedestal on
which to stand when laying hold of Christ, or sink in despair: and, in either
case, he is far from believing on the Son of God. -- Thus, while earnestly
desiring an interest in Christ, and considering himself as destitute of the
requisite holiness, he, as the Prophet speaks, labors in the very fire, and
wearies himself for very vanity. Having such views of himself, and of the
character under which only he is warranted to believe in Jesus; neither the
gospel, with its cheering declarations; nor the Mediator, with his immense
fullness of blessings and of grace, can afford him the least relief; they being
quite out of his reach. Because, till conscious of an holy disposition, or a
pious turn of heart, he neither does, nor can consider himself as one toward
whom the gospel wears a smiling aspect; or as authorized to take the least
encouragement from it. On the hypothesis opposed, therefore, nothing but
embarrassment, and painful disappointment, are likely to attend him. -- But
were he, by strenuous efforts, to obtain a persuasion, that his inclinations
have taken a virtuous turn; that his internal character is greatly improved;
and, under this consideration of himself, to conclude, That now he may believe
in Jesus Christ; what must be thought of his conduct? Why, that he is ignorant
of the gospel; that he is of the works of the law Gal. iii. 10.
; and, that the pains he has taken have produced a good conceit of himself,
rather than prepared him for faith in Jesus Christ. So inimical to solid peace
and real holiness is the sentiment which I oppose, that, according to the
different state of a person's conscience, it has a natural tendency, either to
elevate with selfrighteous pride, or to depress with desponding fear. The
former, if the great evil of sin be not perceived, and the conscience drowsy:
the latter, if the mind be enlightened, and the conscience tender. For, as Dr.
OWEN has well observed, The more spiritual any man is, the more he sees of his
unspiritualness in his spiritual duties On the cxxx Psalm, p. 345.
.

On this hypothesis there is, indeed, no such thing as gospel, or glad tidings,
for any of those whom the Scriptures denominate, sinners -- the ungodly -- the
lost -- those who are in the way to final ruin. Because, according to the
principle against which I plead, all the revealed relief by Jesus Christ, is
directed to those only whose hearts are under an holy hias. But the sacred
Writers are far from pronouncing persons of that character, the ungodly, or the
lost: and they are equally far from teaching, that creatures, possessing any
degree of true sanctity, are in danger of eternal perdition. For it is absurd
to suppose, that our divine Sovereign will ever send holiness to hell: or that
the subjects of truly pious dispositions are in the road to ruin.

Whereas, if we consider the inspired Writings as exhibiting a full, free, and
everlasting salvation, by Jesus Christ, for the chief of sinners; if we
consider the testimony of God concerning his incarnate Son, as a complete
warrant for the most guilty and ungodly to believe in him; there is a revealed
foundation of hope for the vilest of men, even when they have the strongest
conviction of that being their proper character. The word of grace, respecting
the perfect work of Christ, being viewed in this light, is deservedly, and by
way of singular eminence, called, THE GLAD TIDINGS. For, be the wants of a
sinner ever so many, and his unworthiness ever so great, the all sufficient
Jesus is presented to view, as encouraging his immediate dependence, and as
rejecting none that apply to him. Agreeably to which Mr. HERVEY says; Nothing
is requisite, in order to a participation of Christ and his benefits, but a
grant from God Thereon and Aspasio, Vol. II. p. 374. Note Edit. 5th.
. -- It is not under the notion, of being elected to everlasting life; of
possessing any virtuous disposition; of being, by good habits or qualities,
distinguished from other men; of being well humbled for sin; or of being deeply
awakened in conscience, that sinners must first believe in Jesus. No: but as
transgressors; as in a perishing state; and as having nothing to preserve them
from despair, except what the Scripture says concerning Christ, his offices,
and his grace. It is, at least, in this view of the gospel, and of Jesus as
revealed by it, that the writer of these pages either enjoys peace, or expects
felicity.

CHAPTER III. OBJECTIONS ANSWERED.
AGAINST the sentiment for which I plead, and in opposition to the course of my
reasoning, it has been strenuously urged; Repentance includes an holy
disposition, and must precede faith in Christ. -- But, supposing the priority
of repentance to faith were granted, it would infer no valid objection to the
principle here defended: except it were proved, that repentance must precede,
as constituting an essential part of the sinner's warrant to believe in Jesus.
That, however, is not likely to be soon evinced.

In what light, then, is true repentance to be considered? As a change of mind,
or after-thought? This, indeed, seems to be the literal import of the original
word (...): and that, we acknowledge, precedes faith in Jesus Christ. For while
a sinner is either stupidly inattentive to his immortal interests, or expecting
justification by his own obedience, he will not come to Christ. -- As a
conviction of sin, attended with apprehensions of eternal ruin? This also, it
is readily granted, precedes faith in Christ. For, whoever believes in Jesus,
regards him as the only Savior from divine wrath: respecting the danger of
which, a conviction of sin must precede. Nay, we are led, by the language of
Scripture, to consider believing in Christ, as no other than fleeing to the
hope set before us, that we may escape the wrath to come Heb. vi. 18. Matt.
iii. 7.
. That conviction of sin and sense of danger, should not be considered,
however, as inducing God to give, but as inclining us to receive: not as
exciting the Father of mercies to forgive our offenses, or the compassionate
Jesus to justify our persons; but as impelling us to accept the provision which
sovereign grace has made for the entirely destitute. Besides, neither that
change of mind, nor this apprehension of danger, can be justly considered as an
holy disposition: because they respect the state of the intellect, and of the
conscience; not that of the heart. Or, if the heart be affected, it is no
otherwise than as a new turn is given to the operation of self-love: which,
simply and absolutely considered, has no holiness in it.

Must repentance, then, be viewed under the notion of sorrow for sin, and
aversion to it, considered as an opposition to divine authority, and as a
contrariety to divine purity? This, indeed, is that repentance which is
connected with pardon and salvation. But then it may be justly queried, whether
it was ever found in any sinner before he believed in Jesus Christ: as the
following considerations, perhaps, may show.

Repentance, under this notion of it, is manifestly a fruit of sincere esteem
for the dominion of God, and of love to his infinite excellence. Because no one
can be cordially grieved for opposing a government, which he does not esteem;
nor for his past aversion to excellence, which he does not admire. But the
Scriptures will not permit our concluding, that these pious affections are
possessed by sinners, before they receive the truth, and believe in Christ. If
we really love and revere God, it is because he first loved us; because there
is forgiveness with him; because that love, as expressed in the gift of his own
Son, and that forgiveness, through the atonement, have been more or less
revealed to us, in the glad tidings of reconciliation. -- All men, when their
consciences are alarmed, being pained with apprehensions of eternal
destruction, will sorrow for the consequences of sin; but none besides
believers in Jesus mourn over and abhor its intrinsic evil.

Genuine sorrow for sin, and self abasement before God, are closely connected,
in ancient prophecy, with faith in the bleeding Immanuel, and with
reconciliation to our offended Sovereign; rather, they are considered as
effects of that faith and reconciliation. For thus it is written; I will
establish my covenant with thee; and thou shall know that I am the Lord: that
thou may remember, and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any more,
because of thy shame, WHEN I AM PACIFIED TOWARD THEE for all that thou have
done, says the Lord God -- I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace and of supplications: and they
shall LOOK UPON ME whom they have pierced, and they shall MOURN for him, as one
mourns for his only son, and shall be in BITTERNESS for him, as one that is
in bitterness for his first born. To which may be added the following words: I
have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself, thus; Thou have chastised me, and
I was chastised, as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke: turn thou me, and I
shall be turned; for thou art the Lord my God. Surely, AFTER that I was turned,
I repented; and AFTER that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh: I was
ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth
Ezekiel. xvi. 62, 63. Zech. xii. 10. Jer. xxxi. 18, 19.
.

Here we have genuine sorrow for sin, considered as rebellion against Jehovah's
government, and as abhorrent from his purity. Here we behold a remembrance of
past offenses paining the conscience, and shame suffusing the cheeks; confusion
producing silence and grief almost breaking the heart. Whence is it, then, that
inveterate rebels are thus affected, and adamantine hearts thus melted? Not
from denunciations of divine vengeance; nor from apprehensions of endless
perdition: but from knowing, as taught by the Spirit of grace, the import of
that sublime name, JEHOVAH Exodus xxxiv. 5, 6, 7. Isa. xlv. 21.
; from looking to the pierced Messiah; and from God being reconciled to them.
Yes, not only mercy revealed to the guilty, but faith in the divine testimony,
a believing regard to the dying Jesus, and conversion to God, are presented to
view as producing repentance.

That the manifestation of divine benignity toward our apostate species, is
friendly to holy sorrow; and that the exercise of human compassion toward
disaffected neighbors, has a natural tendency to produce reformation, we are
taught by the following remarkable words. The goodness of God leads thee to
repentance -- If thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink:
for in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire on his head Romans ii. 4. xii. 20.
. Are the exercise of divine kindness, in the course of common Providence, and
the puny efforts of human compassion, for the relief of distressed
fellow creatures, adapted to produce repentance and reformation in their
different objects? then, surely, we may conclude, that the boundless benignity
of God, revealed in the gospel of our salvation, must be incomparably better
fitted, to excite an abhorrence of sin, conciliate the affections to God, and
produce a series of holy obedience.

Further: True repentance is the gift of Christ, considered as the ascended
Sovereign and Savior of his church. As it is written, Him has God exalted,
with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance to
Israel, and forgiveness of sins Acts v. 31.
. Repentance and pardon, being here so intimately connected, and both of them
represented as the gifts of Jesus Christ; we are led to conclude, that real
repentance for sin, and faith in the blood of Christ, coexist; that godly
sorrow supposes and includes faith in revealed mercy; and that both of them are
the fruits of sovereign grace.

Dr. OWEN, when speaking of humiliation for sin, expresses himself as follows.
There is a respect in it to the love of God: and this breaks the heart of the
poor returning sinner. Sorrow from the law, shuts itself up in the soul, and
strangleth it. Sorrow from the love of God opens and causes it to flow forth.
Thoughts of sinning against the love of God, managed by the Holy Ghost, what
shall I say? their effects in the heart are not to be expressed -- True
humility consists more in believing, than in being sensible of sin -- Let there
be no mistake: there can be no evangelical sense of sin, and humiliation for
it, where there is not union with Christ. Zech. xii. 10 -- It is the soul's
application to God for forgiveness, and not its sense of sin, that gives unto
God the glory of his grace -- No repentance is acceptable with God, but what is
built, or leans, on the faith of forgiveness -- God expressly declares in the
Scripture, that the forgiveness that is with him, is the foundation of his
prescribing repentance unto man. One instance may suffice, Isa. lv. 7 -- Legal
repentance, which precedes gospel faith, and is without it, is neither a
disposition, preparation, nor condition of our justification On the Hundred and
Thirtieth Psalm, p. 54, 63, 64, 137. ^^0. Doctrine of Justification, Chap. I.
.

Thus Mr. JAMES HERVEY: Repent ye, and believe the gospel. This may be the
meaning of the exhortation. Repent; relinquish all your wrong notions, relating
to the way and manner of finding acceptance with the Deity* Believe the gospel;
which opens a most unexpected avenue, for the communication of this blessing.
Which brings you glad tidings of a salvation, fully procured by the incarnate
God, and freely offered to the unworthy sinner. The word, you know, is (...):
which, in its primary signification, denotes not so much a reformation of
conduct, as a change of sentiment. -- Suppose it to signify a reformation of
conduct; the meaning then may be as follows. Repent; forsake all your vices,
and all your follies; mortify every evil temper, and renounce every evil way.
In order to render this practicable, believe the gospel; wherein a Savior is
preached and displayed. Who makes peace for such offenders; reconciles them to
God; and obtains eternal redemption for them. This will sweetly withdraw your
affections from iniquity, and sweetly attach them to the blessed God. Whereas,
without this powerful expedient, you will never be delivered from the pleasing
witchcraft of your lusts. Sin will always have the dominion over you, so long
as you are under the law, and not under grace. Repentance, thus understood, is
not the condition of obtaining salvation, but the fruit of salvation itself --
I came, not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. Many persons, I
am apt to suspect, mistake the meaning of this sweet passage; and turn the
freely flowing benefits of the gospel, into the rigorous requirements of the
law. They reckon, our Lord's calling to repentance, is like a schoolmaster
calling the youths to their task; or like a householder calling his servants to
their work. Whereas, it is like Joseph, the governor of Egypt, calling his
brethren, each to receive a suit of apparel, and all to partake of his
hospitable banquet. Christ, as a Savior, is the greatest of benefactors. When,
therefore, he calls to repentance, his intention is, not to demand, but to
bestow; not to enjoin, but to impart. He is exalted, says the Apostle, to give
repentance Eleven Letters to Mr. J. WESLEY, p. 114. 115. Thereon and Aspasio,
Vol. III. p. 330, 331. Note, Edit. 5th.
.

Thus Mr. THOMAS BOSTON; The subject of true repentance is a convinced,
believing, soul. An unconvinced sinner cannot be a true penitent; for what the
eye sees not, the heart rues not. Neither can an unbelieving sinner be so; for
without faith the heart may be rent for sin, but not from it -- Faith is the
spring and source of repentance: so that though the graces of faith and
repentance are given together and at once, in respect of time; yet, in the
order of nature, faith goes before repentance, and the acting of faith goes
before the exercise of repentance; and he that would repent, must first believe
in Christ, that he may repent -- Then, it is not gospel doctrine, That Christ
will receive none but true penitents; or that none but such have a warrant to
embrace Christ, by faith -- For sensible sinners to think that they dare not,
and ought not, to believe and embrace Christ, till they be more deeply humbled,
and do more thoroughly repent of their sins and, in a word, be more fit to
receive him: is but a gilded deceit, and a trick of the false heart -- The more
faith, the more repentance; as, the fuller the spring is, the streams run with
the more vigorous current Works, p. 608, 609, 610. Edinb. 1767.
.

It is objected, Though it be not necessary for a sinner to know that he is
born again, before he believe in Jesus Christ; yet regeneration itself must
precede faith. For the heart of a sinner being naturally in a state of enmity
to the divine Character, he will never turn to God, while in that situation,
for pardon and acceptance. -- In answer to which, the following particulars are
proposed for consideration.

Before this objection can be justly considered as valid, it must be evinced,
not only, that regeneration precedes faith; but also that it is necessary to
authorize a sinner's reliance on Jesus Christ, than which, few sentiments are
more foreign from the genuine gospel.

Regeneration must precede faith. This, though assumed as a certain fact, may
be justly doubted: for the page of Inspiration does not warrant our supposing,
that any one is born of God, before he believes in Jesus Christ; or, that
regeneration is effected by the Holy Spirit, without the word of grace. For we
are taught, by the sacred Writers, to consider the word of truth, with regard
to adults, as the mean of regeneration, and of many other happy effects. They
teach, for instance, That it is the instrument of enlightening the mind, of
awakening the conscience, and of softening the heart. The Works, p. 608, 609,
610. Ebinb. 1767.
entrance of thy word gives light -- The word of God is quick and powerful,
and sharper than any two edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of
soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow -- Is not my word like as fire?
says the Lord; and like a hammer, that breaks the rock in pieces Ps. cxix.
130. Heb. iv. 12. Jer. xxiii. 29.
. -- That it is the instrument, or seed, of regeneration. The dead shall hear
the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live -- The words that I
speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life -- In Christ Jesus I have
begotten you through the gospel -- Of his own will begat he us with the word of
truth, that we should be a kind of first fruits of his creatures -- Being born
again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which
lives and abides for ever John v. 25. (Vide LAMPIUM in loc.) John vi. 36. 1
Cor. iv. 15. James i. 18. 1 Pet. i. 23.
. -- That they only, who believe in Christ, are the children of God. As many as
received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them
that believe on his name -- Ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ
Jesus -- Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God John i.
12. Gal. iii. 26, 1 John v. 1.
. -- That it is the mean, in the hand of the Spirit, of conversion, of
sanctification, and of salvation. Of CONVERSION: The law of the Lord is
perfect, converting the soul -- He called you by our gospel, to the obtaining
of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. Of SANCTIFICATION: He that received seed
into the good ground, is he that hears the word, and understands it; which
also bears fruit -- Sanctify them through thy truth: thy word is truth --
That they also might be sanctified through the truth -- Thanks be to God, that
whereas you were the servants of sin, ye have obeyed, from the heart, the model
of doctrine into which ye were delivered -- The new man, which after God is
created in righteousness and holiness of the truth -- Ye have purified your
souls in obeying the truth, through the Spirit. Of SALVATION: The gospel of
Christ -- is the power of God unto salvation, to every one that believes --
The engrafted word, which is able to save your souls Psalm xix. 7. 2 Thessalonians. ii.
14. Matt. xiii. 23. John xvii. 17, 19. Romans vi. 17. (See DODDRIDGE on the
place.) Ephesians. iv. 24. ((...).) 1 Pet. i. 22. Romans i. 16. James i. 17.
.

We are further taught, That the primitive Christians loved one another for the
sake of evangelical truth. The Elder unto the elect lady and her children, whom
I love in the truth: and not I only, but also all they that have known the
truth; for the truth's sake, which dwells in us, and shall be with us for
ever -- The Elder unto the well beloved Gaius, whom I love in the truth. --
That they considered one another as happy, and rejoiced in that happiness, in
proportion as they lived under the influence of divine truth. I rejoiced
greatly that I found of thy children walking in truth -- I rejoiced greatly,
when the brethren came and testified of the truth that is in thee, even as thou
walk in the truth. I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk
in truth -- Demetrius has good report of all men, and of the truth itself 2
John i. 2, 4. 3 John i. 3, 4, 12.
.

Once more: The Apostles frequently describe merely nominal Christians, and
ungodly persons in general, by their not knowing, not loving, or not
possessing, the truth. They received not the love of the truth, that they might
be saved -- That they all might be damned who believed not the truth -- Men of
corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth -- If God, peradventure, will give
them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth -- Ever learning, and never
able to come to the knowledge of the truth -- If we say that we have no sin, we
deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us -- If we say that we have not
sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us -- He that says, I know
him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him 2 Thessalonians. ii. 10 12. 1 Timothy vi. 5. 2 Timothy ii. 25. iii. 7. 1 John i. 8, 10. ii. 4.
.

Such is the language of Inspiration, relative to the high importance of
revealed truth, in the great plan of salvation by Jesus Christ! Hence it
appears, that few things are more evidently contained, or more strongly
asserted in Scripture, than the instrumentality of divine truth in the
regeneration of sinners. It is there described as the honored mean, as the
seed of God 1 Pet. i. 23, 24, 25. 1 John iii. 9.
, by which the Holy Spirit effects the regeneration, the sanctification, and
the consolation of those that are saved. But it is impossible for us to
conceive of the mind being enlightened, of the conscience being relieved, of
the will being regulated, and of the affections being purified, by the word of
truth, any further than it is believed. -- I conclude, therefore, that
regeneration is not, in order of time, previous to faith in Christ.
Consequently, as they are the ungodly whom the Spirit regenerates by the truth,
so persons of that character are warranted to believe in Jesus.

It is not requisite for a sinner to KNOW that he is born again, before he
believe in Jesus Christ. But, if it be a fact, that regeneration itself is
previously necessary to faith in Christ; whoever is persuaded of that fact, and
ardently concerned about his eternal happiness, cannot forbear to investigate
the state of his own soul, respecting regeneration, with much the same
solicitude as if he considered being born again, under the notion of his
warrant to rely on Jesus Christ: and thus his conscience must unavoidably be
embarrassed, respecting his permission to believe, until he become persuaded of
his regeneration. Nay, on supposition that the heart must be renewed, previous
to believing the gospel, and to any degree of dependence upon the atonement; it
seems as if sinners ought always to inquire into the state of their own hearts,
and (...) have evidence of their being renewed by divine influence, before they
can, without presumption, expect the least benefit from Jesus Christ. -- I
said, without presumption. For, according to the sentiment here opposed, it
would be presumption -- it would argue a criminal forwardness, in any one to
rely on Christ for acceptance with God, before he perceived the marks of
regeneration attending his tempers and conduct. -- It is readily granted, that
the hearts of sinners are, by nature, strongly disaffected to the divine
Character; and that, while under the power of this enmity, they are far from
God. But the energy of the Spirit applying the word of reconciliation to their
hearts, the truth is believed, and their enmity subdued, in the same instant.
According to that saying, Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you
free -- free, from guilt on your consciences, and from reigning enmity in your
hearts.

Still further to prove and illustrate the instrumentality of divine truth, in
the regeneration and sanctification of sinners, the following quotations are
pertinent. Thus Mr. CHARNOCK: We are new-created by the Spirit of God infusing
faith into us -- Faith is of absolute necessity to regeneration -- The gospel
is the instrument whereby God brings the soul forth in a new birth. The
scripture does distinguish the efficient and instrumental cause, by the
prepositions (...), or (...), and (...). When we are said to be born of the
Spirit, it is (John iii. 5.) (...), (1 John iii. 9.) (...); (1 John v. 1.)
never (...), or (...): but we are no where said to be born OF the word, or
begotten of the word; but (...), by, or with, the word, (1 Pet i. 23.) and
(...), (1 Cor. iv. 15.) I have begotten you through the gospel. The preposition
(...), or (...), usually denotes the efficient, or material cause; (...), the
instrument, or means, by which a thing is wrought. Sin entered into the heart
of Eve by the word of the devil; grace enters into the heart by the word of
God. That entered by a word of error; this by a word of truth. Ye are clean
through the word I have spoken to you: (John xv. 3.) whereby our Savior means
the word outwardly preached by him; for it was the word spoken by him. Not that
it had this efficacy of itself, but as an instrument of their sanctification,
rendering them ready to every good work. The holiness therefore which it
begets, is called the holiness of truth: (Ephesians. iv. 24.) opposed to the (...),
lusts of deceit, Verse the twenty-second. Lusts grow up from error and deceit;
and holiness of the new man grows up from truth -- If the Spirit quicken, [or
excite spiritual diligence,] it is by some gospel precept; if it comforts, it
is by some gospel promise; if it startles, it is by some threatening in the
word: whatsoever working there is in a Christian's heart, it is by some word
dropping upon it -- The Spirit makes the word, not only the fire to kindle the
soul, but the bellows to blow: it is first life, then liveliness to the soul.
It is through the word he begets us, and through the word he quickens us: Thy
word has quickened me. It is by the word God gathers a church in the world; by
the same word he sanctifies it to greater degrees. (Ephesians. v. 26.) It is the seed
whereby we are born; the dew whereby we are refreshed. As it is the seed of our
birth, so it is the milk of our growth, 1 Pet. ii. 2. Works, Vol, II. p. 43,
509, 155, 158. Edit. 2d.
.

Thus Dr. OWEN: This [regeneration] is wrought by the word. 1 Pet. i. 23. We
are born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of
God. Wherein, not only the thing itself, of our regeneration by the word, but
the manner of it also, is declared. It is by the collation of a new spiritual
life upon us, whereof the word is the seed. As every life proceeds from some
seed, that has in itself virtually the whole life to be educed from it, by
natural ways and means; so the word in the hearts of men, is turned into a
vital principle, that, cherished by suitable means, puts forth vital acts and
operations. By this means we are born of God, and quickened, who by nature, are
children of wrath; dead in trespasses and sins. So Paul tells the Corinthians,
that he had begotten them, in Jesus Christ, by the gospel -- It is the
instrument of God for this end; and mighty and powerful, through God, it is for
the accomplishment of it On Heb. ii. 2, 3, 4. p. 178.
.

The same excellent Author, when speaking of sanctification by the truth, says:
There is a great answerableness and correspondency, between the heart of a
believer, and the truth that he does believe. As the word, is in the gospel, so
is grace in the heart: yea, they are the same thing variously expressed. (Romans
vi. 17.) You have obeyed from the heart, (...), the form of doctrine delivered
unto you. As our Translation does not, so I know not how, in so few words, to
express that which is emphatically here insinuated by the Holy Ghost. The
meaning is, that the doctrine of the gospel begets the form, figure, image, or
likeness of itself, in the hearts of them that believe. So they are cast into
the mould of it. As is the one, so is the other. The principle of grace in the
heart, and that in the word, are as children of the same parent, completely
resembling and representing one another. Grace is a living word, and the word
is figured, limned grace. As is regeneration, so is a regenerate heart: as is
the doctrine of faith, so is a believer. And this gives great evidence unto,
and assurance of the things believed -- First, the truth is in Jesus: then it
is expressed in the word. This word, learned and believed, becomes grace in the
heart, every way answering unto the Lord Christ his image, from whom this
transforming truth did thus proceed. Nay, this is carried by the Apostle yet
higher, namely, unto God the Father himself, whose image Christ is, and
believers his, through the word, 2 Cor. iii. 18. iv. 6 -- Regeneration does
not, in order of time, precede the soul's interest in the forgiveness that is
with God, or its being made partaker of the pardon of sin. I say no more but
that it does not precede it in order of time; not determining which has
precedence in order of nature. That, I confess, which the method of the gospel
leads unto, is, That absolution, acquitment, or the pardon of sin, is the
foundation of the communication of all saving grace unto the soul; and so
precedeth all grace in the sinner whatever -- It is hence evident, that an
assurance of being regenerate, is no way previously necessary unto the
believing of an interest in forgiveness; so that although a man have not the
former, it is, or may be, his duty to endeavor the latter. When convinced
persons cried out, What shall we do to be saved? the answer was, Believe, and
and you shall be so. Believe in Christ, and in the remission of sin by his
blood, is the first thing that convinced sinners are called unto. They are not
directed first to secure their souls that they are born again, and then
afterward to believe. But they are first to believe, that the remission of sin
is tendered to them in the blood of Christ; and that by him they may be
justified from all things, from which they could not be justified by the law.
Nor, upon this proposition, is it the duty of men to question whether they have
faith, or no, but actually to believe; and faith, in its operation, will
evidence itself. See Acts xiii. 38, 39 On the Hundred and Thirtieth Psalm, p.
160, 161, 339, 340.
.

Again, he says: The whole matter of sanctification and holiness is peculiarly
joined with, and limited unto, the doctrine, truth, and grace of the gospel:
for holiness is nothing, but the implanting, writing, and realising of the
gospel in our souls. Hence it is termed (...), (Ephesians. iv. 24.) The holiness of
truth; which the truth of the gospel ingenerates, and which consists in a
conformity thereunto: and the gospel itself is (...), (Tit. i. 1.) The truth
which is according to godliness; which declares that godliness and holiness
which God requires. The prayer also of our Savior, for our sanctification, is
conformed thereunto, (John xvii. 17.) Sanctify them in (or by) thy truth; thy
word is truth: and he sanctified himself for us, to be a sacrifice, that we
might be sanctified in the truth. This alone is that truth which makes us free;
(John viii. 12.) that is, from sin and the law, unto righteousness in holiness.
It belongs neither to nature, nor the law, so as to proceed from them, or to be
effected by them -- There neither is, nor ever was in the world, nor ever shall
be, the least dram of holiness, but what, flowing from Jesus Christ, is
communicated by the Spirit, according to the truth and promise of the gospel.
There may be something like it, as to its outward acts and effects, (at least,
some of them;) something that may wear its livery in the world, that is but the
fruit of men's own endeavors, in compliance with their convictions; but
holiness it is not, nor of the same kind or nature with it Discourse concerning
the Holy Spirit, B. IV. Chap, i. 8. See Mr. T. SCOTT's Essays on the most
Important Subjects in Religion, p. 21.
.

Respecting the word of truth as the instrument of regeneration, it has, to the
following purpose, been objected: They who consider divine truth as the mean of
regeneration must grant, that it is by the Holy Spirit the word is introduced
into the mind, in order to its having such an effect -- That some operation of
the Spirit on the understanding takes place, in order so to change it, as to
receive the word -- And, that this operation precedes the entrance of light
into the mind. Consequently, that the change by which the mind is prepared to
receive the light, is not effected by means of the word: and yet, in that very
change men are born of the Spirit Mr. S. HOPKINS's Two Discourses, p. 112, 113.
.

According to this view of the subject, the word of truth, having no influence,
is of no use, in the work of regeneration; the salutary and important change
being produced entirely without it. Either, therefore, by those expressions,
born again, the objector must intend something very different from what is
meant by them in Scripture; or he is not far from contradicting the express
determination of inspired Writers: as appears by various passages already
adduced -- To imagine that a preparation of the mind, merely to receive the
truth, is a change so great as to answer those emphatical expressions,
regeneration, born again, born of the Spirit, born of God, and a new heart; is,
I think, very unwarrantable. Because, on that supposition, the change denoted
by being born of the Spirit, takes place merely in the intellect, or thinking
faculty; not at all in the will, or the heart. But, whatever light any person
may have in his mind, the Scriptures never teach us to consider him as born of
the Spirit, except his heart be renewed, so as to love God and approve of his
ways. Nay, the Author himself confirms my assertion, by elsewhere saying; This
regeneration of which I am speaking consists in a change of the will, or heart
-- I have good grounds to assert, that in regeneration the will, or heart is
the immediate subject of the divine operation, and so of the moral change that
is effected thereby Page 57, 58.
. Though I -- understand all mysteries, and all knowledge, -- and have not
love, I am nothing. The glorious God, however, is not loved by apostate
creatures, unless as revealed in Jesus Christ, and by the gospel.

It is too hastily assumed, that the mind is prepared to receive the light of
spiritual knowledge, previous to the truth having any influence upon it. For,
may not the Holy Spirit, without any antecedent operation, apply divine truth,
or the sense and meaning of the word; so as to enlighten the understanding,
impress the conscience, and affect the heart? May not that omnipotent Agent,
without any previous preparation, attend his own word with such energy, as to
irradiate the mind, subdue the will, and give a new turn to the whole soul?
Nay, do not the scriptural passages already produced, naturally lead us to
conclude, that this, with regard to regeneration, is a fact? If there be not an
aptitude in the word of truth, as an instrument in the hand of God, to produce
this great moral change, why is that word compared to light, called a two-edged
sword, and represented as giving life? When the Apostle says, I had not known
sin but BY the law; and, the law works wrath Romans vii. 7. iv. 15.
; does he not intend to inform us, that the divine precepts, and their awful
sanction, are means by which the Holy Spirit convinces of sin, and alarms the
conscience? So, when David says, Thy word has quickened me; and when our Lord
prays, Sanctify them through thy truth Psalm cxix. 50. John xvii. 17, 19.
; must we not consider them as teaching, that the word of grace is the mean of
producing comfort, and of promoting holiness? When Paul speaks of life and
immortality being brought to light by ((...)) the gospel; and of Gentiles being
made partakers of the promise in Christ by the gospel 2 Timothy i. 10. Ephesians. iii. 6.
; does he not intend to represent the doctrine of redemption by Jesus Christ,
as the great mean by which that light, and this promise, came to be enjoyed by
us? Why, then, should we affix a different sense to similar language,
respecting the work of regeneration, in the texts before adduced, from the
writings of Paul, of James, and of Peter? Why, when the word of truth, or the
gospel of divine grace, is represented as that by which sinners are born again
-- as the very seed of regeneration -- should the words receive a qualified
interpretation; so as to mean something, which the Author to whom I advert does
not consider as regeneration, properly so called? -- To be OF the truth; TO be
OF faith; and to be OF God John xviii. 37. 1 John iii. 19. Gal. iii. 9. John
viii. 47. 1 John iii. 10. iv. 3, 6. v. 19. 3 John 11.
; are various forms of expression, to exhibit the same spiritual character in
different points of light. Is any one represented as OF GOD? he is to be viewed
as born of the Spirit. Is he said to be OF faith? we must regard him as
believing in Jesus. Is he described as OF the truth? we must consider him as
having received the gospel, and as living under its influence. But, according
to the objection under our notice, a person may be OF God, yet neither be OF
faith, nor OF the truth.

Besides, for an awakened sinner to be persuaded, that regeneration is prior to
faith in Jesus, and that it is effected without the instrumentality of divine
truth; is adapted to give an injurious direction to his prayers and his
expectations, respecting that affair. The former: because if he pray agreeably
to that idea, it will be for something under the notion of regeneration, in
which the knowledge of Christ, and a regard to his atonement, have no concern.
Consequently, for something which leaves him at a distance from wisdom, and
from happiness. -- The latter: because, neglecting the testimony of God
concerning Jesus, he will be ready to look for some secret, and enthusiastical
impulse, to produce the important change. Two evils, these, of no small
consequence, in whomsoever they are found.

Once more: This Author himself, I think, must admit, that Satan laid the
foundation of his kingdom among men, by the use of language replete with
infernal falsehood. But, if so, it cannot be absurd to maintain, that the
spiritual dominion of Christ, in the hearts of sinners, commences under the
salutary operation of divine truth. If the father of lies, by words of deceit,
without any previous physical influence on the mental powers, polluted the
imagination, obscured the understanding, and corrupted the heart of Eve, when
in her primitive state, and under a strong bias to obedience; which, I presume,
this Writer will acknowledge: why should he deny, that the Holy Spirit, by the
word of truth, without any preparatory agency on the soul, enlightens the mind,
impresses the conscience, and gives a new turn to the heart, of one that is
dead in sin?

That our first parents, in their innocent state, were under a powerful
predilection for whatever was morally right, must be allowed; except we deny
their being created in a state of complete rectitude: and that no divine agency
upon their minds, or their will, was employed to produce a compliance with
Satan's temptation, must be granted; unless the Most Holy be impiously
considered as the author of sin. The propensities of their nature, therefore,
in favor of communion with God, and of obedience to him, we may justly
conclude, were not less powerful than those in the hearts of their degenerate
offspring are, to objects quite the reverse. Consequently, as the first
inclination to evil, in the human heart, when perfectly pure, was produced,
without any previous physical influence, by the lie of Satan; we are led, by
analogy, equally as by the language of Scripture, to consider the first holy
tendency, in a heart that is totally corrupt, as produced by the truth of God,
without any preparatory agency.

This argument from analogy is the more observable, as it arises from the only
fact of the kind, that ever did, or ever will take place among men. It may be
rendered more conclusive, however, by remarking, that though the Scriptures
teach us to consider depravity as first produced in the holy hearts of our
paradisiacal progenitors, merely by the operation of Satan's falsehood; yet the
same infallible Writings lead us to conclude, that evangelical truth is only
the mean of renewing depraved hearts, or of turning them to God. Were it
demonstrated, therefore, that the vigor of holy tendencies, in the pure nature
of our original parents, was much less than that of depravity, in the hearts of
their posterity; we might, nevertheless, adopt a principal of reasoning
repeatedly employed in the writings of Paul, and say: If the language of
deceit, from the lying lips of Satan, without any previous influence, was
capable of corrupting an holy heart, and of producing actual disobedience; much
more Romans v. 9, 10, 15, 17. Heb. ix. 13, 14.
is divine truth, in the hand of the Sacred Spirit, able to renew depraved
hearts, and to produce a course of obedience.

The Author to whom I refer, still further objects; There must be knowledge and
approbation of the divine character and law, and a sight and sense of the ill
desert of sin, before there can be any true knowledge of the Mediator and faith
in him -- It is certain to a demonstration, that they who are not heartily
reconciled to God and his law; and do not hate sin, or abhor themselves for it,
do not know, and are not reconciled to the grace of God through Christ: nor can
they attain to the latter, if not first brought to the former; but will remain
eternally enemies to both Mr. HOPKINS's Two Discourses* p. 24, 25. Note.
. -- Here we have, if I mistake not, various ungarded assertions, which corrupt
the gospel, and have a pernicious tendency.

There must be knowledge of the divine character, before there can be any true
knowledge of the Mediator. But whence is that knowledge of the divine character
to be derived? From the glad tidings of salvation? That is contrary to the
principle on which this Author manifestly here proceeds. For, according to his
theology, the divine character must be known and approved, before the gospel be
either known or understood -- before we have the least spiritual acquaintance
with Jesus, or any dependence on his atoning death, for pardon and peace. This,
however, is apparently contrary to the following divine declarations. No man
knows the Son, but the Father; neither knows any man the Father, save the
Son, and he to whom the Son WILL REVEAL HIM -- The only begotten Son, who is in
the bosom of the Father, HE HAS DECLARED HIM -- To give the knowledge of the
glory of God, IN THE FACE OF JESUS CHRIST -- We all, in an unveiled face (...).
, beholding as in a glass THE GLORY OF THE LORD, are changed into the same
image Matt. xi. 27. John i. 18. 2 Cor. iv. 6. 2 Cor. iii. 18.
. These infallible sayings plainly denote, that the divinecharacter neither is,
nor can be known by us, except as revealed in the Person and work of our great
Mediator. But, were the position on which I animadvert founded in fact, we
should have little occasion for the glad tidings of salvation, and the death of
Jesus, in order to learn the true character of God.

Whence, then, if not from the doctrine of redemption, is the knowledge under
consideration to be derived? Not, surely, from the works of creation, and of
common Providence. For then, with the ancient Heathens, we must seek the Lord,
if happily we may feel after him, like men groping in darkness, that we may find
him Acts xvii. 27.
. -- Or, must sinners, by studying the absolute purity, the extensive demands,
and the tremendous curse of Jehovah's law, become acquainted with the divine
character? This, indeed, seems to be our Author's meaning: and it is readily
granted, that the true nature of the law being well understood, furnishes, in
certain respects, a knowledge of the divine character. For, by that system of
moral duty, and its penal sanction, we are informed of the absolute dominion,
the flaming purity, and the punishing justice of God. These, however,
constitute only a part of his character: and we must either know more of his
peerless excellence, and supreme perfection, than the law reveals, or have
neither confidence in him, nor peace of conscience -- neither hope, nor
holiness.

The character of God which must be known, in order to our present
sanctification and future happiness, reveals much more of his eternal
excellence than is displayed in the moral precepts, and in their awful
sanction. For they who are not acquainted with this character, except so far as
the violated law has taught them; have no more knowledge of it than Adam had,
immediately after his first offense, and before divine mercy was revealed. Our
original father, at that unhappy moment, knew enough of his Maker's character
to fill him with terror, and to drive him from the divine presence; but nothing
at all that excited esteem or veneration, confidence or love; nor yet
repentance, or genuine sorrow for sin, and self-abasement before his affronted
Sovereign. For we find that he, and his partner in disobedience, were
thoroughly disposed, had it been in their power, to have exculpated themselves,
by charging the blame upon others. The woman whom thou gave to be with me,
she gave me of the tree -- The serpent beguiled me -- were their pleas; without
any confession of guilt, or any petition for pardon. Having no knowledge of the
divine character, besides that which suited the law of their creation, and
their state of innocence, they could have no hope, till mercy was revealed:
and, among sinners, where there is no hope, there is no holiness -- no
abhorrence of sin, as to its intrinsic evil; nor any genuine self-abasement
before God. For, a sense of religion, without hope, is a state of phrenzy and
distraction; void of all inducements to love and obedience Bp. SHERLOCK's Use
and Intent of Prophecy, p. 69. London, 1726.
.

It is in virtue of evangelical truth, of gracious promises, and of hope, that
the hearts of sinners are sanctified. For thus it is written; Ye have PURIFIED
your souls in obeying THE TRUTH, through the Spirit -- Whereby are given unto
us exceeding great and precious promises: that BY THESE ye might be partakers
of the divine nature -- Having THESE PROMISES, dearly beloved, let us cleanse
ourselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the
fear of God -- We shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is: and every
man that has this HOPE in him, PURIFIETH HIMSELF, even as he is pure 1 Peter.
i. 22. 2 Pet i. iv. 2 Cor. vii. 1. 1 John. iii. 2, 3.
-- Does the most holy bestow any measure of sanctifying influence on depraved
creatures? it is because there is forgiveness with him, and as the God of
peace. For thus the Apostle prays; The very God of peace, or the God of peace
himself, sanctify you wholly 1 Thessalonians. v. 23.
. But, under that amiable character, he does not appear, except as in Christ,
and as reconciling the world unto himself 2 Cor. v. 19.
. -- We may safely conclude, therefore, that he whose knowledge of the divine
character is derived merely from the law, knows little more of the glorious God
than may be learned from what is denominated, Natural Religion; and is far from
having, either that profound respect for him, of which this Author speaks, or
any degree of confidence in him. We are assured, however, that confidence in
God is connected with a knowledge of his character. For thus it is written;
They that know thy Name will put their trust in thee Psalm ix. 10.
.

In what manner, then, is the character of God represented by the pen of
Infallibility, so as to exhibit encouragement for sinners to trust in him? Thus
THE ETERNAL proclaims his most sublime Name, and explains its comprehensive
import: JEHOVAH passed by before him, and proclaimed, JEHOVAH, JEHOVAH, GOD,
merciful and gracious, long-suffering and abundant in goodness and truth;
keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin,
and that will by no means clear the guilty Exodus xxxiv. 6, 7. See Chap. xxxiii.
18, 19.
. Here the Most High appears, as it were, in person, professedly to publish the
import of his own most glorious Name; that Name, for the sake of which he
pardons offenses, and performs his promises; that Name, for the honor of which
he dispenses the richest blessings on his chosen people, and inflicts the most
awful punishments on his hardened enemies Psalm xxv. 11. xxxi. 3. lxxix. 9.
cix. 21. ^lxiii. 11. Isaiah xlviii. 9, 11. Ezekiel. xxxvi. 21. Numb. xiv. 17, 18.
Psalm cxv. 1. Ezekiel. xxxvi. 22, 23. Joshua vii. 9. Ezekiel. xx. 9.
. -- Again, the King Eternal says, There is no God else besides me; A JUST GOD
AND A SAVIOR; there is none besides me. Look unto Me, and be ye saved, all the
ends of the earth Isaiah xlv. 21, 22.
. Now, in these ancient oracles, which expressly declare the divine character,
that character appears to be as rich with sovereign grace, as it is bright with
eternal holiness; and as alluring with pardoning mercy as it is tremendous with
punishing justice. But where, except in the cross of Christ, are the grace and
holiness, the mercy and justice of God, united and realised, according to the
venerable import of these characters? Or how, except by the doctrine of
redemption, shall we behold the cross of Christ, as exhibiting the divine
character? Such, however, is that Name, by which the Great Invisible will be
known by all his people: under which Name, he will be trusted and loved, adored
and obeyed.

The following declarations also, enter deeply into the divine character, as
revealed to the ancient Jewish church. Thou art a God of pardons; gracious and
merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness -- There is forgiveness with
Thee that thou may be feared: and it is with a direct view to the divine
character as thus described, that the people of God are heard, in a transport
of joy, to exclaim; Who is a God like unto Thee, that pardons iniquity, and
passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retains not
his anger for ever, because he DELIGHTS in mercy Nehem. ix. 17. (Margin).
Psalm cxxx. 4. Micah. vii. 18.
. -- Thus is the infinite God characterised in the Old Testament: nor can we
suppose that his essential goodness, and pardoning mercy, are less conspicuous
in the New. No: there he is characterised, The Father of mercies -- the God of
all grace -- the God of love -- the God of hope -- and the God of peace 2 Cor.
i. 3. Romans xvi. 20. Heb. xiii. 20. 1 Pet. v. 10. 2 Cor. xiii. 11. Romans xv. 13.
. Nay, the disciple whom Jesus loved, gives the divine character in two single
words. To denote the glory of supreme holiness, he says, God is LIGHT: and,
most emphatically to express the infinitude of divine goodness, he says, once
and again, God is LOVE 1 John i. 5. iv. 8, 16.
. In each of these delightful and comprehensive sayings, the Apostle has a
direct regard to those discoveries which the Eternal has made of himself in the
work of redemption by Jesus Christ. -- God is LIGHT; God is LOVE. These two
ideas united, constitute a character supremely beautiful, and supremely
venerable -- a character, which encourages confidence, excites hope, and
commands reverence. This character expresses, in the most sublime and concise
manner, the import of those ancient oracles already produced, from the writings
of Moses, and of Isaiah. They that know God, as thus revealed, will put their
trust in him.

Sinners must approve the divine character -- must be heartily reconciled to
God and his law; before they can be reconciled to the grace of God through
Christ. But, if they be so reconciled, previous to believing in Jesus, and to a
view of revealed mercy, it should seem as if they had not much occasion for
either faith, or grace, or Christ. Because it must be admitted, that persons of
such piety are already accepted of God, bear his image, and are in the way to
heaven. A small degree of assistance from Christ, and from grace, may be
necessary, perhaps, to expedite their progress in the heavenly road; on which,
without regarding sovereign mercy and atoning blood, they have so happily
entered; and to render them a little more comfortable under the afflictions
with which they meet. But, certainly, as they already approve the divine
character, and have made such advances in sanctification; they cannot believe
in Christ as justifying the ungodly, nor consider themselves as entirely
unworthy. Because, on a comparison with unregenerate persons, who have always
constituted a vast majority of mankind, their moral worth is very great. For
they who approve the divine character, and are heartily reconciled to God and
his law, must be viewed by all the world, as the cordial friends, and the
willing servants of God. -- On the principles of this Author, therefore, we may
safely assert, that their hearts are holy, their character honorable, and
their state secure, without any dependence on sovereign grace, and without
believing in the great Mediator: so that they are actually in the way to
heaven, without regarding either grace, or Christ. Eternal election does not
more firmly ascertain the future holiness of its objects, than being ' heartily
reconciled to God in his law,' secures the everlasting felicity of all those to
whom that character belongs, Because, being so reconciled, they are in
possession of that holiness, without which, no one shall see the Lord: and,
consequently, in a state of preparation for the heavenly world. There is not,
there cannot be any more danger of God abandoning those to everlasting
perdition, who are become his cordial friends; than there is of his reversing
the decree of election. Are multitudes of our species under a divine curse? it
is as rebels against God, as habitually disapproving of his character, and as
disaffected to his law. Are numbers consigned over to final ruin? it is as
enemies to God, as hating his character, and as averse to his government. For,
as a certain writer says, Nothing that loves God can perish.

Nor, on our Author's principles, is it only in a future state, that the
characters under consideration are sure of blessedness. For, previous to any
reliance, either on divine grace, or on Jesus Christ; and even before they are
permitted to rely on the one or the other; they must have a considerable degree
of true happiness. Because it seems impossible for any reasonable creature to
be really miserable, wherever he exist, while he approves the divine character,
and is heartily reconciled to God and his law. For such an one voluntarily
sanctifies the name, the perfection, the government of God Lev. x. 3. Isa.
viii. 13. xxix. 23. 1 Pet. iii. 15.
. He sincerely unites with saints on earth, and with angels in heaven, in
loving and adoring the Supreme. As a sincere approbation of the character and
government of God is, in every stage of our existence, essential to human
happiness; and as, wherever, in the wide creation, such an holy approbation is
more or less wanting, there is a proportional degree of guilt and misery; so
happiness is, by divine constitution, attached to that approbation, and must
attend the person who 'is heartily reconciled to God and his law.' -- Nor is
this the language of mere theory: for every believer knows by experience, that,
whatever his afflictions and trials may be, he always feels himself happy, when
conscious of his being heartily reconciled to God and his law. While that is
the case, he imitates our Perfect Pattern; and his language is, Not my will,
but thine be done. But the supposition of any one so approving the divine
character, being so reconciled to the government of God, and sanctifying the
Lord God in his heart, before he believes the gracious gospel, or depends on
Jesus Christ, is an opinion absolutely unfounded.

The reason of an holy disposition, or a virtuous turn of heart, being
requisite, previous to faith in Jesus Christ, is thus expressed. The necessity
of the sinner's exercising virtue, antecedent to his justification, and in
order to it, is not because he needs any worthiness of his own, or can have
any; but because by this alone can his heart be so united to the Mediator, as
to be the proper ground of his being looked upon and treated as so far One with
him, as that his merit and righteousness may be properly imputed to him, or
reckoned in his favor, so as to avail for his pardon and justification Mr. S.
HOPKINS's Two Discourses, p. 32, 33. Note.
.

That the principle which I oppose has a natural tendency to feed
self-righteous hope, in the heart of a formalist, and to harrass the awakened
sinner with desponding fear, has been already observed. This pernicious
tendency principally arises, from its corrupting the doctrine of justification
before God. For, under the influence of this anti-evangelical sentiment, our
Author very plainly maintains, That something besides the righteousness of
Christ, as revealed in the gospel, and freely imputed to him that believes, is
absolutely necessary to justification. That something, he tells us, is virtue,
and the exercise of it -- to an eminent degree; as we have seen under the last
objection. This virtue he expressly pronounces necessary, antecedent, and in
order to justification. But if so, the Most High does not, as Paul represents
him, justify the ungodly Romans iv. ^.
. No: it is the sinner as become truly virtuous, or as possessed of moral
worth. -- In strong contradiction to himself, however, this Writer says; Not
that the sinner ' needs any worthiness of his own, or can have any.' But, is
nothing to be called worthiness, which does not enable a man to claim
acceptance with God, as a legal debt? Or is he ashamed of the term worthiness,
while he retains the thing? For what is the exercise of virtue? what is an
approbation of the divine character? what is an hearty reconciliation to God
and his law, but moral worthiness? Whatever our Author may think or say of
these things, the generality of others, I doubt not, will consider them as
exceedingly amiable, as morally excellent, as worthy the greatest saint, and as
highly approved by the Most Holy. -- While this Author utterly renounces the
doctrine of Roman Catholics, respecting the merit of condignity Two Discourses,
p. 30, 31. Note.
; he seems to approve their notion of merit, with regard to congruity. That
notion, however, was held in detestation by our old Protestant writers, both
Lutherans and Calvinists, as inimical to the doctrine of Scripture; and is
deservedly exploded by the Thirteenth Article of the Church of England.

It is ONLY by the exercise of this virtue, that the heart of a sinner can be
so united to Christ, as to be the ground of his righteousness being imputed,
for pardon and justification. The only ground, then, on which our Lord's
obedience can be imputed to sinners, is, -- not their having been chosen in
him, before the foundation of the world; not his relation to them, under the
character of a substitute; nor the vicarious nature of his perfect work; but,
their own virtue, their excellent moral qualities, or the goodness of their own
hearts in cleaving to Jesus Christ! Yes, they having the virtue to esteem
Christ, God has the benignity to love them. But, as their virtue is not quite
complete, he, to manifest his delight in virtue, and to supply its
imperfections, grants them the benefit of our Lord's imputed righteousness.
Thus our own obedience becomes a pedestal, on which the righteousness of Christ
may stand exalted; and whence, having such an excellent basis, it appears to
great advantage! For, according to this dogma, it is by the cooperation of
human worthiness, and of divine grace, that sinners obtain both pardon and
justification.

Never, to the best of my recollection, did I meet with a more palpable
corruption of that capital article, Justification before God, by any writer who
did not explode the doctrine of imputed righteousness, than that in the words
to which I refer! The doctrine of our Author, in this respect, is indeed too
nearly akin to that of the Schoolmen, and of the council of Trent. For thus Dr.
OWEN, relative to the Popish doctrine of acceptance with God. This [first]
justification, they say, is by faith; the obedience and satisfaction of Christ
being the only meritorious cause thereof. Only they dispute many things about
preparations for it, and dispositions unto it. Under those terms the council of
Trent included the doctrine of the Schoolmen about meritum de congruo Doctrine
of Justification, Chap. V. Vide CHEMNITIUM, Exam. Council. Trident. p. 156.
. -- Thus, also, Mr. JAMES HERVEY, when addressing Mr. J. WESLEY: What can be
meant by, Christ shall profit you nothing, if ye be circumcised? If ye make
circumcision, or any thing whatever, besides the righteousness of Christ,
necessary to your acceptance with God, ye shall receive no advantage from all
that the Redeemer has done and suffered. This is to halt between works and
grace, between Christ and self: and such divided regards, he will interpret as
an affront, rather than an acceptable homage* Indeed, this is, in Christians,
the grand apostasy. By this they deny the sufficiency of their Savior's most
consummate righteousness -- and must expect no salvation, but by doing the
whole law. -- If any one say, that man is justified only by the imputation of
Christ's righteousness, or only by the remission of sins, WITHOUT THE
COOPERATION OF INHERENT GRACE AND HOLY LOVE, let him be accursed. Thus
dogmatizes, and thus anathematizes, that Mother of falsehoods, [the Church of
Rome, in the Council of Trent.] Choose now your side. For my part, I renounce
and abjure the proud and iniquitous decree. If you persist in your present
opinion, there will be an apparent harmony between yourself and Rome, but an
essential difference between yourself and Aspasio Eleven Letters to Mr. J.
WESLEY, p. 62, 256.
.

The necessity of the sinner's exercising virtue, ANTECEDENT to his
justification, and IN ORDER to it; and so on. How contrary this to the language
of Inspiration, relative to a sinner's acceptance with God! of which the
following passages are a specimen. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with
himself: God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are -- The Publican,
standing afar off, would not lift up so much as his eyes to heaven, but smote
upon his breast, saying, God be merciful to ME A SINNER. I tell you this man
went down to his house justified rather than the other. For every one that
exalts himself, by pleading his own virtuous exercises, shall be abased; and
he who humbles himself, by sincerely confessing that he is absolutely
unworthy, and by casting himself at the feet of sovereign mercy, shall be
exalted -- I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ; -- for therein is the
righteousness of God revealed, not from one exercise of virtue to another, but
from faith to faith -- The righteousness of God without the law, which requires
the exercise of virtue, is manifested -- even the righteousness of God; 'which
is,' not by virtue, but by faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all them
that believe -- Being justified, not as exercising virtue, but FREELY by his
GRACE -- That he might be just, and the justifier, not of him that is virtuous,
but 'of him that believes in Jesus,' all sinful as he is. Where is boasting
then? It is excluded. By what law? of works, or virtue? Nay, but by the law, or
doctrine of faith. Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified without the
deeds of the law, or the exercise of virtue -- If Abraham was justified by
works, or through the cooperation of his own virtuous exercises, he has whereof
to glory; but not before God. For what says the Scripture? Abraham believed
God, and it was counted to him for righteousness. Now to him that works, in
the exercise of moral virtue, is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt.
But to him that works not, nor is distinguished by virtuous exercises; but
believes on him that justifies the UNGODLY, and therefore entirely destitute
of all true virtue; his faith is counted for righteousness. Even as David
describes the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes righteousness
WITHOUT works, or virtuous exercises of the heart and life: Saying, Blessed are
they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the
man to whom the Lord will not impute sin -- If they which are of the 'law,' or
of moral virtue, be heirs, faith is made void, and the promise of none effect
-- Therefore it is, not of moral virtue, but of faith, that it might be by
grace, independent of our own virtue; to the end the promise might be sure to
all the seed -- As many as are of the works of the law, or of moral virtue, are
under the curse -- What things were gain to me, those I counted loss for
Christ. Yea, doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the excellency of
the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suffered the loss of all
things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in him,
not having mine own righteousness, or moral virtue, which is of the law; but
that which is through the faith of Christ, even the righteousness which is of
God by faith -- The Gentiles which followed not after righteousness; were not
concerned about moral virtue; have received (...), apprehenderunt. Vulgate,
MONTANUS, GROTIUS.
righteousness, even the righteousness which is by faith. But Israel, which
followed after the law of righteousness, has not attained to the law of
righteousness. Wherefore? Because they sought it not by faith, but as it were
by the works of the law; or in the exercise of moral virtue, and by obedience
to ceremonial institutes Luke xviii. 11 -- 14. Romans i. 16, 17. iii. 21 -- 28.
iv. 2 -- 16. Gal. iii. 10. Philip iii. 8, 9. Romans ix. 30, 31.32.
.

A little to illustrate the last of these passages, it may be observed; That
though our Translators have used the word attained, in each member of the
contrast here formed; the original terms employed by the Apostle are different,
and must in this connection have different meanings. The Jews followed after
the law of righteousness; they earnestly sought acceptance with God by their
own obedience. But, notwithstanding all their exertions, they did not attain
((...)) to the law of righteousness; or to righteousness and justification by
the law. Whereas the Gentiles, being inveloped in ignonorance, and sunk in
sensuality, followed not after righteousness; had little or no concern about
acceptance with God, and righteousness for that purpose. But, though thus
inattentive to their immortal interests, they have received, ((...)) as a free
gift Romans v. 17.
, that righteousness which the gospel reveals Romans i. 16, 17.
, even the righteousness which is by faith. -- To attain righteousness, denotes
desire, design, exertion, for that end. These, Paul informs us, the Gentiles
had not: and therefore he uses a word answering to the term received. The Jews
desired righteousness, aimed at righteousness, pursued righteousness, and
succeeded not: the Apostle, therefore, employs terms corresponding to the
words, attained not (...). Thus BEZA on the text: Quae non sectabantur. (...).
Ubi igitur opera praeparationis? -- Gentes enim non modo non sectabantur legem
justitiae, sed etiam eam fugiebantatque illi bellum indixerant. With this, his
Note on 1 Timothy i. 13. may be compared; where, among other things, he says, En
merita praeparationis quae profert Apostolus! -- Misericordia sum donatus,
(...). Hoc non video qui possis Latin, servato ordine, passivo verbo,
explicare: nam miseratus nonnisi active dicitur. VULGATA, Misericordiam Dei
consecutus sum -- ERASMUS, Misericordiam adeptus sum. Neutra interpretatio mihi
satis placuit. Dicimur enim ea consequi et adispisci quae captamus. At Paulus
Christum non modo non quaerebat, sed etiam crudelissime persequebatur. Vide
CALVINUM in loc.
.

'Nothing,' says Dr. OWEN, seems to be more contrary unto reason, than what is
here made manifest by the event. The Gentiles who lived in sin and pleasure,
not once endeavoring to attain unto any righteousness before God, yet attained
unto it upon the preaching of the gospel. Israel, on the other hand, which
followed after righteousness, diligently in all the works of the law and duties
of obedience unto God thereby, came short of it, attained not unto it. All
preparations, all dispositions, all merits, as unto righteousness and
justification, are excluded from the Gentiles. For in all of them there is,
more or less, a following after righteousness; which is denied of them all.
Only by faith in Him who justifies the ungodly, they attain righteousness, or
they attained the righteousness of faith. For to attain righteousness by faith,
and to attain the righteousness of faith, are the same thing. Wherefore, all
things that are comprised any way in following after righteousness, such as are
all our duties and works, are excluded from any influence into our
justification. And this is expressed to declare the sovereignty and freedom of
the grace of God herein; namely, that we are justified freely by his grace, and
that on our part all boasting is excluded. Let men pretend what they will, and
dispute what they please, those who attain unto righteousness and justification
before God, when they follow not after righteousness; they do it by the
gratuitous imputation of the righteousness of another unto them Doctrine of
Justification, Chap. XVIII.
.

Where, now, either in the preceding, or in any other passages of holy Writ,
shall we find our Author's doctrine, respecting the necessity of a sinner's
exercising virtue, antecedent to his justification, and in order to it? Where,
in the Oracles of God, is that union with Christ, which constitutes the proper
ground of his righteousness being imputed to us, represented as arising from
the exercise of our own virtue? Or where, in the inspired Volume, do we
perceive any thing said, about the hearts of sinners being united to Christ,
previous to faith in him, and justification by him? Nay, our Author himself
seems to contradict this, by elsewhere saying; He who believes not in Christ,
is not so united to him and in him, as that his merit and righteousness -- may
be properly imputed to him, or reckoned to his account -- The Son of God, who
is equal with God, and is God, -- is ready to pardon and save all that come
unto him; to which all, even the most guilty and vile, are FREELY invited Two
Discourses, p. 15, 91, 92.
.

They, whom our Lord invites, and whom the gospel encourages to believe in him,
are described as laboring under a burden; as thirsty, and so on. True: but
must we consider that burden, or this thirst, as the mark of a gracious change
having taken place in their hearts; as an holy qualification for acceptance
with Christ; or as authorizing them to believe in him? If so, the gospel, as
already proved, should be preached to none but those who are born of God --
that are, to a considerable degree, sanctified -- that are already in the way
to heaven; and those who are, in Scripture, denominated sinners, have no
encouragement. Whereas, our Lord's commission was; Preach the gospel, or
proclaim the glad tidings, to every creature: and his invitation is, Come, and
take FREELY -- without money and without price.

The burden which is here meant, by our compassionate Savior, seems to be no
other than guilt, oppressing the conscience; of which the awakened sinner
labors to get rid, by means of his own devising: and the thirst, an earnest
desire of happiness, in the attainment of such objects as cannot afford it.
Now, a burden and a thirst of this kind are frequently experienced by those who
are unregenerate, and far from having the least degree of holiness. Cain, for
example, the firstborn of woman, felt that burden, and complained of it, as too
heavy for him to bear Genesis iv. 1^.
; though he was, and continued to be, an enemy to God. Judas, also, experienced
the weight of that burden, to an intolerable degree; sunk under its pressure;
and perished without remedy Matt. xxvii. 3, 4, 5.
. Whence it appears, that the deepest sense of guilt, and the most alarming
apprehensions of eternal ruin, are, detached from other considerations, no
evidence of love to God; no proof of sanctifying influence; nor any indication
that the subjects of them are in the way to holiness and happiness. -- Yet, as
Dr. OWEN has well observed, Some, finding this sense of sin, with those other
things that attend it, wrought in them, in some measure, begin to think, that
now all is well: this is all that is of them required. They will endeavor to
make a life, from such arguments of comfort as they can take from this trouble.
They think this a ground of peace, that they have not peace. Here some take up
before conversion, and it proves their ruin. Because they are convinced of sin,
and troubled about it, and burdened with it, they think it shall be well with
them. But, were not Cain, Esau, Saul, Ahab, Judas, convinced of sin, and
burdened with it? Did this profit them? Did it interest them in the promises?
Did not the wrath of God overtake them, notwithstanding? So it is with many
daily: they think their conviction is conversion; and that their sins are
pardoned, because they have been troubled -- For a soul to place the spring of
its peace or comfort in any thing of its own, is to fall short of Christ, and
take up in self. We must not only be justified, but glory in him also. (Isa.
xlv. 25.) Men may make use of the evidence of their graces; but only as a
medium to a farther end: not as the rest of the soul, in the least. And this
deprives men's very humiliations of all gospel humility. True humility consists
more in believing, than in being sensible of sin. That Is the soul's great
selfemptying and abasing: this may consist with an obstinate resolution to
scramble for something upon the account of selfendeavours On the Hundred and
Thirtieth Psalm, p. 62, 63.
.

Is the heavy-laden sinner invited to Christ? it is, not as qualified by being
burdened, but as guilty and perishing, that he must apply to the Savior;
taking all his encouragement so to do, from the testimony of God concerning
Jesus. -- As to a thirst of happiness, it is natural to intelligent beings: nor
does it seem possible for any creature to possess rational existence, without
desiring its own happiness. But the divine Oracles have informed us, that
sinners may hunger for that which is not bread, and thirst for that which
cannot satisfy.

Mr. TILLINGHAST, in answer to this objection, says: When Christ bids those
that are weary and heavy-laden come to him, does it therefore follow, [that] he
excludes all others? I grant, such are to come: and such are most backward and
afraid to come, and therefore called. But does it follow, therefore, that no
other must come; and that these, and only these, are called? If a prince send
forth [a] proclamation to a company of traitors, to come in, and he will pardon
them; and because he knows that there are some few among them, that are so
sensible of what they have done, and brought themselves into by their
rebellion, that they will never come upon this general proclamation, but, for
fear, will run away; he therefore sends particularly to these, by name, You,
and you, who dare not come for fear as being hanged; Come, I will pardon you,
and you; does it therefore follow, because they have a call, as it were by
name, therefore now all the rest, who have a general call are excluded? So
here. -- But this fain would I know, What is the state and condition that souls
are then in, when they are thus weary and heavy-laden? Are they in the state
and condition of sinners, or not? Righteous, or unrighteous? One [of these]
they must be. If you say, they are not sinners, but righteous persons; then I
ask, How came they [to be] thus? Is it by their being weary and heavy laden,
barely? Or is it by their applying of the promise? If it be by their being
weary and heavy-laden, then what need you press them to come to Christ for
justification; when as they have the same by this their qualification? If it be
by applying the promise, or having it applied to them; then it will follow,
that, notwithstunding this their qualification, that they are sinners, and so
remain until they apply the promise, or have it applied to them Six Treatises,
p. 67, 68. London, 1663.
.

Thus, Mr. THOMAS BOSTON: The thirst mentioned (Isa. lv. 1.) [must not] be
restricted to a gracious thirst, a thirst after Christ and his righteousness.
For some, at least, of the thirsting ones, to whom the offer is there made, are
spending money for that which is not bread, and their labor for that which
satisfies not. But it is evident, that sinners duly sensible, who are
thirsting after Christ and his righteousness, are not spending their money and
labor at that rate; but, on the contrary, for that which alone is bread, and
satisfies; namely, Jesus Christ, the true bread, which came down from heaven.
Wherefore, the thirst there meant, must needs comprehend, yea, and principally
aim at, that thirst after happiness and satisfaction which, being natural, is
common to all mankind. Men, pained with this thirst, do naturally run, for
quenching thereof, to the empty creation, and their fulsome lusts: and so they
spend money for that which is not bread, and their labor, for that which
satisfies not; finding nothing there that can satisfy that their appetite, or
thirst -- As little is the solemn gospel-offer (Matt. xi. 28.) restricted to a
certain set of men endowed with some laudable qualifications, going under the
name of laboring and being heavy-laden: the which do, indeed, denote the
restlessness natural to the sinful soul of man, spending its labor for that
which satisfies not. Our father Adam left his whole family with a conscience
full of guilt, and a heart full of unsatisfied desires. Thus we naturally
having a restless conscience, and a restless heart, the soul as naturally falls
a laboring for rest to them. And it labors in the barren region of the fiery
law, for a rest to the conscience; and in the empty creation, for a rest to the
heart. But, after all, the conscience is still heavy-laden with guilt, -- and
the heart is still under a load of unsatisfied desires. So neither the one, nor
the other, can find rest indeed. This is the natural case of all men: and to
souls thus laboring and laden, Jesus Christ calls, that they may come to him,
and he will give them rest: namely, a rest for their consciences, under the
covert of his blood; and a rest to their hearts, in the enjoyment of God
through him Works, p. 227, 228. See also, p. 845. Note.
.

It has, with some degree of confidence, been demanded; Whether, if sinners
must not come to Christ as penitent, and as possessing an holy disposition;
they are to believe in him, as impenitent, and as under the reigning power of
their depravity? But this, like some other objections, is not pertinent. For
the question is, What is the proper warrant for a sinner to believe in Jesus?
Not, What is the state of his heart, in the moment when he first believes? --
Or, if the objection did apply, it might be answered; Neither as a penitent,
nor as an impenitent sinner: but merely under the character of one that is
guilty and perishing. It was for such that Jesus died: it is to such the
tidings of salvation were addressed by the Apostles: and, therefore, such are
encouraged to believe in Christ. The objector might, consequently, with equal
reason have asked; Whether, in a public ministry, salvation by the Redeemer
should be exhibited to penitents, or to impenitents; to those that have some
degree of holiness, or to those who have none? and then the answer would have
been; To neither those, nor these, respectively as such: but to all of them,
without exception, as deserving condemnation and final misery. Nor is there any
reason to doubt, whether he to whom, by divine authority, salvation through
Christ is preached, be warranted to believe in him.

It has been objected, To assert that sinners, while destitute of holiness, are
warranted to believe in Christ; is to maintain, that they are authorized to
expect the felicity of heaven, while their native love of sin continues in all
its force, and while they are hardened rebels against God. But there is a great
and palpable difference between persons, while in their native state, being
authorized to believe in Jesus; and their being warranted, while in that
condition, to expect final happiness. Yet this objection proceeds on a
supposition, that whoever is encouraged by the word of grace to depend on
Christ; is, at the very same instant, merely on the same ground, and while an
unbeliever, equally authorized to expect everlasting life: which is a gross
mistake. For he that believes in Christ, relies on him as justifying the
ungodly: but he who, on scriptural grounds, hopes for future felicity, expects
it as a believer; as in a justified state; as having a turn of heart, in some
degree suited to the employments and enjoyments of heaven. Because, without
holiness, no one shall see the Lord. -- Did Paul, for instance, believe in
Jesus? it was under the consideration of himself, as a blasphemer, a
persecutor, and the chief of sinners 1 Timothy i. 13, 14, 15
. Did he rejoice in hope? it was, as having received the atonement Romans v. 1,
2, 11.
; as bearing the image of Christ; and as having a spiritual relish for heavenly
things. The sinner believes: the believer hopes. -- Nor can any man believe in
Christ, and continue a rebel against God: for sovereign mercy, when it relieves
the conscience, alters the bias of the heart, and forms the character anew.
God, in the exercise and manifestation of pardoning grace to rebels, makes them
his friends. Thus divine goodness leads to repentance, to holiness, and to hope
of everlasting happiness. There is forgiveness with God, that he may be feared.

If we maintain that the ungodly are warranted to believe in Jesus, there will
be great danger of encouraging a superficial, Antinomian faith. Because guilty
creatures, under the power of their depravity, are much more likely to approve
the character of Christ, when represented as willing to receive the altogether
unholy; than if he were considered as receiving none but those who are
cordially disposed to perform the divine precepts.

That the sentiment for which I plead, may be prostituted to licentious
purposes; and that, in certain instances, it probably has been so abused, will
be admitted. But, be that as it may, Jesus must either be so exhibited in a
public ministry, as to suit the character, the state, the circumstances of
apostate creatures, or there is no gospel for them. Besides, the misapplication
of any doctrine, affords no argument against, either its truth, or its
importance: because the most excellent doctrines, and the plainest passages of
Scripture, have been frequently abused to execrable purposes.

This objection seems to imply, that a selfrighteous turn of heart, and
pharisaical pride, make no part of human depravity. For it apparently supposes,
that there is little or no danger of sinners treating Christ with disrespect,
except by considering him as the minister of sin: or, of their opposing the
designs of divine grace, in any way, besides that of licentiousness. But it
appears, from Scripture, from experience, and from observation, that sinners
are naturally and strongly inclined to seek justification by the works of the
law; that a violent propensity to cherish the notion of self-worthiness, is an
essential part of their natural depravity; and that the disrespect with which
Christ is generally treated by them, arises principally from that quarter. Yes,
their low thoughts respecting the evil of sin, and the high opinion they form
of their own character, are the chief source of that neglect with which they
treat the divine Jesus, and of all their opposition to saving grace. Nay, so
universal, and so predominant is this propensity to self-worthiness, that, for
one who abuses the sentiment here defended, by converting it into an occasion
of sin; ten thousand may be justly considered as dishonouring Christ, and as
rebelling against God, under the pernicious influence of that principle which I
oppose.

It is a great mistake to imagine, that ungodly men are so ready to adopt the
sentiment for which I contend. Certain it is, from the history of our Lord's
ministry, and from the writings of Paul, that few things in the preaching,
either of Christ, or of the Apostle, were so offensive to persons of
respectability among the Jews, as the doctrine which they preached, relative to
pardon and acceptance with God. The discourses of Jesus, respecting divine
grace, were extremely offensive to the Scribes, the Pharisees, and the
reputedly devout in general. But, had the tenor of our Savior's preaching, or
of his converse among the people, been contrary to the principle here avowed;
it is not supposable that the Jews would have so frequently complained of him,
and objected against his conduct, as they did. Witness the following sayings:
Why eats your Master with publicans and sinners? -- Behold -- a friend of
publicans and sinners! -- Why do ye eat and drink with publicans and sinners?
-- This man, if he were a prophet, would have known who, and what manner of
woman this is that touches him; for she is a sinner -- This man receives
sinners, and eats with them -- They murmured saying, That he was gone to be
guest with a man that is a sinner Matt. ix. 11. xi. 19. Luke v. 30. vii. 39.
xv. 2. xix. 7.
. Now, it is evident, these murmurers and objectors were the reputedly devout;
those who considered themselves, and were considered by others, as possessing
virtuous dispositions and holy zeal: yet they were those to whom our Lord
addressed himself in the following manner; Verily I say unto you, That the
publicans and the harlots, the most profligate of both sexes, go into the
kingdom of heaven before you. For John came unto you in the way of
righteousness, and ye believed him not; but the publicans and the harlots
believed him; and ye, when ye had seen it, repented not afterward that ye might
believe Matt. xxi. 31, 32.
.

Such was the treatment of Jesus, by the most respectable part of the public;
and such was his language concerning those who, under the fair pretext of zeal
for holiness, rejected his doctrine, and persecuted his person! With reference
to whom, when arguing on their selfrighteous principles in vindication of his
own conduct, he spoke three admirably gracious Parables at the same time, which
Luke has recorded Luke xv
. -- Now, can it be supposed, with any appearance of probability, that the
selfrighteous Jews would have cast such reflections on the character of Christ,
as a public teacher, if he had insisted on any degree of personal holiness, as
previously necessary to faith in revealed mercy, as the only ground of
acceptance with God? Had our Lord, in the course of his ministry, from time to
time assured them, that every one must, prior to receiving his testimony of
pardoning mercy and believing in him, be heartily disposed to keep the commands
of God; they could not, with any shadow of reason, have raised such a clamor
against his doctrine and conduct.

That the ministry of Paul was perfectly consistent with the sentiment here
defended, appears from those objections with which he meets, kand from the
answers which he returns. Thus, for example: Some affirm that we say, Let us do
evil, that good may come -- Do we then make void the law through faith? --
Shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound? -- Shall we sin, because we
are not under the law, but under grace Romans iii. 7, 8, 31. vi. 1, 15.
? -- Such were the objections: and they imply, That, in the estimation of those
who made them, the doctrine of Paul, implicitly, or by necessary consequence,
vacated the authority of God in his law -- That believers, being delivered from
the kw, as a covenant, or as prescribing the condition on which everlasting
life is to be obtained, may safely continue in sin -- That such continuance in
the practice of sin, would illustrate the riches, and manifest the glory, of
divine grace -- And that, by accumulating moral evil, the highest good would be
promoted.

To such various and formidable objections was the doctrine of Paul considered,
by multitudes, as justly exposed! objections, however, which he repelled with
abhorrence, and refuted with ease. But, could any person of common
understanding, with the least appearance of propriety, have made these
objections to the gospel which Paul preached, if he had taught, That an holy
turn of heart, a disposition to perform the commands of God, or the exercise of
virtue, is previously necessary to warrant a sinner's dependence on Jesus
Christ for pardon and peace? Common sense, and a moment's reflection, forbid
the thought. For, on that supposition, he must have laid the foundation of
expecting any spiritual benefit from Christ, in the previous, personal holiness
of every sinner who applies to him: which would have subverted the whole of his
doctrine, respecting the justification of sinners before God. -- Has it been
usual -- I appeal to the intelligent reader -- has it been usual, in modern
times, for the doctrine of religious teachers to be charged with such
consequences, or to be opposed by such objections; when it was notorious, that
they firmly insisted on the necessity of every one exercising virtue, or
possessing some degree of true holiness, in order to warrant a reliance on
Jesus Christ for pardon and acceptance? Was any teacher of religion ever
charged with making void the law; or with implicitly saying, Let us do evil,
that good may come; by those who heard his discourses, or perused his writings,
in which he maintained, that no sinner is authorized to believe in Christ,
until he is disposed to observe the divine precepts? Surely not! or, if a fact,
the objector's conduct must be considered as the effusion of mental imbecility,
as a violent paroxysm of prejudice, or as the virulence of deliberate malice.

But if, on the contrary, we understand Paul as maintaining, That Christ, with
all his fullness of spiritual blessings, is free, perfectly free for the vilest;
if we consider him as encouraging the chief of sinners, merely under the
character of perishing wretches, to rely on Jesus for their immediate
acceptance with God, and as giving them assurance that, in so doing, they shall
not be disappointed; if we further consider the Apostle as teaching, that the
justification of sinners is merely, entirely, absolutely on the ground of our
Lord's vicarious obedience imputed; then we perceive the true source of these
objections. For that doctrine, in the eyes of all whose hearts are leavened
with legal pride, will ever be treated as an insult on moral virtue; as
inimical to the divine law; and as having the most licentious tendency. The
same doctrine, it is apparent, is opposed by similar objections in our own
times: but, Wisdom is justified of her children.

The principle for which I plead will be further confirmed, if we take into
consideration those replies which the Apostle made in defense of his doctrine.
How, then, does he answer the unfounded and calumniating objections? Not by
saying, No: I never asserted, I never meant, that sinners may believe in
Christ, for pardon and peace, before they are disposed to observe the divine
precepts. I always taught, that they must love God, or be virtuously inclined
to perform his will, before they can acceptably believe in Christ. -- But,
instead of replying in that manner, his answers are? It is a slanderous report;
and the damnation of those who raised it is just -- God forbid! yea, we
establish the law -- God forbid! how shall we that are dead to sin, live any
longer therein? God forbid! know ye not, that to whom ye yield yourselves
servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey; whether of sin unto
death, or of obedience unto righteousness? But God be thanked, that though,
before ye believed in Jesus, ye were the servants, or slaves, of sin; yet ye
have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was delivered you Romans
iii. 8, 31. vi. 2, 15, 16, 17.
.

Here we see, that Paul repels and refutes the objections, by strong negations;
by showing the absurdity of those grounds on which some of them proceed; and by
denouncing the judgment of God against all those who dared, out of hatred to
evangelical truth, maliciously to slander the apostolic ministry. It should be
observed, however, that the Apostle does not give the least intimation of his
doctrine having been misunderstood, relative to the moral state of those whom
he encouraged to believe in Jesus, for the remission of sins, and acceptance
with God. -- To prove that none can justly consider themselves as having
already believed in Christ, except they be cordially disposed to holy
obedience, his replies are pertinent and strong: but they do not in the least
imply, that sinners must have some degree of holiness, or that they must
exercise virtue, before they are warranted to believe in him. The want of
observing this obvious distinction, seems to be the principal reason of that
confusion which often attends the ideas of serious persons on this important
subject; and of those mistakes into which they fall, relative to the true
ground of a sinner's application to Christ, by which their consciences are
frequently so much embarrassed.

Once more: It may, perhaps, be objected; The principle defended infers the
doctrine of general redemption. To this I answer, in the words of Dr. OWEN.
Many disputes there are, whether Christ died for all individuals of mankind, or
no. If we say No, but only for the elect, who are some of all sorts: some then
tell us, we cannot invite all men promiscuously to believe. But why so? We
invite not men, as all men; no man, as one of all men; but all men as sinners:
and we know that Christ died for sinners. But, is this the first thing, that we
are, in the dispensation of the gospel, to propose to the soul of a sinner,
under the law, That Christ died for HIM in particular? Is that the beginning of
our message unto him? Were not this a ready way to induce him to conclude, Let
me then continue in sin, that grace may abound? No: but this is, in order of
nature, our first work; even that we have had in hand. This is the beginning of
the gospel of Jesus Christ. This is the voice of one crying in the wilderness,
Prepare ye the way of the Lord. There is a way of reconciliation provided. God
is in Christ reconciling the world to himself. There is a way of acceptance:
there is forgiveness with him to be obtained. At this threshold of the Lord's
house, does the greatest part of men to whom the gospel is preached fall and
perish; never looking in to see the treasures that are in the house itself;
never coming into any such state and condition, wherein they have any ground or
bottom to enquire, Whether Christ died for them, in particular, or no? They
believe not this report, nor take any serious notice of it. This was the
ministry of the Baptist; and they who received it not, rejected the counsel of
God concerning their salvation; and so perished in their sins. This is the sum
of the blessed invitation given by Wisdom: and here men stumble, fall, and
perish. Luke vii. 10. Prove. ix. 1 -- 5. i. 29, 30 On the Hundred and Thirtieth
Psalm, p. 250.
.

CHAPTER IV. THE SALUTARY AND PRACTICAL TENDENCIES OF THE PRINCIPLE MAINTAINED.
THE truth, as it is in Jesus, being the doctrine according to godliness Ephesians.
iv. 21. 1 Timothy vi. 3. Titus i. 1.
, cannot but be adapted to practical purposes; and, therefore, must have a
salutary influence on the hearts of all those who really believe it. Of this
nature is the sentiment for which I plead; as, perhaps, may appear by the
following considerations.

It has a natural tendency to humble self-righteous pride, by annihilating all
distinctions among men, respecting the ground of their acceptance with God. Now
this is perfectly agreeable to the genius of evangelical truth, and to the
nature of Messiah's kingdom; as appears by the following prophetic Oracle,
relative to the ministry of John the Baptist, and the commencement of gospel
times. Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight in the desert a highway
for our God. Every valley shall be exalted, and every mountaim and hill shall
be made low: and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough places
plain: and the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh, on one
common level, and without the least regard to difference of character, shall
see it together: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it Isa. xl. 3, 4, 5.
.

As vain man would be wise, though born like a wild asses's colt Job xi. 12.
; so proud man would be righteous, though guilty before God, and obnoxious to
ruin. If, however, the divine law be equitable, sinners are justly accursed
Gal. iii. 10.
; and, if their condemnation be righteous, they cannot have the least hope,
except through sovereign mercy. -- A small degree of difference from others,
with regard to exterior character, is commonly considered, notwithstanding, as
recommending to the favor of God, and as furnishing a ground of hope, through
Jesus Christ. Now, in whomsoever this persuasion prevails, the gospel is
understood as directing all the relief it reveals, to the qualified, the
virtuous, the worthy: not the guilty, the vile, and the wretched. It is
considered, therefore, not as adapted to humble the proud heart, and to relieve
the pained conscience; but as maintaining a proper distinction between
different characters, and as paying a just regard to human worth. While,
consequently, to multitudes, who think themselves comparatively righteous, it
ministers food for self importance; it leaves others, who consider themselves
as the chief of sinners, without the least foundation of hope. -- The
principle, however, for which I contend, has a directly contrary tendency: for,
in prophetic language, it levels mountains, and elevates valleys. Or, in the
words of our Lord, it abases those that are exalted, and exalts those that are
abased Matt. xxiii. 12. Luke xiv. 11. xviii. 14.
. Because it maintains, that there is the very same ground of encouragement,
and to an equal degree, for men to belive in Jesus, whether they be esteemed
moral, or profligate; pious, or profane.

It is most happily suited to relieve those who are held in the snare of
despondency, by forbidding despair in the vilest wretch that lives. Many there
are, we have reason to think, who, having, for a long course of time, violated
the dictates of conscience, by indulging their worst propensities; having, in
multiplied instances, acted contrary to friendly advice, to their own
resolutions, promises, vows; and having, perhaps, been the manifest occasion of
ruin to various others; implicitly say, with those in the Prophet, There is no
hope: no; for we have loved strangers, and after them will we go Jer. ii. 25.
. Thus, in a kind of sullen despair, they harden their consciences; in order to
enjoy, for a while, the pleasures of sin, without control, and without
remorse. Perceiving no reason for hope, they endeavor to discard fear. Having
no conception that there is forgiveness with God, for persons in their
situation; or that such enormous offenders may find acceptance through Jesus
Christ; they rush on to final ruin. For, where there is no hope of escaping
evil, there are no efforts to guard against it.

The doctrine for which I plead, is, however, adapted to break the destructive
snare, by exhibiting a ground of hope. Yes, the gracious gospel, considered as
a complete warrant for the ungodly to believe in Jesus, encourages the most
profligate, and the most criminal, to regard the atonement of Christ as
allsufficient. There is not, as one observes, a more effectual remedy [against
despondency,] than the consideration of the freeness of the grace of God in
Christ and the promises: which are not made to such as deserve mercy, but to
such as want it; not to righteous persons, but to sinners; not to the whole,
but to the sick -- Of all the ways and experiments to bear up a sinking spirit,
there is no consideration like this, That from the beginning to the end of our
salvation, nothing is primarily active but free grace. This is a firm bottom of
comfort against the guilt of the most bloody and crimson sins: because free
grace is not tied to any rules: it may do what it pleases Dr. SPURSTOWE'S Wells
of Salvation opened, p. 50, 51.
. It belongs, indeed, to the very nature of grace, properly so called, to be
absolutely free and sovereign, in all its bestowments: for where there is
desert, whether intrinsic or pactional, the operation of grace necessarily
ceases, and, if rectitude prevail, that of equity takes place.

It is admirably fitted to excite hope and produce comfort in those who, though
not sunk in despondency, are deeply distressed by a sense of guilt, of
depravity, and of unworthiness. Are the consciences of men alarmed, by a
conviction of sin, and an apprehension of deserved wrath for past offenses? Are
sinners, being acquainted with their own hearts, conscious of strong
propensities to evil, and of numerous criminal imperfections attending their
best performances? they consider themselves as altogether vile. Discerning
nothing in their hearts, nor any thing in their lives, which deserves the name
of holiness; but, on the contrary, much that seems to mark them out for
destruction; they have nothing to remove their painful fears, or to relieve
their burdened consciences, except what the gospel says concerning divine
mercy, as manifested in Jesus Christ. He being revealed, however, as perfectly
suitable to their wants, and as completely free for their acceptance; they are
presented, by sovereign grace, with an allsufficient Savior for their
immediate dependence. Considing in the testimony of God as true, and receiving
the provision of his grace as a free gift; they find relief, and enjoy peace
Nor does the comfort obtained arise from reflecting on the manner in which they
believe, but from that grace which the gospel reveals, and from the
allsufficiency of Jesus in whom they trust.

It is of great importance to the real Christian, in times of spiritual
darkness and of discouragement. Has he, by the power of indwelling sin, or
through the force of Satan's temptations, lost that peace which arises from a
view of interest in Jesus Christ? Is he incapable of approaching God with a
filial confidence, crying, Abba Father? he recurs to this truth, as the first
spring of his encouragement, and, under the character of a sinner, applies to
Christ afresh. It being fixed in his mind, as a leading principle of revealed
truth, that the most ungodly are authorized to believe in Jesus; and that no
degree of previous holiness is necessary for that purpose; he cannot, even in
his worst condition, but consider himself as within the verge of that
encouragement. As, therefore, it is by faith in Christ that he derives hope;
and as, under the influence of hope, spiritual endeavors are excited; so, in
this procedure, not only peace of conscience, but prayer and watchfulness,
brotherly love and self-denial, communion with God and heavenly mindedness, are
promoted.

Besides, under the practical influence of this principle, he will not be so
liable to deceive himself, with regard to his real state in the sight of God;
by inferring his regeneration from any religious impulses which he has felt, or
from any starts of devotional affection which he may experience. No: he will be
dispo^^^ (...) form a conclusion, respecting his general character, in the
estimate of Omniscience, from the habitual regard which he pays, to the
atonement, the authority, and the example, of Jesus Christ. For though it must
be admitted, that every real Christian is led by the Spirit of God Romans viii.
14.
; and though, by the word of truth, that divine Agent produce, excite, and
maintain devout affections in the soul; yet we ought never to consider
substantial evidence of true godliness, as arising from secret impulses,
however strong; nor from transient flashes of religious affection, be they ever
so high: but from the general frame of the heart, respecting the glorious God,
as revealing himself in Jesus Christ.

It is of great moment in the Christian's daily walk with God. The reason is,
it has a powerful tendency to promote an habitual regard to the word of grace
and the atonement of Christ, as the only source of spiritual peace. The
Christian, being conscious of daily contracting fresh guilt, considering his
transgressions, and his numerous imperfections in religious duty, as attended
with peculiar aggravations, arising from his knowledge of the divine will, the
blessings he enjoys, the profession he makes, and the character he bears; it is
only by an habitual dependence on the atonement of Christ, that peace is
maintained in his conscience, and that he feels the operation of evangelical
motives to obedience. This, if I mistake not, is perfectly congenial to that
grand maxim of Inspiration; The just shall live by faith Hab. ii. 4. Romans i.
17. Gal. iii. 11. ii. 20.
: shall derive all his peace, and perform all his obedience, through faith in
the atoning blood, the gracious doctrines, the precious promises, and the
superintending Providence Matt xxviii. 18. Ephesians. i. 22. 1 John v. 4. Heb. xi.
passim.
, of Jesus Christ The following words of CALVIN deserve regard. Fidei
fundamentum facimus gratuitum promissionem, quod in ipsa proprie, fides
consistat. Tametsi enim Deum per omnia veracem esse statuat, sive jubeat, sive
prohibeat; sive promittat, sive minetur, jussa etiam ejus obedienter excipiat,
interdicta observet, ad minas animadvertat; proprie tamen a promissione
incipit, in ipsa constat, in ipsam desinit. Vitam enim in Deo quaerit, quae non
in mandatis, aut poenarum edictis, sed misericordiae promissione reperitur,
eaque nonnisi gratuita: quoniam conditionalis, qua ad opera nostra remittimur,
non aliter vitam promittit, quam si perspiciamus esse in nobis sitam. Ergo,
nisi sidem tremere ac vacillare volumus, illam salutis promissione fulsiamus
oportet: quae a Domino ultro ac liberaliter, potiusque miseriae nostra quam
dignitatis respectu offeratur. Institut. L. III. Chap. ii. 29.
.

It leads to holy obedience, and furnishes with cogent motives to the
performance of it. Paul, when exhorting servants to adorn the doctrine of God
our Savior, says; The grace of God that brings salvation has appeared to
all men, without exception, as to national distinction, or moral character;
teaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world Titus ii. 11, 12.
. On this very interesting passage, Mr. HERVEY thus paraphrases and remarks:
The grace of God; his infinitely free favor, -- which scorns to be shackled
with conditions, or meanly dependent on human endeavors -- This grace,
requiring nothing of the creature, but bringing salvation, spiritual and
eternal salvation, finished by the incarnate Creator, and free for the chiefest
of sinners. This grace, being revealed in the gospel, being discerned by faith,
and thus appearing in luster, and with power, to all men -- To men of every
rank, every age, every character; making no difference between the servant and
his master; between the ruddy stripling and the hoary sire; between the vile
prostitute and the chaste vestal; but opening its inexhaustible stores, to be
received by one as well as the other -- This grace, does what? Cause
Antinomianism, or practical ungodliness, to come in with a full tide? Quite the
reverse. It represses it like an immovable barrier. It teaches us to deny, to
renounce ungodliness, all ungodliness: not only external, gross abominations,
but worldly lusts also; every vicious inclination, and every irregular desire.
Farther, it teaches us to live soberly, with regard to ourselves; righteously,
toward our neighbors; and godly to our Creator.

The original word is particularly beautiful and significant. It is not (...),
prescribes, by way of rule; nor (...), enjoineth, by way of authority; but
(...), teaches, by way of instruction; points out the effectual method of
obeying the precepts, and conforming to the rule. A tyrant may command his
slave to write, or make a proficiency in writing. A kind tutor forms him to it;
shows him how to do it; and renders what would otherwise be an irksome,
perhaps, an impracticable task, both easy and pleasant. So this grace, clearly
manifested in the understanding, and cordially apprehended by the will, renders
every duty of holiness both practicable and pleasant: it gives us a heart, and
a hand, and ability, to exercise ourselves unto universal godliness Eleven
Letters to Mr. J. WESLEY, p. 179, 180.
.

Dr. OWEN, when directing sinners to regard that forgiveness which is with God,
as the first source of their encouragement, says; This is the only way and
means to enable you to obedience, and to render what you do therein acceptable
unto God. It may be, that some of you are under the power of convictions, and
have made engagements unto God to live unto him, to keep yourselves from sin,
and to follow after holiness. It may be, you have done so in afflictions,
dangers, sicknesses, or upon the receipt of mercies: but yet you find that you
cannot come unto any stability, or consistency, in your course. You break with
God and your own souls, which fills you with new disquietments; or else hardens
you, and makes you secure and negligent: so that you return unto your purposes
no oftener, than your convictions, or afflictions, befall you anew. This
condition is ruinous and pernicious, which nothing can deliver you from, but
this closing with forgiveness. For, all that you do without this, however it
may please your minds, or ease your consciences, is not at all accepted with
God. Unless this foundation be laid, all that you do is lost. All your prayers,
all your duties, all your amendments, are an abomination to the Lord. Until
peace is made with him, they are but the acts of enemies, which he despises
and abhors. You run, it may be, earnestly; but you run out of the way: you
strive, but not lawfully, and shall never receive the crown. True gospel
obedience is the fruit of the faith of forgiveness. Whatever you do without it,
is but a building without a foundation; a castle in the air. You may see the
order of gospel obedience, Ephesians. ii. 7 -- 10. The foundation must be laid in
grace; riches of grace, by Christ, in the free pardon and forgiveness of sin.
From hence must the works of obedience proceed, if you would have them to be of
God's appointment, or find acceptance with him. Without this, God will say of
all your services, worship, obedience, as he did to the Israelites of old,
(Amos v. 21 -- 25.) I despise all; reject it all: it is not to him, nor to his
glory, Now, if you are under convictions of any sort, there is nothing you more
value, nothing you more place your confidence in, than your duties: your
repentance, your amendment: what you do, and what in good time you will be. Is
it nothing unto you, to lose all your hopes and all your expectations, which
you have from hence? To have no other reception with God, than if all this time
you had been wallowing in your sins and lusts? Yet thus it is with you, if you
have not begun with God on his own terms; if you have not received the
atonement, in the blood of his Son; if you are not made partakers of
forgiveness; if your persons are not pardoned, all your duties are accursed.

This alone will give you such motives and encouragements unto obedience, as
will give you life, alacrity, and delight in it. You perform duties, abstain
from sins; but with heaviness, fear, and in bondage. Could you do as well
without them, as with them; would conscience be quiet, and hope of eternity
hold out; you would omit them forever. This makes all your obedience
burdensome; and you cry out in your thoughts, with him in the Prophet; Behold,
what a weariness it is! The service of God is the only drudgery of your lives;
which you dare not omit, and delight not to perform. From this wretched and
cursed frame, there is nothing that can deliver you but this closing with
forgiveness. This will give you such motives, such encouragements, as will
greatly influence your hearts and souls. It will give you freedom, liberty,
delight and cheerfulness, in all duties of gospel obedience. You will find a
constraining power in the love of Christ therein: a freedom from bondage, when
the Son truly has made you free. Faith and love will work genuinely and
naturally in your spirits; and that which was your greatest burden, will become
your chiefest joy. (2 Cor. vii. 1.) Thoughts of the love of God, of the blood
of Christ, or the Covenant of Grace, and sense of pardon in them, will enlarge
your hearts, and sweeten all your duties. You will find a new life, a new
pleasure, a new satisfaction, in all that you do On the Hundred and Thirtieth
Psalm, p. 262, 263, 264.
.

It it perfectly consistent with the necessity of true holiness, to constitute
the Christian character, and to evidence the Christian faith. Does any one ask,
What is my warrant for believing in Jesus Christ? The answer is, Not any thing
done by you, not any thing wrought in you; but the word of grace, or the
testimony of God concerning Jesus. -- If the question be, What is the evidence
of my having believed in Christ, as justifying the ungodly? regard must be had
to the prevailing turn of your heart, respecting the riches of his grace, the
allsufficiency of his work, and the plenitude of his authority: an habitual
approbation of which, constitues evidence to a person's own conscience of real
faith in him. -- If the question be, What is necessary to render a profession
of that faith credible to others? then the answer is, As faith works by love,
and as faith without works is dead; so a profession of faith in Jesus, not
attended with fruits of love to his name, is entirely vain: and all pretenses
of love to Christ, without obedience to his commands, are equally futile. For
thus it is written, If ye love me, keep my commandments -- He that has my
commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me -- If any man love me,
he will keep my words -- He that loves me not, keeps not my sayings -- This
is the love of God, that we keep his commandments -- This is love, that we walk
after his commandments -- He that says, I know him, and keeps not his
commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him John xiv. 15, 21, 23, 24.
1 John v. 3. 2 John 6. 1 John ii. 4.
. -- Carefully to distinguish, between that which authorizes our believing in
Jesus, and that which evidences our faith in him, is of the highest importance.
Because, maintaining that holiness is previously necessary to the former,
savours of selfrighteousness, intrenches on the honors of divine grace, and
embarrasses the awakened conscience: while it is evident, that a denial of its
utility, respecting the latter, contradicts the assertions of Inspiration,
verges upon licentiousness, and tends to Antinomianism.

Relative to these particulars, to some articles of Christian experience, and
to the state of unconverted sinners; I shall conclude the whole with various
extracts from Dr. OWEN. Thus, then, that judicious Author: Our foundation in
dealing with God, is Christ alone; mere grace, and pardon in him. Our building
is in and by holiness and obedience; as the fruits of that faith by which we
have received the atonement. And great mistakes there are in this matter, which
bring great intanglements on the souls of men. Some are all their days laying
the foundation, and are never able to build upon it, unto any comfort to
themselves, or usefulness to others: and the reason is, because they will be
mixing with the foundation stones, that are sit only for the following
building. They will be bringing their obedience, duties, mortification of sin,
and the like, unto the foundation. These are precious stones to build with, but
unmeet to be first laid to bear upon them the whole weight of the building. The
foundation is to be laid, as was said, in mere grace, mercy, pardon in the
blood of Christ. This the soul is to accept of, and to rest in, merely as it is
GRACE; without the consideration of any thing in itself, but that it is sinful
and obnoxious unto ruin. This it finds a difficulty in, and would gladly have
something of its own to mix with it. It cannot tell how to fix these foundation
stones, without some cement of its own endeavors and duty: and because these
things will not mix, they spend a fruitless labor about it all their days.
But, if the foundation be of grace, it is not at all of works: for, otherwise,
grace is no more grace. If any thing of our own be mixed with grace in this
matter, it utterly destroys the nature of grace; which, if it be not alone, it
is not at all. But does not this tend to licentiousness? Does not this render
obedience, holiness, duties, mortification of sin, and good works, needless?
God forbid! yea, this is the only way to order them aright unto the glory of
God. Have we nothing to do, but to lay the foundation? yes, all our days we are
to build upon it, when it is surely and firmly laid. And these are the means
and ways of our edification. This, then, is the soul to do, who would come to
peace and settlement. Let it let go all former endeavors, if it have been
engaged unto any of that kind: and let it alone receive, admit of, and adhere
to mere grace, mercy, and pardon; with a full sense that, in its self, it has
nothing for which it should have an interest in them, but that all is of mere
grace, through Jesus Christ. Other foundation can no man lay. Depart not hence,
until this work be well over. Surcease not an earnest endeavor with your own
hearts, to acquiesce in this righteousness of God, and to bring your souls unto
a comfortable persuasion that God, for Christ his sake, has freely forgiven
you all your sins. Stir not hence, until this be effected. If you have been
engaged in another way; that is, to seek for an interest in the pardon of sin,
by some endeavors of your own; it is not unlikely but you are filled with the
fruit of your own doings: that is, that you go on with all kind of
uncertainties, and without any kind of constant peace. Return, then, again
hither: bring this foundation work to a blessed issue in the blood of Christ;
and, when that is done, up and be doing.

You know how fatal and ruinous it is, for souls to abuse the grace of God, and
the apprehension of the pardon of sins, in the course of their obedience to
countenance themselves in sin, or the negligence of any duty. This is to turn
the grace of God into wantonness, as we have elsewhere at large declared. And
it is no less pernicious, to bring the duties of our obedience; any reserves
for them; any hopes about them, into the matter of pardon and forgiveness, as
we are to receive them from God. But these things, as they are distinct in
themselves, so they must be distinctly managed in the soul: and the confounding
of them, is that which disturbs the peace, and weakens the obedience of many.
In a confused manner, they labor to keep up a life of grace and duty; which
will be, in their places, conjoined, but not mixed or compounded. First, to
take up mercy, pardon and forgiveness, absolutely on the account of Christ; and
then to yield all obedience in the strength of Christ, and for the love of
Christ, is the life of a believer On the Hundred and Thirtieth Psalm, p. 300,
301, 302.
.

They that believe forgiveness in a due manner, believe it for the ends and
purposes for which it is revealed of God -- If God reveals any thing for one
end and purpose, and men use it quite unto another; they do not receive the
word of God, nor believe the thing revealed, but steal the word, and delude
their own souls. Let us then weigh, to what end and purposes this forgiveness
was first revealed by God; for which also its manifestation is still continued
in the gospel. We have showed before, who it was to whom this revelation was
made, and what condition he was in, when first it was made unto him. A lost,
wretched creature, without hope or help, he was: how he should come to obtain
acceptance with God, he knew not. God reveals forgiveness unto him, by Christ,
to be his all. The intention of God in it was, that a sinner's ALL should be of
grace. (Romans xi. 6.) If any thing be added unto it, for the same end and
purpose, then grace is no more grace. Again, God intended it as a new
foundation of obedience, of love, and thankfulness. That men should love,
because forgiven; and be holy, because pardoned, as I have showed before; that
it might be the righteousness of a sinner, and a spring of new obedience in
him, all to the praise of grace, were God's ends in its revelation On the
Hundred and Thirtieth Psalm, p. 239.
.

Self-condemnation and ab^^rency do very well consist with gospel justification
and peace. Some men have no peace, because they have that, without which it is
impossible they should have peace. Because they cannot but condemn themselves,
they cannot entertain a sense that God does acquit them. But this is the
mystery of the gospel, which unbelief is a stranger unto. Nothing but faith can
give a real subsistence unto these things, in the same soul, and the same time.
It is easy to learn the notion of it, but it is not easy to experience the
power of it. For a man to have a sight of that within him, which would condemn
him, for which he is troubled; and, at the same time, to have a discovery of
that without him, which will justify him, and to rejoice therein; is that which
he is not led unto, but by faith in the mystery of the gospel. We are now under
a law for justification, which excludes all boasting, Romans iii. 27. So that
though we have joy enough in another, yet we may have, we always have,
sufficient cause of humiliation in ourselves. The gospel will teach a man to
feel sin, and believe righteousness, at the same time. Faith will carry heaven
in one hand, and hell in the other; showing the one deserved, the other
purchased. A man may see enough of his own sin and folly, to bring Gehennam e
Coelo, a hell of wrath out of heaven; and yet see Christ bring Coelum ex
Inferno, a heaven of blessedness out of an hell of punishment. And these must
needs produce very diverse, yea contrary effects and operations in the soul:
and he who knows not how to assign them their proper duties, and seasons, must
needs be perplexed. The work of self-condemnation, then, which men in these
[painful exercises] cannot but abound with, is, in the disposition of the
Covenant of Grace, no way inconsistent with, nor unsuited unto, justification,
and the enjoyment of peace, in the sense of it. There may be a deep sense of
sin, on other considerations besides hell. David was never more humbled for
sin, than when Nathan told him it was forgiven: and there may be a view of
hell, as deserved; which yet the soul may know itself freed from, as to the
issue -- A deep sense of the evil of sin, of the guilt of [a] man's own sin, is
no way inconsistent with gospel assurance of acceptance with God through
Christ, and of forgiveness in him. By a sense of the guilt of sin, I understand
two things; a clear conviction of sin, by the Holy Ghost saying unto the soul,
Thou art the man: and a sense c the displeasure of God, or the wrath due to
sin, according to the sentence of the law -- Deep sorrow for sin is consistent
with assurance of forgiveness: yea, it is a great means of preservation of it.
Godly sorrow, mourning, humiliation, contriteness of spirit, are no less gospel
graces, and fruits of the Holy Ghost, than faith itself; and so are consistent
with the highest flourishings of faith whatever. It is the work of heaven
itself, and not of the assurance of it, to wipe all tears from our eyes --
Sorrow, absolutely exclusive of the faith of forgiveness, is legal, and tends
to death. Assurance, absolutely exclusive of godly sorrow, is presumption, and
not a persuasion from him that calls us. But, gospel-sorrow, and
gospel-assurance, may well dwell in the same breast, at the same time. Indeed,
as in all worldly joys there is a secret wound; so, in all godly sorrow and
mourning, considered in itself, there is a secret joy and refreshment. Hence it
does not wither and dry up, but rather enlarge, open, and sweeten the heart. I
am persuaded, that, generally, they mourn most who have most assurance. All
true, gospel mourners, will be found to have the root of assurance so grafted
in them, that, in its proper season (a time of trouble) it will undoubtedly
flourish.

A deep sense of the indwelling power of sin, is consistent with gospel
assurance. Sense of indwelling sin will cause manifold perplexities in the
soul. Trouble, disquietments, sorrow, anguish of heart; expressing themselves
in sighs, mourning, groaning for deliverance, always attend it. To what purpose
do you speak, to a soul hghly sensible of the restless power of indwelling sin,
concerning assurance? Alas, says he, I am ready to perish every moment! My
lusts are strong, active, restless, yea outrageous: they give me no rest, no
liberty, and but little success do I obtain. Assurance is for conquerors; for
them that live at rest and peace. I lie grovelling on the ground all my days,
and must needs be uncertain what will be the issue. -- But when such an one
has done all he can, he will not be able to make more woeful complaints of this
matter, than Paul has done before him, Romans the seventh: and yet he closes
the discourse of it with as high an expression of assurance, as any person
needs to seek after Romans vii. 24. viii. 1.
. It is not assurance, but enjoyment, that excludes this sense and trouble.
But, if men will think they can have no assurance, because they have that,
without which it is impossible they should have any, it is hard to give them
relief. A little cruse of salt of the gospel, cast into these bitter waters,
will make them sweet and wholesome. Sense of the guilt of sin, may consist with
faith of its pardon and forgiveness in the blood of Christ. Godly sorrow may
dwell in the same heart, and the same time, with joy in the Holy Ghost: and
groaning after deliverance from the power of sin, with a gracious persuasion,
that sin shall not have dominion over us, because we are not under the law, but
under grace Ut supra, p. 279 -- 283.
.

Known holiness, is apt to degenerate into selfrighteousness. What God gives
us, on the account of sanctification, we are ready enough to reckon on the
score of justification. It is a hard thing to feel grace, and to believe as if
there were none. We have so much of the Pharisee in us, by nature, that it is
sometimes well that our good is hid from us. We are ready to take our corn and
wine, and bestow them on other lovers. Were there not in our hearts a
spiritually sensible principle of corruption; and in our duties a discernible
mixture of self; it would be impossible we should walk so humbly with God in a
Covenant of Grace and pardoning mercy. It is a good life, which is attended
with a faith of righteousness, and a sense of corruption -- Oftentimes,
holiness in the heart is more known by the opposition that is made there to it,
than by its own prevalent working: the Spirit's operation is known by the
flesh's opposition. We find a man's strength by the burdens he carries, and not
the pace that he goes. O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the
bady of this death? ^s a better evidence of grace and holiness, than, God I
thank thee, I am not as other men. A heart pressed, grieved, burdened, not by
the guilt of sin only, (which reflects with trouble on an awakened conscience)
but by the close adhering power of indwelling sin, tempting, seducing,
soliciting, hindering, captivating, conceiving, restlessly disquieting; may
from thence have as clear an evidence of holiness, as from a delightful
fruit-bearing. What is it that is troubled and grieved in thee? What is it,
that seems to be almost killed and destroyed; that cries out, complains, longs
for deliverance? Is it not the new creature? Is it not the principle of
spiritual life, whereof thou art partaker? I speak not of trouble and
disquietments for sin committed; nor of fears and perturbations of mind, lest
sin should break forth to loss, shame, ruin, dishonor; nor of the contending
of a convinced conscience, lest damnation should ensue; but of the spirit
against sin, out of a hatred and a lothing of it, upon all the mixed
considerations of love, grace, mercy, fear, the beauty of holiness, excellency
of communion with God, that are proposed in the gospel. If thou seem to
thyself to be only passive in these things; to do nothing, but to endure the
assaults of sin; yet if thou art sensible, and stand under the stroke of it,
as under the stroke of an enemy, there is the root of the matter. And as it is
thus, as to the substance and being of holiness, so it is also as to the
degrees of it. Degrees of holiness, are to be measured more by opposition, than
self operation. He may have more grace than another, who brings not forth so
much fruit as the other; because he has more opposition, more temptation: and
sense of the want of ALL, is a great sign of somewhat in the soul -- It is
certain, whilst we are in the flesh, our duties will taste of the vessel whence
they proceed. Weakness, defilements, treachery, hypocrisy, will attend them. To
this purpose, whatever some pretend to the contrary, is the complaint of the
church, Isa. lxiv. 6. The chaff, oftentimes, is so mixed with the wheat, that
corn can scarce be discerned. And this know, That the more spiritual any man
is, the more he sees of his unspiritualness in his spiritual duties. An outside
performance will satisfy an outside Christianity. Job abhorred himself most,
when he knew himself best. The clearer discoveries we have had of GOD, the
viler will every thing of SELF appear. Nay, further, duties and performances
are oftentimes very ill measured by us; and those seem to be first, which
indeed are last; and those to be last, which indeed are first. I do not doubt
but a man, when he has had distractions to wrestle withal; no outward
advantage to further him; no extraordinary provocations of hope, fear, or
sorrow, on a natural account, in his duty; may rise from his knees with
thoughts that he has done nothing in his duty but provoked God: when there
has been more workings of grace, in contending with the deadness cast on the
soul by the condition that it is in; than when, by a concurrence of moved
natural affections, and outward provocations, a frame has been raised that
has, to the party himself, seemed to reach heaven: so that, it may be, this
perplexity about duties, is nothing but what is common to the people of God,
and which ought to be no obstruction to peace and settlement On the Hundred
Thirtieth Psalm, p. 343, 344, 345.
.

Take heed of spending time in complaints, when vigorous actings of grace are
your duty. Fruitless and heartless complaints, bemoanings of themselves and
their condition, is the substance of the profession that some make. If they can
object against themselves, and form complaints out of their conditions, they
suppose they have done their duty. I have known some who have spent a good part
of their time, in going up and down from one to another with their objections
and complaints. These things are contrary to the life of faith -- Yet some, I
fear, may please themselves in such a course, as if it had somewhat of eminency
in religion in it. Others, it may be, drive the same trade in their thoughts,
although they make not, outwardly, such complaints. They are conversant, for
the most part, with heartless despondings: and, in some, they are multiplied by
their natural constitutions, or distempers. Examples of this kind occur unto us
every day -- We must say, then, unto such heartless complainers, as God did to
Joshua, Get you up: why lie you thus upon your faces? Do you think to mend your
condition by wishing it better, or complaining it is so bad? Are your
complaints of want of an interest in forgiveness, a sanctified means to obtain
it? not at all. You will not deal so with yourselves in things natural or
civil. In such things you will take an industrious course for a remedy, or for
relief. In things of the smallest importance in this world, and unto this life,
you will not content yourselves with wishing and complaining. As though
industry, in the use of natural means, for the attaining of natural ends, were
the ordinance of God; and diligence in the use of spiritual means, for the
obtaining of spiritual ends, were not! -- Do you use diligence, study,
endeavors, all diligence; diligence at all times, in all ways by God
appointed; all manner of diligence, within and without, in private and public,
to this end and purpose? Do you study, meditate, pray, watch, fast, neglect no
opportunity, keep your hearts, search, try, examine yourselves, fly
temptations, and occasions of cooling, deadening, and stifling grace? Do these
things abound in you? Alas, you cannot do thus; you are so weak, so indisposed.
But, alas, you will not; you will not part with your ease; you will not crucify
your lusts; you will not use all diligence: but must come to it, or be
contented to spend all your days in darkness, and to lie down in sorrow.

Thus do men frequently miscarry. Is it any news for persons to bewail the
folly of their nature and ways, in the morning and evening; and yet scarce
stand upon their watch any part of the day, or in any occasion of the day? Is
this giving all diligence? Is this working out our salvation with fear and
trembling? And may we not see professors, even indulging to themselves in ways
of vanity, folly, wrath, envy, sloth, and the like; and yet complain at what a
loss they are, how unquiet, how uncertain? God forbid it should be otherwise
with you! or that we should endeavor to speak peace unto you, in any such a
frame! To hear of a person, that he walks slothfully, carelessly, or indulgeth
his corruptions; and to find him camplaining, that he is at a loss, whether he
have any interest in pardon, or no; to give, or tender, comfort to such
mourners, without a due admonition of their duty to use diligence, in the use
of means, for to help on their deliverance out of the condition wherein they
are, is to tender poison unto them -- Spiritual peace and sloth, will never
dwell together in the same soul and conscience Ut supra, p. 362, 363, 306, 307.
.

Men living under the profession of religion, and not experiencing the power,
virtue, and efficacy of it in their hearts; are, whatever they profess, very
near to Atheism; or, at least, exposed to great temptations thereunto. If they
profess they know God, but in works deny him, they are abominable, and
disobedient, and, unto every good work, reprobate. Let such men lay aside
tradition and custom; let them give up themselves to a free and rational
consideration of things; and they will quickly find that all their profession
is but a miserable selfdeceiving; and that, indeed, they believe not one word
of the religion which they profess. For, of what their religion affirms to be
in themselves, they find not any thing true, or real -- He that professes the
gospel, avows that the death of Christ does crucify sin; that faith purifieth
the heart; that the Holy Ghost quickens, and enables the soul, unto duty; that
God is good and gracious unto all that come unto him; that there is precious
communion to be obtained with him, by Christ; that there is great joy in
believing. These things are plainly, openly, frequently insisted on in the
gospel. Hence the Apostle presses men unto obedience, on the account of them;
and, as it were, leaves them at liberty from it, if they were not so. Philip,
ii. 1, 2. Now, if men live long in the profession of these things, saying that
they are so, but indeed find nothing of truth, reality, or power in them; have
no experience of the effects of them, in their own hearts or souls; what stable
ground have they of believing any thing else in the gospel, whereof they cannot
have an experience? A man professes that the death of Christ will mortify sin,
and subdue corruption. Why does he believe it? because it is so affirmed in the
gospel. How, then, does he find it to be so? Has it this effect upon his soul,
in his own heart? Not at all: he finds no such thing in him. How, then, can
this man believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, because it is affirmed in
the gospel; seeing that he finds no real truth of that which it affirms to be
in himself? So our Savior argues, John iii. 12 -- Of all dangers, therefore,
in profession, let professors take heed of this; namely, Of a customary,
traditional, or doctrinal owning such truths, as ought to have their effects
and accomplishment in themselves, whilst they have no experience of the reality
and efficacy of them. This is plainly to have a form of godliness, and to deny
the power thereof: and of this sort of men do we see many turning Atheists,
scoffers, and open aposlates. They find, in themselves, that their profession
was a lie; and that, in truth, they had none of those things which they talked
of. And to what end should they continue longer in the avowing of that which is
not? Besides, finding these things which they have professed to be in them, not
to be so; they think, that what they have believed of things that are without
them, are of no other nature, and so reject them altogether Ut supra, p. 157,
158, 159.
.

Men live in sin, and therefore they do not believe forgiveness of sin. Faith
in general purifies the heart. Our souls are purified in obeying the truth; and
the life is made fruitful by it. Faith works by works, and makes itself
perfect by them: and the doctrine concerning forgiveness, has a special
influence into all holiness Acts xv. 19. 1 Pet. i. 22. James ii. 22. Titus ii.
11, 12.
-- No man can, then, believe forgiveness of sin, without a detestation and
relinquishment of it -- All that own the gospel must acknowledge this
principle; The real belief of the pardon of sin, is prevalent with men not to
live longer in sin. But now, what are the greatest number of those who pretend
to receive this truth? Are their hearts purified by it? Are their consciences
purged? are their lives changed? Do they deny all ungodliness and worldly
lusts? Does forgiveness teach them so to do? Have they found it effectual to
these purposes? Whence is it, then, that there is such a bleating, and
bellowing 1 Samuel xv. 14.
, to the contrary amongst them? Some of you are drunkards, some of you
swearers, some of you unclean persons, some of you liars, some of you worldly,
some of you haters of all the ways of Christ, and all his concernments upon the
earth: proud, covetous, boasters, self-seekers, envious, wrathful, backbiters,
malicious praters, slanderers, and the like. And shall we think, that such as
these believe the forgiveness of sin? God forbid! Again; Some of you are dark,
ignorant, blind, utterly unacquainted with the mystery of the gospel; nor do at
all make it your business to enquire into it. Either you hear it not at all;
or, negligently, slothfully, customarily, to no purpose. Let not such persons
deceive their own souls. To live in sin, and yet to believe the forgiveness of
sin, is utterly impossible. Christ will not be a minister of sin, nor give his
gospel to be a doctrine of licentiousness, for your sakes. Nor shall you be
forgiven, that you may be delivered to do more abominations Jer. vii. 10.
. God forbid!

'If any shall say, That they thank God, they are no such publicans as those
mentioned: they are no drunkards, no swearers, no unclean persons, nor the
like; so that they are not concerned in this consideration: their lives and
their duties give another account of them: then, yet consider further, That the
Pharisees were all that you say of yourselves; and yet the greatest despisers
of forgiveness that ever were in the world; and that because they hated the
light, on this account, that their deeds were evil. And for your duties, you
mention, what, I pray, is the root and spring of them? Are they influenced from
this faith of forgiveness, you boast of, or no? May it not be feared, that it
is utterly otherwise? You do not perform them because you love the gospel, but
because you fear the law. If the truth were known, I doubt it would appear,
that you get nothing by your believing of pardon, but an encouragement unto
sin. Your goodness, such as it is, springs from another root. It may be, also,
that you ward yourselves by it against the strokes of conscience, or the guilt
of particular sins. This is as bad as the other. It is as good be encouraged
unto sin, to commit it; as be encouraged under sin, so as to be kept from
humiliation for it. None under heaven are more remote from the belief of grace
and pardon, than such persons are Ubi supra, p. 237, 238.
.

Consider, [ye unconverted and thoughtless creatures!] that you are sinners,
great sinners, cursed sinners. Some of you, it may be, worse than innumerable
of your fellow sinners were, who are now in hell. God might long since have
cast you off everlastingly, from all expectation of mercy, and have caused all
your hopes to perish: or, he might have left you alive and yet have refused to
deal with you any more. He could have caused your sun to go down at noonday,
and have given you darkness instead of vision. He could respite your lives for
a season, and yet swear in his wrath, that you should never enter into his
rest. It is now otherwise: how long it may be so, nor you, nor I, know any
thing at all. God only knows what will be your time, what your continuance. We
are to speak whilst it is called today: and this is that, for the present,
which I have to offer unto you; God declares that there is forgiveness with
him; that your condition is not desperate, nor helpless -- Some of you, it may
be, are old in sins, and unacquainted with God: some of you, it may be, have
been great sinners, scandalous sinners: and some of you, it may be, have reason
to apprehend yourselves near the grave, and so also to hell. Some of you, it
may be, have your consciences disquieted and galled: and it may be, some of you
are under some outward troubles and perplexities, that cause you a little to
look about you: and some of you, it may be, are in the madness of your natural
strength and lusts; your breasts are full of milk, and your bones of marrow,
and your hearts of sin, pride, and contempt of the ways of God. All is one:
this word is unto you all; and I shall only mind you, That it is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God. You hear the voice, or read the
words of a poor worm; but the message is the message, and the word is the word,
of Him who shakes heaven and earth. Consider, then, well what you have to do;
and what answer you will return unto Him who will not be mocked Ubi supra, p.
244, 248, 249.
.

If you are, then, resolved to continue in your present condition, I have no
more to say unto you. I am pure from your blood; in that I have declared unto
you the counsel of God in this thing; and so I must leave you to a naked trial
between the Great God and your souls, at the last day. Poor creatures! I even
tremble to think, how he will tear you in pieces, when there shall be none to
deliver! Methinks, I see your poor, destitute, forlorn souls; forsaken of
lusts, sins, world, friends, angels, men; trembling before the throne of God,
full of horror, and fearful expectation of the dreadful sentence. Oh! that I
could mourn over you whilst you are joined to all the living; whilst there is
yet hope! Oh, that in this your day, you knew the things of your peace Ibid.
!

THE END.
BOOKS, for Sale by S. C. USTICK, No. 79, North Third St. PHILADELPHIA.
FOLIO.
RAPIN's History of England Luther's Table Talk Universal History Downame on
Justification Triumphs of God's Revenge, by J. Reynolds Ower on Hebrews
Lightfoot's Works, 2 vols.
QUARTO.
Leland's Christian Revelation Al Koran of Mahomet Ward's Practical and Special
Grammar Cruden's Concordance Ostervald's Bible Hussey's Glory of Christ
OCTAVO.
American war, by Stedman, 2 vols. 8 vo. Adgate's Music Butterworth's
Concordance Brainard's Life and Journal Brown's Dictionary of the Bible Crisp's
Sermons, 2 vols. Carey on the Yellow Fever Carver's Travels Cyrus's Travels
Coxe's View of the U. States Dalton's Discourses Dilworth's Book-keeping
Drelincourt on Death Elegant Extracts, prose and verse, 3 vols. Ferguson's
Astronomy Flynt's Sermons Gauging, by Workman Guthrie's Grammar Guthrie's
Gazetteer Hunter's Sacred Biography, 3 us. Hopkinson's Works, 3 vols. History
of Women, 2 vols. Home's 6 Sketches of the History of Man History of the
Insurrection History of the Twelve Caesar's Hist. of Redemption, Edwards's Hist.
of China, by Winterbotham Jefferson's Notes Johnson's Dictionary John Johnson's
Sermons, 2 vols. Love's Surveying Laws of the United States, 3 vols.
Millennium, by Pres. Edwards Moore's Navigation Mair's Book-keeping Molloy's
Commerce Memoirs of Dumorier M'Fingal (Large) Newton on the Prophecies, 2 us.
Paley's Philosophy Pike's Cases of Conscience President's Message Practical
Farmer Purple Island, by Fletcher Reid's Essays Rippon's Annual Register Signs
of the Times, by Linn Sheridan's Dictionary Stone's Euclid Treaty Taplin's
Farriery Theological Magazine Vattel's Law of Nations Watts' Glory of Christ
Watson against Pain and Gibbons
DUODECIMO.
Apparitionist Aspasio Antidote to Deism, 2 vols. by Rev. U. Ogden Alleine's
Alarm to the Unconverted Antichrist stormed, by Keach Amusement Hall, by a Lady
Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress -- Holy War -- Grace Abounding Bennet's Christian
Oratory, 2 us. Baptist Confession of Faith Bartow's Psalms, Bibles and
Testaments of different bindings and sizes Boyle's Voyages Cain and Abel
Charnock on Providence Christian's Looking Glass, by T. Priestley Christian
Economy Coals on Sovereignty Columbian Muse Confession of Faith, of the Church
of Scotland Cooke's Letter Writer Democrat Debates of Boston Convention
Dilworth's Assistant Dodd on Death Dodd's Thoughts in Prison Doddridge's Rise
and Progress Duncan's Logic Economy of Human Life Edwards on Affections on
Justification 's Miscellaneous Observe. Elements of Morality Erskine's Sermons
Friend of Youth, 2 vols. Flowers of History, 2 vols. Fisher's Young Man's
Campanion Farmer's Letters Franklin's Life and Works Farriery, by Bracken
Flavel's Husbandry Spiritualized Token for Mourners Fables of Flora, (Small)
Flowers from Sharon Fuller's Letters, being an answer to Dr. Priestley and Mr.
Belsham Gay's Fables Grosvenor's Mourner Goldsmith's History of England
Goldsmith's History of Rome Guardian, 2 vols. Gregory's Legacy Howard's Life
Hawkins's Voyage and Travels in Africa Historic Defense of Experimental
Religion History of North America Hervey's Meditations, Letters The Hive Index
to the Bible Johnson's Dictionary, neat Letters on Courtship and Marriage
Milton's Works Newton's Apology, etc. Owen's Glory of Christ Religious
Courtship Sibbe's Divine Meditations Spirit of Despotism Tillotson's
(Archbishop) Works Watts's Psalms and Hyms, together and separate. With a
variety of authors in Divinity, Law, Medicine, and the Classics. Also an
assortment of Stationary.
N. B. The first volume of MOSHEIM'S ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY is now in Press,
and will shortly be ready for Subscribers. -- Further Subscriptions will be
thankfully received at No. 79, North Third Street.


