THE HISTORY OF MARIA KITTLE. BY ANN ELIZA BLEECKER. IN A LETTER TO MISS TEN
EYCK.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY ELISHA BABCOCK. 1797.

THE HISTORY OF MARIA KITTLE. In a Letter to Miss Ten Eyck.
Tomhanick, December, 1779. DEAR SUSAN,
HOWEVER fond of novels and romances you may be, the unfortunate adventures of
one of my neighbors, who died yesterday, will make you despise that fiction,
in which, knowing the subject to be fabulous, we can never be so truly
interested. While this lady was expiring, Mrs. C -- V --, her near kinswoman,
related to me her unhappy history, in which I shall now take the liberty of
interesting your benevolent and feeling heart.

MARIA KITTLE was the only issue of her parents, who cultivated a large farm on
the banks of the Hudson, eighteen miles above Albany. They were persons of good
natural abilities, improved by some learning; yet, conscious of a deficiency in
their education, they studied nothing so much as to render their little
daughter truly accomplished.

MARIA was born in the year 1721. Her promising infancy presaged a maturity of
excellencies; every amiable quality dawned through her lisping prattle; every
personal grace attended her attitudes and played over her features. As she
advanced through the playful stage of childhood, she became more eminent than a
Penelope for her industry; yet, soon as the sun declined, she always retired
with her books until the time of repose, by which means she soon informed her
opening mind with the principles of every useful science. She was beloved by
all her female companions, who, though they easily discovered her opening
elegance of manners, instead of envying, were excited to imitate her. As she
always made one in their little parties of pleasure on festival days, it is no
wonder that she soon became the reigning goddess among the swains. She was
importuned to admit the addresses of numbers, whom she politely discarded, and
withdrew herself awhile from public observation. However, the fame of her
charms attracted several gentlemen of family from Albany, who intruded on her
retirement, soliciting her hand. But this happiness was reserved for a near
relation of here is, one Mr. KITTLE, whose merits had made an impression on her
heart. He, although not handsome, was possessed of a most engaging address;
while his learning and moral virtues more particularly recommended him to her
esteem. Their parents soon discovered their reciprocal passion, and highly
approving of it, hastened their marriage, which was celebrated under the most
happy auspices.

MARIA was fifteen when married. They removed to his farm, on which he had
built a small neat house, surrounded by tall cedars, which gave it a
contemplative air. It was situated on an eminence, with a green enclosure in
the front, graced by a well cultivated garden on one side, and on the other by
a clear stream, which, rushing over a bed of white pebble, gave them a high
polish, that cast a soft gleam through the water.

Here they resided in the tranquil enjoyment of that happiness which so much
merit and innocence deserved: the indigent, the sorrowful, the unfortunate were
always sure of consolation when they entered those peaceful doors. They were
almost adored by their neighbors, and even the wild savages themselves, who
often resorted thither for refreshments when hunting, expressed the greatest
regard for them, and admiration of their virtues.

In little more than a year they were blessed with a daughter, the lovelier
resemblance of her lovely mother: as she grew up, her graces increasing,
promised a bloom and understanding equal to here is; the Indians, in particular,
were extremely fond of the smiling ANNA; whenever they found a young fawn, or
caught a brood of wood-ducks, or surprised the young beaver in their daily
excursions through the forests, they presented them with pleasure to her; they
brought her the earliest strawberries, the scarlet plumb, and other delicate
wild fruits in painted baskets.

How did the fond parents' hearts delight to see their beloved one so
universally caressed! When they sauntered over the vernal fields with the
little prattler wantoning before them collecting flowers and pursuing the
velvet elusive butterfly, MARIA's cheek suffusing with rapture, "Oh my dear,"
she would say, we are happier than human beings can expect to be; how trivial
are the evils annexed to our situation! may God avert that our heaven be
limited to this life!

Eleven years now elapsed before Mrs. KITTLE discovered any signs of pregnancy:
her spouse silently wished for a son, and his desires were at length gratified;
she was delivered of a charming boy, who was named, after him, WILLIAM.

A French and Indian war had commenced sometime before; but about eight months
after her delivery, the savages began to commit the most horrid depredations on
the English frontiers. Mr. KITTLE, alarmed at the danger of his brothers, who
dwelt near Fort-Edward, (the eldest being just married to a very agreeable
young woman) invited them to reside with him during the war.

They were scarce arrived when the enemy made further incursions into the
country, burning the villages and scalping the inhabitants, neither respecting
age nor sex. This terribly alarmed Mrs. KITTLE; she began to prepare for
flight, and the next evening after receiving this intelligence, as she and Mr.
KITTLE were busily employed in packing up china and other things, they were
accosted by several Indians, whose wigwams were contiguous to the village of
Schochticook, and who always seemed well affected to the English. An elderly
savage undertook to be prolocutor, and desired the family to compose
themselves, assuring them they should be cautioned against any approaching
danger. To enforce his argument, he presented MARIA with a belt interwoven with
silk and beads, saying, There, receive my token of friendship: we go to dig up
the hatchet, to sink it in the heads of your enemies; we shall guard this wood
with a wall of fire -- you shall be safe. A warm glow of hope deepened in
MARIA's cheek at this -- Then ordering wine to be brought to the friendly
savages, with a smile of diffidence, "I am afraid," said she, necessity may
oblige you to abandon us, or neglect of your promise may deprive us of your
protection. -- "Neglect of my promise!" retorted he with some acrimony: No,
MARIA, I am a true man; I shoot the arrow up to the Great Captain every new
moon: depend upon it, I will trample down the briars round your dwelling, that
you do not hurt your feet. MARIA now retired, bowing a grateful acknowledgment,
and leaving the savages to indulge their festivity, who passed the night in the
most vociferous mirth.

Mrs. KITTLE, with a sort of exultation, related the subject of their
conference to her husband, who had absented himself on their first appearance,
having formed some suspicion of the sincerity of their friendship, and not
being willing to be duped by their dissimulation. "And now," added MARIA
smiling, our fears may again subside: Oh my dear! my happiness is trebled into
rapture, by seeing you and my sweet babes out of danger. He only sighed, and
reaching his arm round her polished neck, pressed her to his bosom. After a
short pause, "My love," said he, be not too confident of their fidelity; you
surely know what a small dependence is to be placed on their promises: however,
to appear suspicious might be suddenly fatal to us; we will therefore suspend
our journey to Albany for a few days. Though MARIA's soul saddened at the
conviction of this truth; though her fears urged her to propose immediate
flight, yet she acquiesced; and having supped with the family, this tender pair
sunk asleep on the bosom of rest.

Early the next morning Mr. KITTLE arose, first impressing a kiss on MARIA's
soft cheek, as she slumbered with her infant in her arms. He then awaked his
brother, reminding him that he had proposed a hunting match the preceding
evening. "It is true," replied PETER, but since hostilities have commenced so
near us as the Indians inform, I think it rather imprudent to quit the family.
-- Come, come, replied the other, do not let us intimidate the neighbors by
cloistertering ourselves up with women and children. -- "I reject the thought,"
rejoined PETER, "of being afraid." Then having dressed himself, while his
brother charged their pieces, they left the house, and traversed the pathless
grass for many hours without perceiving any thing but small birds, who filled
the fragrant air with melody. "PETER," said Mr. KITTLE, casting his eyes around
the lovely landscape, what a profusion of sweets does Nature exhale to please
her intelligent creatures! I feel my heart expand with love and gratitude to
heaven every moment, nor can I ever be grateful enough. I have health and
competence, a lovely fond wife whose smile would calm the rudest storm of
passion, and two infants blossoming into perfection; all my social ties are yet
unbroken -- PETER, I anticipate my heaven -- But why, my brother do you turn
pale? what dreadful idea stiffens your features with amazement? what in God's
name ails you, PETER? are you unwel? sit down under this tree awhile. -- To
these interrogaties PETER replied, Excuse my weakness, I am not unwel, but an
unusual horror chilled my blood; I felt as if the damps of death pressed already
round my soul; but the vapor is gone off again, I feel quite better. Mr.
KITTLE cheered his brother, attributing his emotion to fear; who, by this time,
having reassumed his composure, entered into discourse with cheerfulness,
refusing to return home without having killed any thing.

Then rising, they proceeded through lofty groves of pine, and open fields that
seemed to bend under the heavy hand of Ceres. At last, disappointment and
fatigue prevailed on them to return home: they had gone farther than they
apprehended; but passing along the bank of the river within a few miles of Mr.
Kittle's, they espied a fat do walking securely on the beach, which Peter
softly approaching, levelled his piece with so good an aim that the animal
dropped instantly at the explosion. This seeming success was, however the
origin of their calamities; for immediately after, two savages appeared,
directed in their course by the firing. Setting up a loud yell, they ran up to
the brothers and discharged their firearms. Mr. Kittle started back, but Peter
received a brace of balls in his bosom. He recoiled a few steps back, and then
sunk down encompassed with those deadly horrors of which in the morning he had
a presentiment. Mr. Kittle stood awhile aghast, like a person just waked from a
frightful dream; but on seeing the Indian advancing to tear the scalp from his
dying brother, he suddenly recollected himself, and shot a bullet through his
head: then grappling with the other, who was loading again, he wrested his
firelock from him, and felled him to the ground with the but-end of it. This
was no time for reflection or unavailing laments; the danger was eminent: so
leaving the savages for dead, with a mournful silence Mr. Kittle hastened to
throw the deer from off his horse, and laid his bleeding brother across him.

When our souls are gloomy, they seem to cast a shade over the objects that
surround us, and make nature correspondent to our feelings: so Mr. Kittle
thought the night fell with a deeper gloom than usual. The soft notes of
evening birds seemed to be the responses of savage yells. The echo of his
tread, which he never before regarded, now rung dismally hollow in his ears.
Even the rustling of the winds through the leaves seemed attended with a
solemnity that chilled him with cold tremors. As he proceeded with his mournful
charge, his feelings were alarmed for his dear Maria; he dreaded the agitation
and distress this adventure would throw her in: but it was unavoidable!

The sound of his horse's feet no sooner invaded the ears of Maria, than
seizing a light, she sprung with a joyful impatience to the door, and was met
by her partner pale and bloody, who endeavored to prevent too sudden a
discovery of this calamity. But at the first glance she comprehended the whole
affair, and retiring a few steps, with the most exquisite agony in her
countenance, "Oh Mr. Kittle!" she cried, clasping her hands together, "it is
all over -- we are betrayed -- your brother is killed!" -- "Too true, oh, too
fatally true!" replied he, falling on his knees beside her as she sunk down,
"my angel! the very savages that solemly engaged to protect us have deprived
him of life; but I am yet alive, my Maria, be comforted -- I will instantly
procure carriages, and before morning you and your innocents shall be beyond
the reach of their malevolence."

By this time the family had crowded about them, and with grievous wailings
were inquiring the particulars of this sad adventure. Mr. Kittle having related
every circumstance with brevity, ordered the corpse to be laid in a remote
chamber, desiring at the same time a horse to be saddled for him. Then, more
oppressed by his wife's griefs than his own, he led the disconsolate fair to
her chamber, where, being seated, she sighing demanded where he intended to go
at that time of night. "Only," said he, "to the village of Schochticook to hire
a couple of wagons; I shall return in an hour I hope, with a proper guard to
secure our retreat from this hostile place." Maria was silent; at length she
burst into a flood of tears, which his endearments only augmented. Then
expostulating with him, "Is it not enough," cried she, "that you have escaped
one danger, but must you be so very eager to encounter others? besides, you are
spent with sorrow and fatigue -- let one of your brothers perform this silent
expedition. -- "It is impossible," replied the tender husband; "how can I dare
to propose a danger to them from which I would shrink myself? their lives are
equally precious with mine: but God may disappoint our fears, my love!" He
would have continued, but his spouse, rising from her seat, interrupted him --
"At least, my dear, before you leave us give your lovely babes a farewell
embrace, that if fate should -- should separate us, that yet shall sweeten our
hours of absence." Here she found herself clasped in her consort's arms, who
exclaimed, "My Maria! I love you passionately, and if the least shadow of
danger did appear to attend this night's travel, for your sake, for my blessed
children's sake I would decline it: but I have left the Indians lifeless, who
no doubt attacked us from some private pique; nor will they be discovered until
morning." -- "Well then," Maria answered, "I no longer oppose you; forgive my
fears." -- Meanwhile as she stepped to the cradle for her suckling, the fair
Anna, who was listening at the door anxious to hear her parents sentiments on
this occasion, quitted her station and flew to them swift as light; dropping on
her knees before her father, and looked up in his face with the most attractive
graces and the persuasive eloquence of simplicity. Her neck and features were
elegantly turned, her complexion fairer than the tuberose, and contrasted by
the most shining ringlets of dark hair. Her eyes, whose brilliancy was softened
through the medium of tears, for a while dwelt tenderly on his countenance. At
length, with a voice scarce audible, she sighed out, "Oh papa! do not leave us;
if any accident should happen to you, mamma will die of grief, and what will
become of poor Anna and Billy? who will care for me? who will teach me when my
papa, my mamma's papa is gone?" -- "My sweet child," replied he, embracing her
and holding her to his bosom, "there is no danger; I shall return in an hour,
and before tomorrow you shall be safe on the plains of Albany, and my heart
shall exult over the happiness of my family."

Mrs. Kittle now approached with her playful infant in her arms; but its
winning actions extorted nothing but groans from her pained bosom, which was
more stormy than Ontario-Lake, when agitated by fierce winds. Mr. Kittle
perceiving this uncommon emotion, gently took the child from her, and
repeatedly kissed it, while new smiles dimpled its lovely aspect. "Oh!" said he
to himself, "this gloom that darkens Maria's soul is supernatural! -- it seems
dreadfully portentious! -- Shall I yet stay?" But here a servant informing him
that his horse was ready, he blushed at his want of fortitude; and having
conquered his irresolution, after the most affecting and solemn parting, he
quitted his house, never to review it more!

Maria then walked sadly back again, and having assembly the family in a little
hall, they closed and barred the doors* Mrs. Comelia Kittle, Maria's
sister-in-law, was far advanced in her pregnancy, which increased her husband's
uneasiness for her; and they were debating in what manner to accommodate her at
Albany, when the trampling of feet about the house, and a yell of complicated
voices, announced the Indians arrival. Struck with horror and consternation,
the little family crowded together in the center of the hall, while the
servants at this alarm, being in a kitchen distant from the house, saved
themselves by a precipitate flight. The little Billy, frightened at such
dreadful sounds, clung fast to his mother's throbbing breast, while Anna, in a
silent agony of amazement, clasped her trembling knees. The echo of their yells
yet rung in long vibrations through the forest, when, with a thundering peal of
strokes at the door, they demanded entrance. Distraction and despair sat upon
every face. Maria and her companions gazed wildly at each other, till, upon
repeated menaces and efforts to break open the door, Comelia's husband, giving
all for lost, leisurely advanced to the door. Comelia seeing this, uttered a
great shriek, and cried out, "O God! what are you doing, my rash, rash,
unfortunate husband! you will be sacrificed!" Then falling on her knees, she
caught hold of his hand and sobbed out, "O pity me! have mercy on yourself, on
me, on my child!" -- "Alas! my love," said he, half turning with a look of
distraction, "what can we do? let us be resigned to the will of God." So saying
he unbarred the door, and that instant received a fatal bullet in his bosom,
and fell backward writhing in the agonies of death; the rest recoiled at this
horrible spectacle, and huddled in a corner, sending forth the most piercing
cries: in the interim the savages rushing in with great shouts, proceeded to
mangle the corpse, and having made an incision round his head with a crooked
knife, they tugged off his bloody scalp with barbarous triumph. While this was
perpetrating, an Indian, hideously painted, strode ferociously up to Comelia,
(who sunk away at the sight, and fainted on a chair) and cleft her white
forehead deeply with his tomahack. Her fine azure eyes just opened, and then
suddenly closing for ever, she tumbled lifeless at his feet. His sanguinary
soul was not yet satisfied with blood; he deformed her lovely body with deep
gashes; and, tearing her unborn babe away, dashed it to pieces against the
stone wall; with many additional circumstances of infernal cruelty.

During this horrid carnage, the dead were stripped, and dragged from the
house, when one of the hellish band advanced to Maria, who circling her babes
with her white arms, was sending hopeless petitions to heaven, and bemoaning
their cruelly lost situation: as he approached, expecting the fatal stroke, she
endeavored to guard her children, and with supplicating looks, implored for
mercy. The savage attempted not to strike; but the astonished Anna sheltered
herself behind her mamma, while her blooming suckling quitting her breast,
gazed with a pleasing wonder on the painted stranger. -- Maria soon recognized
her old friend that presented her with the belt, through the loads of shells
and feathers that disguised him. This was no time, however, to irritate him, by
reminding him of his promise; yet, guessing her thoughts, he anticipated her
remonstrance. "Maria," said he, "be not afraid, I have promised to protect you;
you shall live and dance with us around the fire at Canada: but you have one
small encumbrance, which, if not removed, will much impede your progress
thither." So saying he seized her laughing babe by the wrists, and forcibly
endeavored to draw him from her arms. At this, terrified beyond conception,
she exclaimed, "O God! leave me, leave me my child! he shall not go, though a
legion of devils should try to separate us!" Holding him still fast, while the
Indian applied his strength to tear him away, knashing his teeth at her
opposition; "Help! God of heaven!" screamed she, "help! have pity, have mercy
on this infant! O God! O Christ! can you bear to see this? O mercy! mercy!
mercy! let a little spark of compassion save this inoffending, this lovely
angel!" By this time the breathless babe dropped its head on its bosom; the
wrists were nigh pinched off, and seeing him just expiring, with a dreadful
shriek she resigned him to the merciless hands of the savage, who instantly
dashed his little forehead against the stones, and casting his bleeding body at
some distance from the house, left him to make his exit in feeble and unheard
groans. -- Then indeed, in the unutterable anguish of her soul, she fell
prostrate, and rending away her hair, she roared out her sorrows with a voice
louder than natural, and rendered awfully hollow by too great an exertion. "O
barbarians!" she exclaimed, "surpassing devils in wickedness! so may a tenfold
night of misery enwrap your black souls as you have deprived the babe of my
bosom, the comfort of my cares, my blessed cherub, of light and life -- O hell!
are not thy flames impatient to cleave the center and engulph these wretches in
thy ever burning waves? are there no thunders in Heaven -- no avenging Angel --
no God to take notice of such Heaven defying cruelties?" Then rushing to her
dead infant with redoubled cries, and clapping her hands, she laid herself over
his mangled body; again softened into tears and moans, she wiped the blood from
his ghastly countenance, and pressed him to her heaving bosom, alternately
caressing him and her trembling Anna, who, clinging to her with bitter
wailings, and kissing her hands and face, entreated her to implore the savages
for mercy. "Do, my angel mamma," she urged, "do beg them yet to pity -- beg
them yet to save you for my poor, poor papa's sake! -- Alas! if we are all
killed, his heart will break! -- Oh! they cannot be rocks and stones! -- Don't
cry mamma, they will spare us!" -- Thus the little orator endeavored to
console her afflicted mother; but their melancholy endearments were soon
interrupted by the relentless savages, who having plundered the house of every
valuable thing that was portable, returned to Maria, and rudely catching her
arm, commanded her to follow them; but repulsing them with the boldness of
despair, "Leave me, leave me," she said, "I cannot go -- I never will quit my
murdered child! Too cruel in your mercies, you have given me life only to
prolong my miseries!" -- Meanwhile the lovely Anna, terrified at the hostile
appearance of the enemy, left her mamma struggling to disengage herself from
the Indians, and fled precipitately to the house. She had already concealed
herself in a closet, when Mrs. Kittle pursuing her, was intercepted by flames,
the savages having fired the house. The wretched child soon discovered her
deplorable situation, and almost suffocated by the smoke, with piercing cries
called for help to her dear, dear mother. -- Alas! what could the unhappy
parent do? whole sheets of flames rolled between them, while in a phrenzy of
grief, she screamed out, "O my last treasure, my beloved Anna! try to escape
the devouring fire -- come to me, my sweet child -- the Indians will not kill
us -- O my perishing babe! have pity on your mother -- do not leave me quite
destitute!" Then turning to the calm villains who attended her, she cried, "Why
do you not attempt to rescue my sweet innocent? Can your unfeeling hearts not
bear to leave me one -- a solitary single one?" Again calling to her Anna, she
received no answer, which being a presumption of her death, the Indians obliged
Maria and her brother Henry to quit the house, which they effected with some
difficulty, the glowing beams falling around them and thick volumes of smoke
obscuring their passage. The flames now struck a long splendour through the
humid atmosphere, and blushed to open the tragical scene on the face of heaven.
They had scarce advanced two hundred yards with their reluctant captives, when
the flaming structure tumbled to the earth with a dreadful crash. Our
travelers by instinct turned their eyes to the mournful blaze; and Maria,
bursting afresh into grievous lamentations, cried, "There, there my brother, my
children are wrapped in arching sheets of flames, that used to be circled in my
arms! they are entombed in ruins that breathed their slumbers on my bosom! yet,
oh! their spotless souls even now rise from this chaos of blood and fire, and
are pleading our injured cause before our God, my brother!" He only replied in
sighs and groans; he scarcely heard her; horror had froze up the avenues of his
soul; and all amazed and trembling, he followed his leaders like a person in a
troublesome dream.

The distant flames now cast a fainter light, and the northern breeze bent the
columns of smoke over the south horizon. Sad and benighted, they wandered
through almost impenetrable swamps, forded the broad stream of Tomhanick, and
the rapid river of Hosack; they passed through deserted settlements, where the
yelling of solitary dogs increased the solemnity of midnight, nor halted till
the stars, emitting a feebler luster, presaged the approach of day. Maria,
overcome by sorrow and fatigue, immediately sunk helpless at the foot of a
tree, while the savages (who were six in number) kindled a fire, and prepared
their meal, (in a calabash) which consisted only of some parched maize
pulverized and enriched with the fat of bears flesh. Observing Maria had fallen
asleep, they offered not to disturb her, but invited Henry Kittle to partake of
their repast. He durst not refuse them; and having swallowed a few mouthfuls of
their unpalatable food, and accepted of a pipe of tobacco, he desired leave to
repose himself, which being readily granted, they soon followed his example,
and sunk asleep, leaving two sentinels to guard against surprise, which
precaution they always make use of.

I am, sorry, dear Susan, to quit Maria in this interesting part of her story;
but order requires that we should now return to her spouse, whom we left on his
way through the wood.

The village of Schochticook is situated on a circular plain, surrounded by
high hills, rising in form of an amphitheatre. Mr. Kittle had just gained the
verge, when, chancing to cast his eyes around, he perceived the whole southern
hemisphere suddenly illuminated with a bright blaze; however, being accustomed
to the forest's being often fired to clear it from the underwood, he was not
much surprised, but proceeded to descend the hill. On his arriving with the
account of his brother's murder, the place was put in the highest commotion;
the men fitting up their arms, and the women clamouring about them, highly
importunate to be removed to Albany; but the night being very dark, this
maneuver was deferred till morning; nor could Mr. Kittle prevail on a single
person to return with him during the darkness; he felt himself strangely
agitated at this disappointment, and, refusing to repose himself, with great
impatience he watched the first orient beam of Phosphor, which appearing, he
sat off for home with two wagons, and a guard of three Indians. As he
approached his late happy dwelling, his bosom dilated with the pleasing hope of
soon extricating his beloved family from danger; he chid the slowness of the
carriages, and felt impatient to dissipate the apprehensions of Maria, to kiss
the pendant tear from her eye, and press his sportive innocents to his bosom.
While these bright ideas played round his soul, he lifted up his eyes, and
through an opening of the woods, beheld his farm: but what language can express
his surprise and consternation at seeing his habitation so suddenly desolated!
a loud exclamation of amaze burst from the whole company at so unexpected a
view -- the blood revolted from Mr. Kittle's cheek -- his heart throbbed under
the big emotion, and all aghast, spurring on his horse, he entered the
enclosure with full speed. -- Stop here unhappy man! here let the fibers of thy
heart crack with excruciating misery -- let the cruel view of mangled wretches,
so nearly allied to thee, extort drops of blood from thy cleaving bosom! It did
-- it did. Uttering a deep groan, he fell insensible from his horse, while his
attendants, hastening toward him, were shocked beyond conception at the dismal
spectacle; and, starting back with averted eyes from the dead, were thunder
struck, not having power to move or speak. After awhile two Indians (who being
used to sanguinary scenes, recovered themselves first) took a blanket, and
walking backward to the mangled Comelia, threw it over her naked body; the
others then timidly advanced, and Mr. Kittle opening his eyes groaned again
bitterly; then raising himself on his knees, with a look of unutterable
anguish, he called upon his dear Maria. Alas! no voice but the solemn
repetition of his own cries was articulated to him: then rising with an air of
distraction, he stalked round the bloody scene, and examined the dead bodies;
first uncovering the pale visage of Comelia, he surveyed in silence her
distorted features; but perceiving it was not Maria, he gently laid the cloth
over again, and turning furiously, caught up his ghastly infant, whose little
body was black with contusions, and his skull horribly fractured. Almost
fainting under his mournful load, and staggering at the dreadful discovery, he
deposited it again on the bloody earth, and clapping his hands together
repeatedly with violence, "O hell! hell!" he cried, "you cannot inflict
torments so exquisite as those I now suffer! how am I crushed to the center!
how deeply am I degraded below the worms of the sod! O my children! my
children! where are you now? O my wife! my Maria! the beloved of my bosom, are
you too fallen a sacrifice? Why do I survive these miseries, my God? how can
mortality support them? Burst -- burst my shrinking heart, and punish a wretch
for not having died in the defense of such lovely and innocent beings! Oh! why
was I absent in this fatal hour? why did not their groans vibrate on my soul
that I might have flown to their aid!" Thus wildly lamenting and wandering
among the smoking ruins, he picked up some of the calcined bones of his once
beautiful Anna. At this sight despair shook his soul afresh, new agonies
convulsed his features, and dropping the sad evidence of his miseries, he
extended his arms to Heaven, and roared out, "Revenge! great God! revenge if
thou art just and kind as represented! Oh! that I had the power of an archangel
to thunder eternal horrors on the guilty wretches who have blasted the bud of
my happiness who have darkened the brightest eyes that ever opened on the
light!"

The men here interfering, to console him observed, the bones were probably
those of his brother Peter; but on finding his skeleton entire, Mr. Kittle
insisted that it must have been Maria and Anna, who, having hid themselves, had
doubtless perished in the flames. Again, in the furious extravagance of
passion, he tore the hair from his head, and casting himself prostrate on the
ashes, he gathered the crumbling bones to his bosom, while the big drops of
anguish issued at every pore, till life, unable longer to sustain the mental
conflict, suspended her powers, and once more deprived him of sensation. His
companions having laid him on a wagon, now conferred together in what manner
to proceed, and apprehending an attack from the savages, they unanimously
concluded to lay the dead bodies on the remaining carriage, and make the best
of their way to Schochticook, which they accordingly performed with great
silence and expedition.

You may judge, my dear, what a panic the appearance of this mournful cavalcade
struck over the inhabitants of this defenseless village. Mr. Kittle was gently
laid on a bed, and being let blood, his respiration became less obstructed,
though he continued senseless till his unfortunate family were interred. Six
weeks elapsed before he recovered any degree of strength; but even then he
appeared pale and emaciated like a second Lazarus; his disposition was entirely
changed, his looks were fierce, his attitudes wild and extravagant, and his
conversation, which was formerly sensible, commanding attention by a musical
voice, now was incoherent, and his cadence deep and hollow, rather inspiring
terror than any pleasing sensation. Thirsting for revenge, and perceiving that
solitude only tended to corrode his moments with the blackest melancholy, he
soon after entered the British service in the capacity of gentleman volunteer,
and signalized himself by his prudence and intrepidity, attracting the
particular notice of his officers, who being affected with his misfortunes,
proffered their services to him with so much friendship and candor, as obliged
him to accept of them, and yet lightened the obligation.

But doubtless, my dear, your generous sensibility is alarmed at my silence
about Mrs. Kittle; I think we left her reposing under a tree; she was the first
that awaked as the sun began to exhale the crystal globules of morning, when
half rising, and reclining on her elbow, she surveyed the lovely landscape
around her with a deep sigh; they were on an eminence that commanded an
unlimited prospect of the country every way. The birds were cheerful; the deer
bounded fearless over the hills; the meadows blushed with the enamel of Flora;
but grief had saddened every object in her sight; the whole creation seemed a
dark blank to the fair mourner. Again recollection unlocked the sluices of her
eyes, and her self complaints disturbed her savage companions, who, rising and
kindling up the dying embers, began to prepare their victuals, which they
invited her to partake of. This she declined with visible detestation; and,
turning to her brother with the dignity of conscious merit in distress, "No,"
said she, "I will never receive a morsel from those bloody hands yet dropping
with recent murder! -- let me perish -- let the iron hand of famine first pinch
out my vitals, and send me after my children!" Notwithstanding this, Henry
added his solicitations that she should accept of some refreshment, reminding
her of her fatal resolution, which could be deemed no otherwise than suicide.
Finding this had no effect, he tried to touch her feelings on a softer key --
"Remember, Maria," said he, "you have a tender husband yet living; would you
wish to deprive him of every earthly consolation? Would you add affliction to
affliction, and after he has performed the sorrowful obsequies of his children,
to crush all his remaining hope by the news of your voluntary death? No, live
my sister! be assured he will soon get us exchanged, when soft sympathies shall
wash away your sorrows; and after a few years, who knows but the smiles of a
new lovely progeny may again draw a paradise of happiness on you." Maria was
affected, and half raising her eyes from the earth, she replied, "O my brother!
how consoling do your words sink on my heart! though my reason tells me your
arguments are improbable and fallacious, yet it soothes the tempest of my soul
-- I will try to live -- perhaps I may again behold my dear -- dear -- dear
husband!" Here a flood of tears interrupted her.

As this conversation was held in English, the savages were inquisitive to know
the subject of it, at the same time enjoining them both never to utter a
syllable in their presence, except in their own uncouth dialect, which, as they
perfectly understood, they could not excuse themselves from. Henry then
informed them that his sister, objecting to their method of preparing food, had
desired him to prevail with them to indulge her in dressing her meals herself.
This they readily granted, and farther to ingratiate themselves in the
prisoner's favor, they dispatched a young Indian to hunt for partridges or
quails in the groves adjoining them: He instantly returned with a brood of
wood-pidgeons, scarcely fledged, which he presented to Henry, who cleaned and
broiled them on sticks, with an officious solicitude to please his sister,
which she observed with a look of gratitude, and taking a pigeon from the
stick, began to eat more from complaisance than inclination. Henry was
delighted at her ready acquiescence, and their repast being ended, they
proceeded on their tiresome journey with less repining than the preceding
night. Maria was exempted from carrying a burden, yet she found the fatigue
almost intolerable. They continually passed through a scene of conflagration,
the savages firing every cottage in their way, whose mournful blaze catching
the dry fields of grain, would scorch off hundreds of acres in a few moments,
and form a burning path for their destroyers. As the sun advanced to his
zenith, its rays beat fiercely on our travelers, augmented by the crackling
flames around them; when meeting with a cool stream of water, Maria was
commanded to sit down (being overheated) while the rest approached the
rivulet: the Indian that guarded Maria was stooping down to drink, when a loud
rustling among the leaves and trampling of bushes attracted his attention; he
listened awhile seemingly much alarmed, then starting up suddenly, he flew to
Maria, and caught hold of her hair, aiming his hatchet at her head: the
consequence was obvious, and her fate seemed inevitable; yet, with a stoical
composure, she folded her arms across, and waited the fatal stroke with perfect
resignation; but while the weapon was yet suspended over her, chancing to look
around, he perceived the noise to proceed from a large deer, whose antlers were
entangled in the branches of a thicket. Though an uncivilized inhabitant of the
forest, he blushed at his precipitancy, and returning the instrument of death
to his girdle, after some hesitation made this apology: "Maria, this sudden
discovery is well for you; I thought we had been pursued, and we never suffer
our prisoners to be re-taken; however, I was imprudent to attempt your life
before there was a probability of your being rescued:" then desiring her to
rise and drink, he quickly shot the deer, his associates helping him to skin
it. Instead of quenching her thirst she sat down pensive on the slowery margin,
casting her eyes carelessly on the stream: she knew not whether to esteem her
late deliverance from death a happy providence or protraction of misery.
Observing the spotted trout, and other fish, to dart sportively across the
water, she could not help exclaiming, "Happy! happy animals! you have not the
fatal gift of reason to embitter your pleasures; you cannot anticipate your
difficulties by apprehension, or prolong them by recollection; incapable of
offending your Creator, the blessings of your existence are secured to you:
Alas! I envy the meanest among ye!" A gush of tears concluded her soliloquy;
and being called to attend the company, she arose, and they began their journey
for the afternoon. Henry desiring to have a piece of venison (having left it
behind, seldom incommoding themselves with more than the hide and tallow) they
returned and obliged him with a haunch, which was very fat: at the next
interval of travel he dressed it for himself and Maria. In the evening they
crossed the river somewhat below Fort-Edward, in a canoe left hid under some
bushes for that purpose. They observed the most profound silence until they
entered the woods again; but it was very late before they halted, which they
did in a deep hollow, surrounded by pines whose tops seemed to be lost in the
clouds. It was necessary here to light a fire, for the wolves howled most
dreadfully, and the whole forest rung with the cries of wild beasts of various
sorts. The confines of hell could not have given Maria more dismal ideas than
her present situation: the horrid gloom of the place, the scowling looks of her
murderous companions, the shrill shrieks of owls, the loud cries of the wolf,
and mournful screams of panthers, which were redoubled by distant echoes as the
terrible sounds seemed dying away, shook her frame with cold tremors -- she
sunk under the oppression of terror, and almost fainted on Henry's arms;
however, on perceiving the beasts durst not approach the light, but began to
retire, she became a little more assured, and helped Henry to erect a booth of
pine branches, making a bed of the same materials in it while he prepared their
supper: having eaten, and kindled a large fire in the front of her arbor, she
laid down and soon fell in a deep sleep. She felt herself refreshed by this
unexpected repose, and the next morning, with some alacrity, continued her
journey, hoping at last to arrive at some Christian settlement. Arriving at
Lake-Champlain, they raised a wigwam on the bank, expecting the coming of
Indians from the opposite shore to carry them over.

Here our unfortunate captives were stripped of their habits, already rent to
pieces by briers, and attired each with remnants of old blankets. In this new
dress Mrs. Kittle ventured to expostulate with the savages, but it was talking
to the stormy ocean; her complaints served only to divert them; so retiring
among the bushes, she adjusted her coarse dress somewhat decently, and then
seating herself silently under a spreading tree, indulged herself in the luxury
of sorrow. Henry, sensible that they expected more fortitude from him, and that
if he sunk under his adverse fortune he should be worse treated, affected to be
cheerful; he assisted them in catching salmon, with which the lake abounds; an
incredible quantity of wild fowl frequenting the lake also, he laid snares for
those of the lesser sort, (not being allowed firearms) and succeeded so well,
that his dexterity was highly commended, and night coming on, they regaled
themselves on the fruits of their industry. The night was exceedingly dark, but
calm; a thick mist hovered over the woods, and the small ridgy waves softly
rolled to the shore, when suddenly a large meteor, or fiery exhalation, passed
by them with surprising velocity, casting on every side showers of brilliant
sparkles. At sight of this phenomenon the Indians put their heads between
their knees, crying out in a lamentable voice, "Do not! do not! do not!"
continuing in the same attitude until the vapor disappeared. Henry, with some
surprise demanded the reason of this exclamation; to which they replied, "What
he had seen was a fiery dragon on his passage to his den, who was of so
malevolent a temper, that he never failed, on his arrival there, to inflict
some peculiar calamity on mankind." In about five minutes after the earth was
violently agitated, the waves of the lake tumbled about in a strange manner,
seeming to omit flashes of fire, all the while attended with most tremendous
roarings, intermixed with loud noises, not unlike the explosion of heavy
cannon. Soon as the Indians perceived it was an earthquake, they cried out,
"Now he comes home!" and casting themselves in their former posture, filled the
air with dismal howlings. This was a terrible scene to Maria, who had never
been witness to so dreadful a convulsion of Nature before; she started up and
fled from her savage companions toward an eminence at some distance, where,
dropping on her knees, she emphatically implored the protection of Heaven:
however, she was followed by an Indian and Henry; the latter, highly affected
with her distresses, taking hold of her trembling hand, "But why, my sister!"
said he, "have you fled from us? is the gloom of a forest more cheering than
the sympathising looks of a friend?" No, my brother!" replied Maria; "but the
though it was suggested to me, that the supreme God perhaps was preparing to avenge
himself of these murderers by some awful and uncommon judgment, and I fled from
them as Lot did from Sodom, lest I might be involved in the punishment of their
guilt." They conversed in English, which displeasing the Indian, he ordered
them to return to the wigmam, threatening to bind Maria fast if she offered to
elope again. The shock being over, silence again spread through the realms of
darkness, when a high wind arose from the north and chilled our half-naked
travelers with excessive cold. The savages (whose callous skins were proof
against the inclement weather) not caring to continue their fires, lest they
should be discovered and surprised by some English party, they passed here a
very uncomfortable night; but the wind subsiding, and the sky growing clear,
the sun rose peculiarly warm and pleasant, streaming ten thousand rays of gold
across the lake. Maria had scarcely performed her oraisons, when the savages,
forming a circle round her and Henry, began to dance in a most extravagant
manner, and with antic gestures that at another time would have afforded mirth
to our travelers. Having continued their exercise some time, they
incontinently drew out boxes of paint, and began to ornament their captives
with a variety of colors; one having crossed their faces with a stroke of
vermilion, another would intersect it with a line of black, and so on until the
whole company had given a specimen of their skill or fancy.

Soon after two canoes arrived, in which they passed over the lake, which was
uncommonly serene and pleasant. They proceeded not far on their way before they
were obliged to halt for two days, on account of Maria's inability to travel,
her feet being greatly swollen and lacerated by the flinty path. At length, by
easy stages, they came in view of an Indian settlement, when Maria's long
unbent features relaxed into a half smile, and turning to Henry* "Here my
brother!" said she, "I (...) some of my own sex, to whom (...) Nature, no
doubt, has taught humanity; this is the first precept she inculcates in the
female mind, and this they generally retain through life, in spite of every evil
propensity." As she uttered this eulogium in favor of the fair, the tawny
villagers, perceiving their approach, rushed promiscuously from their huts with
an execrable din, and sell upon the weary captives with clubs and a shower of
stones, accompanying their strokes with the most virulent language; among the
rest an old deformed squaw, with the rage of a Tisiphone, flew to Maria, aiming
a pine-knot at her head, and would certainly have given the wretched mourner
her quietus had she not been opposed by the savage that guarded Mrs. Kittle: he
at first mildly expostulated with his passionate countrywoman; but finding the
old hag frantic, and insatiable of blood, he twisted the pine-knot from her
hand and whirled it away to some distance, then seizing her arm roughly and
tripping up her heels, he laid her prostrate, leaving her to howl and yell at
leisure, which she performed without a prompter. -- Maria was all in a tremor,
and hastily followed her deliverer, not caring to risk another encounter with
the exasperated virago. By this time the rage and tumult of the savages
subsiding, the new-comers were admitted into a large wigwam, in the center of
which blazed a fire. After they were seated, several young Indians entered with
baskets of green maize in the ear, which, having roasted before the fire, they
distributed among the company.

Mrs. Kittle and her brother complaining of the bruises they met with at their
reception, an old Indian seemed to attend with great concern; then leaving the
place, in a little time returned with a bundle of aromatic herbs under his arm,
the juice of which he expressed by rubbing them between two stones with flat
surfaces; this he gave them to drink, applying the leaves externally. They
instantly found relief from the medical quality of this extraordinary plant,
and composing themselves to sleep, expected a good night's repose; but they
were mistaken, for their entertainers growing intoxicated with spiritous
liquors, which operating differently, it produced a most complicated noise of
yelling, talking, singing, and quarrelling: this was a charm more powerful than
the wand of Hermes to drive away sleep: but grown familiar with sorrow and
disappointment, Maria regarded this as a trifle, and when Henry expressed his
concern for her, smiling, she replied, "We must arm ourselves with patience, my
brother! we can combat with fate in no other manner."

It were endless to recapitulate minutely every distress that attended the
prisoners in their tedious journey; let it suffice, that havin passed through
uncommon misery, and imminent danger, they arrived at Montreal. -- Here the
savages were joined by several scalping parties of their tribe, and having
previously fresh painted themselves, appeared in hideous pomp, and performed a
kind of triumphal entry. The throng of people that came out to meet them, threw
Maria in the most painful sensations of embarrassment; but as the clamours and
insults of the populace increased, a freezing torpor succeeded, and bedewed her
limbs with a cold sweat -- strange chimeras danced before her sight -- the
actings of her soul were suspended -- she seemed to move mechanically, nor
recollected herself till she found she was seated in the Governor's hall
surrounded by an impertinent, inquisitive circle of people, who were inquiring
into the cause of her disorder, without attempting any thing toward her
relief. Discovering her situation, she blushingly withdrew to a dark corner
from the public gaze, and could not help sighing to herself, "Alas! but a very
few days ago I was hailed as the happiest of women -- my fond husband
anticipated all my desires -- my children smiled round me with filial delight
-- my very servants paid me the homage due to an angel -- O my God! what a
sudden, what a deplorable transition! I am fallen below contempt!" As she thus
moralized on her situation, an English woman (whom humanity more than curiosity
had drawn to the place) approached Maria, and observing her tears and deep
dejection, took hold of her hand, and endeavored to smile; but the soft
impulses of nature were too strong for the efforts of dissimulation -- her
features instantly saddened again, and she burst into tears, exclaiming, (with
a hesitating voice,) "Poor, forlorn creature! where are thy friends! perhaps
the dying moments of thy fond parent, or husband, have been cruelly embittered
with the sight of thy captivity! perhaps now thy helpless orphan is mourning
for the breast which gave him nourishment! or thy plaintive little ones are
wondering at the long absence of their miserable mother!" -- "Oh! no more! no
more!" interrupted Maria; "your pity is severer than savage cruelty -- I could
stand the shock of fortune with some degree of firmness, but your soft sympathy
opens afresh the wounds of my soul! my losses are beyond your conjecture -- I
have no parent, no sportive children, and, I believe, no husband, to mourn and
wish for me!" These words were succeeded by an affecting silence on both sides:
meanwhile the Indians testified their impatience to be admitted to the Governor
by frequent shouts; at length his Excellency appeared, and having held a
conference with the savages, they retired with his Secretary, and our prisoners
saw them no more.

After their exit the Governor turning round to Maria and Henry, demanded who
they were? Mrs. Kittle's perplexity prevented her reply; but Henry, in a most
respectful manner, gave him a succinct account of their misfortunes. The
Governor perceiving him sensible and communicative, interrogated him farther,
but he modestly declined giving any political intelligence. Observing that
Maria suffered greatly in this interview, he soon concluded it, after having
presented several pieces of calicoes and stuffs to them, desiring they would
accept what they had occasion for. Mrs. Kittle immediately singled out a piece
of black calimanco with tears of gratitude to her benefactor; who, smiling,
observed she might choose a gayer color, as he hoped her distresses were now
over. Maria shook her head in token of dissent, but could make no reply. He
then dismissed them, with a small guard, who was directed to provide them with
decent lodgings.

Henry was accommodated at a baker's, while his sister, to her no small
satisfaction, found herself placed at the English woman's who, on her arrival,
had expressed so much good nature. She had scarcely entered, when Mrs. D --,
presenting her with a cordial, led her to a couch, insisting on her reposing
there a little, "for," says she, "your waste of spirits requires it."

This tenderness, which Maria had long been a stranger to, relaxed every fiber
of her heart: she again melted into tears; but it was a gush of grateful
acknowledgment, that called a modest blush of pleasure and perplexity on Mrs. D
-- 's cheek. Being left alone, she soon fell into a profound sleep; and her
friend having prepared a comfortable repast, in less than an hour awaked her,
with an invitation to dinner -- "And how do you find yourself, my sister? said
she instinctively, seizing Maria's hand and compressing it between here is; "may
we hope that you will assist us in conquering your dejection?" -- Maria smiled
benignly through a crystal atmosphere of tears, and kissing the hand of her
friend, arose. Having dined, and being now equipped in decent apparel, Maria
became the admiration and esteem of the whole family. The tempest of her soul
subsided in a solemn calm; and though she did not regain her vivacity, she
became agreeably conversible.

In a few days, however, she felt the symptoms of an approaching fever. She was
alarmed at this, and intimating to Mrs. D -- her fears of becoming troublesome.
"Do not be concerned," returned that kind creature; "my God did not plant
humanity in my breast to remain there an inactive principle." Maria felt her
oppression relieved by this generous sentiment; and indeed found her friendship
did not consist in profession, as she incessantly tended her during her illness
with inexpressible delicacy and solicitude. When she was again on the recovery,
Mrs. D -- one day ordered a small trunk covered with Morocco leather to be
brought before her, and opening it, produced several sets of fine linen, with
some elegant stuffs and other necessaries. -- "See, said she, "what the
benevolence of Montreal has done for you. The ladies that beg your acceptance
of these things, intend likewise to enhance the favor, by waiting on you this
afternoon." -- "Ah!" interrupted Maria, "I want them not; this one plain habit
is enough to answer the purpose of dress for me. Shut the chest, my dear Mrs. D
--, and keep them as a small compensation for the immense trouble I have been
to you." -- "If this is your real sentiment," replied her friend, (shutting the
chest, and presenting her the key) "return your gifts to the donors; and since
you will reward me for my little offices of friendship, only love me, and
believe me disinterested, and I shall be overpaid." -- "I see I have wronged
your generosity," answered Maria. "Pardon me my sister, I will offend no more.
I did not think you mercenary -- but -- but -- I meant only to disengage my
heart of a little of its burden." -- As this tender contest was painful to both
parties, Mrs. D -- rising abruptly, pretended some business, promising to
return again directly.

In the afternoon Maria received her visitants in a neat little parlour. She
was dressed in a plain suit of mourning, and wore a small muslin cap, from
which her hair fell in artless curls on her fine neck: her face was pale,
though not emaciated, and her eyes streamed a soft languor over her
countenance, more bewitching than the sprightliest glances of vivacity. As they
entered, she arose, and advancing, modestly received their civilities, while
Mrs. D -- handed them to chairs: but hearing a well known voice, she hastily
lifted up her eyes, and screamed out in an accent of surprise, "Good Heaven,
may I credit my senses? My dear Mrs. Bratt, my kind neighbor, is it really you
that I see?" Here she found herself clasped in her friend's arms, who, after a
long subsiding sigh, broke into tears. The tumult of passion at length abating
-- "Could I have guessed, my Maria," said she, "that you was here, my visit
should not have been deferred a moment after your arrival; but I have mourned
with a sister in affliction, (permit me to present her to you,) and while our
hearts were wrung with each other's distress, alas! we inquired after no
foreign calamity." Being all seated, "I dare not," resumed Maria, "ask after
your family; I am afraid you only have escaped to tell me of them." -- "Not so,
my sister," cried Mrs. Bratt; "but if you can bear the recollection of your
misfortunes, do oblige me with the recital." The ladies joined their entreaty,
and Mrs. Kittle complied in a graceful manner.

After some time spent in tears, and pleasing melancholy, tea was brought in;
and toward sunset Mrs. D -- invited the company to walk in the garden, which
being very small, consisted only of a parterre, at the farther end of which
stood an arbor covered with a grape-vine. Here being seated, after some chat
on indifferent subjects, Maria denied Mrs. Bratt, (if agreeable to the company)
to acquaint her with the circumstances of her capture. They all bowed
approbation; and after some hesitation Mrs. Bratt began: --

"My heart, ladies, shall ever retain a sense of the happiness I enjoyed in the
society of Mrs. Kittle and several other amiable persons in the vicinage of
Schochticook, where I resided. She in particular cheered my lonely hours of
widowhood, and omitted nothing that she thought might conduce to my serenity. I
had two sons; she recommended the education of them to my leisure hours. I
accepted her advice, and found a suspension of my sorrows in the execution of
my duty. They soon improved beyond my capacity of teaching. Richard, my eldest,
was passionately fond of books, which he studied with intense application. This
naturally attached him to a sedentary life, and he became the constant
instructive companion of my evening hours. My youngest son, Charles, was more
volatile, yet not less agreeable; his person was charming, his wit sprightly
and his address elegant. They often importuned me, at the commencement of this
war, to withdraw to Albany; but, as I apprehended no danger, (the British
troops being stationed above us, quite from Saratoga to the Lake) I ridiculed
their fears.

"One evening as my sons were come in from reaping, and I was busied in
preparing them a dish of tea, we were surprised by a discharge of musquetry
near us. We all three ran to the door, and beheld a party of Indians not twenty
paces from us. Struck with astonishment, we had no power to move; and the
savages again firing that instant my Charles dropped down dead beside me. Good
God! what were my emotions! But language would fail, should I attempt to
describe them. My surviving son then turning to me, with a countenance
expressive of the deepest horror, urged me to fly. "Let us be gone this
instant," said he; another moment determines our sat. O my mother! you are
already lost. But despair had swallowed up my fears; I fell shrieking on the
body of my child, and rending away my hair, endeavored to recall him to life
by unavailing laments. Richard, in the meanwhile had quitted me, and the moment
after I beheld him mounted on horseback, and stretching away to the city. The
Indians fired a volley at him, but missed, and, I flatter myself that he
arrived safe. And now, not all my prayers and tears could prevent the wretches
from scalping my precious child. But when they rent me away from him, and
dragged me from the house, my grief and rage burst forth like a hurricane. I
execrated their whole race, and called for eternal vengeance to crush them to
atoms. After a while I grew ashamed of my impetuosity: the tears began again to
flow silently on my cheek; and, as I walked through the forest between two
Indians, my soul grew suddenly sick and groaned in me; a darkness, more
substantial than Egyptian night, felt upon it, and my existence became an
insupportable burden to me. I looked up to Heaven with a hopeless kind of awe,
but I murmured no more at the dispensations of my God; and in this frame of
sullen resignation I passed the rest of my journey, which being nearly similar
to Mrs. Kittle's, I shall avoid the repetition of. And now permit me (said she,
turning to the French ladies) to acknowledge your extreme goodness to me. I was
a stranger, sick and naked, and you took me in. You indeed have proved the good
Samaritan to me, pouring oil and wine in my wounds." -- "Hush, hush, (cried
Madame De Roche,) you estimate our services at too high a rate. I see you are
no connoisseur in minds; -- there is a great deal of honest hospitality in the
world, though you have met with so little."

"I now reject (interrupted Mrs. Bratt,) all prejudices of education. From my
infancy have I been taught that the French were a cruel perfidious enemy, but I
have found them quite the reverse."

Madame De R. willing to change the subject, accosted the other stranger, --
"Dear Mrs. Willis, shall we not be interested likewise in your misfortunes?" --
"Ah! do (added Mademoiselle V.) my heart is now sweetly tuned to melancholy. I
love to indulge these divine sensibilities, which your affecting histories are
so capable of inspiring." -- Maria then took hold of Mrs. Willis's hand, and
pressed her to oblige them. -- Mrs. Willis bowed. She dropped a few tears; but
assuming a composed look, she began: --

"I am the daughter of a poor clergyman, who being confined to his chamber by
sickness, for several years, amused himself by educating me. At his death,
finding myself friendless, and without money, I accepted the hand of a young
man who had taken a leased farm in Pensylvania. He was very agreeable, and
extravagantly fond of me. We lived happily for many years in a kind of frugal
affluence. When the savages began to commit outrages on the frontier
settlements, our neighbors, intimidated at their rapid approaches, erected a
small fort, surrounded by a high palisade. Into this the more timorous drove
their cattle at night; and one evening, as we were at supper, my husband (being
ordered on guard) insisted that I should accompany him with the children (for I
had two lovely girls, one turned of thirteen years, and another of six months.)
My Sophia assented to the proposal with joy. Mamma, (said she) what a merry
woman the Captain's wife is; she will divert us the whole evening, and she is
very fond of your company: come, I will take our little Charlotte on my arm,
and papa will carry the lantern. I acceded with a nod; and already the dear
charmer had handed me my hat and gloves, when somebody thundered at the door.
We were silent as death, and instantly after plainly could distinguish the
voices of savages conferring together. Chilled as I was with fear, I flew to
the cradle, and catching my infant, ran up into a loft. Sophia followed me all
trembling, and panting for breath cast herself in my bosom. Hearing the Indians
enter, I looked through a crevice in the floor, and saw them, with menacing
looks, seat themselves round the table, and now and then address themselves to
Mr. Willis, who, all pale and astonished, neither understood nor had power to
answer them. I observed they took a great pleasure in terrifying him, by
flourishing their knives, and gashing the table with their hatchets. Alas! this
sight shot icicles to my soul; and, to increase my distress, my Sophia's little
heart beat against my breast, with redoubled strokes, at every word they
uttered.

"Having finished their repast in a gluttinous manner, they laid a firebrand
in each corner of the chamber, and then departed, driving poor Mr. Willis
before them. The smoke soon incommoded us; but we dreaded our barbarous enemy
more than the fire. At length, however, the flames beginning to invade our
retreat, trembling and apprehensive, we ventured down stairs; the whole house
glowed now like a furnace; the flames rolled toward the stairs, which we
hastily descended; but just as I sat my foot on the threshold of the door, a
piece of timber, nearly consumed through, gave way, and fell on my left arm,
which supported my infant, miserably fracturing the bone. I instantly caught up
my fallen lamb, and hastened to overtake my Sophia. There was a large hollow
tree contiguous to our house, with an aperture just large enough to admit so
small a woman as I am. Here we had often laughingly proposed to hide our
children, in case of a visit from the olive colored natives. In this we now
took shelter; and being seated some time, my soul seemed to awake as it were
from a vision of horror: I lifted up my eyes, and beheld the cottage that
lately circumscribed all my worldly wealth and delight, melting away before the
devouring fire. I dropped a tear as our apostate first parents did when thrust
out from Eden.

"The world lay all before them, where to choose their place of rest, and
Providence their guide. Ah, Eve! thought I, had thou been like me, solitary,
maimed, and unprotected, thy situation had been deplorable indeed. Then
pressing my babe to my heart, How quiet art thou, my angel, (said I;) sure --
sure, Heaven has stilled thy little plaints in mercy to us. -- Ah! (sobbed
Sophia,) now I am comforted again that I hear my dear mamma's voice. I was
afraid grief would have forever deprived me of that happiness. And here she
kissed my babe and me with vehemence. When her transports were moderated, --
How cold my sister is, (said she) do wrap her up warmer, mamma; poor thing, she
is not used to such uncomfortable lodging.

"The pain of my arm now called for all my fortitude and attention; but I
forbore to mention this afflicting circumstance to my daughter.

"The cheerful swallow now began to usher in the dawn with melody; we timidly
prepared to quit our hiding place* and turning round to the light, I cast an
anxious eye of love on my innocent, wondering that she slept so long. But oh!
horror and misery! I beheld her a pale, stiff corpse in my arms; (suffer me to
weep, ladies, at the cruel recollection.) It seems the piece of wood that
disabled me, had also crushed my Charlotte's tender skull, and no wonder my
hapless babe was quiet. I could no longer sustain my sorrowful burden, but
falling prostrate, almost insensible at the dreadful discovery, uttered nothing
but groans. Sophia's little heart was too susceptible for so moving a scene.
Distracted between her concern for me, and her grief for the loss of her dear
sister, she cast herself beside me, and with the softest voice of sorrow,
bewailed the fate of her beloved Charlotte -- her sweet companion -- her
innocent, laughing play-fellow. At length we rose, and Sophia, clasping all
that remained of my cherub in her arms, Ah! (said she,) I did engage to carry
you, my sister, but little did I expect in this distressing manner. When we
came in sight of the fort, though I endeavored to spirit up my grieved child,
yet I found my springs of action begin to move heavily, my heart fluttered, and
I suddenly fainted away. Sophia, concluding I was dead, uttered so piercing a
cry, that the sentinel looking up, immediately called to those in the fort to
assist us. When I recovered, I found myself in a bed encircled by my kind
neighbors, who divided their expressions of love and condolement between me
and my child. I remained in the fort after this; but, ladies, you may think,
that bereft as I was of so kind a husband and endearing child, I soon found
myself solitary and destitute. I wept incessantly; and hearing nothing from my
dear Willis, I at length resolved to traverse the wilds of Canada in pursuit of
him. When I communicated this to my friends, they all strongly opposed it; but
finding me inflexible, they furnished me with some money and necessaries, and
obtained a permission from the Governor to let me go under protection of a flag
that was on the way. Hearing likewise that a cartel was drawn for an exchange
of prisoners, I sat out, flushed with hope, and with indefatigable industry and
painful solicitude, arrived at Montreal, worn to a skeleton (as you see ladies)
with fatigue.

"I omitted not to inquire of every officer, the names of prisoners who had
been brought in. At length I understood that Mr. Willis had perished in jail,
on his first arrival, of a dysentery. -- Here my expectations terminated in
despair. I had no money to return with, and indeed but for my Sophia no
inclination -- the whole world seemed dark and cheerless to me as the fabled
region of Cimmeria, and I was nigh perishing for very want, when Mrs. Bratt,
hearing of my distress, sought my acquaintance: she kindly participated my
sorrows, and too -- too generously shared her purse and bed with me. This,
ladies, is the story of a brokenhearted woman; nor should I have intruded it
in any other but the house of mourning."

Here she concluded, while the ladies severally embracing her, expressed their
acknowledgments for the painful task she had complied with to oblige their
curiosity. -- "Would to Heaven!" said Madame De R. that the brutal nations were
extinct, for never -- never can the united humanity of France and Britain
compensate for the horrid cruelties of their savage allies."

They were soon after summoned to an elegant collation; and having spent best
part of the night together, the guests retired to their respective homes.

During two years, in which the French ladies continued their bounty and
friendship to Mrs. Kittle, she never could gain the least intelligence of her
husband. Her letters, after wandering through several provinces, would often
return to her hands unopened. Despairing at length of ever seeing him, "Ah!"
she would say to Mrs. D --, "my poor husband has undoubtedly perished, perhaps
in his fruitless search after me, and I am left to be a long -- long burden on
your goodness, a very unprofitable dependant."

In her friend's absence she would descend into the kitchen, and submit to the
most menial offices; nor could the servants prevent her; however, they apprised
Mrs. D -- of it, who seized an opportunity of detecting her at her labor.
Being baffled in her humble attempt by the gentle reproaches of her indulgent
patroness, she sat down on the step of the door, and began to weep. "I believe,
good Mrs. D --," said she, "were you a hard task-master, that exacted from
these useless hands the most slavish business, I could acquit myself with
cheerfulness: my heart is like ice, that brightens and grows firmer by
tempests, but cannot stand the warm rays of a kind sun." Mrs. D -- was
beginning to answer, when hearing a tumult in the street, they both hasted to
the door, and Maria, casting her eyes carelessly over the crowd, in an instant
recognized the features of her long-lamented husband, who sprang toward her
with an undescribable and involuntary rapture: but the tide of joy and surprise
was too strong for the delicacy of her frame: she gave a faint exclamation, and
stretching out her arms to receive him, dropped senseless at his feet. The
succession of his ideas was too rapid to admit describing. He caught her up,
and bearing her in the hall, laid his precious burden on a settee, kneeling
beside her in a speechless agony of delight and concern. Meanwhile the
spectators found themselves wonderfully affected -- the tender contagion ran
from bosom to bosom -- they wept aloud; and the house of joy seemed to be the
house of lamentation. At length Maria opened her eyes and burst into a violent
fit of tears -- Mr. Kittle, with answering emotions, silently accompanying her;
then clasping his arms endearingly round her, "It is enough, my love," said he,
"we have had our night of affliction, and surely this blessed meeting is a
presage of a long day of future happiness; let me kiss off those tears, and
show by your smiles that I am indeed welcome." Maria then bending fondly
forward to his bosom, replied, sighing, "Alas! how can your beggared wife give
you a proper reception? she cannot restore your prattling babes to your arms --
she comes alone! Alas! her presence will only serve to remind you of the
treasures -- the filial delights you have lost!" -- "God forbid," answered he,
"that I should repine at the loss of my smaller comforts, when so capital a
blessing as my beloved Maria is so wonderfully restored to me." Here he was in
civility obliged to rise and receive the compliments of Mrs. Bratt, Mrs.
Willis, and Madame De R --, who, hearing of his arrival, entered just then,
half breathless with impatience and joy. The company increased; an elegant
dinner was prepared: in short, the day was devoted to pleasure; and never was
satisfaction more general -- festivity glowed on every face, and complacency
dimpled every cheek.

After tea Maria withdrew in the garden, to give her beloved an account of what
had befallen her during their separation. The eloquence of sorrow is
irresistible. Mr. Kittle wept, he groaned, while all impassioned (with long
interruptions of grief in her voice) she stammered through her doleful history;
and yet she felt a great satisfaction in pouring her complaints into a bosom
whose feelings were in unison with here is -- they wept -- they smiled -- they
mourned, and rejoiced alternately, with an abrupt transition from one passion
to another.

Mr. Kittle, in return, informed her, that having thrown himself into the army,
in hopes of ending a being that grew insupportable under the reflection of past
happiness, he tempted death in every action wherein he was engaged, and being
disappointed, gave him up to the blacked melancholy. "This gloomy scene," he
observed, "would soon have been closed by some act of desperation; but one
evening, sitting pensive in his tent, and attentively running over the
circumstances of his misfortunes, a thought darted on his mind that possibly
his brother Henry might be alive." This was the first time the idea of any one
of his family's surviving the general murder had presented itself to him, and
he caught at the flattering suggestion as a drowning wretch would at a plank.
"Surely, surely," said he, "my brother lives -- it is some divine emanation
lights up the thought in my soul -- it carries conviction with it: I will go
after him -- it shall be the comfort and employment of my life to find out this
dear brother -- this last and only treasure." Persuaded of the reality of his
fancy, he communicated his design to a few of his military friends; but they
only laughed at his extravagance, and strongly dissuaded him from so wild an
undertaking. Being discouraged, he desisted; but shortly after, hearing that a
company of prisoners (who were enfranchised) were returning to Quebec, he got
permission to accompany them. After a very fatiguing journey he arrived at
Montreal, and was immediately introduced to the General Officer, who patiently
heard his story, and treated him with great clemency. Having obtained leave to
remain a few days in town, he respectfully withdrew, and turning down a street
he inquired of a man who was walking before him, where lodgings were to be let?
The stranger turned about, civilly taking off his hat, when Mr. Kittle,
starting back, grew as pale as ashes -- "Oh, my God!" cried he, panting, "oh!
Henry, is it you! is it indeed you! No, it cannot be." Here he was ready to
fall; but Henry, with little less agitation, supported him; and a tavern being
at hand, he led him in. The master of the hotel brought in wine, and they drank
off many glasses to congratulate so happy a meeting. When their transports were
abated, Henry ventured to tell him that his Maria was living and well. This was
a weight of joy too strong for his enfeebled powers -- he stared wildly about.
-- At length, recovering himself, "Take care Henry," said he, "this is too
tender a point to trifle upon." -- "My brother," replied Henry, "be calm, let
not your joy have a worse effect than your grief -- they both came sudden, and
it behooves a man and a christian to show as much fortitude under the one as the
other." -- "Alas! I am prepared for some woeful deception," cried Mr. Kittle;
but, Henry, this suspense is cruel." -- "By the eternal God!" rejoined his
brother, "your Maria, your wife, is in this town, and if you are composed
enough, you shall immediately see her." -- Mr. Kittle could not speak -- he
gave his hand to Henry, and while (like the Apostles friends) he believed not
for joy, he was conducted to her arms, and found his bliss wonderfully real.

FINIS.

