Mr. BENTLEY's FUNERAL DISCOURSE ON THE DEATH OF GENERAL FISKE.

A FUNERAL DISCOURSE, DELIVERED IN THE EAST MEETING HOUSE, SALEM, ON THE SUNDAY
AFTER THE DEATH OF MAJOR GENERAL JOHN FISKE, WHO DIED SEPTEMBER 28, 1797. AET.
53.

BY WILLIAM BENTLEY, A. M. PASTOR OF THE SECOND CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH IN SALEM.

BEATI RESURGIMUS. Min. Felix. PRINTED AT SALEM, BY THOMAS C. CUSHING. 1797.

Salem, October 12, 1797. To the Reverend WILLIAM BENTLEY. Sir,
IN behalf of the Committee of the East Society, who are desirous to honor the
memory of a worthy Benefactor, I am directed to request that the Discourse
delivered after the death of General FISKE, be committed to the press.

In behalf of the Committee, BENJAMIN WARD, jun. Clerk.

A FUNERAL DISCOURSE.
1 SAMUEL, ix. 6. AN HONORABLE MAN.
THESE words are chosen in honor of General FISKE, whose elogium I am this day
to pronounce. The Scriptures every where pay a tribute to character, in order
to pay a just tribute to truth. History lives in great men, as well as in great
events, and it cannot do justice to the one, without the other. The most simple
chronology is that of lives; and laws take not plainer dates from the reign of
princes, than great actions do from the times of great men. Surely then the
silence will not be required of religion, which truth has denied to history. We
may pay the debt of friendship, and form the love of virtue, in the memory of
the dead. The good man will ask no apology, and no other man can deserve one.
It is the privilege of virtue to be dear in the recollection, and to have glory
from past actions.

A peculiar obligation arises on the present occasion, from the distinguished
services which our departed friend performed for this religious society. The
spirit of our times had required a change from a parish, to that of an
incorporation of the proprietors in this house of worship. Other parts of the
town enjoyed such privileges, and many inhabitants were bound by local
residence to support a minister in the parish, who had other engagements. To
obtain a law to dissolve the parish was easy, but to change the proprietors of
the house so as to provide such as were competent to the settlement and support
of a minister, was difficult. The work must be accomplished by slow degrees,
and in this time, the support of a minister must be very precarious. It must
depend upon generous exertion, and require some active friend to persevere in
firm, but mild measures, till the end was attained. Such was our deceased
friend, and his liberality on the occasion was unbounded. He was constant,
consistent, and competent in such services, and attained his wishes without
division, or contention. His endeavors to establish, what he had so laudably
assisted to create, were uniform, till an apoplectic shock disenabled him from
any important services in our interest. We may then, with the greatest justice,
unite with his fellow citizens in commemorating the event of the past week, in
the death of an HONORABLE MAN.

Major General JOHN FISKE was born in this town, on the 10th day of April,
1744. His father was minister of the first church, which was, at his
ordination, the only church within the limits of the town. He was a man of
eminent talents in the pulpit, of a firm and persevering mind, and of great
ambition. He married into one of the most flourishing families of the town, and
was in very high esteem, till dissensions in the society, from the ill defined
discipline of our churches, interrupted the harmony, and prevented his
usefulness. Samuel Fiske, ordained October 8, 1718, died in Salem, April 7,
1770, Aet. 81.
Among his children, was the gentleman we lament. John was baptized on the 6th
of May, by his uncle Nathan Bucknam, of Medway, in the first church in Salem.
This venerable man, lately deceased, nearly finished a century of years. He
died, in his charge at Medway, in February, 1795. Aet. 92.
Debarred from the hopes of living in the ministry, the Father was obliged to
provide for his children in the usual business of life, and his son, with a
common education, early engaged in the business of the sea, and having great
success and happy talents for this employment, he soon became able to obtain
promotion. He married for the first time in June 1766 to a daughter of a Deacon
in this church, in whom he found a worthy wife, and the mother of his children.
She deceased in 1782, and he afterward married a daughter of Col. Lee of
Manchester, with whom he lived only two years. He then married his present
wife, with whom he lived happily, and from whom he experienced all the kind
offices which were so necessary in the last years of his life. He married Lydia
Phippen, June 12, 1766, who died October 13, 1782. He married the widow Martha
Hibbert, daughter of Col. John Lee, of Manchester, February 11, 1783, who died
November 30, 1785. He then married the widow Sarah Oerry, of Marblehead,
daughter of Major John Wendell, of Boston, June 18, 1786. His surviving
children are Anna, Elizabeth, and John, Elizabeth married Ebenezer Putnam, M.
A. son of Ebenezer Putnam, physician, of Salem, lately deceased. They have one
child.


Soon after he became easy in his circumstances, the American Civil War
commenced. His intrepidity and ambition soon marked him out, as capable of
useful services to his country, and he was appointed a commander in the service
of the State, in one of the vessels then fitted for sea, and held the first
commission. The natural warmth of his temper could never control the generous
sentiments of his heart. Even in times of war, he felt the great difference
between the liberty of the law, which public exigencies might give to private
vessels on the high seas, and the authority it could have in the name of the
State to capture vessels of the enemy. Of a commission he thought most highly,
and the most generous conduct resulted from the pride, which this opinion
inspired. Our feeble marine force could atchieve nothing greater than to
interrupt the trade of the enemy, and this might be done without insult, and
inhumanity. At the close of the war, he established himself as a merchant. As
he rose in life, from the employments of navigation, he connected his character
as a merchant, immediately with ships in commerce, and extended his voyages, as
the enterprising spirit of the times, and his own ambition led him, and had he
not possessed from early life an uncommon generosity, he must have risen to as
splendid wealth, as has ever been enjoyed in our country. In his business, he
soon became distinguished by his generous encouragement to all whom he
employed. He never appeared more sincerely happy, than when the masters of his
vessels grew rich, and never discovered more earnest desires, than to promote
such as had been faithful in his employment. Punctuality with the tradesmen, he
most highly valued, and his contracts were generous, never oppressive, and
seldom of less than equal advantage, to all who formed them. He carefully
observed an annual settlement and arrangement of all his affairs, and no
merchant could provide more amply for the accuracy of his papers, or the order
and just series of his books of account. And he suffered no persons to be
engaged in this service, who had not adequate hopes of advantage from their
fidelity. No man therefore could be more loved by his clerks and masters. All
are ready to attest the warmth of affection, which they have discovered.

His business kept him from any thoughts of civil offices in the state, but no
man ever paid greater veneration to the servants of the people. He always spoke
of places of trust, as offices of the highest honor, and he religiously
guarded against the liberty to extend the censure of a bad man, to any office
he might hold in the state. Our chief magistrates, our judges, and men of every
office found him respectful to all the honors, which the state could confer,
and discovered that such honors were sure claims of the highest attention from
his enlightened patriotism.

But though confined by his attention to business, in his wishes of civil
promotion, no man was more attentive to the police, and the prosperity of the
town, in which he lived. As an officer of the town he was always useful; always
ready; and always employed. In the administration of the public charities, no
man contributed more to the most happy arrangements, to the kindest attentions,
and to the general satisfaction of the poor. No part of the economy was
forgotten by him. Every thing passed before his own eyes. He entered into the
condition and claims of the lowest, and was as punctual and faithful, as in his
own highest concerns. Upon the occasional contributions in the Congregation, he
has been known to assist liberally in the collection; to have added repeatedly
in the arrangements; and then again in the distribution, and has then said, "It
is indeed more than usual, but while one want is unsupplied, it is not enough."

For the Schools he always expressed the most sacred regard, and he was very
active in obtaining that late establishment, from which the town derives so
much honor, and so general satisfaction. He inspected the building of the new
Schools, and encouraged with great zeal the public Schools for the instruction
of Females. He always had an high opinion of the important trust of a
Schoolmaster, and therefore always was zealous for the most ample compensation
of their labors. The Schoolmasters have lost a distinguished benefactor. The
exemplary industry, and just economy of this town, had subjected it to false
charges respecting its hospitality. The silent and reserved manners so natural
to its employments, and to a town, which has so very little inland trade, had
given occasion to such reports. It was the duty of men, who could unite with
application to business, happy opportunities for leisure, to remove ungenerous
prejudices. For this duty, our friend was eminently qualified. The habits of
business were easy to him, and his affairs were well arranged, while his love
of society had never been impaired by his great industry and activity. He
therefore opened his house to the worthy of all nations. He received visits
freely from all strangers, recommended to him, and searched out the wants of
all, who entered the town. In his extensive services to men of every rank and
description, he remains unequalled.

He had been always taught to associate the influence of good morals with
religious institutions of public instruction, and therefore at public worship
he was constant. No excuses sufficed for him. But with religious opinions he
had formed no enmities. He never thought men, who differed from him, were fools
or knaves. He had a persuasion that religious opinions depend not on names, but
upon sincere inquiry, for their best influence, and that an honest mind might
be so circumstanced, as to admit the most absurd doctrines, and be uncharitable
in the defense of them, while there might be great benevolence in the native
purposes of the heart. He therefore loved all men, who acted in sincerity, and
never found his own heart less sensible, nor his hand less ready, from the
opinions, condition, or prejudices of any men. Few men can preserve this
generosity of mind, with greater freedom from caprice. No hasty expression was
hard to recall, and no fudden purpose was sufficient to check his bounty; and
when he acted, he was sure to do what was honorable. He felt the claims of
humanity rising above all the distinctions of civil life, and he had one law
for all mankind.

The kind opinion of his fellow citizens marked him out for all the honors
they could confer. His promotion was unavoidable. They knew his ambition to
give the highest success to all his undertakings, and could not refuse to urge
him to many important services. The state of the militia, the boast, as it
ought to be the defense of Republics, then under many discouragements, required
a man of perseverance, and bold exertion. The laws of the militia were examined
with great prejudices, and the contrary opinions all tended to insubordination.
A man of a disinterested spirit was necessary to quiet the public mind, and to
overrule prejudices in regard to a subject upon which the public sense is not
yet determined. After his public appearance he soon rose to the highest
preserment. He became Colonel of the Regiment in 1788. In July 1789 he was
elected, and commissioned Brigadier General, and in 1792 became Major General.
Under his patronage began an association of the Military Officers, which has
been very favorable to private friendship, as well as conducive to the
ambition of a military command, while it much increased the disposition for the
necessary subordination.

While employed in organising and encouraging the militia, he was not forgotten
by the merchants, and the members of the Marine Society. This institution,
designed for the charitable assistance of distressed mariners and their
families, embraced also the liberal design of promoting every thing useful to
navigation, and of preserving and communicating all discoveries and occurrences
on the voyages of the members, as well as of receiving all plans to facilitate
the navigation of this port. The Marine Society was formed in 1766, revised its
laws in 1784, and again corrected them in 1790. After the death of that worthy
man, Captain Jonathan Gardner, in 1791, our friend was appointed his
successor, as President, or Master of the Society. Under so active an officer,
its spirit revived. It was not long after the appointment, convenient piers
were raised to guard against the dangers and the delays of a narrow and shallow
channel to our wharves, and the stately beacon soon appeared at the entrance of
the harbor, which promoted from its known utility, the petition for the new
light house already erected. The funds have increased, and this Society is now
one of the most flourishing and reputable in the State.

But to teach us the uncertain prospects of life, while he was projecting the
boldest designs for the prosperity of Salem, he had a stroke of apoplexy, which
put an end to his usefulness. The evil had so affected the brain in June 1795,
that the hopes of recovery were lost. It was attended with great loss of
memory, and with great absence of mind, when he first awoke from sleep, and
increased into an entire derangement. But in his most deranged state, he was
full of great designs for mankind, and never betrayed a narrow thought, or one
ungenerous purpose on any occasion. The aid of physicians in town and country
was sought in vain, and the shocks were repeated, till an entire debility
ensued, and at last the powers of speech failed, and in a violent fit of
apoplexy, he expired at two o'clock on Thursday last, the 28th day of September.

Various causes have been assigned, of a calamity, which arrested a man, of so
apparently firm constitution, in the midst of his hopes and usefulness. But the
effects do not so well correspond with the events, which occurred in his
domestic circumstances, and his secular concerns, as to persuade us, that they
were the remote, or immediate causes of his sufferings. The repeated breaches
in his family, and the depredations on his property at sea, undoubtedly
distressed him, but his natural cheerfulness, and the property he still
possessed, relieved him from the worst apprehensions. From an intimate
acquaintance, and an impartial inquiry, and from daily observation, it may be
presumed, and from the history of his family and constitution, that what he
suffered arose from no moral cause, and from no anxiety of mind, but from the
nature of that disorder, which has so often arrested the best and most active
men, and which did arrest on the past week a worthy gentleman of the same rank
at the head of his division, and in the public discharge of his duty. Genesis Hull
at the review in Concord. He has since recovered of this shock.


High as may be our esteem of him in his public offices, we shall not value him
less, when we observe his disposition in domestic life. In his first years, he
was called to repay the cares of his aged parents, when he might have hoped to
provide for his own advancement. The joy as well as fidelity with which he
discharged this duty, is well known, and has been the subject of many a
prophecy among the aged, respecting God's blessings upon him Such an ingenuous
affection displays his worth in an unequivocal manner.

As an Husband, he passed in quick succession through various scenes, all of
which were adapted to explain the firm habits of his mind. In the wife of his
youth, he had sweet endearment. The short scene of gay, and fond life, which
succeeded, served to fix his love of social joy, and the amiable virtues of his
last companion were rich blessings upon the last scene of his usefulness, and
in the hours which called for sympathy, fidelity, and the severest duty.

Of sympathy he felt all the cruelty, and yet he commanded all the virtue. His
children were dear to him. They rose into life, but perished at the hour they
ripened. An accomplished daughter of his hopes completed her education, and
returned to her parents, to embrace them, and to die. He saw the fond mother in
one of his children, and found another home, but this expectation was soon
lost. The mother and the babes soon passed to the silence of the grave. Yet
another smiled on the world, and bid a speedy farewell in youth and innocence.
In these scenes, he was tender, yet resigned. He with increased affection
united to those who remained with him, and as the circle became small, he
filled it more with his presence and his love. His manners were kind, and
familiar, and commanded respect. He was fond, easily excited to pity, but had a
dignity in his tears. Superior to complaint, he listened to the complaints of
other men, and engaged their confidence. Without fraud, his language seldom
required an explanation, and did not admit concealed purposes of evil. He never
valued his friendship, till he had proved it, and never believed his own
sincerity, till he had discharged every obligation. Justice with him was all
the good in his power. He was fond of favor, but he endeavored to deserve it.
He loved men, rather than opinions, He professed the Unitarian doctrine.
and he desired to know more of their actions, than of there professions. As a
just tribute, it may be said, that in his friendships, he was constant. Few
men, so much in the world, knew so little of being in and out of favor. No
resentment made him deny any man's merit, and no enmity made him refuse to
serve him. He blamed error only when persisted in. He made it the interest of
his friends to forsake it, and judged of their sincerity by their actions. No
explanations debarred them from a return. He lived and died, as truly as any
man ever did, the friend of all mankind.

We freely inquire respecting the person of a man, whom we are taught to love.
General Fiske, in his person, was of fine proportions; handsome; in his manners
easy; had a dignity in his motions, and could command respect. He had a
benevolence in his countenance, while his eye was lofty, quick, and expressive.
In his conversation, he was often impetuous; but soon calmed. Always sure of
his motives, he was able to correct his natural fire from the heart. He never
concealed his faults, confessed them, but rose above them by great virtues.
When most zealous, he was most benevolent, and he could never be sudden, but
when he had purposes of instant good in his actions. His steps, his soul
instantly partook of all his emotions, and he was all in every thing. His
ambition was never dangerous, for it had no guilt. His fondness for praise,
made him deserve it, and his pleasures were purely social. In his constitution
he was firm, in his natural strength great, in his muscles athletic. The
conformation of his face had strong lines, but he could not long preserve any
angry emotion. He discovered his soul in his person, as much as in his actions.

When we consider the benefits, which mankind have derived from the benevolent,
we are convinced, that it is in the order of divine providence, to accomplish
the best designs for men, by the generous, and enlightened few, who appear in
the successive ages of the world. No man has been able to exhibit that equality
of talents, which qualifies all men to be equally useful, enterprising and
successful in any state of society. Such circumstances must combine, such
habits be formed, and such generous zeal must exist, as can command the
passions of mankind. In every country, in every pursuit, in every thing
excellent, this has been the privilege of few men, and therefore it may be
considered as a peculiar blessing to any society, when such men are allied to
its interest. Such indisputably was the friend whom we have this day in
grateful remembrance, and whom we in the past week, followed, with the highest
honors, to the tomb. To commemorate real worth, is to create it. Great
examples develope character, and inspire virtue. The prophet celebrated in the
text, was thus honorable. He knew the people were ignorant and corrupt; that a
disposition for change was not to be resisted; that he was in danger from envy,
competition, and interest. That the safe path to present ease was by flattery,
consent, and conformity. Had he yielded, he could not have uttered that
generous appeal by which he has been rendered immortal. History could not have
reported any thing great or honorable of such a man. He therefore yielded to
the generous purposes of his own heart. He did every good thing in his power.
He was crowned with the love, and rewarded with the prosperity of an whole
nation. May we never forget the richness of the reward, or the glory of the
service.

In such recitals, the scriptures are true to history. In all enlightened
nations, such names are recorded at every eventful period. Consult even the
history of the church. FATHERS have been reverenced in the primitive ages. We
give this name to eminent men. If superstition has attached itself to great
names, it is not because men have been ungrateful, but because they were not
philosophers. If men have reverenced great, though perverted talents, it was
because they knew more of great talents, than of truth. The most memorable
superstition is ignorance grateful to reward great zeal in the service of
mankind. In the reformation, we celebrate the successful labors of men,
indignant at oppression. There have been as great men since, and more
enlightened. When men are determined to do good, God always says, it shall
prosper.

But why should we search ancient records? Why should we explore distant
regions? The world is but one volume, and our own country has instructive pages
open to our view. Our fathers boldly enterprised. We respect their names with
gratitude. They have left no monuments, but in the memory of their labors.
Their sons have arisen, have enlightened and instructed their country. Every
where, there has been virtue, and glory. A father has begun a settlement, and
has given his name, his character, and his hopes to all around him. In the
state, the city, and the field, men arise to ensure the rewards of public
gratitude. We are not without examples in all our various communities. The
funeral discourses lately printed in this county, upon the death of the Hon.
Azor Orne, Esquire. of Marblehead, and of Col. John Low, of Gloucester, express the
public sentiment.
The obligations are universally known. A display of genius, is the
developement of the human powers, by the force of circumstances in which they
are placed. We see not the full strength of every man's capacity, nor do we
suppose, that the man distinguished in some circumstances, would have been
eminent in all. A great man arises, and he diffuses light around him. He
kindles up new suns to shine with native splendor, and genius has its glory.
So a man of generous goodness gives his fairest character to the regions in
which he has his habitation. This is confirmed in the history of the human
mind. One mind Lock.
employed on the human understanding, has given exalted wisdom to this divine
philosophy. The Newton.
principles of a philosopher have disclosed the laws of nature. The pulpit Age
of Louis XIV.
was instructed in the last age, and humanity Howard.
in the present. We all know the date of these events, when we commence our
studies. Common minds follow up these eminent men to their last discoveries,
and if they cannot pass beyond, they make familiar the path, which has been
opened. So when a good example of life has been fairly exhibited, without any
stretch of the human powers, men advance freely, and possess the best
seize. Not half the labor is required to render men wise, which was
necessary to confirm them in error and ignorance.

And may we not confirm the same history of the virtues? One man teaches an
whole nation to be brave. One man diffuses a spirit of industry around him. One
man forms a love of order, and of peace. There is no virtue, which cannot
dispossess the most inveterate errors, when it is established in some great
example. Men become proud of the imitation. Cruel is the attempt to confine
them to the measure of scanty virtue. When they copy in strength of desire,
they produce with sure success, the highest virtues of our nature. It is enough
to know where men live, under what influence they are directed, to know what is
the measure of their hopes and of their virtues.

And must not then the progress of society depend upon generous minds? The half
taught parent must err in the most simple lessons of truth. The mind of the
child cannot be happily expanded. The unqualified instructor delays the visits
of knowledge till some future generation. The darkness of his own mind prevents
truth from shining upon the world. But when his understanding is clear, he
raises men to his own seize, and grand elevation. They rise then with
greater ease, than they could have grovelled below. This truth is not only
clear, but momentous. It is too much forgotten in the foolish satisfaction with
past ignorance.

And shall not we take a lesson from this truth, as illustrated in the example
of our friend? We have seen a generous man. We knew his services, and we
confess his influence. Should we ever descend to things which are mean, we
shall act unworthy of the most just expectations. It is an happy reflection
that our friend found ample support in some men, who possess the same virtues.
We trust that they will continue to recommend the laudable principles they have
adopted. May they act upon their enlightened understandings, and while they
remember the good things in their power, may they be in love with their highest
duty.

Consider the worth of our departed friend, and then can you wonder at our
tears? Can you expect that we should have the last sight of our dearest friend,
and not weep? that after an intimate acquaintance, constant services, and
uniform affection, we should forget the man, who has done so much to make us
happy, and should separate without anguish? We are not so taught by our purest
affections. Nor do we expect to be forsaken in our tears. Many will crowd
around us, to partake in our sorrows. They will know our loss, and mourn with
us the death of an HONORABLE MAN. They who have been assisted, while entering
into life, and have experienced the care of a benefactor, they will lament the
man who so heartily rejoiced in their prosperity. The poor will remember that
they are no longer to behold him, who has so often administered relief to their
wants. The mariner will think of him, who has so often sent charity to the
house, from which the husband was absent, or to which he could never return.
While the soldier will pass in thought, over the joy, which his general and his
friend could inspire. Every good man will mourn, when the friends of public
happiness forsake the world. But whatever reflections good men may indulge upon
the melancholy changes of human life, they who have lived in the intimate
affections must discharge the duties of the severest sympathy. We condole, in
sincerity, with the bereaved widow, who is separated from the man, she loved.
Her piety, her exemplary patience, and her sublime hopes will carry her to her
God. The more rich our gifts, the greater the duty of resignation. Religion
exalts the duty, while the greatest blessings form the severest obligation. We
compassionate an aged relative, Madam King, sister of his mother, and living in
his family.
who has shared his love, and found in his house, a quiet habitation. We pity
an infirm brother, who has lost the best of friends. We look with anxious
concern to his sisters, who have received bountifully from his unceasing
goodness. We behold a mourning family. May that sweet virtue, which in a
daughter's heart, has lived to support a father in his infirmities, and to
reward his affections, in his own bosom, find ample reward from the purest
blessings of Heaven. May the son see the father's virtues, and emulate them.
May this tender scene confirm the young daughter in all the duties of her
domestic affections, and the renewed Mr. P. married two daughters of the
general, successively.
obligations of her husband urge his heart to the lovely cares which devolve
upon him. May all the friends take the best lessons of life, and be wise unto
salvavation. The calls of such a season of mourning are loud. We see where the
proudest hopes of the present life do end, and the glory of the Christian. We
learn the best recommendation of mutual love, and the only pure consolations of
our dying moments. We soften our hearts by the tribute of sympathy, and
understand the true honor of our character. May we imitate what is lovely in
our friends, and receive with them an everlasting reward. May virtue inspire
our hope of heaven, and our purest joys be more perfect pleasures of
benevolence, which on earth we have learned to enjoy with delight.

O God, thy will be done!

