MR. BIGELOW's ORATION. JULY 21, 1796.

AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED AT CAMBRIDGE, BEFORE THE PHK, AT THEIR ANNUAL MEETING
ON THURSDAY, JULY 21, 1796. IT BEING THE DAY FOLLOWING THE PUBLIC COMMENCEMENT.

BY TIMOTHY BIGELOW.

BOSTON: Printed by MANNING and LORING.

1797.

AN ORATION.
BRETHREN AND FRIENDS,
I ADDRESS you with a mixture of pleasure and embarrassment. It is impossible
not to participate the general satisfaction which this anniversary affords;
though a want of sufficient leisure and opportunity has, I fear, prevented my
coming forward prepared to satisfy the expectations of this respectable
auditory, or justify the partiality of those who placed me here. But the fields
of Science have lately been so thoroughly explored, and the choicest
productions so carefully collected, that to expect a new and rich repast at
this time, would be like looking for the bounties of Nature in fields where the
harvest had been gathered.

It is a custom with the Society which is here assembled, on the occasion of
this anniversary, to delegate one or more of its members to deliver a public
harangue. In discharging this duty, the performer has the choice of his theme.
It must be proper on such an occasion, when friends and strangers out of the
Society oblige us with their attendance, to unfold and discuss the motives
which led to this establishment; the principles which have governed the members
of it, in prosecuting the design; and the consequences that may probably result
therefrom. As this has never yet been done, so far as my knowledge extends,
with your permission I will attempt it.

The form of this Institution originated in a Sister Seminary to the South, and
from thence was mediately communicated to this. It was not adopted here with an
idea of attaching to its members superior privileges, or arrogating to them an
invidious distinction. No expectations were formed that the connection would
afford a dispensation from any of the duties of scholastic life, or
independently insure success in the world. But it was well understood that
respectability here, and eminence and good fortune through life, were
exclusively attached to ability, information and merit. To improve and increase
these important qualities, give complete effect to the endeavors of our
instructors, more fully accomplish the purposes for which we were placed here
by our friends, as well as to cultivate harmony and establish a durable
friendship, the plan of the Institution was approved and carried into effect.
Experience has confirmed theory; and the utility of the scheme has equalled the
expectations of its advocates.

In its prosecution, objects of pursuit and the modes of investigation have
been pointed out. These have been such as were either useful in themselves, or
as they tended to invigorate and extend the reasoning faculty. A literary
accountability to the whole is naturally expected of each of the members; and
hence results, not only industry, but a circumspection of mind, an endeavor at
classic purity and correctness, which might otherwise have been neglected. Free
communication on all proper subjects is encouraged; and accurate discussions of
particular points enjoined. By this expedient, the stock of information is
improved, the ideas are afforted and arranged, and pedantry and hesitation give
place to ease and ready resource. The student who confines himself to his
closet, and collects his information wholly from the dead letter of his
authors, without improving the faculty of communication or an interchange of
sentiments and observations, may acquire much learning; but the mass will be of
little more use to him than a treasure deposited under the base of a pyramid.

As the Society was not exclusively connected with one seminary, it was
necessary, to prevent mistakes and impositions, as well as for other purposes,
to preserve those mysteries and arcana, which had been attached to it from its
origin. Independent of the many precedents which exist in point, to which we
might appeal for an apology, we trust that this consideration will afford to
the candid a sufficient justification. But a tree, it is said, is to be known
by its fruit; and, as we have endeavored to approve ourselves to the world, we
feel a modest assurance that our Institution will not suffer by an application
of the rule. Fifteen years have already elapsed since its first establishment
here: During all which time, irregularities of conduct, riot, tumult and
disorder have uniformly been discountenanced; and due subordination and a
regard to order have been enjoined and practiced. Many advantages therefore
have resulted to the University, and perhaps to society itself. From a
conviction of the utility of the scheme, on all these and various other
accounts, the Government of this Seminary have, with great propriety, afforded
their patronage and countenance to the Institution.

Some of the general consequences that may probably flow from this
establishment are obvious and apparent. The interests of the community are
undoubtedly advanced by the information and ability of its members. Nay, a
general diffusion of knowledge and literature is thought essentially necessary
to the preservation of a free government. This benefit, however, does not fully
result to society, unless the powers of the head are connected with goodness of
heart. In what consists the difference between a civilized man and a savage?
Certainly not more in the improvement of mind, than disposition. Let one,
therefore, be enlarged, without a proportional correction of the other, and the
man will be but a savage still, with greater ability to gratify his uncorrected
propensities. Those societies, therefore, must be importantly useful, which
make a reciprocal friendship a part of their constitutions. For, it is from the
cultivation of private attachments, that we learn to extend our affections to a
general philanthropy. It is not to be denied, that some of the benefits which
they would produce are happily superseded by the tranquil state of our country,
and the mild manners of a polished and enlightened age. Such institutions,
especially if they become extensive, are admirably calculated to soften the
manners, and ameliorate the condition of mankind, in barbarous or tumultuous
times.

The Masonic Establishment, which is of this description, from its antiquity
and universality, furnishes the best illustration of this doctrine. Avoiding
all the chimerical, or at best, doubtful accounts of a very high antiquity; it
is certain that their order existed, and was held in respect, during the latter
part of the dark ages. In addition to the refinement of disposition, which the
cherishing the mild virtue of friendship always induces; history affords us
many instances of the beneficial effects which that establishment produced. The
exile, whom differences in religious opinions, revolutions in government, or
the chances of war had driven from his country to a foreign land; instead of
there finding himself friendless and alone, instead of being exposed to the
insuits and abuse of the unfeeling, or reduced to the sad alternative of menial
service, or soliciting a cold charity to obtain a pitiful subsistence; no
sooner did he make known his connection to any of the fraternity whom he might
chance to meet, than he found the bosom of friendship open to receive, the arm
of power stretched forth to protect, and the hand of a liberal charity unfolded
to support him. The unhappy captive who had fallen into the hands of a
ferocious and exasperated enemy, instead of meeting that cruel death, or being
condemned to the still more cruel bondage which he expected, is discovered by a
brother of the order among the conquerors: Forthwith the fetters are struck
from his limbs, the balm of consolation is copiously administered, and he is
relieved from his fearful apprehensions. This generous relief was not confined
to Masonic Brethren, but often extended to their friends and fellow sufferers.
How grateful is it to observe such instances of humanity and benevolence,
breaking forth in times of general barbarism and depravity of manners! The gem
of friendship shines with a brighter, a diviner ray, in proportion to the
general gloom of the times in which it is found.

Unacquainted with the secrets of Masonry, I state no other instance of analogy
between that order and ours, but that of a fraternal attachment to each other.
But certain I am that a cultivation of the tender and social affections, and
the consequent extension of our benevolence to a general philanthropy, is the
most important, the most honorable principle that any fraternity can profess.
If ever this was a secret, thank God, it is now rapidly developing, or is
already unfolded to society at large.

Comparing the state of mankind with what it was scarce more than a century
ago, how immensely is it improved! In many countries, instead of laws which
authorized the governments to seize the property of an unfortunate stranger,
who should die within their jurisdiction, however just the claims of his
relations or others might be; or to strip from the wretches who were wrecked on
their coasts, the remnant of their property which the rage of the elements had
spared; instead of the barbarous custom of coolly murdering or condemning to
slavery the unhappy captives, whom the fortune of war, or even a violation of
the rights of hospitality had brought within their power; we find laws
providing for the support of the distressed of every description; societies
established and countenanced by government for the relief of the unfortunate.
In times of peace, most countries are open for the free admission and departure
of strangers; and their equal right to protection and relief is acknowledged:
And in time of war, excepting some partial instances of cruelty, which have
unfortunately stained the history of our own times; if any one fall into the
hands of his enemy, the danger of his life ceases with his resistance; he is
treated with politeness, and allowed all the conveniences and comforts of
life. In a short time he is liberated on his simple parole, or exchanged
unhurt; or, on the conclusion of a peace, is dismissed without a ransom. Wars
in general are no longer personal, but national: And though individuale
discharge their duty with gallantry in the field; yet they have none of that
private animosity and rancor which formerly armed that destructive evil with
double terror.

In this picture, which is undoubtedly just with respect to much the greater
part of what is termed the civilized world, it must be highly satisfactory to
observe that our own country stands in the foreground. Mildness and benevolence
are ruling principles in all our governments: Philanthropy is both honored and
practiced by the great body of our citizens. The poor are provided for by
standing laws; and the unfortunate often relieved by particular acts of
munificence. Individuals also have uniformly discovered alacrity and zeal to
avert the dangers with which others were threatened, and have liberally
contributed to repair unmerited misfortunes. Societies have been formed for the
kind reception and friendly treatment of such foreigners as seek an asylum in
our happy country; others, to restore persons apparently dead to life and the
embraces of their anxious friends. Many similar establishments do honor to our
country. When engaged in war, no American was ever known to take the life of
the unresisting or unarmed; and the kindness and humanity with which our
magnanimous armies, though often exasperated by cruelties which had been
practiced on their countrymen, always treated their prisoners, extorted praises
from their enemies themselves. What other people can exhibit an example of a
complete revolution achieved, both in the form and the administration of
government, or of rebellions effectually suppressed, where no blood has been
spilled on account of the opinion of individuals, or the side of the
controversy merely, which they espoused? Far hence be the time, when either
foreign war or internal commotion shall again call for the exercise of these
magnanimous virtues; but still let us cherish, and be ready to put them in
practice, if the sad necessity should ever re-exist.

Though humanity and benevolence be justly a part of our national character;
yet, as other nations are behind us, so we have not arrived at perfection.
There still remains a wide field for the exercise of a generous ambition. To
revise, and mitigate in many cases, our codes of criminal law, by endeavoring
to make a reformation of the offender, instead of his extirpation, the object
of punishment; to transform our common places of confinement from seminaries of
wickedness and villainy into schools of morality; to liberate the unhappy
Africans from the horrors of a slavery equally unjust and inhuman; to promote
an interchange of good offices, and a mild and pacific disposition among
mankind; objects like these are worthy the pursuit of the noblest minds. Some
of them have already immortalized the names of PENN, HOWARD, and WILBERFORCE.
Shall we be deterred, shall we shrink in despair from objects of such
magnitude? Is it chimerical to indulge a hope that even we may bear a
conspicuous part in this noble pursuit? No; remembering that, in such a cause,
it is much more honorable to lead than to follow; we will lend our individual
assistance, as circumstances may permit, and endeavor to give a tone to the
public opinion. If one man, by his personal exertion, could alleviate the
distresses of thousands, scattered through all the countries of Europe, nay,
could gladden even the horrors of the East; what may not numbers achieve? It is
true we are yet comparatively few: But our number, both here and elsewhere, is
continually increasing. Our Institution is now confined to a few seminaries in
this country: But what obstacle exists to its further extension? or even to a
communication of it to foreign universities? in many of which, establishments
of this kind have heretofore found a cordial support. Let us remember also,
that in the practice of philanthropy, which is far from being the least
important object of our association, we shall act in concert with many other
respectable institutions, and meet the concurrence of a generous public. With
due exertion, therefore, even of a few, in various places and different walks
of life, the great current of opinion may be directed into proper channels, and
its raraifications reach every object of compassion. When the beneficial
effects of a general spirit of humanity shall be observed here, it will readily
be adopted abroad. Our country has already taught the world the true science of
government, and the art to be free. She exhibits the example of a great people
flourishing and happy, among whom, to the surprise of other nations, gradations
in rank, and exclusive rights, are entirely unknown. Why then shall we not
instruct the species in the arts of humanity, and the science of universal
friendship? Is this general diffusion of philanthropy mere chimera and
extravagance? If it be, I could almost wish that we might still cherish the
delusion. For what but the reality could be more grateful to benevolent minds,
than a confident anticipation that the whole world would become a common
country to each individual; that mankind would be but one family, by practice,
as well as extraction; and thereby taste on Earth, the joys of Heaven itself?

FINIS.

