The Rev. Brother BENTLEY'S DISCOURSE, And Brother DANA'S ADDRESS; AT THE
CONSECRATION OF THE BENEVOLENT LODGE IN AMHERST.

A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED AT AMHERST, AUGUST 10, 1797; BEFORE THE (...)
WORSHIPFUL NATHANIEL ADAMS, OF THE GRAND LODGE OF NEWHAMPSHIRE, AND THE
OFFICERS OF THE GRAND LODGE OF MASSACHUSETTS; AT THE INSTALLATION OF THE
BENEVOLENT LODGE, UNDER THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL SAMUEL DANA, ESQUIRE

FIDES ANTIQUITATIS, RELIGIONE FIRMATUR. TACITUS DE MORIBUS GERM. -- COLLOCATAS
ESSE SCIO COLUMNAS, QUIBUS RUNAE,
AD EVOCANDOS MORTUOS EFFICASES, SUNT INSCRIPTAE.
EDDA. BY THE REV. BROTHER WILLIAM BENTLEY, A. M. F. H. S.

SAMUEL PRESTON, PRINTER. 1797.

GRAND LODGE AT AMHERST, AUGUST 10, 5797.
VOTED, that the Right Worshipful Brothers SAMUEL DANA and JOHN BRAZER, and
Brother JONATHAN GOVE, be a Committee, to wait on the Rev. Brother WILLIAM
BENTLEY, and return him the thanks of the Lodge, for his very ingenious
discourse, delivered this day before the Lodge, and requeft a copy for the
press.

Attest, SAMUEL DANA, JUN. Sec. Pro Tem.

A DISCOURSE.
I. JOHN IV. 21. THIS COMMANDMENT HAVE WE FROM HIM; THAT HE WHO LOVES GOD,
LOVE HIS BROTHER ALSO.


TO promote this lovely sentiment, and to provide its richest blessings, men in
all ages, have formed various associations. Among these, is the Order of Free
Masons, which we this day honor by our public solemnities, and by the
consecration of a Lodge, and its Officers, agreeably to this benevolent
institution.

THOUGH Masonry, in its priciples, be venerable in the most ancient traditions,
yet its form must have been improved, by the progress of the human
understanding. It rose not a perfect building: It combined its grand
proportions, as the arts advanced toward perfection. It had a new era, at the
building of the T'emple, and must have seen new glory in the ages of
christianity, when Grecian triumphed over Gothic structures. From our present
improvement, it becomes a pertinent enquiry, how our institution received its
last forms from the light which shone upon Europe. It has been pretended, that
it was aided by the Cruisades, when Europe engaged in destructive adventures,
formed an object for its ambition in religious enthusiasm. Such enthusiasts
from various nations might require some associating principle, and originate
some band of union. But this principle would be as far from science, as was the
design of their adventures. It would spring out of their enthusiasm, and bear
the strongest marks of a design to assist the cause in which they engaged. It
would be as public as their design, and as memorable as its consequences. They
would think, not of Architecture, but of the March and the Camp; not of
Geometry, but of the Cross. But the red Cross in the Banner is unknown to us,
and our signal is not for victory. The age of chivalry has no better claim. It
is unknown in our emblems, and prevailed in a country, we have least visited.
Our last history has nothing connected with Grecian mysteries, or common with
the Mystics. Though allied to the ancient manners of the north, it attended not
in silence upon the circles of the Druids, where the science of the square
never appeared. We look elsewhere for its present form. And we follow with
cautious steps, its progress from the east. The old Chronicles attest, that
early associations existed in the northern regions, and that these
fraternities, of which the nobility Mallet.
were members, long preserved their primitive form. Upon the reception of
christianity, they welcomed the doctrines and arts, which accompanied it. Their
silence, their elections, their members, their monumental stones, concur to
explain our progress. The concise Tacitus will give us many lines for
comparison. Even in Iceland, we see the five magistrates, the ordinary and
extraordinary meetings, the members, who were freemen, the assemblies at the
solstices, the pure manners, the submission, the songs, and the fund for the
distressed, even before the use of written laws. Part of the pay was feasting,
Tacitus.
and at these feasts, their obligations were renewed. In the northern regions
these Lodges are yet to be seen, and the monumental columns, and Cordiner's
Scenery of the North, 1780.
Torfeus will inform us of the first artist, and of the contributions of
Europe, to which we are indebted for the noble structures of the tenth century.
To be known abroad the Christian Architects encouraged our institution. The
Keledci, or Emissaries of the sacred colleges employed it, as concurring with
the best manners of their converts. The Runie character is still imitated upon
our records, as the first introduced into that part of Europe, from which we
descended. Christian have united with ancient emblems, that we might honor the
best institutions and partake of them, while we forget not our origin, or our
antiquity, Our return to light is Christian, but our fellowship is more
ancient. The Lodge is finely situate on the shore, while the retreating tide
tells the Brother (...) was caught at the (...) of the sea.
upon his first landing of the danger of perfidy and guilt. The Acacia is
opposed to the Misseltoe, and the body of Balder is not forgotten. The
paintings shown to the apprentice are of the original kind. The higher grades
have been conjoined with lessons from the schools of Greece, and more modern
inventions. Each image is simple in the first order, and the progress is seen
as we rise. Hence we find as the ancient order traveled southward in Britain,
after the conquest of the Danes, that the York Lodge claims highest antiquity,
and united the simplicity of the north, with the gay freedom of a more southern
sky. Builders then came from all nations, and this stately Fabric on its first
foundations stands firm and glorious.

LET us examine this spacious habitation. A Lodge is not the abode of one
solitary family. It bars not its doors in the storm, and dreads not to give the
assistance of the night. It has its buildings erected on the most desert path
of life, and they stand open to receive every fatigued and benightened Brother.
It is one, because one soul inhabits all its regions. A Brother is at home
wherever a Brother dwells. We have seen the worthy; who have had many an honor,
come and expire calmly in our arms. We dropped the Acacia into the tomb, and
have seen them slumber in peace. We have given the kind salutation to the
hostile sons of Afric's once delightful shore. They have eaten of our bread,
and have tasted of our wine, with which they have been refreshed. We have seen
Brethren retreating from the cruelty of blood, partaking of our joys. These
kind offices have extended our thoughts to generous love. We have searched for,
and we have found, from different nations, the same friends of mankind. How
useful would be a true history of Masonry! The Saints have their Books of
Martyrs. The gay world, their novels for amusement. Nations have their history.
Might not Masonry, through the State find a subject worthy of the friend of
mankind? To see the hospitable lodges distributed around the enlightened world,
and to travel in one evening of meditation through all the Lodges on the globe.
We trust that our rising order will not long be deprived of this invaluable
pleasure. To adorn a quiet seat may be our delight; but to enter with the
sentiment, that we belong to the world of friendship and life, must give the
highest glory to the character of man.

THEN shall we assemble the hospitable virtues from all nations. The eastern
traveller shall tell his tale, enlivened by fancy and by hope, to awaken every
kind attachment, and to command instant and cheerful relief to sorrow. The
ready oil, not less pure than the Samaritan's, shall be poured by the injected
thought of kindness, without one fear to check it as it freely flows. Then, as
in the hardy north, the good man shall feast at his open door, and invite each
longing appetite to come and be satisfied. Then shall the kind peasant rise to
survey the dangers of the path and the mountain, while the inhabitant of the
shore shall awake from his midnight slumbers, least distress should call in
vain. Sweet confidence shall then dwell in the breast of man, and cheerfulness
discover, how he reposes on the lap of friendship. Who can forget the
importunity of old Abraham with the stranger! What has civil life done to
advance the pleasure of this invitation! In these forms shall we learn to love.
They display the lovely attractions of simplicity, native innocence, and ready
sympathy, the purest virtues of the heart.

WHAT will then be our enquiries? Who knocks now at the Lodge? Who has been
welcomed and blessed? What cares disturb a weary Brother, and whence can he
have relief? Where does his light shine, and is it bright? Are his seet ready
at the door for offices of love? Does he come hand in hand with the brethren?
Is his heart free to conceive, and his hand ready to bestow? How many days in
each month has he recorded on his heart the kindness done to a Brother, to
renew it? In how many nights has he given light to the path of a stranger? Can
he say to a Brother, Let me see thy countenance, and let me hear thy voice; for
sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance delights me.

BUT when is the heart of man most open? It is then, we will embrace and enjoy
him.

AND are we not all agreed, that man is only seen in his friendly dispositions,
when the soul is cheerful. Then all the causes, which concur to shut the heart,
are least felt. Cheerfulness is required in every state of innocence and love.
The testimony of mankind is ready. How abundant are examples in the scriptures
of all antiquity. How emblematical the wine, which cheers the heart, and how
strong the pictures of a Mahomedan, and of every heaven! Cheerfulness was
reproached in Jesus, but beloved by him, because it may correct every vice, and
corrupts no principle of virtue. See it, when it accompanies life's blessings.
It is the same health of the mind as a good organization is of the body. Then
the understanding dwells in a clear sky, and the affections, like the pure
streams of life, have a divine light to invigorate them. Not all the wisdom of
man, not all the motives of his happiness can exalt him like the heart thus
free to enjoy the affections brought pure into his soul. The man, cheerful at
his labor, never forsakes it. Cheerful in his domestic affections, he never
wanders from his home. All nature spreads her charms before him. Do you see the
intemperate man. He is flying from the cares and duties of his life. He is not
in love with himself and the world. Does he shun domestic life, his soul is not
in peace. Does he solicit diversion for his thoughts, serene pleasure will
never bring him virtue and happiness. Take the good apprentice, and it is the
cheerful youth, ready for every duty of his calling. Take the good husband, and
his heart is clear as the light, and cheerful as the day. The countenance of
the good citizen warms wherever it shines. The public spirited man is cheerful
when blessings multiply around him.

BUT cheerfulness is not spontaneous in the heart; else why should so many
gloomy countenances, never cleared, offer to our sight? Why so many imaginary
cares, to produce endless disquiets, and to conjure misery from the dead? Why
is man so easily disturbed?

WE must then plant and cultivate the virtue, where the purest sympathies may
nourish it; where the sun of benevolence may daily cheer it, and where generous
spirits may refresh it. Then it will gather strength in habit, and stand firm
against every blast by its own power.

IN MASONRY, we cultivate this virtue in the best manner, by removing from
every thing which confines the heart. Do competitions in life raise the angry
storm; -- here the breezes refresh from general and diffusive hope. Does the
sad countenance alarm by sympathy; -- here it flies, like the white cloud above
us, wasting in ether. Do religious fears straighten the breast, and heave a
sigh, as in the dull air of a misty morning; -- here the sun rises, soon to
scatter them, and all the air is in love. Do angry passions hang, like the
storm, upon the heart of man; -- here they are driven away by the breath of
charity. Do parties thunder like the meeting clouds, and waste their lightning
on the guiltless; -- here is the serene air, and the bright horizon of peace.
Do fears, like the gale, rise adverse to our hopes; -- soon we quit our
dangers, and take the gale free in the ocean of benevolence. Does disturbed
joy, like the gust, for a moment defy our skill; -- we soon reach the winds
which bend their constant summer course toward the regions where are balsamic
flowers, rich spices, and the land of plenty.

COME Cheerfulness, and find a seat with us. The tales of Asia, and the
borrowed romance of Europe, know thee not so well as we. No, not the man of
nature, hovering over a winter's fire, to tell his gay loves, and to forget the
storm in friendship and in glee. We will make thee welcome. We will open our
hearts to thee. We fly not our cares. We only seat ourselves here, to return
with greater delight. We meet from every circle of active life, in one grand
circle of love. But it is, to carry home the rich provision with which thou
can fill us, till we meet again. We leave the world behind not to hate it,
but to assemble all thy blessings into our bosoms, and to go abroad and scatter
them. The friend of our dearest love shall confess, that we transplant all thy
favor to be enriched in her bosom. Cheerfulness, come and sit with us. Here is
love waiting to be cheered by thee. Here all the graces shall attend thee. Joy
shall enkindle at thy countenance, and laughter be ready at thy call. Social
glee shall sport without guilt, and instruction steal with kind insinuation
into every heart. Charity shall tell her deeds to learn to multiply them, and
Sympathy shall repeat them, mirth shall be gay, and the song shall enrapture
the ear, while the thought on which it lives goes welcome to the heart, to
dwell there forever. Where can thou find better friends? Where can thou
inspire purer joys? Enchanted, we will hold thee, and never separate from thee.
Whither thou go, we will go. Thou may visit other friends, but here shall
be thy habitation.

LET us now enquire, how the MASON is prepared for the greatest virtue of the
heart, and the exalted duties of an enlightened understanding. Should he not
discover his qualifications for the highest character, let him renounce the
honor of his name. We expect that he will be among the MOST GENEROUS OF MEN, --
among the most ENLIGHTENED IN SOCIETY, -- and among the most CHARITABLE IN
RELIGION. This is the character he claims, and this, it is his ambition to
deserve. To become the most generous of men, when a Mason leaves his Lodge, he
reflects -- I have pledged my love, and promised every kind service to my
brethren of every name. How shall I perform my obligation? Can I have a just
expectation, that my virtues will be more pure, because I have breathed a freer
air than belongs to the crowded habitations of men? Can I then at once return
to the contagion of impure regions, and will the past draught then nourish me?
Shall not my every thought in life be free as in the Lodge, and corrupt by no
vile affection? It is not a short visit to the happiest clime, which enables us
forever to inhale the best sweets of life. It is the residence in these purer
skies. Each duty then retains its fragrance, and the strength is recruited at
every hour. A Mason may change his place, but not his heart. He lives in love,
and when he dies, love fits on his lips, and speaks the last language of his
soul.

In society the Mason maintains his dignity. He has seen competition lost, in
kind discourse and mutual endearment. He has often seen the gay freedom of one
nation, enliven the sedate and pensive countenance of another. The majesty of
one nation has yielded to the insinuating manners of another. The business of
the merchant, and the industry of the husbandman have not made them insensible
to the good humor of the gay. The professed friends of science have not
forgotten to mingle with mankind. And having like so many streams united, they
have more bountifully supplied life, with wisdom and happiness. He has seen
man, as he is, when divested of all his fondest habits, his dearest self, and
when separated from the partial views of private interest. And the character of
man is so much the same, that he is sure of the true image of the family, and
that one nature belongs to them. He lives then as under common wants, and as
capable of relief from the same virtues. All may have the countenance of love,
and he studies to bring the kindest glances upon himself. He asks only what he
is ready to give, and if refused, refuses not again. Noble life this! Here we
fill our cup of blessedness. It inspires by the freest draught, and by its
fullness, we are made divine.

BUT what rites consecrate this interwiew of the blessed? The priest looks for
his mitre in vain. The altar is a pure heart, and the wise man is a friend. The
Mahomedan has left his robes, and enters in peace, and the Christian displays
not his cross. Religion is reverenced in silence, and man appears in the
virtues of the heart, beloved for the possession of ^ergion, as his greatest
good, and most ample recommendation. Virtue takes its value not from names, or
the opinions with which it is associated, but from the blessings it brings. The
greatest offering is social duty, and the richest possession is love. Thus
free, how happy is man. With himself to choose; but with the world to love
goodness, wherever it can be found.

BUT we are to remember that we are friends of an institution, and that we are
to commend it not only as pure in its principles, but as supported by peculiar
duties, which we owe to it.

TO enter a Lodge does not make a man a Mason, more than to enter a Church
makes him a Saint. He has his duties there, sacred as his happiness, and
perpetual as his hopes.

IT is then apparent, that every man cannot be a fit subject of its honors. A
slave to prejudice, he cannot be enlightened by truth: Unable to separate the
social character from the religious opinion, he is not capable of philanthropy:
Destitute of an ingenuous mind in private life, he cannot exercise a rational
and universal benevolence.

IT is evident, that a Brother owes also his full concurrence in the liberal
purposes of his Brethren. By a constant attention he gives his personal virtues
to the Lodge. Absent, he withdraws his best influence from the institution.

A Brother also cannot be lost in a circle of private friends. We might as well
sit near our fires, and detail stories about London and Paris, and call
ourselves merchants of those cities, as to have no correspondence with the
great world of Masons in our Grand Lodges.

A Brother cannot forget the importance of Elections, and the judgment to be
employed in them. The Officers are the soul of the Lodge, and they impart their
own character to it. If they are active, constant and charitable, the Lodge
will imitate them. If they fail of their duty, the best hopes are lost. They
will therefore be encouraged by the greatest respect. Good Officers will create
this respect, but worthy members may establish it. Doubtless in attention to
appearances in the world, we may covet to see men in office, who have
corresponding offices in civil life. This is a great advantage, but no love of
rank should incur any hazard of the neglect of the duty of any appointment.
This would be a pride fatal to our Lodge, and contemptible in the meanest
associations. To be fine abroad, and poor at home, has not even decency to
recommend it. It is useful to remember the danger, and never to forget, That
the best Master should be always the best Mason.

A Brother should consider also, how much his personal virtues assist an (...)
order to which he belongs. The public honors come with double pleasure to us,
when we are told, that he who has deserved them, is a Brother. And the great
Patron of the Lodges of Massachusetts is recollected with this pleasure. When
we behold the monument, which stands high upon his grave near their Capital, we
remember that it is sacred to a Mason. The friends of WASHINGTON know him in
this character. An enthusiasm to give our order support from our personal
character, is the most generous we can entertain.

A TRUE Brother will also be attentive to the endearments of life, and be the
greatest friend to the companion of man. The sympathy of woman is the bliss of
man. But though equal in her rights, she depends on the generous goodness of
man, for her best hopes. She depends on man, for the opinion, which gives laws
to her condition, and for the power to render them sacred. It is with him to
enlarge her education, that she may know her worth, and be able to preserve it.
She repays by her sympathy, but she receives from generous virtue. Always the
friend of man, she is his slave, his domestic servant, or his bosom friend, at
his own discretion. By exalting her, he exalts himself. The kinder forms of
education, and the most noble thoughts of Love belong to the protection of our
Order, in its best designs to advance human happiness. A greater reproach
cannot fall upon a Mason, than that he is a stranger to domestic peace. It is
not a want of confidence that has kept our sisters from our association, but
the established order of Civil Society. The enlightened Brother knows, that if
his mind can comprehend his exalted duty, it must be the tenderness of female
sympathy which must qualify him to receive it.

A TRUE Brother will always venerate age. He suffers it to lean upon his
shoulder. He covers its infirmities, and assists to remove its cares. It is his
glory to enrich age with blessings, to provide its consolations, and to fill it
with hope. Its occasional wants he may not always discover, but its natural
wants he cannot forget.

A Brother will not be an idle spectator of the world. We live in an age of
revolutions. Our institution requires no revolution; but admits our warmest
friendship. While every institution professes to collect new force, it is in
our power to rise with glory. Our principles are just, and are eternal. They
regard the highest virtues of enlightened society; but they exist in minds
constantly developing. Their truth is eternal; but may be more clear. They may
enjoy a brighter sky. The wisdom of each generation may be like the mildness of
our climate, the more visible, the longer it is inhabited. May it not then be
said, that it must afford us the greatest pleasure, as Brethren, in having
contributed to the honor of the Craft, by personal merit, and the reputation of
our Lodge.

A YEAR had not clapsed, after Masonry had been welcomed to New England, before
New Hampshire was blessed with its light. So congenid in its character with
Massachusetts, and emulous of all its advantages, this State concurred in the
design of giving support to Masonry. The bands of union have ever been firm
between these States, and on these solemnities, we trust that we shall assist
to perpetuate the friendship. Happy indeed are we to see, beyond any former
example in our own country, the two Grand Lodges united in this purpose, and
concurring in the consecration of Lodges in their respective jurisdictions.

AS they began together, may they continue united in the common cause. Thus the
intercourse of Brethren pervades the whole Fraternity. Visits to the Lodges,
and the presence of Lodges with each other at celebrations, are now proved to
be in the spirit of the institution. May this union of our Grand Lodges be one
of the happy events which shall prepare for a representation of the order
through the world.

FROM the undissembled joy, good order, and harmony of the Brethren, we may
congratulate our Brethren of the Lodge this day consecrated, upon their opening
prospects.

To our brother elected as Master of this Lodge we may give our friendly
salutation. It is the highest glory of God to be loved, by those whom he
protects. We love him, because he first loved us. A faithful Master will have
our affections, and in them has the highest honors we can render him.

YE Watchmen, who guard our Temple, we salute you. Perpetual are the blessings
of the Sun, whether he shine in the west or the south. He declines, but he
turns a full orb of light to the world. He sets to rise again with his wonted
vigor. We know his course, and are satisfied.

YE attendant Lights, we bless you. If ye serve not as ministers at every hour,
your order makes nature perfect.

HEAVEN has its records and its treasure. The pure mind keeps the first, but
the eldest Brother keeps the last. He was tried, and found faithful. May the
same benevolence and fidelity possess the heart of him who keeps your deposit.

BRETHREN,

WE sincerely rejoice with you on the present occasion. The duty and the
dignity of our order has been our theme. Your virtues can outspeak description,
and by becoming what ye ought to be, ye will prove to the world, that TRUE
MASONS ARE THE MOST ENLIGHTENED, AND THE MOST BENEVOLENT OF MEN.

AN ADDRESS, DELIVERED IN AMMERST, AUGUST 10, 1797; BEFORE THE OFFICERS OF THE
GRAND LODGES OF NEWHAMPSHIRE AND MASSACHUSETTS; AT THE CONSECRATION OF THE
BENEVOLENT LODGE.

BY THE HON. BROTHER SAMUEL DANA, ESQUIRE. MASTER OF THE BENEVOLENT LODGE.

OMNE TULIT PUNCTUM, QUI MISCUIT UTILE DULCE. PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OF THE
LODGE. SAMUEL PRESTON, PRINTER. 1797.

AN ADDRESS.
MUCH RESPECTED AUDITORS, "CUSTOMS A JUDGE, A RULE, AND STANDING LAW,"
IN obedience to which, I now come forward on this, to some of us, at least,
joyful occasion; to acknowledge, with gratitude, the honor you do us by your
company, and the pleasure we feel in having your countenance on this occasion;
and to assure you that we shall always endeavor to deserve your favorable
opinion. For myself, I shall make no apology, lest I should share the fate of
most apologizers on similar occasions, that is, of having my sincerity
questioned, instead of engaging the candor of my audience.

OUR Society claim the honor of being ancient as any among men; and of being
extended as far as the civilized world: and we glory in the thought, that no
Lodge of Masons was ever justly chargeable with attempting to raise
disturbances in church or state.

INFLUENCED by principles of benevolence, we wish a decrease of misery, and an
increase of happiness to all mankind; not confining our views to particular
friends, nations or countries, but extending our good will to all nations,
countries and languages. We wish to see peace on earth, while we feel good will
to all men.

THE Lodge now constituted in this public manner is distinguished by the name
of THE BENEVOLENT LODGE: and the grand principle of Masons is brotherly love;
and every practice inconsistent herewith, is abhorrent to their feelings, while
those which are calculated to increase the general felicity are congenial with
their most ardent wishes.

THE Fraternity of Free and Accepted Masons present, of whatever rank, will
permit me to congratulate them on this auspicious day, and unite with them in
supplicating that no misconduct of the Benevolent Lodge may ever cast a gloom
upon it. Our country affords an ample field of employment to speculative minds.
But a few centuries past, it was wholly inhabited by savage beasts, or more
savage men. Now, millions of civilized men are spread over it. Our ancestors,
often in danger of being destroyed in their youthful state, were as often,
almost, miraculously preserved; till they arrived at mature age; when they were
obliged to vindicate their rights, with the sword and bayonet, against the
parent state. But thanks to that kind providence, without the notice of which
not a sparrow falls to the ground, and by which the hairs of our heads are all
numbered; they supported a dangerous war; obtained an honorable peace;
established their rights on a firm basis; and we may now sit every one under
his own vine and figtree and have none to make us afraid. Happy we may be if we
understand our own interests, and have virtue enough to pursue them.

WE have now a right to claim rank among the nations of the world. We enjoy
prosperity which few others know; and if we are not wanting to ourselves, may
continue a happy people. For these favors we ought to acknowledge with
gratitude that providence which extends through creation; that providence which
improved our illustrious Brother WASHINGTON in conducting the war; and since
that, at the head of our civil government: In both which he has established a
reputation which does honor to our Craft, to his country, to human nature; and
which cannot be fullied by the tongues of slander, nor exalted by the pens of
panegyrists.

EVENTS that are future are in a great degree hidden from our knowledge; but it
requires no spirit of prophecy to determine that within a century or two more,
this country will be populous as most of the countries in Europe; and if not
equal in wealth, vet before them in the means of real happiness.

IN this State, we have a striking display of the increase of population. But
little more than half a century since, to wit, at the time of the settlement of
the Rev. Mr WILKINS, lately dedeceased; this town did not contain twenty
families: and to the north, (...) a single family of (...) Rivers, to the
settlements in Canada; except a few on the banks of those Rivers. There are
now, perhaps, an hundred towns, containing from forty or fifty to an hundred
and fifty or two hundred families, and the means, not barely of subsistence,
but of enjoyment, bear proportion to the rapid increase of inhabitants. What
was, within the memory of many now living, a howling wilderness, is turned to
fruitful fields; -- what was a frightful desert, now blossoms as the rose. And
doubtless in other States more southern, and where there are more inviting
advantages, population and improvement on lands have made a proportionable
progress. Well may our country rejoice in the rapidity of her population and
improvement, if not too rapid. Well may we of the Masonic Fraternity felicitate
ourselves on the prospects before us; and though we urge none to join our
society, we may be allowed to hope that the principles of it will be diffused
in proportion to the population of our country, and may rest assured that they
will be in proportion to the degrees of light and knowledge that are attained
by our fellow citizens, whether they join our society or not. Our fervent
prayer is, that brotherly love may be universally diffused, and the happiness
it is calculated to produce, as universally enjoyed. And to my Brethren of the
Fraternity, I may say, that we shall best contribute to this happy purpose, by
conducting agreeable to our principles and obligations; to excite us to which,
we should consider, that many eyes are upon us beside the all-seeing one; that
we are as a city set on a hill, and under indispensable obligations so to order
our conversation, at all times, that those who wish to find occasion to speak
evil of us, may be ashamed.

THIS assembly in general will permit me to ask them their motives, in coming
together at this time. Was it a wish to profit by the public exercises of the
day? If it was, you will not loose your time, if you rightly improve the advice
you have had from our worthy monitor of the day; and if you will not do this,
you must charge your loss of time to your own negligence, and not to the
occasion; -- Or was it mere curiosity which brought you together? If it was, we
wish you may be as fortunate as Zaccheus of old, who, from the same motive,
climb a tree to see our common lord.

HERE, perhaps, some of you will inquire why, if our principles are so noble,
and our intentions so benevolent, we do not lay open all our conduct to the
world, and not have any secrets in our meetings? In this we are not singular;
Lawyers, Physicians, Merchants, and most Mechanics, have their secrets, which
they will not disclose to any but such as merit them. But we have more to say:
The secrets of our Craft cannot be communicated to one who is not a Mason.
Should we attempt it, our words would be thought idle tales, and we should not
be believed; -- that if a man wishes to learn the secrets of Free Masonry, he
must become a Mason, as otherwise he can no more understand them than a natural
man can discern those things which are only spiritually discerned.

SOME of you, perhaps, have imbibed an idea, that we indulge too much in mirth
for our sober professions: Of such I would inquire, whether the christian, who
leads a gloomy, sour, morose life, does more honor to his profession than he
who leads a cheerful one? We follow reason, which teaches us, that the man who
is pleased with his master, and with his service, and feels no guilt on his
conscience, has the best right to be merry, and will feel the greatest
inclination to it. Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the
upright in heart.

SOME very captious persons may farther object to us, that we admit unworthy
members. We submit to the charge, and confess that we have not the means of
searching hearts, but are liable to be imposed on; but is not this the case
with all other societies? Do not christians of every denomination, with the
sublimest precepts, and the brightest example ever given to man, err in the
same way? When unworthy persons creep in unawares to our society, we wish they
had not been admitted.

MY fair hearers, who honor us with their company at this time, and add so much
to the brilliancy of the day, demand particular attention. Methinks I almost
hear you inquire why you are not invited to partake of our pleasures, and make
a part of our social meetings? It might be asked in return, why you are not
chosen governors, councillors, senators, etc. but this will not satisfy you; I
must therefore tell you an honest truth, which I almost blush to own, but of
which you are our witnesses; to wit, that in all festive meetings where your
sex and ours join, your charms engage so much of our attention, and the
pleasure of pleasing you, so entirely engrosses the time, that no serious
business is attended to; and, as it would be more mortifying to you to be in
our company and not the principal objects of our attention; and our meetings
are for serious business, though softened and enlivened by mirth and hilarity;
and we must either deny ourselves the pleasure of your company, or neglect our
most important business: we prefer the former, howeever hard the task; and hope
you will rather commend than censure us for sometimes attending to the calis of
duty in preference to the allurements of love: especially if at other times you
find us as faithful and affectionate husbands, as ardent lovers, as kind
parents, as dutiful children, as trusty friends, and in all respects as good
members of society as other men; and we flatter ourselves you will, on no other
occasions, find us behind your warmest admirers.

To this assembly, I beg leave to add; -- whether we can answer to universal
satisfaction all the objections that may be brought against us, or not; we are
entitled to the same exercise of candor and charity which men in general have a
right to expect from their fellow creatures, considering that the right of
private judgment is unalienable, and as we have one common master in heaven, so
to him we must, each one for himself, finally stand or fall. As we all
acknowledge the same rule of faith, and that rule most strongly recommends that
we love one another; let us, laying aside all evil surmises, jealousies, and
suspicions, endeavor to conduct toward each other on the present scene of
action in such a manner, that our own hearts may not reproach us while we live;
and when this drams shall be closed; this world and all things in it be
dissolved, and even the solid works of Masonry be involved in the common ruin;
may we, through the mercy of the great Architect of the universe, and the merit
of the Grand Master of the christian church, be admitted to a seat in that
MOUSE WHICH IS NOT MADE WITH MANDS, BUT WHOSE BUILDER AND MAKER IS GOD.

THE END.

