OPINIONS RESPECTING THE COMMERCIAL INTERCOURSE BETWEEN THE United States and
Great Britain.

OPINIONS RESPECTING THE COMMERCIAL INTERCOURSE BETWEEN The United States of
America, AND The Dominions of GREAT BRITAIN, INCLUDING OBSERVATIONS UPON THE
NECESSITY AND IMPORTANCE OF AN American Navigation Act.

BY A CITIZEN OF MASSACHUSETTS.

"Fas est et ab Host doceri." BOSTON: Printed and sold by SAMUEL HALL, No. 53,
Cornhill. 1797.

TO THE CITIZENS OF THE UNITED STATES IN GENERAL, AND TO THE MERCHANTS and
OWNERS of VESSELS IN PARTICULAR.
CONVINCED that the Treaty of Commerce with Great Britain conceded important
principles, which ought never to have been relinquished; the Writer of these
Sheets supposes, that it ought not to be implicated, by an unjust and
irrational construction, upon the supposition, that the UNITED STATES have it
not in their power to reciprocate the Disadvantages of their Commerce with
GREAT BRITAIN. Conceiving this not to be the case, nor to have been intended,
but that the UNITED STATES are at full Liberty to place it upon the footing of
Reciprocity, provided the Regulations, necessary thereto, extend to every other
Nation, the following Observations are most respectfully submitted, by

THE AUTHOR.

OPINIONS RESPECTING THE COMMERCIAL INTERCOURSE BETWEEN THE United States and
Great Britain.
A GREAT fundamental principle of action, applying to national intercourse and
transactions of every kind, whether commercial or not, is, that one nation
should not injure another: that national conduct should, upon all occasions, be
frank and sincere; or that whatever might be the relative power, there should
be no aim to overreach, or to obtain unequal or improper advantages. The
writers upon the law of nations agree in this great principle, as springing
from the law of nature. From whence they infer, that treaties made, and to be
kept, should have equality for their basis, let what may be the state and
condition of the contracting parties; for as superiority of power creates no
obligation, or right, "so power or weakness," says Vattel, "does not, in this
respect, produce any difference." Vattel, book 1. chap. 1. page 18.
Equal treaties then, founded on equal rights, and conferring equal benefits,
are alone obligatory by the law of nations. "Treaties equal," says Vattel, "are
those in which the contracting parties promise the same things, or things that
are equivalent; or, in short, that are equitably proportioned, so that their
condition is equal. Equal treaties may be subdivided into as many kinds as the
sovereigns have different transactions between them. Thus they treat of the
conditions of commerce," Vattel, book 2. chap. 12. sect. 172.
etc. "Nations not being less obliged than individuals, to have regard for
equity, they ought, as much as possible, to preserve equality in their
treaties; when, therefore, the parties are in such a state, as to obtain the
same reciprocal advantages, the law of nature requires their treaties should be
equal, at least, if there is not some particular reason to deviate from that
equality, such as gratitude for a former benefit," Vattel, book 11. chap. 1^.
sect. 17^.
etc. Unequal treaties, says the same author, are those in which the allies do
not promise the same things, and where the conditions of commerce, or whatever
may the objects of the treaty, are unequal.

To apply the foregoing observations, drawn from the law of nations, to a
particular article of the British treaty, to determine its meaning and
construction, it may not be improper, in the first place, to recite the 14th
article of the treaty at large, and then to inquire, whether there is not
sufficient latitude, in its construction, to justify such additional
regulations of commerce, as shall give that protection and support to the
commerce and navigation of the United States, which reciprocity demands.

14th ARTICLE.
There shall be between all the dominions of his Majesty in Europe and the
territories of the United States, a reciprocal and perfect liberty of Commerce
and Navigation. The people and inhabitants of the two countries respectively
shall have liberty, freely and securely, and without hindrance and molestation,
to come, with their ships and cargoes, to the lands, countries, cities, ports,
places and rivers, within the dominions and territories aforesaid, to enter
into the same, to resort and to remain and to reside there, without any
limitation of time: also to hire and possess houses, and warehouses, for the
purposes of their commerce; and generally the merchants and traders, on each
side, shall enjoy the most complete protection and security for their commerce;
but subject always, as to what respects this article, to the Laws and Statutes
of the two countries respectively.

If the stipulation of a reciprocal and perfect liberty of commerce and
navigation herein made, as well as the protection and security promised to the
merchants and traders on each side, is not sufficiently explicit, when it is
declared, as to what respects the article, to be always subject to the laws and
statutes of the two countries respectively; should it be made a question,
whether a general stipulation, under as general an exception, as to the laws
and statutes of the two countries, shall be construed to preclude the
Legislature from making laws and statutes, which are necessary to procure the
reciprocity guarantied, or such laws and statutes as are founded in reciprocity
and equality; and in the policy and practice of one of the contracting parties,
the British? or whether it ought to be supposed, that the other contracting
party (the United States) should be tied down under the general stipulation,
and not allowed to protect its citizens and commerce against foreign
interference? or whether a perfect liberty of commerce and navigation ought to
be granted on one side, against a very imperfect one on the other? or, in other
words, whether the affected perfect liberty conferred by the treaty, marred by
restrictions and prohibitions, ought to reciprocate few, or no advantages on
the one hand, whilst the most perfect liberty, common to every citizen of the
United States, is allowed on the other, with the exception of an extra tonnage
duty upon foreign vessels, and an addition of one tenth to the amount of the
impost accruing upon their cargoes?

If such a construction is admitted, there is no room left on which legislation
can exercise its powers; all future laws and statutes of the two countries
being necessarily contravened. And although British merchants and traders might
introduce practices injurious to the rights and interests of the merchants and
citizens of the United States, they would not be amenable to laws made
posterior to the treaty; and of course there might be a set of foreigners,
under the privileges of a general protection, committing injuries to the
commerce of the country beyond the reach of legislative remedy.

If this construction was the one designed, why was the exception made as to
the laws and statutes of the two countries? Was it to ratify and confirm
British navigation acts, and the restrictions and prohibitions of British
statutes on the one side, and to leave no means to reciprocate such
disadvantages on the other?

If this was intended, why was it not declared; and that no future laws or
statutes should be made to limit or restrain the liberty therein given; in
which case, with what view, or to what purpose, was the succeeding, the 15th
article, made?

The 15th article appears to be but an exception or a proviso to the 14th; or
if it is not, it has neither meaning nor signification: For if the legislative
power was to be controled, in future, by the provisions of the preceding
article, of what consequence was it to stipulate, that "no other or higher
duties shall be paid by the ships and merchandises of the one party, in the
ports of the other, than such as are paid, by the like vessels, on merchandise
of all other nations"? or that "no other, or higher duty, should be imposed in
one country, on the importation of any articles of the growth, produce or
manufacture of the other, than are, or shall be payable (mark this expression)
on the importation of the like articles, being of the growth, produce or
manufacture of any other foreign nation"? Or of what import are the following
words? Nor shall any prohibition be imposed on the exportation or importation
of any article, to or from the territories of the two parties respectively,
which shall not equally extend to all other nations. The reply is, that the
15th article must become nugatory, and be without meaning or signification, if
the unnatural construction aforementioned is admitted. The stipulation of the
14th article appears to guaranty a reciprocal liberty of commerce, and
navigation, with protection and security to merchants and traders; but subject
to the laws and statutes of the two countries respectively; provided such laws
and statutes shall conform to the provisions and limitations of the 15th
article. Taking the two articles together, the constructions harmonize, and the
legislatures of the two countries are left only under the restraints of
reciprocity, as to commerce and navigation; that in case either party should
think it necessary to reciprocate what it should deem unequal, or
disadvantageous, the regulations necessary therefore must extend to every other
nation. This construction gives to the treaty its true meaning, and conforms to
the law of nations, which exacts justice and equality, as the basis of
commercial and political transactions. It is presumed then, that the United
States have a clear, obvious right to pass such laws and statutes as are
necessary to equalize commercial advantages, and to give protection and
security to their citizens against foreign interference.

Admitting the foregoing reasoning to be just, the next inquiry which arises
out of our subject, is, What regulations does reciprocity require, on our part,
to place the commerce of the two countries upon that footing of equality which
wisdom on the one side, and a liberal policy on the other, ought to demand?

To permit commercial intercourse to take off the surplus productions, beyond
what are necessary for home consumption, is a duty that nations owe to the
welfare and happiness of each other; and the obligation is no less strong, that
the exchanges should be founded in justice and equity; for the moral principle
of nations does not permit unequal regulations of commerce; or, at least, if
they are assumed, or procured through artifice or intrigue by the one party, it
is made the duty of the other, by the law of nations, to resist and to oppose
them. In order then to examine the subject before us with clearness and
precision, it is necessary to inquire, 1. What is the relative situation, in
respect to commerce and navigation, arising out of the existing laws and
statutes of the two countries respectively? And 2. To suggest what measures are
probably necessary to place their commerce and navigation upon the footing of
reciprocal and mutual advantage.


In treating the important subject herein undertaken, it is proper to premise,
that what is aimed to be established, rests as much upon facts, as deductions;
upon commercial statements, as political inferences. The facts depended on, are
the custom-house statements of Great Britain, and those official documents, and
other references, which were thought sufficient data, on which to ground that
system of rules and regulations, by which Great Britain is, and has been guided
in her commerce with this country. A recurrence to the same facts and
authorities, which, it is conceived, are the best the subject admits, cannot be
deemed unfair, to show the inequality and danger of the United States from such
regulations, and the necessity of resisting and opposing them by counter
regulations.

The first object of inquiry herein proposed, referring to the comparative
benefits resulting from the commercial and maritime regulations of the two
countries, shall be considered under their distinct heads, as far as the nature
of the subject will permit.

In the year 1783, the British Parliament, not knowing what might be the effect
of the independence of the United States, in regard to the English commerce;
the national resources and credit being reduced to a low state, and a general
alarm being spread through the nation, for fear that the resentment of this
country might transfer its commerce to other channels, gave a discretionary
power to the king, by the advice of the privy council, to adopt such temporary
regulations, in regard to the United States, as the interest of the nation, and
the new situation of the United States, might require. Accordingly the
following order of the king and council passed 2d of July, 1783.

At the Court of St. James's, 2d July, 1783. Present, the King's Most Excellent
Majesty in Council.
Whereas by an act of Parliament passed this session, entitled, An act for
preventing certain instruments from being required from ships belonging to the
United States of America; and to give to his Majesty, for a limited time,
certain powers for the better carrying on trade and commerce between the
subjects of his Majesty's dominions, and the inhabitants of the said United
States, it is, amongst other things, enacted, that during the continuance of
the said act, it shall and may be lawful for his Majesty in council, by order
or orders to be issued and published, from time to time, to give such
directions, and to make such regulations, with respect to duties, drawbacks, or
otherwise, for carrying on the trade and commerce between the people and
territories belonging to the crown of Great Britain, and the people and
territories of the said United States, as to his Majesty in council shall
appear most expedient and salutary, any law, usage, or custom, to the contrary
notwithstanding; his Majesty does therefore, by and with the advice of his
privy council, hereby order and direct, that pitch, tar, turpentine, hemp,
flax, masts, yards and bowsprits, staves, heading, boards, timber, shingles,
and all other species of lumber; horses, neat cattle, sheep, hogs, poultry, and
all other species of live stock and live provisions; peace, beans, potatoes,
wheat, flour, bread, biscuit, rice, oats, barley, and all other species of
grain, being the growth or production of any of the United States of America,
may (until further order) be imported BY BRITISH SUBJECTS IN BRITISH BUILT
SHIPS, owned by his Majesty's subjects, and navigated according to law, from
any port of the United States of America to any of his Majesty's West India
islands; and that rum, sugar, molasses, coffee, cocoa-nuts, ginger and pimenta,
may, until further orders, be exported BY BRITISH SUBJECTS IN BRITISH BUILT
SHIPS, owned by his Majesty's subjects, and navigated according to law, from
any of his Majesty's West India islands, to any port or place within the said
United States, upon payment of the same duties on exportation, and subject to
the like rules, regulations, securities and restrictions as the same articles
by law are, or may be subject, and liable to, if exported to any British colony
or plantation in America. And the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners of
his Majesty's treasury, and the Lords Commissioners of the admiralty, are to
give the necessary directions herein, as to them may respectively appertain.

Signed, STEPHEN COTTRELL. The petty custom of one per cent. upon alien goods
was repealed, and the allowance of drawback to aliens, in certain cases,
permitted, 1784.


With respect to the regulations above recited, it is to be observed, that they
were repeated the December following, and have been, from time to time, since
continued, with little alteration in their principle, by acts which have
passed, at every session of Parliament, authorizing his Majesty to make them;
and they are now confirmed, with the approbation of the United States, in the
ratification of the late treaty with Britain, viz. in the 14th article
aforementioned, which subjects the liberty of commerce, therein given, "to the
laws and statutes of the two countries respectively." It is but justice to the
treaty, however, to say, that the provisions of the 12th article, which were
refused ratification by the United States, were intended as a mitigation to the
injuries and inequalities of these regulations. The concessions therein made,
by the British government, although unequal to the sacrifices, by the United
States, in other parts of the treaty, might have been of some commercial
advantage; but they were accompanied with such indignities to the freedom and
independence of the country, in relation to productions from the dominions of
other states, that they could not be accepted.

But before I proceed to observe upon the detail, it will be proper to make a
few observations upon the principle of the foregoing regulations.

They hold up an important distinction between the European and the other
dominions of Great Britain, in the allowance of commerce with the United
States. If this distinction was proper, why did it not go further, and extend
the same restriction to Ireland, which is no more than a British colony; or to
Scotland or Wales, or to all of them; for there would have been equal propriety
in extending the restrictions further, even to all the British dominions,
whether in Europe or elsewhere, which, it is believed, would have been most for
the interest of the United States, as to have limited the restrictions to the
English colonies only? In such case, the United States would have seen through
the equity of the regulations, and governed themselves accordingly. As well
might the United States say, that liberty of commerce should be granted to the
subjects of Great Britain, except with Virginia, South Carolina and Georgia,
and with them, so far as to permit the citizens of the United States to
transport tobacco, rice, and naval stores to Great Britain, if shipped in
American bottoms, with liberty to import into those states, in like bottoms,
English manufactures, with the exception of woolen cloths, cottons, and some
other principal British merchandises, which should be totally prohibited.

Whenever a nation sets up a principle of action, as a rule of commercial or
political conduct, which is to operate upon the commerce or policy of other
nations, it is becoming, that it should regard justice and equity, in relation
to such nations with which she has political or commercial transactions. It is
not sufficient for a nation to say, that she has colonies, which, because she
has planted, she will wantonly exclude from other nations, and monopolize to
herself their commerce and labor: nor is it sufficient, that this principle be
fortified by the usages and practices of nations; or that Grotius, Puffendorf,
Burlamaqui, and Vattel, implicitly or explicitly justify it. Two
considerations, in their nature previous to the adoption of such a rule, enter
into its exercise, and ought to make its principle; the first is, whether it is
for the best interest of the parent state as connected with the least injury to
the inhabitants of her colonies: and the second, whether it is for her best
interest as connected with those advantages she derives from the commerce of
other states. Admitting the right of monopoly over colonies, in the most
extensive sense that protection and power can give it, it does not follow, that
the inhabitants of colonies have no claim upon the parent state, from situation
and humanity, from circumstances and expedients, in procuring their own
welfare, with the objects of their establishment: although the parent state is
sovereign, and colonies should be subordinate; and should produce, say
indefeasible right, on the one side; and absolute submission on the other; yet
unnecessary and cruel deprivations cannot be justified under such a claim.
Their circumstances and situation, their internal and external relations, must
produce a choice of means, which must designate the wisdom, justice and policy
of the measures pursued. To say then, that colonies have no rights, but such as
are absorbed in the mere will of the metropolitan state, is absurd: nor less
so, would it be to say, that it would be always for the interest of the
metropolitan state to exclude foreigners from a participation in its colonial
commerce; for such a regulation should arise rather from policy than right, and
must depend upon the liquidation of advantages and disadvantages, in its
commerce with other states: if the right is assumed, the policy may be denied,
and the metropolitan state may become the loser from its assumption. In such
case, it had been better to have adhered to the policy, rather than the right.
The concurrence, then, of both the one, and the other, must be brought into
view, to determine the fitness and propriety of such commercial regulations.
The right then rests precisely upon the same footing, which every independent
country possesses, of regulating its own commerce, to extend, to limit, or
totally to prohibit it, with foreign nations, leaving the same right to the
nation affected by such regulations, which must, of necessity, at length reduce
the right to a mere question of policy.

Let us examine then, whether right and policy concur, in the present case, to
justify Great Britain in excluding the citizens of the United States from a
participation in the commerce and navigation of her West India islands,
admitting the right and power of retaliation in the United States, which shall
hereafter be shown.

Whenever we reflect upon what was the relative situation of the United States
and the English West India colonies, that we were the offspring of the same
parent, established and protected by the same power, and nourished and
cherished for the same purpose, viz. the aggrandizement of the British empire;
without entering into the disputes which brought on the American revolution;
suffice it to say, that there was, before the revolution, a close, intimate and
beneficial commercial connection, which subsisted between the English
West India islands and the now United States. Mutual wants and conveniences
were its foundation, which contributed not less to the growth and prosperity of
the then respective colonies, than to the opulence and grandeur of the mother
country.

To sever and cut off a commercial intercourse, springing from situation,
interwoven by habit, and cemented by so many ties of interest and convenience,
ought to be justified by arguments of more solidity than the independence of
the United States, or the mere right of monopoly over the trade and produce of
colonies.

It is admitted, that the citizens of the two countries, by the sovereignty and
independence of the United States, became aliens to each other, and that each
country possessed, in a sense, the right of limiting, restricting, or
prohibiting its commerce, as it might deem best; yet, when a narrow, illiberal
policy, bottomed upon resentment and disappointment, rather than its real
interest, or the convenience or advantage of its colonies, became adopted into
a system of commercial regulations, such a conduct, if proved, must deserve
reprobation and reproach, and in the end will produce defensory measures, which
shall requite their injustice. Several of the states, in the year 1784, in
their individual capacities, as well as the English West India merchants and
planters, made ineffectual efforts to procure the repeal of these offensive
regulations. The latter, that is, the English merchants and planters,
petitioned the English parliament, pointing out the injurious consequences of
the regulations of commerce to the West India islands; that they were founded
in ill policy and resentment, and would induce a retaliation on the part of the
United States. The states of Virginia, New York, New Jersey, and Maryland,
passed resolutions upon the subject, considering them as aggressions upon the
commerce of the states, and strongly recommending countervailing restrictions.
The state of Massachusetts passed a navigation act, with an expectation it
would have been followed by similar acts from the other states, which was to
have been in force until Congress should have been empowered to regulate trade:
but it not being seconded by any other state than Rhode Island, it was
repealed, for the want of a more general concurrence. Thus ended the prophecies
of retaliation by English writers, and West India planters; and thus became
fruitless, the individual attempts of several of the states to remedy the
injuries and cruelties of these pernicious regulations of commerce.

Mankind don't administer to the rights of others so much from duty as from
fear; it is by retaliation, that nations must make their rights and interests
respected, when they are infringed. The United States, untaught by experience,
and not having provided against the evils, which awaited their independence,
for six years were laid under British commercial bondage, and patiently
suffered their navigation, commerce, and manufactures, to be almost cut up by
the roots, for the want of those defensory restrictions, which were necessary
to their protection. These injuries, sensibly as they were felt, had their
attendant benefits; they afforded an instructive lesson to the honest
unsuspecting politics of our country. Great Britain, under the deceitful
appearance of tendering to us the liberal hand of friendship and
reconciliation, at the establishment of peace, disarmed us of our prudence;
and, by her commercial arrangements, even put to hazard the very independence
for which we had contended, and achieved. The several states saw the evil,
which was sapping their best interests, jealous of their sovereignties, and
distracted by opposing sentiments, from the defect of the old organization of
Congress; and from the necessity of a power to regulate commerce, the great
actuating motive for the adoption of a Federal Constitution, the now
Constitution of the United States became accepted, and approved by the people,
trusting, that its result would produce a conduct from Great Britain more
consonant to equity, and to those advantages she was daily deriving from the
commerce of the United States. But English ministers, hitherto knowing the
influence of language, habits, manners, fashions, and credits; knowing the
difficulties and embarrassments attendant on the altering of old channels of
commerce; knowing her power to circumscribe her own markets, whilst ours were
open to her manufactures; knowing the prejudicies and jealousies subsisting
between the several states, she has even procured a preference in our own
ports, through her merchants and factors, for the employment of her ships and
vessels, to those of the United States: and the United States, for several
years, exhibited a situation as novel as it was absurd; foreign ships and
vessels finding in our ports ample and ready freights, whilst those of the
United States, circumvented by British restrictions, were rotting at our
wharves, for want of employ.

It is by the settled tendency of measures, rather than by professions and
declarations, that we must judge of the friendship or enmity of nations: we
need not recur, for instance, to the histories of either France or England, to
know their enmity and hatred to each other: a recurrence to their laws, and to
their rules of commerce, will sufficiently discover their passions and
resentments, perhaps more strongly than the history of their battles. Accident,
mistake, or occurrences, from a thousand circumstances, might produce temporary
hostilities; but in the settled rules and regulations of their general and
commercial policy, their hatred, their malice, and their rivalries, will be
more fully designated: in like manner, if we recur to the English regulations
of commerce, adopted toward this country, in the face of the petitions and
remonstrances of the most respectable English merchants and West India
planters, to point to their leading motives, we cannot doubt, that extreme
selfishness, and a marked resentment against the United States generally, and
the New England states in particular, for their manly conduct in the
revolution, were the chief objects and end of their policy. Circumstanced and
situated as the New England States particularly were, at the close of the war,
can the narrow, selfish, bigoted policy of a British minister be justified in
denouncing their navigation, fisheries, and commerce, by the most sudden, cruel
and oppressive regulations? Is it possible, that the New England states can
have witnessed the tendency of such measures, and observe them continued and
persisted in, and yet be taught, as some amongst us affect to instruct us, that
an English alliance ought to be courted and preferred to all others? if
alliances with restrictions and prohibitions ought to be courted; if they are
marks of friendship, a New-Englandman might well ask, what are indications of
enmity, short of open hostility? whilst he will apostrophize and say, From such
friendship, and such regulations of commerce, good Lord deliver us!

But as it would be unwarrantable, and it is not my intention, to misrepresent,
either the designs or the policy of the British government, it is fitting that
the facts and statements, on which the foregoing suggestions are grounded,
should be laid before the public.

1. The citizens of the United States and their vessels were excluded
commercial intercourse with the British West India islands, whereby the
employment of above thirty thousand tons of American shipping was totally
interdicted, besides the disadvantage of a great diminution, both in the vent
of American productions, and in the supply of those of the West Indies, which
arose from confining the carrying trade, in both directions, to English vessels.

2. The following important articles of the produce of the United States,
particularly those of the New England states, were totally prohibited to be
imported into the English West India colonies, either in British or American
bottoms, viz. beef, pork, salted fish, whale oil, spermaceti candles, etc.
whereby the New England states sustained an annual loss of vent or market for
upwards of fifteen thousand barrels of beef and pork, two hundred and thirty
thousand quintals of fish, about five hundred tons of whale oil, which, with
the other articles of the growth and produce of the United States annually
shipped to the English West Indies, amounted, by the British accounts, to not
less than a million sterling, which not only supplied them with the produce of
the English islands, viz. with three million six hundred thousand gallons of
West India rum, three thousand hogsheads, fifteen hundred tierces and four
thousand barrels of sugar, one hundred and fifty thousand gallons of molasses,
with coffee to the amount of L50,000 sterling; cocoa, mahogany plank, pimenta,
ginger, cotton wool, fustick, logwood, and lignum-vitae, to the amount of L.
60,000 sterling, besides a balance in cash of L.240,000 sterling. See Brian
Edwards's pamphlet, respecting the trade of the West India islands with the
United States.


It was natural for the unsuspecting politics of the United States to suppose
that Great Britain had so much to gain, by permitting their commerce to take
its old channels, and in the end, so much to lose, if they would not permit it,
that the general balance of the whole trade was so much to the advantage of
Great Britain, by receiving an annual balance from the United States of above
six hundred thousand pounds sterling, besides the immense advantage arising
from the freightage of the produce of the United States, that she would not,
under such circumstances, aim to proscribe her markets to American vessels; nor
to carry into effect against them, her illiberal system of restrictions and
prohibitions upon foreigners, and foreign vessels, to the disadvantage of any
particular part of the commerce of the United States, especially of the
New England states: but in this, the United States have found themselves
deceived, and Great Britain has hitherto been able to support her narrow,
selfish system of commercial regulations, unretaliated by the United States,
through her machinations and intrigues, in the government of the United States.

But the necessity of revising the commercial system of the United States does
not rest, merely, upon the English colonial arrangements, but must be
considered in connection with her European system of commercial policy; and in
relation to the distinctions and disabilities, which the laws of England
impose, between foreigners and British subjects.

Although merchant strangers enjoy important privileges in England, compared
with those of some other countries of Europe, except Holland; that when
friends, they have a constitutional right of residence, and a legal protection
to their persons and properties, extending even to the right of holding real
estate, when not to their own use, they are still under numerous disabilities,
and subject to peculiar impositions, which, although lessening, says Judge
Blackstone, "from the commercial interest and policy of the nation," yet they
create important distinctions between natives and foreigners, to the benefit of
the one, and to the prejudice of the other. To these impositions, numerous as
they are, say British ministers, the citizens of the United States became
subject from their independence! and what rendered them the more injurious,
was, that they had been the ground, and reason, on which the commerce of the
United States had, in many cases, been predicated. A conspicuous example of the
fact herein stated, well known to the people of New England, is the alien duty
of L.18-3 sterling per ton on foreign train oil, originally intended, as it now
continues to be, a prohibition upon its importation into England; whereby the
employment of one hundred and thirty sail of our vessels, or thirteen thousand
tons of shipping, in our whale fishery, was laid under such embarrassments,
that it became nearly ruined before other channels of vent could be found To
preserve the whale fishery of Massachusetts from total ruin, the state of
Massachusetts, in the year 1785, was obliged to grant the following bounties
upon whale oil, viz. on white spermaceti oil, five pounds per ton; yellow
ditto, three pounds; and common whale oil, 40 shillings per ton; which were
continued until the 1st of December, 1787: and on which were paid L.
10,293-3-10 Massachusetts currency.
; and it has not, even at this period, arrived at its usual state of
prosperity; not now employing more than forty ships of two hundred tons, or
eight thousand tons of shipping; in consequence of which, a remittance of one
hundred and fifty thousand pounds sterling in train oil, to pay for British
manufactures, allowed free entry, was at once interdicted, and the country
reduced to the necessity of finding therefore other means of payment.

Upon the same principle, American built ships were prohibited sale in British
ports; or, what was the same thing, the prohibitions and restrictions of the
English navigation act destroyed the English market for the sale of American
built vessels, which, before the revolution, Great Britain had been in the
habit of purchasing, deriving, at least, two fifths of her ships and vessels
from the built of America, amounting to about two hundred and ten thousand
tons, which, if renewed every seven years, the time allowed, by British
accounts, for the duration of American built vessels, an annual vent for thirty
thousand tons of shipping became lost to the United States; which, if
calculated at six pounds sterling per ton, including their sails and rigging,
without reckoning their freight to England, amounted to one hundred and eighty
thousand pounds sterling. If we add to these injurious distinctions, the
numerous restraints upon aliens, who may reside in England, for the purpose of
carrying on commerce, (the particulars of which may be seen by recurring to the
English rate books), we shall find, that the privileges granted, by the 14th
article of the British treaty, to the citizens of the United States, unless
counter restrictions and prohibitions are adopted, can bear no comparison with
the privileges conferred upon British subjects, residing in this country,
independent of the restraints of the English navigation act, of which I shall
take more particular notice hereafter.

1. English merchants are allowed to import into England, many articles of
merchandise, which are not permitted to merchant strangers.

2. Numerous articles of merchandise are not permitted to be uttered or sold,
either by foreigners or British subjects.

3. The exclusive privileges given to particular trading companies, such as the
East India Company, the Turkey Company, the Hudson-Bay Company, etc. are
further restraints upon the liberty of commerce.

4. The prohibitions upon the exportation of raw materials, such as gold,
silver, iron, brass, copper, lattin, bell metal, pan metal, gun metal, shruff
metal, tallow and raw hides, unwrought horns, wool, woolfelts, mortlings,
fuller's clay, pipe clay, and many other articles, the bases of manufactures,
are among the restraints upon commerce.

5. The qualified prohibition upon the following articles, which are only
allowed to be exported when under a given price, or value, at the place of
exportation, viz. gunpowder, wheat, rye, barley, malt, oats, beef, pork,
butter, etc. under the express exception, that when allowed, are only permitted
to be exported in British bottoms.

6. The absolute prohibition, upon the importation of most articles of
manufactures from foreign countries, and of course, upon those of the United
States, such as woolen cloths, shoes, goloshoes, hats, wool cards, etc. some of
which might be very advantageously exported from this country to England.

7. The importation into England of beef, pork, cattle, sheep, fish, etc.
important articles of export from the New England states, are deemed a public
nuisance, and are forfeited if offered for sale.

8. Double light money and trinity duties of 1s9 sterling per ton on foreign
vessels, except to the port of London.

9. The alien duties of scavage, package, and porterage, paid to the
corporation of London, and to other cities in England, on goods exported
therefrom. There are no less than nine distinct tables of prohibited articles
in the English rate books, each containing a long list thereof, under the
distinct heads of, 1. Goods prohibited to be imported into, or exported from
Great Britain. 2. Goods prohibited to be imported for sale. 3. Goods prohibited
to be imported without license from his Majesty. 4. Goods prohibited to be
imported for sale, unless made and wrought in Ireland. 5. Goods prohibited for
sale by strangers, or aliens. 6. Goods prohibited, appertaining to particular
crafts. 7. Ditto, except in particular weights, packages, or under other
restrictions. 8. Goods prohibited to be exported. 9. Qualified prohibitions
upon wheat, etc. as before stated.





In short, to enumerate the invidious distinctions between English subjects and
foreigners, in relation to commercial advantages in Great Britain, would be to
transcribe some pages, at least, from their English rate books; and to take up
more time and attention than is necessary for the present purpose: sufficient
is it to say, that the acts and statutes of the English Parliament are well
calculated to procure to the English merchants, the factorage upon foreign
merchandises, to exclude foreigners from participation in any of the advantages
of her internal commerce, and to secure her markets, exclusively, to her own
citizens, against foreign interference, by prohibiting such articles of foreign
growth or manufacture, which interferes with her own. It is by recurring to the
principles of these laws, and by carrying them into practice, that the United
States will be able to obtain, promote, and secure their own prosperity, and at
the same time, to retaliate the disadvantages they experience, from the
selfish, commercial policy of Great Britain.

If what has been already suggested, does not fully state the principles of the
English regulations of commerce; if the details produced, do not corroborate
those principles, nor satisfactorily evince their injustice, and inequality,
the annual balance of trade, in favor of Great Britain, will give force to
their tendency, and must convince every unprejudiced mind, that means more
effectual, than those already devised, are necessary to place the commerce of
the two countries upon a more equal footing than the one on which it now stands.

If there is a principle of commercial intercourse, which can neither be
controverted by argument, nor denied with reason; if there is a predominating
maxim, distinguished as a just rule of commercial transaction; it is, that a
commerce is beneficial, or pernicious, in proportion to the balances paid and
received by the respective countries carrying it on. The commercial intercourse
between England and Russia, for example, has been the theme of much English
Parliamentary discussion, if not of political lamentation and grief, in
consequence of the annual balance of half a million sterling, paid in favor of
Russia, Balance of trade in favor of Russia, against Great Britain, in the
year 1749, was 1,012,209 rubles, at 4s2 each, L.256,950-16-8 sterling. In the
year 1773, the balance was 653,983-17-2 do. -- 1785, ditto, 1,372,689-16-0 do.

See Anderson on Commerce, vol. 3. p. 275; vol. 4. p. 604.
by the imports therefrom exceeding the exports thereto, by that sum. The
annual balance of two hundred and forty thousand pounds sterling, See Brian
Edwards's pamphlet on the commerce of the United States with the English
West India islands.
in favor of the United States, in their commercial intercourse with the
English West Indies, was taken SINGLY, by the English minister, to determine
the policy, of prohibiting and restricting the commerce of the United States to
those islands; although, if taken collectively, into one comprehensive and
liberal view, the concession of the West India trade, and many others, in the
European, would have been proper, on the part of Great Britain; and even then,
would not have been equivalent to the immense advantages she derives from the
commerce of the United States. Commerce is the interchange of the products of
one country, for those of another; the advantages are reciprocal, when the one
receives as much of the other, as it gives of its own products in exchange; but
if the exchanges are unequal, in proportion to their excess, they become
beneficial to the one, and injurious to the other. From hence arise the
advantages or disadvantages of the balance of trade, which, if insidiously or
artfully procured on the one side, ought to be retaliated and counteracted on
the other.

Among the several means which have been suggested, to ascertain the balance of
trade, between countries having commercial intercourse, two ways seem to have a
preference; although these are not without their objections; the one is, by
custom-house dockets; the other, by the price and value of bills of exchange.
It appears, by the English statement of imports and exports for the year 1773,
that there was paid, by the United States to Great Britain, a balance of
L.610,184-12-5 sterling; viz.

1773. Imports. Exports. New England, L. 124,624-19-6 L. 527,055-15-10
New York, 76,246-12-0 289,214-19-07 Pennsylvania, 36,652-08-9 426,448-17-03
Virginia and Maryland, 589,803-14-5 328,904-15-08 Carolina, 456,513-08-4
344,859-09-01 Georgia, 85,391-01-8 62,932-19-08 1,369,232-04-8 1,979,416-17-01
Deduct 1,369,232-04-08 Balance L. 610,184-12-05

See Anderson on commerce, vol. 4, p. 170. The custom-house dockets of the
United States, allowing no frauds to have been committed upon the revenue, by
evading the duties upon importation, (a circumstance almost impossible to
suppose), the balance of trade in favor of Great Britain, the year preceding
the 30th of Sept. 1790, was 5,922,012 dollars; the whole amount of the exports
to the British dominions, having been 9,363,416 dollars; and the imports
therefrom, 15,285,428 dollars

With respect to the rates of exchange between the two countries, they have
been corroborative of the balance of trade being against the country, which
have varied from two to nine per cent. above par; as will appear by the
schedule, herewith annexed, which has been taken from the books of persons, who
have been in regular habits of purchasing, and remitting bills of exchange,
since the year 1783, for the purpose of paying for British manufactures.

SCHEDULE of the Rates and Value of Bills of Exchange, at sixty Days' Sight,
drawn upon London, since the American Revolution, viz.
1783. November, 2 per cent. above par. 1784. May, 2 do. do. November, 4 do.
do. 1785. May, 2 do. do. November, 6 do. do. 1786. May, 3 do. do. November, 4
do. do. 1787. May, 4 do. do. November, 4 do. do. 1788. May, 4 do. do. November,
4 do. do. 1789. May, 4 do. do. November, 4 do. do. 1790. May, 3 do. do.
November, 3 do. do. 1791. May, 4 do. do. November, 3 do. do. 1792. May and
November, at par. 1793. May, do. November, do. 1794. May, 4 per cent. above
par. November, 6 do. do. 1795. May, 9 do. do. November, 4 do. do. 1796. May, 2
do. do. November, 3 do. do.

It is observed, that much is to be inferred from the state and condition of
the people, in relation to the general balance of trade; See Anderson on
commerce.
if the people are generally employed, and their affairs prosperous; if the
several professions and callings find ready vent for their labor, that such
circumstances are a strong symptom of a favorable balance: but this is a
suggestion very little to be depended on, as it has applied to the United
States, since the adoption of the Federal Constitution; for the renovation of
public credit, by funding the debts of the United, and of the individual
states, produced such an effect, by the introduction of near eighty millions of
dollars into circulation, that the relation of personal to real property became
suddenly altered, and thereby the means of industry extended, and the value of
lands and other property greatly enlarged; but these circumstances were no
evidence of a more favorable commercial relation to foreign nations; for the
increase of wealth did not spring from industry, nor from new improvements in
arts, manufactures, or commerce, but from the establishment of public credit,
of banks, and from the creating of artificial capitals, on which were
predicated some useful schemes, but many pernicious speculations, injurious to
commerce, manufactures and agriculture; and has hitherto added little or
nothing to the advantage, or independence of the country, in relation to
foreign nations. But when we have had so unfavourable a balance, so immense in
its amount, when applied to Great Britain, that the demand for British
manufactures, instead of relaxing, has acquired force, from our commercial
policy: that the manufactures, which had grown up under the restrictions and
prohibitions of the several states, had been gradually expiring; whereby the
intermediate relations between husbandmen and merchants have almost wholly
subsided: that what had been called protecting duties, whether arising from
insufficiency in their execution, or inadequacy in their provision, had
afforded neither security nor protection; or from whatever cause, a plain,
obvious fact is manifest; that the manufactures of the United States are now
reduced to a lower state, than they have been at any former period. No doubt,
some of those inconveniences are to be attributed to the war in Europe; but it
must be remembered, that the inconvenience, attendant on the paper system of
the United States, from the nature of it, was to reduce the value of specie, by
causing an artificial repletion; the effect of which, was to raise the price of
labor, and of the necessaries of life, and of course to discourage our own
manufactures, by rendering their competition more favorable to foreigners.

The fitness and propriety of commercial intercourse depends on calculation,
and minute investigation of advantages and disadvantages: To suppose that an
object of such importance ought to rest merely on the casual, transient
information of the members of a Legislature, would seem improper; or, at least,
it has been deemed so, by the British nation, as long ago as Cromwell's time,
(1665), when a board of commissioners of trade and plantations was established;
which, although afterward laid down for a time, was revived in the year 1696,
under the administration of King William. To this board, the British nation
owes its principal commercial prosperity: its business has been, from time to
time, to recommend alterations in the trade laws; to state "favorable, or
unfavourable balances of trade, with foreign nations; and to receive proposals
for the case and improvement of navigation, manufactures, and commerce." By the
constitution of the board, it was to consist of members, having a " thorough
knowledge of the general state, history, and interests of commerce. How far an
establishment of this sort, would be worth the consideration of our government,
is not the present inquiry, any further than to show, that the navigation,
manufactures, and commerce of a country, and the placing them in a just
relation to each other, and to foreign nations, are objects of the highest
importance, demanding the attention of government, particularly in relation to
the policy of such nations, with which we have unfavourable balances.

There are writers, among whom is Mr. Hume, See 5th essay, vol. 2.
who have supposed, that the received, if not established opinions, in respect
to balances of trade, were erroneous, and without foundation; and that such
balances would find their own level: that the precious metals were no other
than merchandise, which would have a value with regard to commodities, or other
property, in proportion to their plenty or scarcity: that if money was more
plenty than other property, it would be of a less comparative value; and that
if commodities, or other property, were plentier than money, that it would be
of a comparative greater: that if a country had accidentally loft the greater
part of its circulating medium, that the remaining quantity would still be a
mean of transferring property, at a proportionably less price: and that,
therefore, a nation had nothing to do, but to attend to its industry, and that
trade would balance itself. However plausible and solacing this theory is, and
however well intended it may have been, for the people and times in which it
was suggested, the government of England never thought the principle worthy of
their attention, but aims at preserving a general balance in its favor; and
considers every trade pernicious, which carries a balance against her; and the
more so, in proportion to the increase of such balance. Professor Smith
concurs, in some points, with Mr. Hume, in regard to balances of trade; but
confesses, that there is a balance of produce, and consumption, which, as it
happens to be either favorable or unfavourable, necessarily occasions the
prosperity or decay of a nation;" "if the exchangeable value of the annual
produce," says this excellent writer, "falls short of the annual consumption,
the capital of the society must annually decay in proportion to this
deficiency. Smith on the wealth of nations, vol. 2. chap. 3d. part 2d. page 208.


But admitting Mr. Hume's position to be true, in an abstract view, it does not
follow, that trade ought to be left to itself, and to the commercial
impositions, that other nations may put upon it; for a commercial law extends
beyond the jurisdiction of the government making it: it may go to the denying,
curtailing, or extending the privileges of other nations; even to the giving a
preference of one nation to another. In proportion as such a law limits,
restricts, or denies commercial intercourse to other nations, the assumed
jurisdiction, if unretaliated, becomes pernicious and injurious. In this case,
a commercial, may have the effect of a political law, operating either upon
other nations generally, or to extend the power of one state, whilst it may be
a mean of depressing that of another: it may give advantages, with or without
receiving equivalents; it may deny benefits, when more than equivalents are
bestowed, if the nation receiving the disadvantages, will permit them: but if
the restrictive operation of the law should be retaliated, as it ought to be,
the commercial intercourse might diminish, or be suspended for a time, until
both parties should find it convenient to make mutual concessions. Since, by
regulating trade then, it may be so contrived, as to produce favorable or
unfavourable balances, so a nation, for the most part, paying an unfavourable
balance, may most commonly conclude, that in case of its taking place, it
arises from unjust and selfish trade laws in other nations, which require, and
ought to be retaliated. For one of three things must necessarily result from an
unfavourable balance of trade, when the commodities imported are consumed, and
are not re-exported. 1. The specie must either be exported, to pay the
unfavourable balance: -- or, 2. it must be made up from the excess, in the
commerce with other states; -- or, 3. it must remain a debt against the country.

With respect to the first, whatever may have been said by Mr. Hume, that a
circulating medium will regulate itself, and that no country need be
apprehensive from its exports, whilst it has population, and the means of
industry; yet every state must feel apprehensive for its safety and welfare,
from depreciating the value of property, in relation to the precious metals,
when such changes are known to lay the foundations of injustice, and to produce
distrust, disorder, and confusion in every country. For example, we need but to
retrace events a few years back, in our own country, to know the cause and
effect of the loss of our circulating medium. The heavy balances due to
Great Britain, from cutting off our usual remittances, by her commercial
regulations, produced the uneasinesses, distrusts, and confusions of the year
1786. The people, who had contracted debts, and made promises of specie at one
rate of value, found themselves utterly unable, from its undue exportation, to
fulfill them at another, i. e. an enhanced one, arising out of its scarcity; --
for instance, he who had bought a hundred bushels of grain, and gave his note
for it, at a given price, payable at an advanced period, say twelve months,
found that it would require more than double the quantity of grain to discharge
his note. In short, such were the disorders introduced into the money
transactions of the country, through this fertile source of public calamity,
that public and private credit were for a long time suspended, and confusion
and disaffection to government, in some instances, grew out of the unfavourable
balances of trade, grounded on British regulations of commerce.

With respect to the liquidating an unfavourable balance of trade with one
country by a favorable one with another, it must be considered as a mean too
precarious and uncertain to be calculated upon, in a system of commercial
regulations; for it cannot be expected to continue longer than until the
nations, with which we have favorable balances, shall become apprized of their
situation and interest. For instance; Can it rationally be expected, that
France, with which we have had, before the present European war, a more
favorable balance of trade than with any other nation, amounting to 2,068,348
dollars, will not put further restrictions upon our commerce, or demand an
equivalent, in some form or other; especially when she finds, that the balance
she pays to the United States, goes to feed and to nourish the commerce and
power of her enemy? Every nation ought, then, to expect an unequal commerce
will be retaliated, and that it will be restricted and retrenched, as times and
opportunity present.

Although there was a balance of trade of 235,975 dollars, in the year 1790,
against the United States, yet it has been said, that it has been sometimes in
their favor; but a little reflection upon what took place, prior to the
present European war, will not only show the suggestion unfounded; but will
sufficiently prove, that unless additional protection had been given to the
commerce of the United States, what with the old debts due to Great Britain,
and those which were daily accruing, there was much reason to fear, that the
English commerce would, in a few years, have absorbed the greater part, or all,
of the personal property of the country; as the insufficiency of the exports
was made up, for several years, out of the public securities, bank stocks, and
an extensive sale of our wild lands in England; and although these operated as
remittances to a vast amount, comprehending, as it has been supposed, one half
of the national bank stocks, and one third, at least, of the public debt of the
United States; yet the concurrence of these circumstances was not sufficient to
reduce the price of bills of exchange. If these then are facts, and that they
are, a reference to people in trade, and to the rates of exchange, until the
beginning of the present European war, will fully evince; -- must it not, then,
be a serious cause of alarm, to see the same pernicious commercial system
persisted in, almost without a suggestion, or an attempt, to retaliate the
commercial policy of England? Well might the British minister exult, as he did,
in the year 1790, that the independence of the United States had cost nothing
to Great Britain; that so far from its proving an injury, it had saved the
heavy expense of their protection; whilst Great Britain had derived greater
commercial benefits, from the United States, than when they were colonies: or,
in other words, that the American independence had been, and would continue,
but a name, whilst a physical dependence could be retained by commerce.

If the power of regulating commerce, given to the United States, implies an
obligation, it must have been intended, that the commerce should be so managed,
that the annual imports should not exceed the exports; or that the productions
of foreign countries should not be consumed out of proportion to the means of
paying for them, by the productions of the United States; for any thing short
of this, is not the regulation, but the mismanagement of commerce; for the term
regulation carries with it, the idea of a just and proper method of management,
which cannot be the case, if this principle is unattended to.

Baron Montesquieu observes, Montesquieu, book 20, chap. 12 and 13.
that the liberty of commerce depends upon its restraints; that it does not
consist, on the one hand, in an unbridled freedom to traders; nor yet in unjust
impositions for the sake of revenue, on the other: that government should stand
neuter between its commerce and revenues, and not suffer the interests of the
latter to encroach upon the rights of the former. In short, Blackstone, book 3.
chapter 13. vol. 3. p. ^17.
the law maxim of sic utere tuo, ut alienum non laedas, seems strongly to
apply, both as to the individual liberty of commerce, and to the rules and
regulations necessary to produce it; on the extension of which, must
principally depend the public economy: -- Public economy exacts, that the
public income should not exceed the public expenditure: -- In this case, the
annual exports are the income, and the annual imports the expenditure; which,
if the regulations of commerce do not control, so that the latter should not
exceed the former, it is a sure mark, that the commerce is not sufficiently
restrained. The impost laws of the United States allow the importation of every
thing from abroad, whether wanted or not, on payment of the stipulated duties;
but to allow the importation of such articles, which we do not want, or can
procure amongst ourselves, must lessen the capacity to obtain what we actually
stand in need of. If we expend equally in what we do, and do not want, we must
have a reduced quantity of what we do want, by the amount of the expenditure in
what we do not want. To lessen foreign importations, then, it is necessary to
prohibit entry to such articles as we can raise or manufacture amongst
ourselves in sufficient quantities, to supply the demand. High duties, by some
called protecting duties, are seldom collected, or very imperfectly so, in
countries even less suited to conceal smuggling than the United States; from
whence it may be inferred, that prohibitions will afford greater security to
American manufactures, than what are called protecting duties, which offer
temptation to smuggling, produce little or no revenue, and justify the sale,
use, and consumption of such manufactures, which merit an exclusion. Sure it
is, that means more effectual, than those which have been hitherto devised, are
necessary to reduce the ruinous and growing balance of trade, against the
United States, in favor of Great Britain. The state of Massachusetts
prohibited the importation from abroad, of many articles of home produce, and
manufacture, in the year 1786, which had a beneficial effect, as to several of
the articles; for whilst the prohibition shut out foreign importation, such was
the competition produced in their manufacture, that many of the articles were
supplied at a less price than before their importation was prohibited. The
article of nails, particularly, fell from seven and six pence, Massachusetts
currency, to five and four pence per thousand; and the other articles of iron
ware in a like proportion; whilst the general prices of all were not enhanced
by the prohibition. The articles prohibited by Massachusetts were as follows,
viz. See Massachusetts impost act, passed in the year 1786.


"Loaf sugar, hats made of fur, hair, and wool, or any or either of them; boots
and shoes of every denomination, coaches, and all other riding carriages, or
any part thereof, and harness of all sorts; scyths, iron shovels, hoes, broad
and narrow axes, flat irons for ironing clothes, anchors, iron and brass
stoves, mill saws, saddles and bridles, wool cards, cotton cards, ready-made
millinery, articles of dress of all kinds, plumes and artificial flowers of all
kinds, white and blond lace of all sorts, fans charged at more than five
shillings sterling a piece in the invoice exhibited, embroidered patterns for
waistcoats, or for any other parts of dress, gold and silver lace, and
trimmings, women's and children's stays, leather gloves and mitts of all sorts,
message cards, playing cards, hair powder of all kinds, pomatum, and all kinds
of perfumery, paper hangings and children's toys, spelling books and primers,
novels, romances and plays, whips, walking canes, horn and tortoise-shell
combs, porter, beer and ale, butter, cheese and mustard, coffin furniture of
all kinds, linseed oil, candles, snuff of all kinds of manufactured tobacco,
all kinds of wearing apparel, and wooden household furniture, except the
furniture brought by persons who shall come to reside in this country." The
following articles, with the quantities annexed, were imported, and paid duties
to the United States, which, it is conceived, might be mostly prohibited, with
safety and advantage.

[See the return of imposts for the year 1790, published in Tench Coxe's view
of the United States.]

Beer, ale, or porter, in casks, 70,564 gallons. Loaf sugar, 132,837 pounds.
Tallow candles, 15,157 pounds. Wax and spermaceti ditto, 4,224 do. Cheese,
88,771 do. Soap, 24,120 do. Nails and spikes, 1,579,947 do. Snuff, 2,198 do.
Tobacco manufactured, 3,182 do. Tarred cordage, 5257 cwt. 2 qr. 5 lb. Untarred
do. and yarn, 900 3 14 Twine and pack-thread, 609 2 8 Beer, ale, porter, or
cider in bottles, 17,746 dozen. Wool and cotton cards, 780 do. Coal, 181,885
bushels- Shoes, slippers, etc. of leather, 49,003 pair. Do. do. of silk and
stuff, 20,701 do. Boots, 746 do.




There is little doubt but most, if not all the foregoing articles, as well as
many others, might be supplied, in sufficient quantities, to answer the demands
of the citizens of the United States, without foreign importation. Admitting
this to be the case, ought not such articles to be prohibited? ought not the
citizens of the United States, who are taxed by, and submit to the federal and
state governments, to be protected in their professions and callings, against
foreign interference? is it not bad economy for a government, acting in its
personal capacity, to purchase what it does not want, or what its citizens do,
or may procure of themselves? is it not as reprehensible to permit such
importations, as it would be for a farmer to allow himself to purchase wheat or
corn, when he had the most ample means to procure a sufficiency of both?
Absolute prohibitions, therefore, upon all articles of foreign importation,
interfering with our own manufactures, when their demand can be supplied;
increasing duties upon articles imported, which are of our own manufacture,
until extinguished by prohibitions; heavy duties upon such articles as we
ought, and do not manufacture, as an encouragement to their being undertaken,
are the measures pursued by Great Britain; and the means the most likely to
promote manufactures, and to procure a more favorable balance of trade. But
should the present pernicious system of commercial regulations be unalterably
adhered to, and the produce and manufactures of the United States meet no
farther protection against foreign interference, would not the separate states
be justified in levying an excise upon such imported articles, which produce an
injurious effect upon their respective manufactures? for example, why should
not the farmers of the United States be entitled to the exclusive sale of their
productions, especially when they already suffer so many inconveniences for
the want of established markets? why then should not the articles of beef,
cheese, porter, beer, and other articles, which appertain to the produce of the
soil, be prohibited? do the protecting duties, as they are termed, exclude
their consumption? on the contrary, are not large sums annually expended upon
such imported articles? do they not produce a much greater injury from their
importation, than the revenue, derived from them, is a benefit? may it not be
asked, why these articles are not permitted entry into England? and whether the
policy of protecting the interests of agriculture and manufactures, in its
principle, does not apply as strongly to the United States, as to
Great Britain? The best vent for the productions of every country, is that of
its richest citizens, who, if supplied with what they use, through foreign
nations, must prostrate all efforts to improvement, and leave to the native
farmers and artisans, the supply of the poorer citizens only, who are unable to
purchase, but of the inferior kinds. It is by prohibitions, and in the
expenditures of the richer citizens, that the poorer are to be maintained, and
the requisite improvements in arts and manufactures are to be expected: and
shall government, for the sake of retaining duties, imperfectly collected,
indulge luxury, pride, and vanity, at the expense of the public welfare? Are
the sums collected in this way, to be put in competition with the interests of
the great body of husbandmen and artisans of the United States? Are they to be
put in opposition to the habits, manners, and independence of the country? If
laws are intended to prevent public evils; if the impost laws, particularly,
can be so constructed, as to lessen luxury, to influence manners, and to induce
habits of industry, economy, and moderation, ought not considerations of this
sort to have weight in a republican government? Nations, like individuals,
suffer more from example, than by the natural progress of corruption. Every
one, therefore, must wish, that if the American character shall be
contaminated, it should result from the slow progress of luxury, through its
own improvements, rather than from the corrupt sources of the tinseled sineries
of Europe. The importer of foreign luxuries and fineries finds it greatly for
his own profit to encourage a spirit of dissipation and extravagance amongst
all ranks of people; for he not only reaps profit on them, but, in the mean
time, he knows that what were accounted mere superfluities at first, soon
become necessaries of life, so that this trade will increase with the
increasing demand for them: It is his interest, therefore, and will be his
study, to promote, as far as he can, that general spirit of extravagance and
dissipation, which is the most effectual bar to sober industry, and the most
certain means of destroying the internal felicity of every individual of the
state. In consequence of this system, the people soon become poor, and the
profits of the dealer increase with their poverty; how absurd then is it in
mankind, to estimate the degree of improvement of a country by the richness of
its merchants!

See Anderson on national industry. Luxury and prodigality, says Sir Josiah
Child's, are as well prejudicial to kingdoms as to private families; and that
the expense of foreign commodities, especially foreign manufactures, is the
worst expense a nation can be inclinable to, and ought to be prevented as much
as possible.

See Sir Josiah Childs's preface to his new discourse upon trade.


Another object, perhaps of no less importance than what has been before
intimated, to reduce an unfavourable balance of trade, may not be improper here
to suggest: it is a measure of no less consequence than to secure the
commissions, or factorage, upon the supply of our own markets with the
productions and merchandises of foreign countries: and it is conceived, that no
better suggestion, for the purpose, can be readily offered, than an alien duty
upon goods, wares, or productions of foreign countries, shipped for, or
consigned to any other, than an American citizen; and that no drawback should
be allowed upon the exportation of articles, otherwise shipped or consigned,
which had previously paid duty upon importation: By a measure of this sort, the
United States might calculate a saving, at least, of two millions of dollars
annually, which the commissions upon importation and exportation, calculated at
5 per cent. with incidental charges, would at least amount to.

American merchants, considered as such, in relation to their country, stand in
an important point of view; they are to be regarded as the instruments of
communication with foreign countries, of exciting domestic industry, of
diffusing prosperity and wealth, and of holding the capitals of the country, to
be recurred to, in cases of exigence or necessity. To suppose that persons, of
this respectable class, ought not to find protection, in preference to those of
foreign nations, is to consider that foreign merchants are not bound by ties
and connections, which attach them to their native country; and that their
opinions and sentiments are divested of those partialities, which commonly
actuate the human heart. So fully do the English laws recognize this principle
of attachment to their native country, that they suppose, if a merchant shall
even assume a foreign allegiance, that it is only "local and temporary," and
that his natural allegiance is a perpetual, actuating principle, from which he
cannot be withdrawn without the "concurrent act of the government to which it
was first due." See Blackstone, book 1. chap. 10. p. 370.
This principle of the English law is likewise concurrent to another, quite as
generally received, and better understood, which is, that the profits obtained
in commerce, if carried on by foreigners, will be expended out of the country,
in which they were procured.

When we reflect upon the numerous evils, arising from the profits of labor,
(which most commonly center in commerce), being expended out of the country, to
which they properly belong; that a gradual poverty, and an accumulating misery,
are its never failing consequence, as may be exemplified in the people of
Scotland and Ireland, particularly the latter, where their wealth, being
principally expended in England, instead of nourishing the sources, from whence
it is derived, has reduced the inhabitants to the lowest state of beggary and
wretchedness. In proportion, therefore, as a country suffers its commerce to be
carried on by foreigners, will its citizens become depressed and impoverished.
Virginia, the two Carolinas, and Georgia, afford an additional example in
point, where English and Scotch merchants and factors carry on the commerce,
and retire to their native country, with the wealth which they thereby acquire,
to the injury of those states. To suppose, then, that a distinction ought not
to be made, between American merchants and those of other countries; and that
the disabilities of foreign merchants ought not to be increased in the United
States, when so many inconveniences must arise from the establishing of a
foreign influence, from the transferring the profits of commerce to a foreign
country, and from withdrawing the credits and capitals from the country, at a
time of exigence, or of war, when they may be most needed, is, in every point
of view, a prostration, both of national and commercial policy. For this
purpose, additional and special impediments should be thrown in the way of
naturalizing merchant strangers, in order to procure the preferences and
advantages herein contemplated. When we consider the numerous disabilities of
foreigners, carrying on trade in Great Britain, the commercial impositions to
which they are subject, and the restraints which meet them in every direction:
-- that residence procures no remission to those restraints, except in the
British plantations The colonial assemblies were authorized to naturalize
foreigners of good character, after a residence of seven years.

13 Geo. 2. chapter 7.20 Geo. 2. chapter 24. and 2 Geo. 3. chapter 25.
: -- and even should they procure letters of enfranchisement, the commercial
disabilities still follow them, until they can find influence sufficient to
obtain, at a great expense, a special act of naturalization in their favor,
See Blackstone, vol. 1. p. 371 to ^74.
which cannot be sustained, in either house of parliament, without a disabling
clause, declaratory, that they can neither be themselves members of the privy
council, nor of either house of parliament, nor hold any office of trust, civil
or military, nor capable of any grant from the crown: -- when we compare these
disabilities with the liberties and privileges of English merchants and factors
coming to, and trading in the United States; when we compare them with the
ease, facility, and advantages of Englishmen, becoming naturalized American
citizens, every one is left to wonder at the motives, the policy, and
inducements, which authorize the disparity. -- In short, there seems to be
little less than a communion of commercial benefits on the one side, against
limitations, restrictions, taxes and prohibitions on the other!

With respect to the relative situation of the two countries, in regard to
navigation -- the last division of our subject -- in order to place it fairly
before the public, it may not be improper to recite a few clauses from several
principal statutes of the British parliament, viz. from an act entitled, "An
act for the encouraging and increasing of shipping and navigation," "An act for
the encouragement of trade," and from other acts supplementary thereto.

The first of these statutes 12 Cha. 2. chapter 18.
enacts, Section 1. That no goods or commodities whatsoever shall be imported
into, or exported out of any lands, islands, plantations, or territories, to
his majesty belonging, or in his possession, or which may hereafter belong
unto, or be in the possession of his majesty, his heirs and successors, in
Asia, Africa, or America, in any other ships, vessel or vessels whatsoever, but
in such ships or vessels as do truly, and without fraud, belong only to the
people of England, or Ireland, dominion of Wales, or town of Berwick upon
Tweed, or are of the built of, and belonging to, any of the said lands,
islands, plantations or territories, as the proprietors and right owners
thereof, and whereof the master and three fourths of the mariners, at least,
are English, under the penalty of vessel and cargo.

Sect. 3. Extends the same prohibition to all goods or commodities whatsoever,
of the growth, production and manufacture of Africa, Asia or America, under
like penalties.

Sect. 4. Provides that no goods or commodities, that are of foreign growth,
production, or manufacture, and which are to be brought into England, Ireland,
Wales, the islands of Guernsey or Jersey, or town of Berwick upon Tweed, in
English built shipping, or other shipping belonging to some of the aforesaid
places, and navigated by English mariners, as aforesaid, shall be shipped or
brought from any other place or places, country or countries, but only from
those of the said growth, production, or manufacture, or from those ports where
the said goods and commodities can only, or are, or usually have been first
shipped for transportation, and from none other places or countries, under the
forfeiture of vessel and cargo.

Sect. 6. That from henceforth it shall not be lawful to any person or persons
whatsoever, to load, or cause to be laden, and carried in any bottom or
bottoms, ship or ships, vessel or vessels whatsoever, whereof any stranger or
strangers born, (unless such as are citizens or naturalized), be owners, part
owners, or masters, and whereof three fourths of the mariners, at least, shall
not be English, any fish, victual, wares, goods, commodities or things, of what
kind or nature soever the same shall be, from one port or creek of England,
Ireland, Wales, islands of Guernsey or Jersey, or town of Berwick upon Tweed,
to another port or creek of the same, or any of them, under the forfeiture of
vessel and cargo.

The 6th Section of the Act for the encouragement of trade, contains the
following prohibition. 15 Cha. 2. chapter 7.


That no commodity of the growth, production or manufacture of Europe, shall be
imported into any land, island, plantation, colony, territory or place to his
majesty belonging, or which shall hereafter belong unto, or be in possession of
his majesty, his heirs and successors, in Asia, Africa, or America, (Tangier
only excepted), but what shall be bona fide, and without fraud, laden and
shipped in England, Wales, or in the town of Berwick upon Tweed, and in English
built shipping, etc. whereof the master and three fourths of the mariners, at
least, are English, and which shall be carried directly thence to the lands,
islands, plantations, etc. and from no other place or places whatsoever, under
the penalty of the forfeiture of goods and vessel.

In addition to the Sections of the foregoing Acts, the following clauses are
taken from two other Acts, passed in the 26th and 27th years of the present
King of England, since the American revolution, supplementary and confirmatory
of the prohibitions and restrictions of the acts aforesaid, as they respect the
United States, viz.

That no ship or vessel built in any of the colonies of North America, now
called the United States of America, during the time that any act or acts of
parliament made in Great Britain, prohibiting trade and intercourse with those
colonies, The laws prohibiting trade and intercourse with America were repealed
in the year 178^, by 23 Geo. 3d. chapter 26.
was or were in force, nor any ship or vessel which was owned by, or belonging
to the subjects of the United States, or of any of the said States
respectively, during the existence of those acts, and not registered before the
commencement thereof, is or shall be entitled to be registered under this
present act, or to any of the privileges or advantages of a British built ship
or vessel, unless such ship or vessel shall have been taken and condemned as
lawful prize, or have been stranded, shall have been built or rebuilt, and
registered in the manner heretofore practiced and allowed.

From and after the 1st day of August, 1786, no ship or vessel shall be deemed
or taken to be British built, or enjoy the privileges thereunto belonging,
which shall from thenceforth be rebuilt or repaired in any foreign port or
place, if such repairs shall exceed fifteen shillings for every ton of the said
ship or vessel, except to enable her to perform the voyage in which she shall
then be engaged. 26 Geo. 3d chapter 60.

"For obviating all doubts which may arise, touching the meaning and
construction of the act made and passed in the 26th year of his present
majesty, for the further increase and encouragement of shipping and
navigation," Be it enacted and declared, that all ships and vessels, which, by
said act, are declared not to be entitled to any of the privileges or
advantages of a British built ship, or of a ship owned by British subjects, and
all ships and vessels not registered according to the directions and
regulations of the said acts, shall, although such ships and vessels may be
owned by his majesty's subjects, be held and deemed, to all intents and
purposes, as alien ships, and shall, in all cases, be liable to such and the
same penalties and forfeitures as alien ships, in the like cases, are or shall
by law be liable to. 27 Geo. 3. chapter 19.


Although the acts, from which the foregoing clauses are transcribed, passed in
the 12th and 15th years of the reign of Charles 2d. and the 26th and 27th of
George 3d. yet the first act was produced during Cromwell's protectorship, at
the instigation of Mr. St. John, who, through resentment, from an unsuccessful
negotiation with which he had been charged to the states of Holland, procured
its adoption. The policy of these acts, the pride and boast of Englishmen, and
to which they show an enthusiastic, if not a bigoted attachment, has been, and
is still considered as the foundation of the maritime importance of England.
Lord Hawkesborough, in his discourse with regard to neutral nations, calls
Cromwell's act A NOBLE STRAIN OF COMMERCIAL POLICY, which has proved the
fertile source of all the naval power, which has operated insensibly to the
preservation, and has been the spring from whence has flowed, the wealth and
greatness of England.

How far this noble strain of commercial policy ought to be resisted, or
harmonized with; and whether, in the poetic language of the noble Lord, the
United States ought to echo to the song, and in notes responsive, bear up its
lengthened sound, let it be the object of the following observations to examine.

Admitting the advantages of navigation, and of a carrying trade, to be
unquestionable, as a mean of wealth and defense, which will scarcely be denied;
-- a commercial intercourse ought equally, as has been already suggested, to
reciprocate such advantages; -- and the benefits received should equal those
which are bestowed: But the inquiry recurs, What is the state of the case, as
it respects the important subject in discussion? It is, in fact, that in the
year ending the 1st of October, 1790, the United States allowed to the vessels
of Great Britain, five times the direct freightage that they received; and of
course, our carrying trade contributed to the wealth and defense of
Great Britain in the proportion of four parts in five, at least, of what it did
to the advantage and benefit of the United States!!

The whole tonnage of vessels, on which duty was paid in the United States, in
the aforementioned year, was 761,710 tons, of which there were belonging to the
United States 492,100 tons, to other nations 269, 610 tons, of which
Great Britain had 226,953 tons See Mr. Jefferson's statement to Congress in
December, 1793. Also Tench Coxe's view of the United States.
: whereby Great Britain drew for the freightage, calculating but one trip, or
two passages to the vessels, at the mean rate of fifty shillings sterling per
ton, on each passage, 1,134,765 pounds sterling, which sum, if rendered into
dollars, amounts to 5,043,400 dollars, or about one quarter part of the value
of the exports of the United States, by the employment of eleven hundred and
thirty-four ships, of two hundred tons each; which, if calculated to carry
twelve men to each vessel, employed 13,608 seamen; whilst the direct freightage
of American vessels, to and from the British dominions, employed no more than
43,580 See Mr. Jefferson's statement.
tons of shipping, leaving the immense balance of 183,370 tons in favor of the
shipping of Great Britain: -- so that he relative advantages, on the employment
of the respective ships and seamen of the two countries, stood in the
proportion of two hundred and eighteen ships to eleven hundred and thirty-four:
in seamen, of 2,616 to 13,608 -- and in the value of freightage, 968,444
dollars to 5,043,400, without taking into view the advantage of freightage from
port to port, permitted to English vessels in the United States, and not
allowed to American vessels in the British dominions, which must add much to
the already too glaring disparity.

The whole carrying trade of the English West India islands, in the year 1772,
by the British accounts, (see statement below "An accurate abstract of the
number of vessels, which appears, from the registers of shipping, to have been
cleared from each respective English island, during a year of great export,
distinguishing the British from American built shipping.

Islands. British ships. Amer. ships. British tons. Amer. tons. Jamaica, 145
136 26,906 15,847 Barbados, 47 13 6,546 1,172 St. Kitts, 35 20 6,494 2,310
Antigua, 28 22 4,073 2,290 St. Vincents, 25 9 3,042 1,100 Tobago, 6 3 615 320
Montserrat, 10 9 1,437 1,043 Nevis, 18 0 2,851 Grenades, 51 49 7,717 5,942
Dominica, 32 21 3,933 2,433 British, 397 282 63,614 British, 397 63,614
American, 282 32,457 679 96,071 Total 1772

See George Chalmers' opinions on public law and commercial policy, published
in the year 1784. An account of sugar and rum imported into England, from March
25 to October 19, in the year 1785.
Ships. Casks of sugar. Casks of rum. Jamaica, 132 48,615 14,743 Antigua, 30
13,505 529 St. Kitts, 30 14,220 628 Barbados, 18 7,275 133 Grenades, 35 11,841
1,634 Montserrat, 5 2,159 58 Nevis, 8 3,974 116 Dominica, 9 3,601 14 St.
Vincent, 10 4,273 251 Tortola, 5 2,110 24 Tobago, 6 669 54 Total, 288 112,272
18,184

See Anderson on commerce, vol. 4. page 602. N. B. Anderson makes the whole
West India tonnage, in the year 1787, 528 ships, 123,581 tons, outward, and
132,^22 tons inward."


), including that part of it which was participated in, by the citizens of the
United States, employed 96,071 tons of shipping, of which 32,457 tons belonged
to the citizens of the United States, employing three hundred and eighty-two
American vessels, with their complements of seamen.

The trade to and from the United States to Newfoundland, employed one hundred
and twenty-five American vessels, in the year 1771, carrying 8475 tons,
employed chiefly in the exchange of provisions for fish, of which they
purchased 67,000 quintals, being about a ninth of the fish caught, and about a
fifth of the tonnage employed, in the Newfoundland fishery, in the transporting
the fish: -- the whole tonnage, including that of the United States, being
41,424 tons, and the whole number of vessels, five hundred and four, from
which, deducting the American vessels and tonnage, left 379 British vessels,
the tonnage of which were 32,949 tons, as will appear by the following detail
of the Newfoundland fishery in the year 1771, taken from George Chalmers'
opinions on interesting subjects of public law and commercial policy.

"British fishing vessels, of which 244 on the great bank fishing, 269 ships.
British trading vessels, 110 American ditto, 125 Total, 504 ships. Tonnage of
British trading and fishing vessels, 32,949 tons. ditto American, 8,475 Total,
41,424 tons. Number of men in the British fishing vessels, 4477 ditto in the
British trading vessels, 1118 ditto in American ditto, 865 Fishermen,
shoresmen, and passengers from Britain and Ireland, 5529 Inhabitants, who
remained during the winter, 6913 18,902 The number of boats employed by fishing
ships, 556 do. yearly from Great Britain and Ireland, and having no share in
vessels fishing on the great bank, 559 The number of boats employed by the
inhabitants, 1178 2288 The quintals of fish made in fishing ships, 236,000
quintals 645,322 ditto in bye boats, 147,999 quintals 645,322 ditto by the
inhabitants, 261,240 quintals 645,322 The quintals of fish carried to foreign
market, 580,204 Tons of oil exported, 2,846 Tierces of salmon exported, 1,248."

With respect to the trade to Canada and Nova Scotia, before the revolution, it
might have employed about five thousand tons of American shipping, which, if
taken in connection with the advantage the United States now derive from the
direct trade, in American bottoms, with the English East India settlements, It
is true, Great Britain licenses American vessels, contrary to her colonial
system, by the 13th article of the treaty, to import and export direct to, and
from her East India settlements, interdicting all freightage from one port to
another, but under the express exception of such articles, of which the
importation or exportation, respectively, to, or from the said territories,
shall not be entirely prohibited. The right of freightage, granted by this
article, is a limited one, and may be wholly restrained by the express
stipulation itself; but if this was not the case, the liberty given is not an
important concession in favor of our navigation, or carrying trade. The trade
will employ but few vessels, and requires a great exportation of specie, added
to any cargo which might be shipped from the United States, to afford a
tolerable freight upon the little bulky, and high-priced manufactures, such as
muslins, calicoes, etc. of the East India setttlements.
amounting to 1155 See Nourse's statement of American tonnage for the year
1794, marked D.
tons; the general result of comparative advantages, from the freightage
afforded, by the commerce of the respective countries, admitting the
participation of benefits before the revolution to be considered as data, on
which to ground an opinion, of what would have been the effect of a more
liberal policy, than the one, which has been pursued by Great Britain, in the
admission of American vessels into her colonies, upon the same footing since,
as before the revolution, would probably be as follows.

Dr. British shipping to the Amer. carrying trade, calculated upon an average
of three years, viz. from 1st October, 1789, to the 1st of October, 1792, the
average tonnage of which years is 211,199 The English tonnage employed in the
commerce of the United States, beginning with the 1st October, 1789, ending the
1st of October, 1792, is as follows, viz. N. B. As there seems to be a
difference in the tonnage statements of the year 1790, viz. in that made by Mr.
Tench Coxe, and that made by Joseph Nourse, the avarage in this account is made
upon the statement, the most favorable to Great Britain, viz. Nourse's.
1790, 216,914 tons. 1791, 210,618 do. 1792, 206,965 do. whole number 633,597
tons. Average, 211,199 tons.
Cr. American shipping by the British direct carrying trade, to and from the
English European dominions, in the year 1790, viz. 43,580 The exportation from
England of 82,500 hogsheads of tobacco to France, Holland, Germany, and to the
northern and southern states of Europe, the freight. The imports into
Great Britain from Virginia and Maryland, before the American war, were 96,000
hhds. of tobacco, of which 13,500 were consumed at home, and the duty on them,
at L26 1s each, amounted to L 331,675; the remaining 82,500 hhds. were
exported, by our merchants, to different parts of Europe, and brought a great
deal of money into this kingdom. This trade alone constantly employed 330
ships, and 3960 sailors. See Anderson on commerce, vol. 4. p. 187.
The exportation from England of 74,375 casks of rice, imported from the United
States, and exported as above, the freight Great Britain imported and exported
rice as follows, viz. in the year 1773. England imported. Scotland imported.
cwt. q. lb. cwt. q. lb. Carolina, 370,290 2 5 8,492 1 27 Georgia, 72,469 1 10
3,750 0 7 New York, 2,454 3 14 12,242 2 6 Pennsylvania, 3,857 3 18 459,072 2 19
459,072 2 19 471,315 0 25 of which Great Britain consumed 99,438 cwt. 2 q. 1
lb. and exported 371,876 cwt. 2 q. 24 lb.

N. B. In the year ending the 30th Sept. 1792, there was exported from the
United States, it is conceived, principally to Great Britain -- but of this
there is no public document -- viz. 112,428 hogsheads of tobacco, 141,762
tierces of rice, and 147,937 barrels of naval stores.


Tons, 211,199 Lost to the United States by the English regulations of commerce
in the carrying trade to and from the English West India islands, being before
the revolution, 32,457 Ditto in the Newfoundland trade, 8,475 Ditto in the
Canada and Nova Scotia trade, (say) 5,000 Gained by the treaty in the
East India trade, 1,155 90,667 Balance against the United States, 120,532
211,199

But to extend the foregoing calculations farther, let us suppose the worst of
the case, as it refers to Great Britain, which would be to admit that the
vessels of the United States should have permission to enter freely into the
British colonies, and thereby absorb their whole carrying trade, except that of
their East India settlements, of Nova Scotia and Canada, which should continue
as above stated, the balance of freightage would still be in favor of the
English navigation, as will appear by the following statement.

Dr. British Shipping as before stated, Tons 211,199 Cr. American Shipping, By
the English European carrying trade, 43,580 Newfoundland, ditto, 41,424
West India ditto, 96,071 Nova Scotia and Canada ditto, 5,000 East India ditto,
1,155 187,230 Balance against the United States, 23,969 Tons, 211,199

But if the freightage in foreign vessels is a just charge against the exports
of the United States, which it undoubtedly is, it will not only affect the
general balance of trade, but the particular balance in favor of Great Britain
against the United States: for although the freights, paid to foreigners, may
not be a clear loss to the country, as one of the best writers upon English
commerce, Sir Josiah Child's, asserts it is, it must, at least, be considered as
a deduction from the value of the exports, and in favor of the nation, to
which such freightage is paid.

The average of foreign tonnage, for three years preceding the present European
war, was 245,158 tons, Foreign tonnage for the year 1790, 250,546 tons. 1791,
240,552 do. 1792, 244,278 do. 735,376 Average, 245,158 tons.


which, if calculated at five pounds sterling per ton freightage, upon two
passages, amounts to 1,225,790 pounds sterling, or 5,459,288 dollars, which
being added to the other just charges against the exports of the United States,
(noted below), The general balance of trade, stated in the year 1790, by Mr.
Jefferson, in his report to Congress, made December 13, 1793.

The United States stood debtor for a general commercial balance against them,
235,975 dollars. The United States paid freightage to foreign nations, in the
same year, as before stated, 5,459,288 The commissions upon the imports, not
charged at the custom-house, the duties being levied exclusive thereof, at 2
per cent. 500,000 Goods and merchandises smuggled, contrary to law, estimated
at 2 per cent. (only) 500,000 General balance of trade against the United
States, 6,695,263

N. B. No notice is herein taken of goods admitted free of duty, no account
thereof being kept at the custom-house.


the general balance of trade, including that of navigation and commerce,
against the United States, is 6,674,831 dollars; and a particular balance
against the United States, in favor of Great Britain, amounting to 11,078,787
dollars.

Although Mr. Jefferson, in his report, states the particular balance of trade
arising from the imports from, and the exports to Great Britain, to be
5,992,012 dollars against the United States, yet, for the greater accuracy, as
well as to show the British statement of imports and exports into, and from
Great Britain, the following statement is transcribed from Anderson's
Chronological History of Commerce, which is the latest that it contains, and is
for the year 1785.

Imports from and Exports to L. 56,647-11-11 163,348-05-03 New England.
61,671-10-09 405,762-12-00 New York. 57,705-06-05 369,215-08-05 Pennsylvania.
443,580-06-02 1,015,102-08-10 Virg. and Maryla. 228,070-15-10 310,198-03-07
Carolinas. 45,919-14-07 44,396-04-06 Georgia. L. 893,695-05-08
L.2,308,033-02-00 The value of the exports of the two years 1794 and 1795 was
80,000,000 of dollars, and of the two years 1791 and 1792 did not amount to 40
millions. That prodigious augmentation cannot be viewed as permanent, unless
owing to the increase of the quantity of articles of our own growth, or
manufacture, that were exported. But it has already been stated, that that
quantity has received but a trifling addition, if any, since the former period.
That increase is due to mere temporary causes; the first arising from an
advanced price, of perhaps forty per cent. upon the total amount of our
exports, beyond their usual value; the second, from our having become the
carriers of a large proportion of the produce of some of the West India
islands. Those two items, both of which are owing to the present European war,
constitute nearly one half of the value of our exports for the two last years.
See Gallatin on the finances of the United States, lately published, page 27.




Balance against the U.S. L. 1,414,337-17-4 sterling, or 6,285,946 dollars. To
which, if is added the freightage, viz. 4,792,841 dollars, there will be a
balance of 11,078,787 dollars against the United States, which, if compared
with the amount of exports upon an average of three years, ending on the 1st of
October, 1793, the whole exports, upon such average, being no more than
21,805,516 dollars, there is an excess of more than one half of our exportable
produce annually accruing to Great Britain from her commerce with the United
States.

Exports. 1791, 18,399,202 dollars. 1792, 21,005,568 dollars. 1793, 26,011,788
dollars 65,416,558 Average 21,805,516 dollars.

See Tench Coxe's statement of exports, in his view of the United States.

Observe, that the above statement does not include the imports or exports to
and from the British colonies.

If the foregoing statements are founded upon facts; (for it is by facts and
statements of this sort that the commercial policy of a country must be
adjudged); -- if they justly point out the relative advantages, arising from
the commerce and navigation of the two countries, can there be a doubt
remaining, as to the ill policy of our existing regulations of commerce? and is
it not obvious, that a balance of trade, so immense in its amount, and so
ruinous in its consequences, threatening both public and private credit with
shipwreck, ought, by some means or other, to be remedied? and to what measure,
concurrent to those already suggested, can we better recur, than to an American
navigation act, similar to that of Great Britain? It is a measure of justice to
ourselves, of protection to our citizens, and of reciprocity to Great Britain.
Tench Coxe, in his view of the United States, observes upon it, That the
article of the British trade laws, which confines the importation of foreign
goods to the bottoms of the country producing them, and of their own citizens,
appears applicable to our situation. By means of those two flags, we should be
certain of the necessary importations; and we should throw out of each
department of the carrying trade, every competitor, except the ships of the
nation by which the goods were produced or manufactured. All trade with several
countries, such as China and India, whose vessels seldom or never make foreign
voyages, would be secured in our own hands. It will be found, that a modified
application of this regulation, in practice, will be attended with no
difficulties or inconveniences; and besides the immediate benefits already
mentioned, our merchants will be led directly to the original market for the
supplies of which we stand in need. Instead of purchasing goods of Russia, or
the East Indies, in England, France, or Holland, our own ships will sail
directly to the fountain, from whence they have hitherto flowed to us through
foreign channels. The credits given to us in Europe, after the peace, kept us
in the practice of going to a very few places, for all our importations. But
they have trusted us, in many instances, at a dear rate indeed; and however
useful credit may be, as a supplement to our means of trade, in this young
country, it is very certain that we should first lay out to the best advantage,
our funds in hand.

Lest it may be objected, that the reforms herein suggested, in the commercial
system of the United States, might impugn the revenue, and thereby produce
mischief and disorder in the public finances; -- but as this is neither
intended, nor expected; and with a view to prevent such a suggestion, as well
as to avoid unnecessary amplification, it may not be improper to suggest the
following queries.

Query 1. Whether the revenue upon goods imported, ought to be calculated upon,
beyond the value of the goods or produce exported?

2. Whether an increase of revenue, arising from an undue importation in one
year, must not be followed by a reduced revenue in succeeding years; and if the
excess be repeated, (the imports exceeding the exports), whether the revenue,
grounded upon such importations, will not be subjected to a gradual reduction,
if not a final extinction?

3. Whether the amount of the importations would in fact be diminished by
particular prohibitions, taking several years together; and whether the
exclusion of articles, unnecessary and luxurious, would not produce the same
revenue, by the increase of such articles as were useful and convenient?

4. And, lastly, Whether a diminution in the revenue from a partial exclusion
of foreign tonnage, by an American navigation act, might not readily be
indemnified by an increased duty upon the domestic?

Before the present subject is concluded, it may not be improper to make a few
additional observations.

An American navigation act, it is conceived, must operate not less
beneficially to the agricultural, than to the commercial states, by giving
security to the transportation of their produce to foreign markets at all
times, and especially in times of war; and should it be sound, that the
competition, in the supply of vessels, should not at first be sufficient to
furnish the freightage at the lowest rates, (which must soon be the case,) the
agricultural states, under such circumstances, would be wanting in a just view
of their true interests, not to cooperate in the measures necessary to produce
it: In proof of which, it may be asked, what would have been the probable
situation of the southern states, from the present European war, if the United
States had been without navigation? Their produce must, in all probability,
have perished upon their hands, or have been transported to market at so heavy
an expense, as to have left little to the profit of their lands: whereas they
have found immense prices for their productions, whilst our ships and vessels
have had ample and generous freights for their transportation. The union of the
commercial and agricultural interest in this, as in most other cases, has been
found contributive to the general welfare; and perhaps no measure of more
general policy, or particular advantage, applying to the northern and southern
states, could be readily devised for the mutual benefit of agriculture and
commerce, than an American navigation act, upon the principles herein proposed.

But when we consider the encouragement of navigation as contributive to the
general defense, without going far into the history of ancient or modern
nations, there are few or no instances of a country holding extensive colonies
or possessions abroad, or of enjoying power or respectability at home, or among
the neighboring states, without the aid of a maritime force. Navigation, as a
nursery of seamen, and as a mean of bestowing wealth and power, is found, by
experience, to be among the first objects of national policy. The Carthagenians
maintained their independence, and were successful rivals to the Roman power,
as long as they preserved their naval superiority: -- The most brilliant
achievements of the Athenians were through the means of their fleets: -- The
answer given by the oracle of Delphi to the Athenians, to fortify their city
with wooden walls against the invasion of Xerxes, is an advice which has been
successfully adopted by the French and English, Postlethwaite
and ought to be operative upon the citizens and government of the United
States.

France, by the establishment of distant colonies, and by laying a duty,
amounting to a prohibition, upon foreign shipping, in the time of Lewis 14th,
gained such an ascendency upon the ocean, that her fleets became formidable to
those of England, Holland, and Spain: England, although always known as a
maritime power, yet from the time of King Edgar, to that of Queen Elizabeth,
made no great figure upon the ocean: -- Her colonies, principally Virginia, and
afterward the Carolinas, added to the wise provisions and prohibitions of her
navigation acts, first laid the foundation, and afterward established her
maritime importance.

To the policy of these acts ought the citizens of the United States to have
recourse, as a mean of procuring their country's prosperity and power, as a
measure of security against foreign invasion; -- to convoy and to protect their
commerce, to assure to them the just reward of their labor, and to protect it
against foreign interference: -- as a defensive measure, to equalize the
advantages of commerce with foreign nations; to place prohibitions against
prohibitions, and generally to secure those benefits, to which their situation,
productions and good policy ought to entitle them.

To conclude: -- Fellow-Citizens of the United States! let not "partial views,
or local prejudices," deter you from a due consideration of the measures herein
recommended: weigh well your commercial and political situation with
Great Britain! Let unity of action and design (the chief characteristics of a
nation) mark your measures and councils! -- Weak -- timid -- yielding politics
never yet achieved any thing of importance! -- It is for you to say, whether
you will be a great, independent, enterprising and commanding people; -- or a
weak -- dependent -- timid -- and degraded one! -- Speak the word, infuse your
influence into your government; and those acts and measures will soon be
pursued, which will not only secure you against the impending evils, which
threaten you, but will waft to your favored shores, progressive wealth,
prosperity, and power.

FINIS.
ERRATA. In the 24th line of page 18, and the 22d line of page 19, read
defensive, instead of defensory.

A COMPARATIVE STATEMENT of the Tonnage of Vessels entered into the United
States, from 1st January 1790, to 31st December 1794.
TO WHAT NATION BELONGING.
United States Vessels. Vessels owned in part by Americans and Foreign. Vessels
foreign built, owned by Americans. Vessels American built, owned by Foreigners.
Foreign. In Foreign Trade. In Coasting Trade. In Fishing Trade. Great Britain.
France. Spain. Portugal. Italy. United Netherlands. Imperial. Hanse Towns.
Denmark. Sweden. Prussia. Russia. Tons. Tons. Tons. Tons Tons. Tons. Tons.
Tons. Tons. Tons. Tons Tons. Tons. Tons. Tons. Tons. Tons Tons For the year
1790, 354,767 103,775 28,^^^ 312 216,914 12,059 7,381 3,777 6,136 459 1,978
1,113 535 394 1791, 363,662 106,494 ^^,542 192 210,618 8,988 4,337 4,766 3,751
2,326 2,989 2,092 361 320 1792, 414,679 120,95^ 32,062 206,065 24,343 2,692
2,341 3,557 3,214 1,159 907 1793, 447,754 141,6^9 38,177 1,110 100,180 45,287
3,090 3,153 458 577 4,972 1,166 2,364 2,319 1794, 525,649 192,686 27,260 1,497
50 37,058 11,249 2,230 6,044 192 417 978 4,373 9,^90 11,043

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, REGISTER'S-OFFICE, 22d January, 1796. JOSEPH NOURSE,
Register.


