SKETCHES OF FRENCH AND ENGLISH POLITICS IN AMERICA, IN MAY, 1797.

BY A MEMBER OF THE OLD CONGRESS.

CHARLESTON: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, BY W. P. YOUNG, FRANKLIN'S HEAD. No. 43,
Broad-Street. M.DCC.XCVII.

SKETCHES OF FRENCH AND ENGLISH POLITICS IN AMERICA, IN MAY, 1797.
CHAPTER I.
WHEN the rulers of a free people presume to overleap the bounds of law; when
they impose upon the credulity of honest men who have not, some, the capacity,
others, the means, of information; when every stratagem of knavery and cunning
is spread to ensnare the weal of simple innocence; when the gorgeous fabric of
civil and religious liberty, which has been reared upon the bones, cemented
with the blood of patriots, is tottering to its fall, his must be sure a cold
or coward heart, which swells not as with aspick's tongues. Let rogues and
sycophants indulge themselves in the unhallowed rites of base idolatry,
worshipping the mimic godhead greatness which they have fashioned; but let the
hardy, true republican raise up a warning voice to the misguided multitude,
that they defile themselves no more with vile pollutions. For me, I shall not
hesitate to develope principles however veiled beneath the mask of power: and
for the unblushing tribe of upstart courtiers, whether swollen with the poison
of ambition, or basely ducking to the lordly brow, I hold their anger as my
sport: I execrate the wretch who treads upon the helpless neck of innocence, I
scorn the worm that crawls beneath his feet: and, while they cower to the
scourge of satire, let them rejoce, since they commute for this the tree of
infamy they have deserved.

The British faction in America having thrown the republic into a state of
civil animosity and disunion at home, and peril from the hostility of long
established friendship abroad, and the treaty of amity and commerce with Great
Britain being the pestilent source of these disorders, it is a natural
suggestion that we should attempt to rid ourselves of this detested box of
evils, returning it with loathing to the Pandora of this latter age.

Assuming it as a datum that the treaty is a detestable instrument, nor shall I
strive to illuminate a sunbeam, let us proceed to the examination of such
principles as may present themselves, and which would authorize a republican
congress to spurn this instrument in the dust.

By the constitution, the congress is vested with the power of regulating
commerce: by this power they have an opportunity of interrupting our
intercourse with Britain, and springing a mine under the very basis of the
treaty; thereby rendering us respectable to the British monarchy, and once more
dear to the French republic. That it is just to contravene the treaty I shall
first endeavor to establish; afterward that it is expedient: and in speaking
of the expediency of the measure, I shall make some necessary remarks upon the
late measures of the government of France.

First of the justice of the proposed measure: and in the course of this
discussion I shall, as much as may be, adhere to the authority of a writer, to
whom the ministry have, in their reasonings, constantly discovered a decided
preference.

But before we resort to any other authority, let us appeal to that of the
constitution itself, no militation with which, it is apprehended, will be
adventured even by those hardy champions who have set at naught the proudest
bulwarks of truth, and have made incursions upon the confines of common sense
itself.

I shall say nothing of those infractions of the constitution, which were made
by the adoption of the treaty, as the law of the land, without the consent of
the house or representatives. Of this kind were, first, the assumed powers of
regulating commerce; second, of establishing a rule of naturalization; third,
of making all laws necessary for carrying into execution any powers vested by
the constitution in the general government. Of this kind too is the assumed
power of granting appropriations of money which moreover makes room for the
power to establish new federal courts to be paid by congress. All these points
have been ably discussed elsewhere.

But even in the preamble itself to this illegal instrument, it is asserted,
that the senate had advised and consented to the appointment of Mr. Jay to the
negotiation of the same. This previous measure, which was never taken, was
indeed directed by the constitution; an Mr. Jay's acting without it, was not
only and infraction thereof, but such a one as Britain, had she not so much
reason to be pleased with the treaty, would not have hesitated at pleasure to
have made her plea for a violation of the compact.

Congress have powers to define and punish piracies, but not by any other mean
than what is prescribed by the constitution; namely, a trial by jury. But by
the 21st article of the treaty, the British are allowed to punish an American
citizen for piracy, in any mode they shall think proper. Of the woeful influence
which this article has had upon the politics of the French we shall speak
hereafter.

Moreover congress are not in possession of any powers not expressly granted by
the constitution; they had therefore no right to prohibit a citizen from
expatriating himself at pleasure; they might indeed refuse to readmit him as a
citizen when so expatriated; but to detain him against his will, or punish him
for the freedom of his actions abroad, was a species of tyranny not exceeded by
the usurped domination of an Eastern despot: It was nothing less than to cut
him off from the last resort of an indignant hero, who should exclaim with
Sidney, Manus haec inimica tyrannis
Ense petit placidam sublibertate quietem.
Besides it is expressly declared (in the 7th article of the amendment to the
constitution) that no person shall beheld to answer for a capital or otherwise
infamous crime, unless on a presentment or indictment by a grand jury, except
in cases arising in the land or naval forces, or in the militia, while in
actual service, in time of war or public danger; nor be deprived of life,
liberty or property, without due course of law. Now a man who has expatriated
himself, and consequently is no longer a citizen of the country he chooses to
abandon forever, is not only unjustly deprived of his liberty in the first
instance, but of his life if he attempt to regain his liberty (that is to
indulge his will by entering into a foreign service) and all this too without
the due course of law.

It has been denied (and I have not seen it proved) that congress has a legal
right to alienate its powers. Congress we know is vested with the power of
regulating trade, and may therefore cooperate with the executive in the
fabrication of a treaty. But because this may be done in instances which
particularly affect the interests of the nation, and to the extent that the
negotiation of treaties usually demands, does it follow, that it is consistent
with the constitution, in those momentous instances which touch the very vitals
of the government? Does it follow, that because one congress, by virtue of its
authority in regulating trade, has passed laws for the purpose of creating a
treaty, another congress, under circumstances of imperious necessity too, shall
not, by virtue of the same authority to regulate trade, now devolved upon them,
be at liberty to repeal these pernicious acts? A writer, above alluded to,
cites some expressions of Mr. Maddison (used, I believe, in the convention of
Virginia, for the purpose of reconciling the audience to the treaty making
power). They are to this effect: That the treaty making power was never
intended to warrant any part of the legislature in an act for dismembering any
part of the empire, or alienating any essential right; and that the whole
legislative authority possess not this power. The exercise of the power (says
he) must be consistent with the object of the delegation. -- Now one object of
the delegation of the treaty making power, was the improvement of commerce; but
it certainly never was designed that commerce should be erected upon the ruins
of legislation, much less that partial commercial advantages should be
purchased at so dear a rate.

Vattel says (and we should have known it had he not said it) that whenever a
minister exceeds the instructions of his sovereign, a treaty is void. He says,
moreover, if I mistake not, that the violation of a single important article of
a treaty abrogates the whole.

Now the sovereign of a free government is the people; and the instructions of
this sovereign are contained in the constitution they have caused to be
composed: but we have seen above, that these instructions have been exceeded in
several important particulars; and had they been exceeded only in the solitary
instance, in which Mr. Jay has made a treaty without the previous advice of the
senate; it is evident, that this delusive preamble, itself, would have been
sufficient to annihilate every article of the treaty which accompanies it,
although each had been modelled as correctly, and as scrupulously, by the
dictates of the constitution, as they are in many instances most impudently
forged in evident defiance and contempt of its authority.

CHAPTER II.
SUCH reasonings, as the foregoing, it is apprehended are sufficient, and even
superfluous, to the purpose of convincing the enemies of the British treaty,
that it is unwarranted by the constitution: and we have long since experienced,
that the friends of British politics are impracticable to all the arguments of
a republican. To such men it would be vain to urge, that in the construction of
an article of the constitution, when an ambiguity occurs, that meaning should
prevail, which is most favorable to the interests of a republican government.
But were we even to admit the constitutionality of the instrument, principles
could still be found, which would militate as powerfully against its claim to
our esteem.

It is declared by the mischievous fabricators of the treaty, which we have
entered into with our enemies, against the interests of our abandoned friends,
that America had it not in her choice, at that time, by any other means, to
obviate a war with Britain. This treaty then, with our brother and good ally,
king George the IIId, who had already cut the throats of an hundred thousand of
our fathers and brothers, this treaty of true and sincere friendship was made,
we see, under the muzzles of his guns, and at the points of his bayonets.
Whether an instrument so executed, be binding or not upon the weaker party, is
a question by no means worthy a consideration to men who love a sceptred
ruffian; but it surely will not fail to give some pause to those, who love much
more the freedom, the happiness, and the innocence of their country.

Vattel (p. 180, large octavo) expresses himself thus, "Though the simple
injury, or some disadvantage in a treaty, is not sufficient to render it
invalid, the case is not the same with those inconveniences which lead to the
ruin of a state. Since every treaty ought to be made with a sufficient power, a
treaty pernicious to the state is null, and not at all obligatory; no conductor
of the nation having the power to enter into engagements to do such things as
are capable of destroying the state, for the safety of which the empire is
entrusted to him. The nation itself being necessarily obliged to perform every
thing required for its preservation and safety, it cannot enter into
engagements contrary to its indispensible obligations. In the year 1506, the
states general of the kingdom of France, assembled at Tours, engaged Lewis XI
to break the treaty he had concluded with the emperor Maximilian, and the
archduke Philip, his son; because that treaty was pernicious to the kingdom.
They also found, that neither the treaty, nor the oath that had accompanied it,
could oblige the king to alienate the dominions of the crown."

Now if a treaty, which has for its object the impoverishment of a country, by
the imposition of the hardest conditions; if a treaty (entered into by a
monarchy with a republic) which evidently tends by the unqualified,
unalterable intercourse established thereby, to the utter extirpation of
republican principles, if a treaty of monopoly and foreign influence may be
said to lead to the ruin of such a government, the principles laid down by
Vattel give ample warrant to a rejection of the British treaty; nor will any
zealous commonwealth's man, any man whose blood has chilled with horror at the
martyrdom of Sydney, or boiled with indignation at the intemperate claims of a
Stuart, or Brunswick, one moment hesitate to pronounce that deed a cursed
compact for his country's downfall. I will even venture to ask any sensible and
candid man, how great soever his zeal in British politics, whether he
seriously believes the king and parliament of England would not tear into a
thousand pieces any instrument, signed under the pressure of the occasion, if
they saw each article operating to their injury; and whether they would even
give the question but a second thought, when they had foreseen this instrument
would probably introduce into their dominions, the principles of republican
government. Let those who know the object of the present bloody and expensive
war with the French republic, deny this doctrine if they can.

How entirely different from the maxims of British policy, are the principles
laid down by Vattel, in the business of constructing treaties. After speaking
of the propriety of preserving a reciprocity of advantage in such contracts, he
adds, "I see those pretended great politicians smile, who place all their
subtilty in circumventing those with whom they treat; and regulating the
conditions of the treaty in such a manner, that all the advantage shall accrue
to their masters. Far from blushing at a conduct so contrary to equity, to
rectitude, and natural honor, they make it their glory, and pretend to merit
the name of great negociators. How do men in a public character glory in what
would dishonor an individual? The private man, if he is without conscience,
also laughs at the rules of morality and justice; but he laughs in secret; it
would be dangerous and prejudicial to him, publicly to make a mock of them.
The powerful abandon more openly the honest for the useful. But it frequently
happens, for the happiness of the human race, that this pretended utility
becomes fatal to them, and even among sovereigns candor and rectitude are
found to be their safest politics. All the subtilties, all the shufflings of a
famous minister, on occasion of a very interesting treaty with respect to
Spain, turned at length to his confusion, and the damage of his master; while
the good faith, the generosity of England, toward her allies, procured her an
immense credit, and raised her to the highest point of influence and respect."

The compliment to Britain, which closes this passage, we know, by bitter
experience, how long she has ceased to deserve; and against it the reason of
every American republican must revolt, whether he reflects on the hellish
conspiracy against the precious rights of human nature, which was formed by the
combined powers, or whether he looks back upon a few of the latter pages of
English history, and contemplates there atrocities against his countrymen,
compared to which, the crimes of Roberspierre himself would turn to whiteness.
It is evident, indeed, from the boasts of Mr. Pit himself in parliament, that
he piqued himself upon his insidious artifices, and that instead of relaxing
the oppressive bonds, which bind our hands, it was his design to slight no
opportunity to draw the stricture tighter.

CHAPTER III.
ONLY into existing treaties need we cast our eyes, to know how liberal and
friendly were the wishes and designs of that nation, against which the tools
and incendiaries of British policy in America, are endeavoring, with
unexampled acrimony and industry, to kindle our resentment. The following are
the words of the second article of the treaty of alliance eventual and
defensive with France:

"The essential and direct end of the present defensive alliance is to maintain
effectually the liberty, sovereignty, and independence, absolute and unlimited
of the said United States, as well in matters of government as of commerce."

The following is article the 9th:

"The contracting parties declare that, being resolved to fulfill, each on its
own part, the clauses and conditions in the present treaty of alliance,
according to its own powers and circumstances, there shall be no after claim of
compensation, on one side or the other, whatever may be the event of the war.

"The most christian king renounces forever the possession of the island of
Bermuda, as well as of any part of the continent of North America, which,
before the treaty of Paris, in 1763, or in virtue of that treaty, were
acknowledged to belong to the crown of Great Britain, or to the United States,
heretofore called British colonies, or which are at this time, or have lately
been under the power of Great Britain."

Thus do we see that we were to lose nothing, and might gain immensely by the
French alliance, the direct purpose thereof being the establishment of the
independence of America, while the manifest, unequivocal, systematick, design
of the British treaty is its destruction. When, after all these instances of
service, a French minister applied to your secretary at war for the loan of
arms for their defense, what was his reply? that "the French government would
not be supplied with so much as a single pistol." Would not the British
government, under such circumstances, and in the insolence of monarchy have
demanded instantly, that we should join their arms, that we should not carry
grain into an enemy's port, but should bring it to their own? Nay, did she not
do this at last, and will she not do it again, if ever another foolish and
wicked hope is entertained that France can be starved? Does any man of honor
say he doubts this? No not one. Whether we were right in giving no assistance
to France shall not be discussed here; but at least let not this boasted
neutrality of the treaty administration be applauded by us, because an enraged
party in the British house of commons, wishing to exalt American policy at the
expense of Mr. Pit, thought proper to applaud it. Mr. Fox and Mr. Sheridan
applauded what would serve their country: they deprecated a war with America.
Did these gentlemen arraign the policy of the American government, when, in its
infatuated and most mischievous devotion to Britain, an ignominious treaty was
executed with that power, which prostrated at her feet the honor and interests
of America, the interests of France, and put at hazard the future services of
so firm a friend, with the evident peril of converting her, by this act, into a
most virulent, as she would, of course, be a most powerful foe? Certainly they
did not. By the neutrality Britain was to prosper, and they were pleased of
course; but when they found we had meanly deserted the French, and thrown
ourselves into the arms of Britain, they knew they would prosper more, and were
therefore still better pleased.

But it may be said the French, whatever they have been, are no longer our
friends, and that it has become our duty as patriots, and men of honor, to
enter into a conflict with them. Let us look into this business and then we
will return to the British, and the tendency of their treaty, and their
politics.

Three charges are brought against the French government: 1st, That it has
plundered our trade. 2d, That it has refused to receive our minister. 3d, That
it has resolved, in imitation of the British, to treat as a pirate, every
American seaman that shall be found aboard of the enemy's ships.

For the first of these charges it has been false from first to last; the
spoliations committed both in Europe and America never having, as we have any
reason to believe, been authorized by the executive of France. This point, so
far as relates to Europe, is proved by Cossin's letter to the directory,
demanding permission for the French merchants to cruise against the American
trade. What at last has the directory done to embarrass your commerce? They
have allowed their armed vessels to bring in neutral ships suspected of
containing enemy's property, and have ordered, that as soon as the condemned
property is disembarked, the vessel shall be allowed to depart with full
compensation for freight and detention. This, I apprehend, is the general state
of the business, encumbered, no doubt, with some inconvenient regulations.
Compare this with the plunder of the British, and it will appear but as the
teazing of a fly, compared with the ravening of a tiger.

The second charge which is to reconcile us to a war with men who so long
continued to love us, is, that, because they thought we loved them no more,
they said to our minister, "Depart; you are not our friend, you give us no
substantial proofs of affection; you give us words indeed, but words are air;
you wish to give us more words, but our enemies you uphold with deeds; nay us
you have agreed to starve." This charge is frivolous: it is disgusting to
unravel the woof of passion; to break a spider's web is not the task of manhood.

We come now to the most weighty, the most momentous charge of all; the
directory have ordered your seamen, taken in arms against them, while the two
nations are at peace, to be treated as pirates. In this what do they but
imitate the example of the British, authorized by yourselves in a treaty,
which, intimidated, as it is confessed on all hands, by the influence of the
British nation, in an evil hour, your rulers debased themselves by forming.
After all then, what is the purpose of the French government in the adoption of
the very worst of the measures we complain of? Self-defence; the very purpose
for which it is declared we took those previous steps which led to these.

Let us but retrace the ground we have trodden, and the French will do the
same, and we shall both regain the post we have lost -- the post of amity and
peace.

Be it however admitted for a moment, that the French have been to blame; yet
let not the censure fall upon the nation, but upon the directory, the political
agents of the nation. Every people, be the form of its governments what it may,
must, on some occasions, experience the evils of an intemperate, or an unwise,
administration. The pride or weakness of the treaty administration brought this
country into those embarassments, which so puzzle the will in the election of
the lesser evil. To quarrel with a nation on account of its ruling
administration (unless the form of the government allows no change to the
aggrieved citizens) is to encourage one bad administration to provoke another
for insidious purposes, which very thing (supposing that of the French had been
a bad one) would appear to have been done in several late American
transactions; more especially in the late labored mischief of Mr. Secretary
Pickering. If the rulers have been faulty, let it not be said as of old, Dum
delirant reges plectunter achivi. But even supposing the nation of France
itself to be opposed to us, even this is not a sufficient warrant to the cool,
deliberate judgment for us to become their enemies who have been so long their
friends, or (which to the heart of gratitude is more) we to whom they have so
long been friends. First, without more information than falls to the share of
the million, the French people might easily fall into the error of believing
the American people were their enemies, since our government has given the
fullest testimony of a rooted hate. Secondly, in public, as in private,
friendship, he is most a hero who forbears the most. Between long established
friends, as Americans and Frenchmen, forbearance leads to reconciliation;
between long established foes, as Americans and Britons, forbearance leads to
arrogance in one, to meanness in the other. Which is best, to yield something
to a long tried friend, or be the shallow dupe of an inveterate national enemy,
and her vile or wicked agents, and adherents, in the very heart of your
government.

But after all what is it the French desire that you should do? To abandon
certain articles of a treaty, which has been made in despite of the mandates
of your constitution, and which therefore it ought to be your most ardent wish,
and unalterable purpose, immediately to abandon in toto. Will it be said that
we should hesitate to take this step, lest we should incur the imputation of
timidity? If we have not already incurred this imputation, by a most ignoble
submission in the adoption of the British treaty, are we likely now to do so by
a reasonable and honorable compromise with disgusted friends? In private life
does a man of honor hesitate to acknowledge an offense, if he has offended? or
to repair an injury if he has injured? And does he not these things with the
greater readiness, in proportion to the establishment of his reputation? Do
Americans feel themselves suspected? Will not the character of their valor
afford an apology? Will not their achievements in the revolution war, bear them
out of a dispute without a battle? Is it not evident, that by the confession of
error, we shall most effectually assert our national honor? Let the treaty be
abandoned, as it ought, upon the principle of national interest; let the
measure be declared necessary to the legal administration of the government,
and the independence of the republic; then it surely will be no objection to
this act that it will be agreeable to the French. Rid yourselves of your
thraldom, not because the French wish it, but because it becomes you as men of
spirit. Would you do a wrong thing, merely because the French have hoped you
would do a right one? Had we acted rightly in the first instance, we should not
have been called to do so now. Nay, if after the rejection of one minister, the
reception of another should become a question, even this would be no objection
to the abandonment of the treaty. If violations of the constitution are
tolerated in cases which militate against the public weal, how familiar will
the violations become in cases which present some partial good? And how soon
shall we have no constitution at all? It has been matter of curiosity to see in
governments, where liberty has been yielded up in despair, how insurrections
have taken place from the most trifling impositions; as when a king of Spain
attempted to regulate the dress of his subjects; or a king of France, or
England, to deprive the citizens of a public walk: yet even in those states,
which are eminently free, the gaping multitude can gaze with silent inactivity,
when designs, which cannot be mistaken, against their most precious rights, are
in daily progress and maturation. Philip would have met with more prompt and
formidable opposition from the people of Athens, had he threatened to suppress
their favorite spectacles, than he did when he advanced to subvert the
republic.

CHAPTER IV.
BUT the truth is, that we are now brought into a position in which we can no
longer temporize, but must take up some part, either much more abject than any
played even in the treaty drama, or much more manly and decisive than the
wretched actors in those wretched scenes, ever hoped to see us execute. We
must, forthwith, accommodate ourselves to one of three things: 1st, To see our
seamen pressed by the English government, and then hanged by the French: or
2dly, we must fight the nation of France: or 3dly, we must abandon the British
treaty. By this last measure, I apprehend, we shall be in no danger of being
oppressed by, or fighting, either.

Now after all that has been said, about the humiliation of being under the
influence of French politics, in any degree, even the smallest, (for we have
seen that very little has been attempted, and that in their own defense, and to
no detriment of ours,) let me ask, is there any weak nation, that is not, in
some measure, under the guidance of its stronger neighbor? There seems
scarcely an instance to the contrary, but in the little republic of St.
Marino, which is perched like an eagle's nest amidst the clouds. And indeed it
is remarkable, that as the French are anxious, in all instances, to propagate
the principles of republican government, or in other words, as will be believed
by all but the British faction among us, the principles of permanent freedom,
so in the instance even of the unimportant establishment we speak of, they did
not disdain to pause, amidst their great career, to speak their kindness. But
let me ask; does not your treaty with Great Britain, now rule your politics
with a rod of iron? France wishes you to consult her views, in one instance,
wherein it is your evident interest and glory to comply; England, that you
should truckle to her will, in every instance, which now, or ever may exist:
yet you are indignant at the attempt of a nation so long your friend, to break
those bonds. No man deprecates, more fervently than I, the prevalence of
foreign influence; yet, where a certain portion is inevitably to be sustained,
surely that is to be preferred, which, from the habitual attachments, and
character of the government, may be expected to act with superior mildness.
France, we see, is powerful, and loves republican governments; while England,
if she is powerful, is also inimical to republics; and should she be a
republic tomorrow, and prior claims of the French upon our services stood not
in the way, most willingly ought we to forget all the animosities which prevail
under the monarchy, and join our friendly hands. As to the point of
accommodation with a superior nation, it ought to be remembered, that
notwithstanding the distance of our country from the republic of France, the
condition of the peasantry of the southern states, renders one half of the
union extremely feeble, and this weakness is increased by the complexion of
French politics in this particular. Were every man in America a freeman, we
might encounter France with some prospect of success; but where a conflict is
evidently hopeless, it is not fear, but reason, which should decline it; it is
not valor, but madness, which should attempt it. The British navy, if it
remains (and whether it will long survive the palsy of the bank of England may
very well be questioned) may injure us in the spoil of such property as we may
choose to venture on the seas, (for the meanest tool of Britain thinks her not
capable of a second terrene war;) but the potency of myriads of heroes, flushed
with unexampled victories, who shall attempt to calculate. Does not every man
of sense see too, that, since their late successes against the emperor and the
Italian states, the French shortly "must sheath their swords for lack of
argument;" then, should the directory be covetous of glory, as their enemies
assert, where can they wave their banners with greater gain of territory than
on the western shores of the Atlantic; and while they are disbanding one half
of their army in the East, who shall declare, that if we become their enemies,
they will not, with the other half, attempt to plant another empire in the
west? In such a case who doubts that they would delight in an opportunity of
crippling the trade of Britain in America, upon the same principles of
self-preservation which carried them into the territory of Italy. Who then
shall fight your battles? The western peasantry are out of the attraction of
British policy, and love the French. While such are the pursuits of the French,
be it also our part, in like manner, to adopt the principles of
self-preservation, founded too, as they surely are, upon the principles of
national honor and dignity. The British, we see manifestly, cannot subdue the
French; but what if the French subdue the British, the preciousally of the
treaty administration? What, under such circumstances of imbecility, as above
described, will be the situation of the southern states, more especially, sunk
as they will be by the combined oppressions of disappointment, ingratitude, and
despair? Let the French land when they will in the southern states, whether
before or after the conquest of England, whether before or after the attainment
of the Floridas, at that ill-fated hour those states will be dismembered from
those of the north, and east, and west. Then will the northern states, if not
likewise subdued by the French, sink, without hope of resurrection, into the
deep abyss of British politics; for the influence of it is baleful and
universal as its reach; like the dogstar, it falls with indiscriminate rage
upon every nation in all the regions of the habitable globe, and upon every
tribe. But of this more hereafter.

CHAPTER V.
IF, as has been urged, the British treaty is unconstitutional, (and this is a
point not contested, that I know of, even by its patrons) and if it is at
variance with the laws of nations, it will surely not be objected to the
abandonment thereof, that our national faith will be violated. On the contrary,
this happy consequence will result from the measure; it will put intriguing
nations upon their guard, in future, that they make no compact with flagitious
rulers in America, when her laws do not uphold their acts. And what, let me
ask, shall we abandon in the treaty? The greatest curse (formed by a
complication of curses,) that ever visited an incautious, oppressed, dishonored
nation. It is not misfortune, but ruin; nay it is worse, it is annihilation.
The treaty is not one of many evils which like congregating streams fill up a
mighty torrent to burst upon its hapless neighbors; it is an earthquake, which
with wide and wasteful bane, yawns to engorge the nation. Why did we surrender
our birthright to those haughty lordlings, even while their kingdom was
tottering to its fall? Nor did we gain a mess of pottage in return. Instead of
drawing tighter the bonds of union, we should have rent asunder the ignominious
mischief, like Sampson in his strength, and not have suffered this British
treaty to enslave our limbs. By acts of alienation, and not by ties of
friendship, have we four times been rescued from the grasp of Britain: in two
instances by the non-importation agreements which followed the stamp and tea
acts; in two others by the declaration of independence, and the treaty of
alliance with France; which two instruments established our empire. Have we not
formed a league with our implacable foe, as monstrous as between a tiger and a
lamb? for the character of monarchy, of Britain above all monarchies, is bloody
and ravening; the character of representative government is peaceful and
unoffending. The laws of nations, themselves, even when a legal treaty is
formed, between a monarchy and a republic, give the former immense advantages
over the latter. Vattel makes a distinction between a personal and a real
alliance; the former, he says, "expires with him who contracted it;" the latter
"is affixed to the body of the state, and subsists as long as the state; if the
time of its duration is not limited. He then subjoins, "every alliance made by
a republic is in its own nature real, for it relates only to the body of the
state. When a free people, a popular state, or an aristocratical republic,
concludes a treaty, it is the state itself that contracts; and its engagements
do not depend on the lives of those who were only the instruments: the members
of the people, or of the regency, change and succeed each other; but the state
is always the same." If then republics always remain bound, while monarchies
may, in some cases, be let off from their engagements, it is evident that such
treaties should not, but in cases of inevitable necessity, to be entered into.
The same writer adds, "when kings make treaties, and it is doubtful whether
they be real or personal, they should be supposed to be only personal, if
extremely burdensome to one party." But burdensome as this treaty is to the
people, though light as the gossamer to the administration which have given it
birth, yet, because our government is a republic, we, had it been a legal act,
must still have born the weight forever, though we should have groaned like
Atlas beneath the world; whereas a treaty which had been found an encumbrance
to Britain, might, in many instances, have been got rid of as a personal one,
by her, by the death of a prince. In monarchies too we find there is no public
faith but what is founded on convenience; we ought not to have made a treaty
with the French monarchy, but that it seemed the only mean by which to hope for
the establishment of our freedom. We have now, on the contrary, entered into a
treaty which will make us slaves. The confidence which men of observation place
in monarchs is so small, that the only reason why we could hope to avoid the
evils of a par^^^^^^ treaty, between George the IIId and Lewis XVIth was, that
Lewis must have known, that, in that event we should have chosen the master we
were to obey, and that habit, the milder maxims of the British government of
that day, and indignation at such treachery, would have decided in favor of
George. When, too, we have seen kings, and the ministers of kings, bowing their
humbled heads beneath the laurels of Rome and Paris, and when nothing but the
preservation of our principles is needful to the same ascension, shall we
meanly seek relation to these the meanest, and most hateful of mankind, the
foolish, and the wicked? What security have we from a government which has been
faithless to its own citizens? A while the liberty, as well as the property, or
an individual Englishman was left inviolate, to mask the assassins of the
public weal. The French revolution, it was feared, would redeem the liberty
and the property of the citizens, both public and private; private liberty has
therefore been invaded in the persons of some daring patriots; and the like
will be the fate of private property, as soon as the exigencies of the state,
and the felicities of opportunity, shall present themselves together. If thus
they treat the citizens of their own immediate government, their friends and
brethren, what shall we expect? We whom they view but as refractory subjects?
Certainly that they will keep no terms with such. Do we not know that a
flagrant violation of faith happened after the capitulation of Charleston, when
they said they would not fulfill compacts made with rebels? What though they
since have acknowledged the independence of the government? That would
assuredly but weigh with them as lightly as any other principle of honor or
good faith: they would allege, that they made their compact through necessity:
a necessity arising out of their designs upon our liberty; and they would
deride our claims accordingly. Who doubts the readiness of Spain to resume the
long relinquished sovereignty of Holland? To what end are even the laws of
nations resorted to by princes, when the laws of nature have been violated? Is
it not, as Satan quotes scripture for his purpose? Camillus, to obtain our
favor for the treaty, points out some arrogant demands which Britain had
forborne in consequence of the treaty. And will the treaty make this spoiler
modest? It will as soon transmute Corinthian brass to gold, or die with virgin
blushes the ghastly, pallid cheek of veteran guilt. The same writer tells us
the treaty was made to secure us from a war. Great care might have been
expected to be taken in this treaty to secure us from a war, when the best
security from that grievous burden, and no inconsiderable fund for its support,
were surrendered by the treaty; But who shall secure us from a war with
perfidy? Can honor agree with infamy? Humanity with barbarism? Are not
political enormities even familiar to that government? Have we forgot already
the dungeons and prison ships of the revolution? Cruelties committed where
there was no retaliation, and (mean as atrocious!) because there was no
retaliation. If then it was likely we must have a war at last, and that we
could only repose ourselves in peace and infamy, better had it been to have had
this war at first: then should we not only have preserved those resources in
wealth which are spoken of above, but we should also have preserved the
attachment of our friends, and probably been included by their good offices in
that peace which Britain is about to sue for at the feet of France. Whether
such acts of friendship are still to be expected from them, should we require
and deserve them, will not admit of doubt. How much better had it been to have
braved the fury of this British lion, or this British shark? Would not the
memory of former miscarriages have checked the ravings even of British
arrogance? Surely no nation, baffled and confounded as Britain has been in her
attempts to crush the germs of liberty, both in America and France, had ever
better reason, instead of expecting an advantageous treaty from America, to
dread her smiting hand, and to exclaim with the vanquished Trojan: Non aea vis
animo, nec tanta superbia victis. Yet this must be her language still.

CHAPTER VI.
IN some of the foregoing reasonings, we have enquired, whether it would be
honorable, and (if we wish to preserve the purity of republican principles)
whether it would be prudent to quarrel with an old friend, against whom we feel
a sudden disgust, and to connect ourselves with a long established foe. We did
not then enter into the question, whether this foe could, or could not afford
us the support which we once received from the friend we have lately lost.

In familiar discourse, when we are disposed to mark an immense disproportion
between two objects, we are apt to say there is no comparison between them.
Upon this principle we will forbear to speak of the respective achievements of
the two military nations, between whom it may become necessary that we should
make an election, for the purpose of a defensive alliance.

Within twenty years the British government has twice been engaged in war; and
the unquestionable object of either contest, has been the extinguishment of
republicanism, and the fall of liberty. In these unhallowed attempts Britain
has expended two hundred millions sterling; and her national bank has at last
stopped payment; a calamity, which, until it was felt, was deprecated as the
surest source of universal ruin. The two modes, by which the expenses of the
public business of Britain are defrayed, are these: Taxation and loans; but
taxes are paid in bank notes, and so is the interest of loans. Now if the value
of bank notes is lost, what will be the value of taxes? and who will lend money
to government?

But as some doubt may be entertained, whether, notwithstanding an occasional
stoppage of payment, the bank may not yet be in a flourishing condition, let us
advert to some late transactions of the British government, relative to the
business we now speak of.

By an order of council, absolute and unconstitutional, advocated by the plea
of sad necessity, the bank of England is suddenly forbidden to issue specie.
What is the immediate consequence? The credit of the bank is impaired, the
notes depreciate. Do the directors of the bank hereupon remonstrate with the
council, and demand permission to change their notes as usual, that they may
restore their credit? No: they do no more than tell the people, in general
terms, that the bank remains in a state of prosperity. Do the people believe
the tale? Ignorance itself, made drunk, would not believe it.

What scene of this inimitable farce comes next? The minister proposes, that a
committee of the house of commons be appointed to examine into the causes of
the late measure of council, and to ascertain the stability of public credit.
Well; this committee are to return into the house of commons, and, that the
minds of men may be set at rest about the public credit, the committee are to
report what they have seen at the bank; are they not? Nothing like it, good
citizen of England; the minister tells you, you are satisfied already; and does
not he know best? Do but hear his words: "When this committee was appointed, it
would be evident that it was not for the purpose of ascertaining, what indeed
had already been ascertained by public opinion, the solidity of the bank of
England; but to confirm that impression by the most indisputable evidence."
Would not any one suppose, that this man was, to the very last hour, picking
the pockets of the public, and, at the same time, like the man who promised to
jump into a quart bottle, meditating his escape with the plunder? This new
principle of confirming, by new evidence, what was not before believed, is
perhaps the strangest that has ever been adopted, even by the brazen hardihood
of a British minister; and it well may be so, for the occasion itself is
without an example. But who are these disciples of Mr. Pit, who are thus to
give more faith to unbelievers? They are, in the first instance, the creatures
of his hand; next, they are a committee of secrecy; and even they themselves,
"may not go into the more minute and delicate branches of the company's
transactions, provided they certify the grounds of the necessity, which
justified the late measure." This, I think, is looking up the bible, and
inviting good christians to believe. Besides, let us suppose the committee
"shall certify the grounds of the necessity which justified the late measure,"
Does this establish the truth of the solidity of the bank? The best ground for
stopping the emission of specie, I apprehend, is the want of it.

After these notable transactions, we may suppose the curtain will drop upon
the catastrophe of this tragi-comedy, and there remain, perhaps, till it shall
rise again upon a tragedy, wherein not one scene of comedy will be introduced.

An attempt has been made to hoodwink reason, by comparing former calamities to
that which embarrasses the English bank at the present crisis. The run on the
bank at the time of the Scotch invasion was a case entirely distinguished from
the present: payment was then made, though slowly; besides, as the cause was
sudden and of short duration, so also was the effect. But the causes of the
present mischief are the the immense expenditures of specie abroad, and perhaps
the consequent alarm of the monied men, who chose to secure in time what cash
they might collect. By what means the traveling guineas will return to England
we know not, unless the French shall bring them to support their armies; and we
are then to learn how their dismayed foe is to support his own. As to the
hidden treasure which has sunk into the caskets of the subject, the man who
sent it there is not likely to conjure it up again. As to the plan talked of to
restore credit by a mortgage of real property, both reason and passion will
revolt at the idea: monied men have been supported by the despotism of the
British government, and they have given their support in turn, till they are
like to sink beneath its weight: warned by this example, and safe in their safe
possession, the men who hold the soil will not put it to hazard to soothe a
tyrant's breast; but start up in their now unrivalled strength, and brave the
scepter.

Another instance of the stoppage of the bank, which took place in the time of
William III. is as little in point. There was, at that time, no immense
emission of bills to answer the purposes of guineas; a fair acknowledgment of
the present government, that there is no intention to issue any considerable
number of guineas: besides, the termination of a war put a period to the panick
of avarice.

The natural consequence of a bank's stopping payment is one of these; if it
remain shut, notes will depreciate, we know not to what degree. If specie be
again sent out, demands, of course, are made much greater than those which
helped to cause the suspension of its circulation.

It may perhaps be urged, that a peace may turn the resources of Britain into a
lucrative channel, and fill the bank once more. But does any man of observation
believe, that the French will make such a peace, as will leave the British
marine in a state to preserve entire the influence of their military and
commercial power? Such a peace as will keep in after check, perhaps in
annihilation, the navy and the trade of France?

If it be urged, that the business of a nation has before this time been
sustained in its operations by a paper currency, let it be remembered, that the
money of the American revolution (which by the way did not depreciate, it is
said, for the first year, while bank notes have depreciated the first day of
their emission,) was sent forth by degrees, and was employed to defend us
against a distant foe, who fought at a very unequal expense; and it would not
at last have established our empire without the aid of France: for it had
perished before the fall of Yorktown under the arms of the allies; which event
put a period to the contest with Britain. The French assignats depreciated also
with great rapidity, and the government was obliged to have recourse to their
immense resources of eighty millions of specie. Besides, the battles of France
have been chiefly carried into the territories of their enemies; an advantage
well known to military men. But the British have issued, in addition to their
former enormous emissions, fourteen millions, with no resources of treasure,
that we know of, in reserve. This paper medium is, perhaps intended to carry on
a naval war, which yields no commercial spoil to an enemy, with a power, which
only a tempest could frustrate in his design to cast the crown of Ireland
beneath the peoples feet; a power, which will shortly set his foot upon the
British throne, and spurn it to the dust.

"But (say the advocates of the British faction) we admit the probability of
the dissolution of the bank; many thousands will be ruined, yet will England
rise up in her strength, unencumbered by her weight of debt." This case is
similar to the old case of Antaeus, who was the son of the earth, from which he
received new vigor at every fall; 'till Hercules, impatient at the contest,
upraised him in the air, and scattered his brains in the winds. The fate of
England may not, perhaps, be more auspicious. If any reasonings may be called
fanciful, they surely are such as these. When a convulsion shall have
terminated, shall a physician promise health to the weary patient? But
England's resurrection, if ever she shall rise again from the ruins of the
bank, must be in the form of a republic. The monied men, who shall tumble with
the monarchy, will favor those plans of economy which suit the state of an
impoverished man: the whole mass of the needy million will do the same. The
dissenters will associate themselves with ardor, with those men who will
extinguish their disabilities, and give them power, wealth, civil and religious
freedom. If then, this republic is to be a liberal one, we have nothing thence
to dread, if we shall have acted upon the principles of republicans: if it
shall not be liberal, we must have reason to repent the connection we have
formed with the existing monarchy. Besides, if the present system is not doomed
to stand, the English administration must make their new arrangements under the
eye of France; must maneuver in the presence of an enemy, who will take
advantage of her confusion, and has long sought so precious an occasion to
crush that power, which bound his hands so long. Away then forever with these
English ministers! these men in iron masks, whom no one but their keeper knows,
and knows them for their mischiefs. For the mean nodding trifler, who dreams of
British faith and power, let him still slumber in his paradise of fools, 'till
with a fury's scourge the parricide shall wake to anguish.

CHAPTER VII.
IT is a matter of notoriety, that the clamours of the commercial citizens of
America, more especially those of Philadelphia, had no inconsiderable weight in
the origination of the treaty. The appropriations for carrying it into effect
had been negatived in a committee of the federal house of representatives by a
majority of twenty, and in a few days after, without any change of
circumstances, but the increased impatience of those citizens, the
appropriations were granted in the house itself. It is very natural for trading
men to wish for a connection with a power, which they fancy to be capable of
protecting them in their commercial relations, and of offering to their
election the great and varied objects of commerce. But let not the true
interests of America be made a sacrifice to party; nor let liberty be given in
barter for the unexhausted, or inexhaustible mines, of the south. Too long did
the late abject and wicked administration rest their feeble system upon the
crutch of avarice; but let the indignant yeoman kick down at length the
faithless prop, and plant the tree of liberty where it stood. In the
commencement of our revolution war, the cities of London and Bristol
recommended to the British parliament, that the most vigorous measures should
be pursued, and they would give them the fullest support. In a year or two
after, when they discovered that England had not the character of omnipotence,
and that their commerce was interrupted and desolated by the war, they
presented their second petitions, praying for an immediate peace. In like
manner the commercial faction in America, deprecated at first, nothing so much
as a war with Britain, but if the credit of the bank of England shall run its
mortal course, it is to be expected that these gentlemen, as eagerly as the
most stern republican, will demand the termination of our British connexions.

From this so coveted commerce with Great Britain, has sprung the arch terror,
the British treaty; and this monster shall be the mother of others, as
multitudinous as the vipers of Africa. But when we shall feel these reptiles'
sting, where shall we seek the remedy? Will Britain minister it? Britain will
minister nourishment to the serpent. Kill then the present monster 'ere she
breed. Cut off, or reduce that pernicious intimacy which gluts the pride of
Britain, while it breaks the spirit, while it corrupts the morals of America.
Can any intercourse be more unnatural, than that which enriches a foe, provokes
a friend, and drains from us the means of resisting the attacks of either?

This brings us to the discussion of a subject, which seems hitherto to have
occupied much too small a share of the concern and attention of the public. It
is well known that the fopperies of Europe, and of England in particular, are
poured into the republican states of America, to an extent that has affected
the principles and the manners of the people; to an extent which has excited
the wonder, and the contempt of discerning foreigners. This influx of
transatlantick commodities, cooperating with the funding system, has converted
into misers the men of business; and the idle gentry into fastidious triflers.
Break at once these bonds, which like a felon's chains disgrace our hands, and
restrain our actions! Promote the culture of those articles which are in demand
in Europe; but bring not back returns which sink or unnerve the character.
Promote, at home, the prosperity of those manufactures which render the
country, in all sufficient measure, independent of the aid of others; and in
exchange for produce receive so much specie, as coming in support of freedom,
forms the best support of your independence.

We have just seen the British nation thrown into the utmost consternation, and
threatened with present ruin, by the absence of those customary supplies of
specie, which have been exhausted by a war. And does any man doubt that
Britain, so long as the 14th and 15th articles of the treaty remain, will
perpetually inundate us with good, first to enrich herself; secondly to keep
the balance of trade against us, or so little in our favor as to drain us of
the current coin. Trade, in its present vast extent, is injurious in the
extreme, more particularly as it is conducted with Britain; which perhaps has
more the advantage of us, in the conveniences arising from the balance of
trade, than all the powers of Europe taken together: and were such duties laid
upon the commodities of the whole, as would answer the purposes we speak of,
the measure would probably be misunderstood by the people, and be considered as
an intolerable burden, and enormous grievance. By unrestrained commerce, we
know that the greatest mass of wealth may be accumulated; but specie is the
most useful wealth, next to the necessaries of life, and is even requisite to
the defense of those necessaries. Great manufacturing countries, with great
resources in specie, have nevertheless rendered their manufactures extremely
beneficial to them, as the means of preventing the exportation of specie in
great foreign wars. A war has cost Great Britain several times the amount of
its whole circulating specie; yet this money did not go out and return in large
sums; the circulating specie, therefore, could not be the support of the war;
but manufactures, and bills purchased therewith. (Adam Smith, b. 4, chap. 1.)
What then would be our resources, not only in a foreign war, but a war of
defense, since we have neither specie nor manufactures, and who, it is
admitted, ought not, with such tracts of uncultivated land, to carry
manufactures to a great extent, except in those instances wherein facilities
are formed by machinery, which older states reject, to give employment to their
population. The Spartans, it is true, defended themselves without the precious
metals; but our plans of government and social habits are of characters utterly
distinct from theirs, which we know were eminently rigid, self-denying, and
parsimonious. Since then circumstances are not likely to change in the present,
or perhaps in any other state of philosophical improvement, let us at least not
add to the evils of avarice the evils of paper money; more especially because
these last do, in a very observable manner, conduce to the propagation of the
first. Besides the Spartans were sometimes reduced to the necessity of
borrowing specie from monarchs, a measure greatly to be deprecated, for reasons
which will be suggested by what has gone before.

There is a great error in supposing that wealth ought to be the first
consideration in the plans of every government; and yet this error seems to
prevail in a most pernicious degree. When wealth is the first consideration,
liberty is not allowed to be the second; for wealth engrosses the whole man.
Thus has fallen the democracy of England. So when different species of wealth
present themselves to our election, -- that which upholds the freedom of the
government -- and that which enriches and enfeebles it -- let us not hesitate
to prefer the first.

Adam Smith complains, that money only is apt to be considered as wealth.
Whatever commercial arrangements have been made upon this principle, were
undoubtedly wrong; for money, correctly speaking, is but the current
representative of wealth, and is of no use without it. But whatever was
intended to encourage exportation, and restrain importation, so far as might be
necessary to the admission of a circulating medium, in exchange for the
products of the country, seems evidently to be right. The wealth which has been
accumulated by the British nation, under all the disadvantages of a very
profligate, and most lavish government, shows sufficiently the wisdom of their
commercial arrangements; the two principal of which Mr. Smith admits, have been
encouragements to exportation, and restraints upon importation. Theories it is
to be apprehended, unless self evident, or enforced by reasonings of
mathematical certainty, ought ever to be rejected in favor of experience.
Whatever mistakes Britain may have made about the relative value of specie, it
is evident that her maxims and pursuits have at different times introduced
immense treasures into her government. That these treasures remain no more, is
a disgrace which is not to be imputed to her commercial arrangements, but to
two other causes, well worth the observation of a younger state; the one is,
the unparallelled profusion of licentious rulers; the other, that paper system
of finance, which our ministers have had the audacity to adopt, which has
already sapped the basis of liberty, and will ever poison the streams of
public opulence: that system of wickedness and ruin, which nothing but the use
of specie can banish from our land. A rich country, without secure money, is in
the same condition with a rich merchant, who has no monied capital; and even
the property of the country, however great (as will shortly be proved in
England) is no convenient subject of taxation.

Certain goods however, as those of India, though purchased with specie, might,
agreeably to the reasonings of Adam Smith, set on foot a trade, which would
conduce to the vigor of a government. The goods so purchased, being sold in a
foreign-market, might have brought more than was given for them, and a surplus
of cash might have returned to America. The British minister however, perhaps
foreseeing this advantage, pursued the wonted policy of Britain, and poorly
stipulated, in article 13, of the treaty, that all goods brought from British
ports in India, should be landed in no place but America, after which there
should be regulations adopted by both parties. Now should it even be agreed
upon by Britain, that such articles shall be re-shipped, it is evident that the
expense would be a great objection: so that the money which goes to India, is
likely to remain there by virtue of the treaty.

In B. 4, Chap. 1. Smith asserts that "the quantity of every commodity, which
human industry can either purchase or produce, naturally regulates itself in
every country according to the effectual demand, or according to the demand of
those who are willing to pay the whole rent, labor, and profit, which must be
paid, in order to prepare and bring it to market."

Here he seems to overlook this circumstance; that a country may have occasion
for a commodity, and yet not possess the means of effectual demand, and this
too, not by reason of its natural want of means "to pay the whole rent, labor,
and profit, which must be paid in order to prepare and bring it to market," but
by reason of its resources being swallowed up by the purchase of other
commodities. Upon the same principle he seems to be wrong, when he says (b. 4,
chap. 1) "No complaint is more common than that of a scarcity of money. Money,
like wine, must always be scarce with those who have neither wherewithal to
buy, nor credit to borrow it. Those who have either, will seldom be in want,
either of the money, or of the wine they have occasion for." This, as well as
what went before, he adduces to prove, that no care need be taken to provide a
country with specie. Money, like wine, will not only be scarce with those who
have neither wherewithal to buy, nor credit to borrow it; but it will also be
scarce with those who direct the whole of their resources into other channels.
In some of the states of America, wine, and other articles of importation, are
abundant; because the produce of the soil is given in exchange for them: if, on
the contrary, the produce of the soil were given for money only, wine and other
imports must, of course, be as scarce as specie is at present.

Smith says, moreover, (b. 1, chap. 9, part 3) "Gold and silver, like other
commodities, naturally seek the market where the best price is given for them,
and the best price is commonly given for every thing in the country which can
best afford it."

But in South Carolina, before the revolution, a great price was given for
specie: 100 weight of rice for seven shillings; yet were not gold and silver
very abundant. To what could this be owing, but the excess of the imports above
the exports, and the productions of the country being paid for, not in specie,
but in the manufactures of Europe? A country may indeed grow richer, as has
happened to America, though its imports every year exceed its exports. This
year it may export L. 500,000, and import L. 550,000; the next year it may
export L. 550,000, and import L. 600,000, it has therefore advanced L. 50,000
in its productions, and its capital has become greater in proportion to this
advancement. This accession of wealth may happen either by the importation of
laborers, the propagation thereof, or improvements in agriculture and
manufactures, etc. at home. Yet, under these circumstances, may a country feel
most sensibly the want of current coin.

Smith observes, that the trade of a nation ought not necessarily to be
discouraged, merely because the balance is in its favor, it is only to be done
in the aggregate. If by this it is meant, that the general average balance, all
nations considered, is to be retained in our favor, let it be repeated that
Britain almost monopolizes the trade of America; consequently, care ought to be
taken by us, to keep in our own hands the balance of trade against that
particular nation, which, as was said above, holds more of it than perhaps all
other nations taken together.

As to the extent to which encouragement should be given to the importation of
specie; and the prosperity of manufactures (both as the means of excluding
those from abroad which prevent the influx of specie in peace, and as the means
of rendering us independent of foreigners in time of war) if the principle were
admitted, the regulations would follow of course.

This chapter shall be closed with this remark; that could a paper currency be
ever so well secured, even in time of war (which is impossible) this evil will
ever attend at in time of peace; the expensive plans of policy, to which it
never fails to lead, accumulate a mountain of public debt; and this debt
paralyses government, and confirms abuses, by the dread which is excited in
monied men, the nation's creditors, lest innovation should shake the interests
of the funds. This principle has supported the war against France; and
prevented hitherto a reform in the parliamentary representation of Great
Britain.

CHAPTER VIII.
IN the foregoing discussions, I have omitted much matter, which I originally
intended to bring against the treaty with Britain. I feared to fatigue the
attention with what I believed to be unnecessary, and indispose it to the
consideration of topics which I believed to be necessary in the extreme.

There are two main points, however, upon which some of the promoters of the
treaty attempt to ground their defense, and I shall remark upon them in few
words.

They say we first violated the treaty of peace; and that the British, in the
act of taking away American property, during the war, did not violate it. The
violations, on our part, were extremely unimportant in their consequences, and
were evidently converted into a pretext for embarrassing us in a variety of
particulars; among the rest, in the detention of the western posts. It was well
known that their predatory conduct upon the seas, was more than a balance for
our imputed infractions. The real motive of the detention of the western posts,
was the power of involving us in an Indian war; and this power the British
employed, as they ever do their mischiefs, with most wicked speed. Yet do the
British faction, in America, in conformity to the rest of their principles, and
proceedings, presume to advocate the perfidy of carrying off American property.
Let us examine the article: "All hostilities, both by sea and land, shall from
henceforth cease: all prisoners, on both sides, shall be set at liberty; and
his Britannick majesty shall, with all convenient speed, and without causing
any destruction, or carrying away any negroes, or other property, of the
American inhabitants, withdraw all his armies, garrisons and fleets from the
said United States, and from every port, place, or harbor, within the same."
All hostilities between America and Britain we see were to cease; if then, in
future, any American property should be taken, it would be a matter of course
that it should be delivered up; what need then for any provision that it should
be done? and what the purpose of the stipulation for "causing no destruction,
and carrying away no negroes, or other property, of the American inhabitants?"
Surely the purpose was to prevent the removal of what was actually in the hands
of the British, and which we are told by Vattel, had become the property of the
sovereign: What was not in their power could not be carried away, without a
violation of the agreement, that "all hostilities should cease:" and in
conformity to this additional stipulation, with regard to private property, we
find a similar one relative to public property also. "It is agreed, that the
British shall leave in all fortifications, the artillery that may be therein,
and moreover they shall cause, or order, all archives, records, deeds, and
papers, belonging to any of the said states, or their citizens, which, in the
course of the war, may have fallen into the hands of the officers, to be
forthwith restored and delivered to the proper states, and persons, to whom
they belong -- "If then the British violated the treaty, in this instance, it
is evident, that, even supposing the interruption of the recovery of British
claims to have been an infraction of the treaty, it was justifiable as an act
of reprisal, and did not warrant the detention of the western posts, and other
measures; attended as they were with advantages to the British so vast and
disproportionate, and to us, with proportionate losses in men and money;
sustained too in a cruel war with savages, fomented, as is now well known, by
the merciless government of England.

Vattel (page 240) says, "When a case arises in which it would be too
prejudicial to any one to take a law, or a promise, according to the rigor of
the terms, a restrictive interpretation is also then used, and we except the
case agreeably to the intention of the legislature, or of him who made the
promise. For the legislature only requires what is just and equitable, and in
the contract no one can engage, in favor of another, in such a manner as to be
essentially wanting to himself. It is therefore to be presumed, that neither
the legislature, nor the contracting powers, have intended to extend their
regulations to cases of this nature, and that they, themselves, would have
excepted them, had these cases presented themselves."

Now, in the two most important cases urged against us, as infractions of the
treaty, namely the laws of Virginia and South Carolina, to prevent the recovery
of British claims, the most ruinous consequences must have ensued upon the
operation of such suits. It is a matter of notoriety, that when the restraints
upon the courts of law were removed, the British creditors, while they spared
the estates of their own faction, tore to pieces, without hesitation, or
remorse, all those which belonged to the friends of America: and the business
of issuing writs, brought into lucrative practice, the most obscure in the
profession of the law: and, for want of purchasers, so cheaply would property
have sold, at the first passing of the instalment law in South Carolina, that,
even the British creditors themselves would have suffered exceedingly, had they
immediately enforced their claims. But who can hear with patience the defense
of British infractions, in consequence of trifles imputed to ourselves, which
affected but a small proportion of British subjects, when the whole body of
American seamen, in violation of every principle of morals and humanity, in
contempt of the rights, and honor of America, had perpetually been seized like
beasts, and afterward made to fight against friends, or brethren. When too no
compensation, or future security, was insisted on by the American negociators.
We are told by Camillus, that American seamen spoke the language of Englishmen,
and therefore could not be distinguished from such. Does Camillus believe, the
British government would submit to a plea thus ruinous to their trade, and
naval strength, and degrading to their honor, were we to attempt to press
their seamen?

It is to be observed, moreover, that most of the infractions complained of,
took place from the disjointed, unorganized state of the old federal
government. Let any candid, sensible man, judge, whether any power ought to be
treated with in a second instance, which, in the first, acting as in derision
of all maxims of honor, and the laws of nations, had taken advantage of
over-sights, and unavoidable circumstances. Thus, because, in a pacifick
disposition, we had stipulated more than we found ourselves able to perform,
and because we did not ultimately perform what was not in the power of the
general government, this friendly state of Britain is justified in all its acts
of infidelity, deliberate treachery, oppression, and robbery: all of which were
trebly advantageous to itself, as they were moreover eminently pernicious to
ourselves, and to that people who first enabled us to take our rank among the
nations of the earth.

This then is the ally with which we have connected ourselves, to the great
disgust of long known, faithful friends. In our transactions with the British,
I have observed above, that we have repeatedly felt the advantage of acts of
alienation from the English government, and never surely was there a time when
such acts more powerfully pressed themselves upon our adoption. Never, too,
were we in a condition which so fully could establish the prudence of such
measures. America, in her former attempts to rid herself of British influence,
was in the situation of a man who strives to amass wealth without a capital to
work with. The success, in both instances, must be the result of great internal
resources. The natural and political advantages of America, however, have
increased exceedingly since the declaration of independence. Her wealth is
perhaps doubled, and her population more than doubled. Who shall tell the
force, collected into mass, which the combining republics of America, France,
and Holland, if it should be found necessary to combine, shall hurl against the
drooping head of Britain? Who shall calculate the exploits of three republics,
each of which has triumphed in its turn in the cause of freedom, and one of
which has brought to utter ruin the noblest armies of Europe, and overrun the
continent? Will any man set bounds to the potency of three free nations of
armies, linked together for the purpose of breaking the bending pride of
Britain? With what unequalled might will this triple giant dash vengeance upon
a sinking foe? Where shall Britain, with an exhausted treasury, ruined, divided
councils, and impoverished rebellious subjects, find means, once more, to hurl
around the thunders of the deep? Who shall calculate the resources and
achievements of population, soil, and climate, so various and so vast, all
acting in concert for the greatest of purposes, under the immediate guidance,
and the animating shouts of enthusiastic liberty? All the proud advantages of
commerce, wealth, naval power, and conquest, which so long marked Britain as
the champion of the universe, whence came they, but from the liberal hand of
freedom? Shall America, who in her infancy shrunk not from the uplifted arm of
Britain in her fullest might, now decline the contest in her puberty; and dare
not, with powerful associates in the fight, to brave a feeble, aged, warrior,
and send with ignominy, and sorrow, to the grave, those hairs which have grown
gray in wickedness and strife? What is the very purpose of this British treaty?
Is it not to break the energy of a republic, which the decaying strength of
Britain dreads? So, when Charles IId of England was a helpless wanderer, the
monarchy of France restored him to his throne, to cripple the growing might of
the republic which they feared. What are the miscreant principles which bind
us to this fallen bully, Britain? Fear and disaffection. But let the cool,
deliberate republican remember, that Britain cannot hurt him now; and that she
will never do him good. The experience which we ourselves, and the French
nation, have had of the British government, both hated for our love of liberty,
warrant the conclusion, that, upon all occasions which shall present
themselves, it will not fail to consult its interests, indulging to the utmost
its lust of domination. England is not simply unfriendly to us in a negative
sense; it is positively and warmly inimical, as a haughty fastidious despotism:
and France was, before the treaty, and may be made again, positively and warmly
our unfeigned friend. The British have often shed our blood; the French have
often shed their own in our defense. We have tried too long the friendship of
the British government, but let us now, at length, once more convince this
proud intruder, that it has deemed falsely of that spirit it once knew to
dread, and that, like a little wanton boy, it has rashly waked a sleeping lion.

CHAPTER IX.
BUT let us endeavor to improve our judgment upon the question, whether the
connection which has been formed between America and Britain, by the treaty, is
likely to be attended with advantage to the republic. One mean of effecting
our purpose, will be by examining into the characters of those men in power,
who, during the late administration, succeeded by unexampled pertinacity in
every art of flattery and arrogance, meanness and impudence, in procuring the
execution of this treaty of amity and commerce.

Before the contrivers of this odious deed consented to forget their mutual
sentiments of hatred or contempt, before these personal enemies combined, as
political friends, in one general hellborn league, against the people; before
these atrocious parricides had held their daggers to the breast of liberty,
bidding her wear their chains, rushing upon our sphere, like a comet, which
brings dismay, and threatens ruin to the nations, her temple seemed to stand
upon a rock of adamant, firm, inaccessible, and sublime. They beguiled the
thoughtless multitude, by babbling idle tales about the needful energy of
government; And in what at length have their pernicious errors and designs
terminated? In what but the energy of rushing into the gulf of misery and
infamy? in submission to long, repeated, unprovoked injuries of the past, and a
free consent, on our part, in our treaty of redress, to submit to more, or
greater, which may be offered in future? After triumphing over the arms of
Britain, these sorry statesmen have degraded us like a conquered country.
America is the Carthage of the present hour, which has lately passed beneath
the yoke of Britain. To bring about these flagitious purposes, these daring
ruffians have not hesitated to shake to the very basis the fabric of the
federal union; while they accused the republicans of disorganizing the
government, they encouraged a mob to defy the immediate representatives of the
general mass of the people in the federal house of representatives, by whom,
amidst menaces and every species of outrage, the treaty was finally and
reluctantly carried into execution. The gigantick form of America was found in
slumber by the administration, and they, with their little hands, have bound
her, like Prometheus, with indissoluble chains, that vultures may feed upon her
tortured vitals, till time shall be no more. Now can any man who reflects upon
the labors of the revolution, more especially if he can say Quorum pars minima
fui; can such a man, without a stoick's apathy, forbear to rage at the view of
schemes, which avarice or ambition, or the pernicious pride of selfish
aristocracy has devised to make such labors fruitless?

After all, bad as this treaty must be admitted to be, can we but succeed in
ridding ourselves of so great a bane, this eventual good will at last have
attended its adoption; it has had an influence in pointing the eyes of the
people, with some degree of attention, to the measures of their rulers. We
should know therefore, under that circumstance, that wasps having used their
stings have parted with them, that those serpents which have injected their
poison can destroy no more. Yet, after sins, which the tongues of angels cannot
tell; after crimes, which the fiends who prompted cannot recount, these men,
who in their cells of midnight darkness, have undone their country, have the
matchless effrontery to come forth in the glare of day, and to avow their
guilt. The face of consummate profligacy, formed of no penetrable stuff, has
given to these men the sacred privilege of innocence, nulla pallescere culpa.
Since then, this abandoned crew are so little ashamed of ignominy, let us
proceed to look into those previous steps by which they strove to alienate the
minds of the citizens from those principles which might frustrate the execution
of their designs upon the freedom, and upon the very existence of the republic.

One of the earliest artifices, by which it was attempted to strip the nation
of its rights, was, an attack upon the liberty of speech, and of the press. The
men who were associated for the purpose of watching over the movements of our
rulers, and expressing their opinions to the public, were industriously
represented as the very pests of the community. The printers of free
discussions upon public measures, were treated with scorn and abhorrence; and a
halter, enclosed in a box, has been sent to one of them, to intimidate the
whole fraternity. In future, it is to be hoped, that both writers and printers,
by the freedom of their animadversions, will show the decadence of all such
pernicious influence, and that they will unite in an active use of a privilege,
which it has been attempted to wrest from their hands; a privilege, which while
it remains, will be the palladium of the rest, and gives us good hope, that the
spoilers, who strove to grasp it, may be forced, in their own despite, to quit
in dismay those posts they have held so long in infamy. But for the
preservation of the freedom of the press, we might again have been told, we
must not "Prate of state affairs;" But let us in our turn, acquaint these puny
lordlings, that the rulers of a republican nation, can obtain the obedience of
the citizens, by no means so certain as the exercise of republican maxims;
without which they deserve not to be obeyed; let us tell them that the most
artful, selfish demagogue, will ever find it hard to shake an administration,
in a representative republic, so long as it performs its duties. Virtue, so
dangerous to public officers in bad governments, in such as are good is
celestial panoply. Let not the violators of the public rights expect forever
to escape impunity, notwithstanding the lenity they have undeservedly
experienced, during the late administration. And what was the return the people
found for their moderation to the promoters of the shameful and illegal treaty?
Was not every man, who disliked this treaty, nay, were not the sages and heroes
of the revolution, whose hoary hairs were twined with ivy, or with laurel; were
not this veteran band of patriots branded with every mark of contumely and
disgrace, by the most nefarious faction that ever insulted the sacred ears of
virtue -- a faction which are now striving to bring these venerable seniors
into their designs against the French: But shall these faithful servants of our
country's cause, forget that they were stigmatized as deceivers,
antifederalists, jacobins and disorganizers? Deceivers they were called,
because they strove to undeceive; antifederalists, because they strove to
preserve the constitution and blessings of the federal government; jacobins,
because they wished to avert the miseries of civil war, and mutual slaughter,
which even now this treaty threatens, nay has already commenced in a brother's
blood; disorganizers, because they wished to keep in sound condition the organs
of the nation's liberty. When men, whose heads had whitened with the cares of
government, and the toils of war -- whose hearts remained still spotless and
unsophisticated with the foppery of courts, the corruptions of speculation, or
the fever of ambition; when such citizens as these, are censured as the
deluders of the people, to whom, beside, shall we apply for counsel and
consolation? Shall we look to those upstarts, who have amassed inestimable
treasures by the sale of honor? Shall we look to men who but yesterday were the
deadly foes to the champions of assaulted freedom? Shall we look to that
government, which through ten long years of toil, and woe, and carnage,
labored to enslave whom they had not murdered? Shall we link in fond embrace,
our hands with hands of fell assassins, clotted with the blood of brethren, who
died for our salvation? Or with the hands of selfish dastard slaves, who set
them on? Or with the hands of a furious, unrelenting, consuming tyrant, who
pointed them to their task of death, and at whom even folly looks with
derision, and guilt with horror? Oh, call to your remembrance those who freed
you from that dependence on a despot, which this treaty would renew! They were
simple, sensible, incorruptible men: men, who if they were poor, still
continued poor, that they might not be wicked: men, who were the firm, and I
hope, in general immutable friends to that nation, which with ingratitude,
commensurate with congenial baseness, the treaty invited us to abandon: to
abandon too for distresses which happily they felt not. Who shall confide in
such foul flagitious counselors? Who shall again administer to our aid, under
circumstances of such complicated guilt and folly? England is perfidious and
France is wise: the first, if she has power, will oppress us, because she knows
the last will sport with our well deserved calamity, and scorn all commerce
with the base: thus shall we be even stripped of the sacred dignity of misfortune.

Among the topics of calumny employed by the administration, it has been
asserted, that their enemies have wished them removed from selfish or ambitious
views, and that the treaty was made the pretext. Selfish and ambitious men
there doubtless will be found in every opposition: the reasoning of these
however deserve to be heard, and if, upon a scrutiny, the argument be
acknowledged to be good, and the character worthless, accept the advice, and
let the adviser be rejected; for it must be admitted by all parties, that a bad
man will make a worse officer. As to the administration, and the promoters of
the treaty, every man who loves the principles of republican government, which,
as far as in them lies they have destroyed, cannot choose but wish them out.
But how miserably negligent, or ignorant of their interests, must that nation
be, whom nothing but this damning instrument can rouse? How deep that sleep
whence bursting thunders only can awake?

It is said too, that the republicans are unfriendly to the treaty, because
enemies to the British. If by the British is meant the British nation, the
charge is false; were Britons republicans we could freely make them brethren;
but in being enemies to the British government, we are enemies to perfidy,
which regards no treaties; to ambition, which grasps at the dominion of our
country; to tyranny, which delights in cruelty. Could we, with any prudence,
put confidence in a state, which at the very moment it was framing a treaty of
amity with one free people, was engaged in the abominable attempt to deprive
another of its freedom, or its being?

CHAPTER X.
THAT the arrogance, meanness, duplicity, and baseness of our rulers should
have been such as we have found them, ought not to be a subject of surprise,
since these men have not scrupled, some to profess, others to prove, themselves
votaries to monarchy, which bears these ignominous symbols on its front. Nor
need we marvel, that those who vilely truckle to a prince's nod, should seek
their graceless retribution in the people's wrongs. A patient slave proves an
unfeeling tyrant; so pride and meanness strut or creep by turns, and mark the
Proteus form or selfish despotism. Such men as were employed in the fabrication
of the British treaty were, if not morally, at least politically, disqualified
for the task of forming an alliance for the prosperity of a republic. Nor is
it to be wondered at, that such men have toiled, with wasteful hands, to bring
to wreck all principles of freedom, which had but yesterday been launched upon
the sea of politics. In the unhallowed strife no means were left untried;
neither the guile of Satan, the fallacies of Belial, nor the rage of Moloch.
This treaty, which holds up an olive branch to our eyes, veils a scourge of
scorpions for our backs, and, like a wily Dalilah, will yield us, sunk in soft
langours, shorn of strength, into the unsparing hands of Britain. Oh let us not
forget the blessings we possess, but grasp them now, as with the convulsive
pangs of dying liberty! The American government, as it lingers now, is founded
upon a full, and free, and equal representation, in every branch of
legislation, of the whole body of the people which gave it being; the first
government, of this species, which the world could boast, and the only species
of free government which gives, or could give, a credible prospect of duration.
Too long did monarchies affright the shuddering world with deeds of horror, in
ever-during conflicts for the powers of mischief. Never will mankind be freed
from woe and slaughter, till republics shall bear down the scale of power, and
keep all conquerors in awe. Then, and not till then, shall we see the Saturnian
reign of order, peace, and justice. Nor does the warlike character of France
invalidate this doctrine at all. France fights in her defense, and does but
drive back into the countries of her enemies those wars which would consume her
own. But when the work of liberty shall be complete, free republicans will
direct their eyes to more inviting scenes, nor will appoint such rulers as will
withdraw them from repose. In monarchies, on the contrary, the subject is
constrained to content himself, as he can, with the wretch who rules, whether a
coward, who deserts him in the day of peril, or a conqueror, who impels him to
the field of blood. Let us render ourselves dear to those nations which have
striven with us the fight of freedom; let us love, and we shall be loved again
by that astonishing nation, whose enthusiasm is upheld by their magnanimity,
whose magnanimity by their vigor, whose vigor hurls them like thunderbolts
upon their foes. This is the character of the French republic; while feeble
Britain, like a broken reed, shall sink beneath your weight, or pierce your
side. Her weakness only can restore her innocence; a frozen serpent, or a
toothless savage.

What difficulties may be thrown in the way of conciliation with France, by the
treaty makers of the senate, it is impossible to foresee: but let those
apostates to the faith of freedom remember the fate of delinquents in the
revolution congress. Let such recreants to good be warned by the fall of
Bolinbroke, or strive too late, in vain, to cool the fever of ambition, with
the unpalatable cup of cold philosophy,

Even these men, if they love themselves -- if they wish to be remembered
without execration, when gray hairs shall give them warning to quit the stage
of public life -- if they wish to escape that bed of thorns, which goads the
faithless ruler, should use their utmost efforts to redeem their country.

As to those members of the house of representatives, from whom the pressure of
the time extorted reluctant cooperation, let them feel no repugnance against
the measure of countervailing mischief; more especially mischief which
themselves have done. The public confidence must be resumed by confession and
renunciation, not by pertinacity in error.

For the president of the United States, he has held up a beacon, by which each
mariner, in our turbulent sea, may steer his course. He came into office at a
crisis, and in a situation. more than any to be coveted. He found an order of
things, and a body of courtiers, the very worst a free representative
government could ever dread to know. This order of things, and this body of
courtiers, he has resolved to fix. His country looked up to him for wisdom, for
candor, for decision, for salvation, and what would have been the glory of
that man, who should have redeemed his country a second time from slavery and
perdition.

How widely this giddy ruler has wandered from the path of rectitude, how madly
he is in hostility with the principles of the republic which has employed him,
we see with sorrow; but we see it not with wonder, since he is the work of
British hands. All that has been left undone, by others, to effect our ruin, he
has striven to complete. Of the country, over which, in an evil hour, he was
called to preside, he speaks with exultation for her prosperity, when some
angel's hand should be employed to snatch her from despair. He speaks of peace,
and while his breath is still warm with the word, it is employed again to sound
the charge to battle. Can we admit the sincerity of such a magistrate? If we
acquit his heart we must despise his head; if we acquit his head we must
abominate his heart. As to his wretched gasconade, upon the subject of American
arms (to say nothing of the silence which his party observed upon the insolence
of Britain) let me add to what has gone before, that the peasants of the
northern states, who alone can be depended upon for their strength, would soon
be deprived, by their allies the British, of all self respect, and even that
independence which must give efficiency to strength; and for the marine of
America, a naval war would be a mine of gold to the French nation, while we
should not reap the advantages even of a mine of lead. The means by which alone
we can hope to grasp our object, is by holding up the greatest good to friendly
nations; the treaty, on the contrary, has rewarded aggression; and not only the
French, but the Dutch also, and perhaps every other nation, make the same
complaint. The minister at the Hague, indeed, tells you, the Dutch complain,
because they are instructed so to do by France; but needs a man a prompter to
discern his enemy? Had the French insulted us as grossly as has been declared,
and found their policy in the policy of Britain, what, who, let me ask, first
spurned into the dust this pride of ours, placing it under the feet of every
wanton passenger to crush it down at pleasure? What but the treaty with
Britain? Who, but the British faction in America? Yet does your president tell
you we are not to throw ourselves into either scale of European politics. Has
not the treaty done this now? Would not mr. Pit smile with triumph, to hear
the first magistrate of the United States boast of such a neutrality? A
neutrality, which if not an armed, is at least a hostile neutrality. When the
obnoxious articles of the treaty shall have been done away, when the articles
which are at defiance, not only with France, but every power on earth, are done
away, then, then indeed, will there be a neutrality in fact and not in words,
not in thin air, not in any nothing. Far different will be the operations of
such a measure, from that of measures formed by men, who while they steered the
bark of state, were not possessed of skill to foresee a storm of slaughter, or
a shower of blood; or watched like cloud-veiled fiends but to betray; and
tempted to destroy!

Hear further what you are told by this newborn monarch of a republic; and
from his rant should the character of America be too rashly estimated, she
would be judged an infant of untimely stature, which, in its mental weakness,
believed itself a man.

In remarking upon the speech of the president of the directory to mr. Munroe,
upon his departure, he says, "the speech of the president discloses sentiments
more alarming than the refusal of a minister, because more dangerous to our
independence and union; and, at the same time, studiously marked with
indignities toward the government of the United States. It evinces a
disposition to separate the people from the government: to persuade them that
they have different affections, principles, and interests from those of their
fellow citizens, whom they, themselves, have chosen to manage their common
concerns; and thus to produce divisions fatal to our peace. Such attempts ought
to be repelled with a decision which shall convince France and the world, that
we are not a divided people; humiliated under a colonial spirit of fear, and
sense of inferiority, fitted to be the miserable instruments of foreign
influence, and regardless of national honor, character, and interest."

This speech of the president of the directory, it seems, was delivered in the
warmth of his attachment to Mr. Munroe, as a republican. Whether it would have
excited so much indignation in the feeling bosom of Mr. Adams, had it been
delivered by the secretary of an European monarch, to an aristocratick
minister, expressing similar disapprobation of a republican administration in
America, I shall leave to the decision even of the aristocracy itself. But, so
far as the speech has a tendency to persuade the people that "their rulers have
different affections, principles, and interests, from those of their
fellowcitizens, whom they, themselves, have chosen to manage their common
concerns;" so far as this doctrine goes, no republican of common information,
whether in America or France, will find it possible to conceive even the embryo
of a doubt: and no man who was not conscious of the truth of this distinction
of affections, principles, and interests, would so warmly resent the
explanation. Mr. Adams could not but know, or he knows not enough to qualify
him for a much inferior office to that which he has been called upon to
disgrace, that the pursuits of the governors, as discriminated from those of
the governed, have, in all states, been the primal source of tyranny in the
first, and vassaliage in the last. An endeavor, therefore, on the part of the
president of the United States, to close the eyes of the unwary multitude upon
their concerns, and to persuade them to resign, with sottish apathy, and
infatuation, their dearest rights and interests, into the unresponsible hands
of any set of rulers, much more into the hands of avowed enemies to republican
government, is an act of treason against the majesty of the American people.
How far the French were wrong in declaring their belief of an existing
difference between the sentiments of the people, and the rulers of America, we
will not determine, but simply remark, that if it did not exist, the
promulgation of the opinion of the directory was not likely to originate this
difference; and this we will add, (and who shall deny it?) that it was very
fortunate the directory so long had one opinion of an administration which so
little deserved a good one, and another of a people which it was so much our
interest they should love. For the present administration, if they are wise,
they will not delay to show, not only to the French, but to all the world
beside, that they deserve not to be stamped with any marks which shall
distinguish them from their fellowcitizen; but that they are as good, and
attends as assiduously to the interests of the republic as the nation itself,
which they have the high honor to serve.

Much stress is laid upon the desire indicated by the French to cripple the
commerce of Great Britain; and upon their attempt to get English vessels
excluded from the ports of Denmark, Hamburgh, and I know not what. It is
intimated that they are ambitious, and are desirous to build their greatness
upon the ruin of Britain. That any nation should strive to build their
greatness upon that foundation which alone can bear it, is surely no customary
subject of complaint, in those instances wherein it is not pretended that any
scruples have been observable in the proceedings of the party which is to
suffer.

Denmark, Hamburgh, America, and every maritime nation upon the globe, no
doubt, are ambitious to obtain a portion of those commercial advantages, which
have so long rendered Britain the tyrant of the seas. While tyrants prosper,
subjects must remain in poverty. Let them perish all, whether upon the water,
or upon the land! The struggle is not between America and France; it is between
kings and freemen. Our die will soon be thrown, and it is an awful cast.

FINIS.

