GEORGIA SPECULATION UNVEILED; IN TWO NUMBERS.

BY ABRAHAM BISHOP.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY ELISHA BABCOCK. [COPY-RIGHT SECURED.] 1797.

THIS Pamphlet is an actual, though not a literal answer to the "STATE OF
FACTS," published by the Georgia Companies. It contains the outlines of the
present state of the Georgia business, and a brief sketch of the arguments on
both sides, with such Commentaries as the compass of the work would allow. The
general tenor of it, especially that part which treats of the Chancery powers
of our Courts, will be found applicable to the cases of all, who have suffered
by any kind of Land speculation.

STATE OF FACTS, RELATING TO THE GEORGIA LANDS.
UNDER the term of GEORGIA WESTERN TERRITORY is included all that part of the
State of Georgia, which dies west of the head waters of those rivers, which
fall into the Atlantic ocean. These lands are principally inhabited by three
nations of Indians, the Chactaws, the Chickasaws, and the Creeks, -- of which
nations the following is a summary character.

THE Chactaws, or flat-heads, are a powerful, hardy, subtle and intrepid race
of Indians, who inhabit a very fine and extensive tract of hilly country, with
large and fertile plains intervening between the Alabama and Missisippi rivers.
They have about 40 towns and villages, and 4000 fighting men. -- They have
large plantations or country farms, where they employ much of their time in
agricultural improvements, after the manner of white people.

THE Chickasaws are a nation of Indians, who inhabit the country on the east
side of the Missisippi, on the head branches of the Tombeckbe, Mobille and
Yazoo rivers. Their country is an extensive plain, tolerably well watered from
springs, and of a pretty good soil. They have 7 towns, and their number of
sighting men is estimated at 575.

THE Greeks inhabit the middle part of Georgia. They eminently deserve the
encomium of all nations for their wisdom and virtue in expelling the use of
spiritous liquors. The first and most cogent article in all their treaties with
the white people, is, that there shall not be any kind of spiritous liquors
sold or brought into their towns. -- Instances have frequently occurred, on the
discovery of attempts to run kegs of spirits into the country, of the Indians
striking with their tomahawks those who attempted it, and giving the liquor to
the sand, not tasting of it themselves. It is difficult to account for their
excellent policy in civil government: it cannot derive its efficacy from
coercive laws; for they have no such artificial system. They have 55 towns,
beside many villages, and their fighting men are about 5800. -- They are a
well-made, expert, hardy, sagacious, politic people; extremely jealous of their
rights, and averse to parting with their lands. They have abundance of tame
cattle and swine, turkies, ducks and other poultry. They cultivate tobacco,
rice, Indian corn, potatoes, beans, peace, cabbage, melons, and have a plenty of
peaches, plumbs, grapes, strawberries and other fruits. They are faithful
friends, but inveterate enemies; hospitable to strangers, and honest and fair
in their dealings. No nation has a more contemptible opinion of the white men's
faith in general, than these people: yet they place great confidence in the
United States, and wish to agree with them upon a permanent boundary, over
which the southern States shall not trespass. The country which they claim, is
bounded northward by about the 34th degree of latitude, and extends from the
Tombeckbe or Mobille river to the Atlantic ocean (though they have ceded a part
of this tract on the sea coast, by different treaties, to the state of Georgia.)

OF this western territory, thus inhabited, the state of Georgia by act of
their legislature, passed January 7th, 1795, sold about twenty-two millions of
acres, to four different companies -- viz.

ONE tract to James Gunn, Matthew M'Allister and George Walker, and their
associates, called, The Georgia Company.

ONE tract to Nicholas Long, Thomas Glasscock, Ambrose Gordon and Thomas
Cummings, and their associates, called, The Georgia Missisippi Company.

ONE tract to John B. Scott, John C. Nightingale and Wade Hampton, called, The
Upper Missisippi Company.

ONE tract to Zechariah Coxe, Mathias Maher, and their associates, called, The
Tenessee Company.

HALF a million of dollars was the purchase money: -- this, or the greatest
part of it, was secured by mortgages, which have been since cancelled. -- But
the state of Georgia now reclaims these tracts of land, alleging that the act
authorizing the sale, is contrary to the 4th article of the constitution of the
United States; repugnant to the 16th and 17th sections of the 1st article of
the constitution of Georgia; and was moreover obtained by means of fraud,
atrocious speculation, corruption and collusion. -- Hence, by an act passed
February 13th, 1796, the aforesaid act of January 7th, 1795, was declared null
and void, and the grants, rights and claims deduced from it, annulled and
rendered void and of no effect.

THUS far my statement is probably correct, being mostly taken from Doctor
Morse's American Gazetteer.

BETWEEN the time of passing the granting act in January, 1795, and of passing
the rescinding act in February, 1796, a great portion of these lands were
alienated by the Companies, and became the property of purchasers in the middle
and eastern states. These sales were effected under the influence of a certain
pamphlet, entitled, State of facts, showing the right of certain companies to
the lands, lately purchased by them from the state of Georgia, and under the
influence of certain other means, which will be noticed in the course of these
numbers.

To save the inconvenience of frequent references and quotations in the
following pages, it may be well to inform the reader, that relying on the
statement of facts, published by the Georgia companies, I verily believed (till
after the rescinding act) that the sea of the lands sold to the companies and
by them to us, had been extinguished by the state of Georgia; but that the
Indians had a right of hunting and fishing, which would in time be abdicated or
easily purchased; as such a kind of right had formerly existed in this colony,
and had been virtually recognized in the several treaties with different
tribes. But after the rescinding act, it appeared that the right of the state
of Georgia to the fee, was just such a right as the state of North Carolina had
set up to Indian lands; but which had been negatived unanimously by a committee
of Congress, consisting of a member from each of the states. It also appeared
that this setting up of a see was pointedly opposed to the uniform policy of
the United States, to the uniform declarations of Congress, and to the treaty
with the Creek nation, concluded August 7th, 1790.

As the fee which was the substance of all these sales had failed entirely and
did not exist, and as much money had been paid, and many notes been given, it
became important to enquire whether the right of preemption was worth any
thing. -- On enquiry it appeared that the state of Georgia had a very
questionable right to purchase lands (of three Indian tribes, who had no
disposition to sell them) whenever Congress, (who denied the existence of this
right) should grant them liberty to hold a treaty. The Massachusetts and
Connecticut rights of preemption were undisputed, and they contemplated lands,
which the policy of the United States would justify them in purchasing, and
which the right owners were disposed to sell; but the numbers, characters and
situation of these three nations, combined with the policy of the United
States, presented a very powerful contrast in these Georgia lands. Impressed
with these ideas, it occurred to me, that if the Creek nation had sold to Long,
Glasscock and others, their right of preemption to the state of Georgia, or the
state of Connecticut, I should as readily have been an assignee of the claim,
as with a knowledge of facts, have been a purchaser under the Georgia companies.

BUT the rescinding act led up some ideas about fraud, atrocious speculation,
corruption and collusion, practiced on the legislature, which led me to
consider whether some such practices had not been adopted at the northward as
well as the southward; and on enquiry, it appeared that some of the agents of
the Georgia companies had conducted honorably -- and have not any intention of
profits in this unfortunate and delusive business: -- but that others had
eminently sustained the characters of fraud and deceit in selling, which they
had acquired in purchasing.

FROM these premises it appeared to me that men who take money or notes for
that which proves to be nothing, especially under the above circumstances,
ought to refund. -- And this sentiment, if true, will operate in favor of all,
through whose hands these lands have passed, back to the members of the first
companies; and the rescinding act has recognized this sentiment, by providing
that the first companies may receive back the money paid, and no one can oppose
the operation of it, but those who are watching to make fortunes out of the
nothingness of this Georgia business; and this number I hope (for the honor of
humanity) is very small.

REPEATED disclosure of these opinions has led me to hear much logic and
law-learning upon this subject -- much censure upon the state of Georgia --
many remarks upon what the legislature might, could, or ought to have done. --
But though my attention has been often suspended by the eloquence of great and
learned men, on the subject; yet no one has convinced me that the right of the
state of Georgia to buy land of the Creeks, Chickasaws and Chactaws was ever
worth a farthing. -- No one has convinced me that the state ever had such
right. -- No one has proved that the fee of lands, and a right to buy the fee,
are the same thing. Amidst the variety of opinions and the indefinite state of
this business, I have ventured to throw out the following discussion, as the
result of my own conviction; and have subscribed it for the express purpose of
avoiding that confusion, which often results from anonymous publications.

Georgia Speculation Unveiled.
No. I.
LET the buyer look out, is a maxim supposed applicable to all contracts where
land is named; -- but to the northern sales of Georgia land it can have no
application; for these are not sales of land, as facts now show; and by the
sellers were not intended to be sales of land, but a mere floating imaginary
right to buy land -- which partakes no more of reality than a right to buy
goods or horses. The right to buy Indian land is at best no more than a
chattel, and is a perfect non-descript, unknown to all the writers upon real
estate. It originated in avarice and power, and never, in this instance, has
gained any other existence than on paper.

THE State of Georgia claimed a right in fee to certain lands, -- which lands
were in fact subject to an absolute fee-simple, in the right owners, -- and
said state acknowledged this fee, subject to a particular kind of usufruct --
which usufruct was the absolute undisputed dominion and possession of these
owners, with an ancient, inherent and interminable right of doing with it as
they pleased, without any hindrance or molestation from this claimant: -- and
this fee, dominion and possession of the right owners, guaranteed by the
Uninited States, and secured by severe laws from all fraud and force on the
part of the preemptors: -- and to crown all, this same preemption claimed over
the heads of this same state of Georgia by the United States, who have an
uncontrolable right to decide by judicial officers of their own creation on the
right of preemption: -- and again, this usurped preemption of the state of
Georgia, secured from invasion by their own constitution and positive laws, and
guarded against fraud and deceit by all those general maxims which obtain and
are recognized in all sovereign states.

THE mind of man can proceed but one step further, and yet retain one idea of
lands or claims; and this step is presented in the kind of right, which the
Georgia companies claim to these lands. By the force of fraud and corruption
(as I shall show hereafter) they have broken through all the barriers, which so
perfectly secured the fee and possession of the right owners -- and after
obtaining the semblance of a granting act, came forward, and by a printed
pamphlet, entitled, "State of Facts," etc. declared to all the world, that they
were the true and lawful assignees of the fee of those lands, and to all the
uses of it, except a particular kind of usufruct, called a right of hunting and
fishing of the Indians. Not one of the attributes of their claim was of
necessity a matter of record; and the land could not from its situation promise
to any purchaser under them an office of record, where he might resort for
evidence of title; -- therefore every thing inducing a sale must be from the
seller, and in all such cases, let the seller look out, that he deceive not the
buyer. It Is a maxim of common sense and reason, that whatever inducements the
seller improves to draw money from the buyer he shall make true, or suffer the
inconvenience of their proving false; for if he has taken money for his own
falsehoods, he ought to resund it, whenever equity and good conscience demand
it. -- And if this rule is not in the books, it ought to be placed there, by
the side of caveat emptor. Both parties are to look out; all men are to look
out; but courts are especially to look out, and see that men get no gain by
cheating their neighbors; -- and if in every case they cannot find a precedent
for doing right, let them, as Lord Hardwicke did, make a precedent.

THE frauds practiced in the negotiation and sales of these Georgia lands, have
been as numerous and complicated as the heart of man could conceive; and the
property now resting for decision of the courts in consequence of them, is to
an immense amount. The rescinding act of the state of Georgia has brought all
these matters to a crisis, and one decision of the supreme court of the United
States, may probably influence the decisions of lower courts. I shall therefore
proceed to discuss, -- 1st. the validity of this rescinding act -- 2d. the
impossibility of affecting it by any court or power in the United States -- and
3d. the consequence upon all the notes depending on the sales under the
granting act.

1. THE validity of the rescinding act depends on the power which passed it. --
This is the sovereign independent state of Georgia, having a right to make or
repeal their own laws at pleasure, and this right wholly uncontrolable. When
individuals deal with each other, there are courts to compel compliance with
their contracts: -- how far the policy of the United States will sustain a
citizen in a dispute against a state, for moneys due on state notes, or
otherwise acknowledged; and whether a marshall may safely commit to prison the
governor, treasurer or secretary of the state for a state debt, is beside my
present object. This was a grant said to be standing on records, whereof the
legislature had the control. These records do not now exist; -- they are burnt,
and the reasons are assigned on new records for destroying the same. I ask,
what remedy have the Georgia companies? They cannot bring a writ of ejectment;
for none but the Indians are in possession. -- They cannot sue for the lands,
but in the state where the lands lie; -- and whatever court tries the cause,
must try it by the existing laws of the state of Georgia; and no law exists in
favor of the companies. -- Copies of record will not answer: if they would, a
secretary might certify what on trial would eject all the people of a state
from every foot of their land. The existing laws must be such as are recognized
by the people, legally represented; and the legal representatives must have a
right to declare their sense of the laws.

IN various cases a legislature may declare a pretended act void -- as whenever
it is contrary to constitution -- as where a less number was present at passing
it, than is required to form a house -- or where the speaker or president of
the council was bribed to declare that a vote, which was not a vote; or where
the voters in favor of an act were interested in the passing of it; or where it
was passed by members not having taken the necessary oaths; and in all cases,
where fraud and deceit are combined between those who compose the legislature,
and those who are to be benefited by any particular act. Take this power from a
legislature, and where is the sovereignty of the state? -- Such a powerless
state would be left open to the ravages of all the unprincipled men in the
universe, and their property and rights might be bartered for bribes. All
contracts with sovereign states must be made in confidence that power and
integrity will be united; and he who approaches a sovereign people for grants,
must do it with clean hands. The maxims of honor and honesty, which form a part
of the policy of all enlightened sovereignties, are a sufficient guarantee to
those who deal uprightly with governments. Let those who maintain a different
doctrine, go prosecute the national assembly of France to make good their
assignats, or the United States for their continental bills. -- Where is the
power to try the cause? -- Or let such point out the power, which can control
the state of Georgia in the enaction of their laws, or the management of their
records. Can the congress of the United States do it? Certainly no: -- this
would destroy the confederation. Can the court of the United States? Clearly
they cannot judge what laws ought to exist.

ALL the arguments of the opposers to the rescinding act would be more
plausible, if they had in view real estate in see and possession; and had
honestly paid a fair consideration for it. -- In such a case the law might
stretch its force to obtain them justice; but this being an unsubstantial thing
the law cannot reach it, and could not do it, even if the question was between
two individuals. As in case A owns a large farm, divided into 16 lots, and has
a right to keep it and use it as long as he lives, and then to leave it to his
heirs forever, B, C, D, and so on, to the number of 16; knowing that
competition of buyers raises the value of sarms, and disposed for their own
advantage to deprive A of this benefit, agree among them that B shall alone bid
on lot No. 1, C on No. 2, so that A may sell to no other. -- B sells his right
of preemption in lot No. 1 to S for 10 dollars -- S sells it to T for 100 -- T
to U for 1000. Now B declares that he was cheated out of it, -- that he never
delivered the deed, etc. and that he holds himself a bidder for the land as
much as ever. A is still in possession, and likely so to continue. Can U
sustain an action against B? All men will agree that B has done U no damage,
and U has gained nothing by his money; but U has given his notes to T, and they
are put in suit. -- He petitions for relief, stating that T pretended that he
owned the sea, and that it was the most valuable part of the farm; and that
this was his inducement to give 1000 dollars: that there were no records to
resort to, and that he relied solely on T's word. T owns it all -- and that in
fact he did not own the land, but had a right to buy it. Will a court doubt
what equity and good conscience demand in this case? -- To apply this, the land
in question is merely a right to buy land, which perhaps may never be for sale;
which consideration alone, separate from the doctrine of state sovereignty, is
an invincible intrenchment for the state of Georgia, and the northern
purchasers.

SOME say they may restore the records. Am I to lie out of my money for an age,
waiting to see whether the sovereign state of Georgia will pity me for having
been cheated by those who cheated her? But say others, she may grant it to
another company, and then we may try the title. Perhaps ages may pass before
this sovereign state will grant it again, and then neither of us can try the
title to the lands, 'till the Indian title is extinguished. -- That cannot be
done, but by liberty to hold a treaty; and this liberty cannot be granted to
those whom the state of Georgia denies as her grantees, without violating her
sovereignty; unless by a suit at law the title should be determined; -- and
this title can never be made a law question, 'till the fee and possession of
the right owners is extinguished. Suppose a suit brought for the preemption,
what marshall could levy the execution? -- on what could he levy it? Whatever
might be the judgment, it would be an idle one, founded on nothing, and no one
could carry it into effect.

OTHERS say we have fairly bought it, and will have it -- and under this grant,
rescinded and burnt, negociations are now making on the Missisippi lands. Vain
new editions of Missisippi dreams! Such managers might as well have used force
without a grant; but when sorce is used, the reign of law and argument has
ceased.

THOSE who have not cheated nor been cheated in this business, feel
dispassionate; they utter no deprecations against Jackson and his party, but
calmly view the state of Georgia, exercising a sovereign right in a sovereign
and righteous manner. A great class of people comfort themselves with a hope of
trying the question in the federal court, in some one of the northern states,
whether the rescinding act is valid. As well might you try it before a
justice's court: the judgment of both would be equally powerless. Can you put
at issue in a distant state the sovereignty of Georgia? Can you obtain judgment
that her legislature has been distracted; and what will you do with your
execution? All the propositions which have been made to render the rescinding
act of no validity are equally unpromising, as to the present claimants under
the granting act. -- All common law principles attempted to be applied to the
subject are lost; and the greatest lawyer is as the weakest peasant, when
attempting to discuss it. As preemptive claims were never founded on law or
right, they are not a subject of law books; as they are peculiar to this
country, they are not understood elsewhere; and as no cases such as that of the
rescinding act have ever before occurred, we are not to wonder, that men should
be confounded at the operation of it.

BUT take the nature of their claims, as it is explained -- the rule of equity,
which applies to the transfer of them -- the sovereignty of the state -- the
rescinding of the act -- the impracticability of trying the legality or equity
of it, and it will fairly appear that the present purchasers have nothing, and
have no prospect of any thing for their money or their notes.

2d. THESE things being true, what is the consequence upon the notes, depending
on the sales under the granting act? My answer is, that they ought not to be
paid. What sorms the courts may think proper to adopt in rendering them void is
not material. If it be once ascertained that they ought to be void, courts will
adopt or invent means proper for the end.

I BEGIN then by taking the three following positions -- 1st. That where a man
has been deceived in a contract, and in consequence has deceived another, he
shall gain nothing by the transfer: if he escape without loss, it is the most
he can desire. -- 2d. If he know of the deceit practiced on him previous to his
selling, and yet made use of the deceit to induce a bargain, the least he can
expect is the total loss of the price agreed on. -- 3d. If he were a partaker
in the original deceit, he ought to lose the whole and be severely punished.
All the sellers of Georgia land have been within these classes; for there was
deceit at the bottom; -- and the many insidious arts practiced by many of the
sellers, give good reason to believe that they were the original deceivers.

THE whole transaction has all the air and appearance of a deep-laid and
thoroughly executed plan of swindling. -- The management of it proves that in
the plan some southern people were to be gainers, and a great number of the
northern people to be losers. I venture to predict, that some southern people
will be bankrupts, and that the northern people will, after much vexation and
delay, escape from loss. The rescinding act has struck a deadly blow at these
first deceivers, and has arrested their career at the very moment when they
were about to be loaded with wealth.

IN this precise stage of the business, the granting act being rescinded -- the
preemption resumed -- no fee of lands in existence -- the sellers greedy for
payment, crouding for it at the bar of our courts -- hosts of lawyers in their
pay, on great wages -- notes all in suit, and petitions for relief pending: --
What can our courts do? I answer, they are courts of law and equity, and are
instituted for the purpose of doing right between man and man; and this they
are to do as far as may be, according to the principles and practice of law and
equity in the books. I think it has been shown abundantly, that this case could
not have been contemplated in the books; -- it will follow then that this must
form the basis of a precedent, and must be determined on its own merits.

THE first natural enquiry of the courts therefore, is -- the character of the
parties and their respective claims on the justice or equity of the law. -- Not
their private character; but that which they wear in relation to this new and
unprecedented cause. The plaintiffs in these causes when asked this question
may safely answer -- "We are of those, who contrived and colluded with several
members of the legislature of the state of Georgia, to procure an act,
violating their constitution and alienating the property of the people. -- By
promises of gain, by bribes, we led them to violate their oaths and those
principles of honor and fidelity to their constituents, which all laws command
them to maintain. -- We succeeded in our plan -- procured a grant -- we
published not single pages, but pamphlets of lies -- circulated them with our
own hands -- supported them by our own affirmations -- swore to them on our
honor. -- We thus enlisted men of integrity on our side -- caused them to
betray their neighbors -- opened subscriptions for the land -- headed with
names of men, whose permission had never been obtained. -- We entrapped the
unwary -- committed heads of families for more than they were worth --
pretended that we were selling under the influence of embarrassment, for less
than half what we might get, had we time to seek purchasers. -- We hastened our
bargains, lest the rescinding act should overtake us; -- and to crown all,
after we knew the act was passed, we employed emissaries from Philadelphia to
ride express to complete bargains already projected, and to open contracts at
all hazards; -- and when all this was known, we cursed Jackson and his party,
in the language of fallen Lucifer to Michael. -- We then secretly employed
lawyers to write treatises against the rescinding act, as their voluntaries,
upon such an unprincipled measure. -- We circulated these to convince the dupes
of our management, that Jackson was an enemy to fair dealing, and that the
sovereign state of Georgia was a miserable subjected province, whose laws
wanted no other confutation than our contempt: -- but when conviction begun to
operate on the public mind, and even on our own, that this rescinding act was
serious and conclusive, -- we employed hosts of lawyers, with enormous fees, to
abet our cause; -- and by their combined influence, and the aid of law books,
we hope to bear all before us. Though we knew that the men whom we had deceived,
retained only the miserable shadows of land, which we pretended to sell them,
and were willing to give up their deeds, and to suffer loss for their delusion
-- we haughtily refused; and to show our power, loaded them with attachments --
put them to all manner of expense, and are determined that wide-spread ruin and
desolation shall follow those who have dealt with us, -- for which object we
approach the altar of justice, and pray the aid of this honorable court to
carry our purposes into effect. -- And if the court doubt this our character,
we refer them to the rescinding act, containing 64 depositions in proof of it
-- to our pamphlets, and to our uniform conduct." To which character, well may
the court say -- Hail Lucifer, son of the morning!

THE other characters are plainly those, who have been the subjects of all this
deceit, imposture, falsehood and vexation; and who come before the court to
obtain relief against a system of fraud and swindling -- perhaps more
complicated in its machinery, and varied in its operations, than any which has
disgraced the character of man in this or any other age.

I HAVE put language into the mouths of the plaintiffs, which they would not be
apt to use -- for it is the language of truth, -- not sancied, but thorougly
proveable; and with all the varnishes and apologies, which this age of reason,
refinement and revolutions, can put upon their conduct, the result of a fair
investigation will produce just such a conclusion. -- To overdraw the
character, or distort the cause in this stage of it, would be a prejudice to
the end which is aimed at. I have therefore presented them as they must appear,
when record, evidence and substantial testimony shall be combined in the proof;
-- which will infallibly take place before the conclusion of this business. Let
not those judge chimerical, this mode of introducing characters, who have
observed in courts of chancery every thing brought sorward, which forms the
characters of the parties, in direct relation to the cause in question. -- This
is always admitted, and no more is contended.

THE second question to the plaintiffs, is -- "What claim have you upon the
justice or equity of this court?" -- The answer must be -- "We have notes for
our Georgia deeds, and we pray the power of the court to enforce the collection
of them." The question to the defendants, is -- "Did you sign and deliver those
notes? -- are they your act and deed?" -- The answer is -- "We did sign and
deliver the notes; but they are not our act and deed?" At this instant books,
authorities, precedents all crowd in favor of the plaintiffs: and a court
possessed of full power to make a precedent of right, is to be stormed out of
all deliberation. But is every note, signed and delivered unconditionally, the
act and deed of the signer? -- suppose he is unable to read, and the note is
read to him as for L.100, and it really is for L.1000, and can be so proved,
and that the obligee read it to him wrong, -- is that his act and deed? --
Again, suppose that he reads a note himself, and by shuffling of the obligee,
another is placed for him to sign, and he deliver the last, -- is that his act
and deed? -- Or if he signed and delivered it with a pistol at his breast: --
Are such notes the act and deed of those who deliver them? -- Every one will
agree no. Then there are cases where a note may be signed and delivered
unconditionally, and yet not be the act and deed of the signers. -- Pray is
there any difference between slight of hand and slight of head? Or shall he who
reads a note wrong, and he who tells 100 lies to obtain it, stand on a
different footing? -- Reason and common sense say no. The books may be very
nice about the mode in which the injured signer shall get rid of the payment;
but they will never support a malefactor in recovering notes under these
circumstances.

COURTS will not decide against notes upon mere suggeston of fraud: It must be
made evident. In these cases, various are the kinds and degrees of evidence;
but when once it can be shown, that the plaintiff is one of the horde, or
allied to those men who overrun these northern states with their Georgia scrip
or deeds, and that the consideration of the notes has wholly failed -- the
presumption becomes violent, that these frauds have attended the sales; and
that small portion of light and evidence, which almost every individual
purchaser can produce, will be sufficient to bring every case within the
general principles and decisions, which must obtain in all the Georgia causes.

OUR courts and juries, if driven to peremptory law decisions, will decide that
these notes are not the act and deed of the makers and deliverers of them.
Sanguine Georgia speculators, who feel not the indignation and contempt which
follows their enveloped frauds, may, under the pupilage of their lawyers, be
taught to hope better things: -- But let them remember, that great causes draw
forth the energy of man; and that on causes of such magnitude, courts will do
right. Haste, negligence, confinement to nice constructions, sometimes thwart
the course of justice, in small disputes; but here no recovery can eventually
be had, unless it shall appear eventually right, that men shall gain wealth by
their own wrong. I have here taken the worst issue which the causes can
possibly be brought to; and if courts and juries will not, under the old
establishment, determine against the notes, yet when the sellers knew they had
no right in fee, and when it appears by the event, that by reason of their own
fraud they had no right at all, -- courts and juries will determine against the
notes, whatever innovation it may produce. Probably a decision that these notes
are not the act and deed of the makers of them, upon the ground that they were
obtained by the grossest deceit of the obligee, would form a new precedent: but
being based on right, it could never prejudice right in any future decisions.
The danger of new precedents is, that the perverseness or ignorance of man may
apply them where they ought not to be applied; but this danger, however great
and often inculcated, has never intimidated the independent judges in
Westminster Hall from doing right, and making precedents where justice required
them.

THESE remarks may apply to negotiable notes -- to Missisippi script -- to
quit-claim deeds -- and to all the variety of cases under these Georgia
contracts. -- For if my premises are right respecting the original fraud, and
the total loss of the lands, or the preemptive right in the purchasers, -- the
conclusion will extend to every note and contract, issuing from such a corrupt
original.

THE case in respect to the northern purchasers, is precisely as if the first
grantees had forged the grant: For, a grant voidable because of fraud and
corruption, is no better nor worse, than a forged one; -- and the original
actors in this fraud, and all their abettors, confederates and accessories, are
every way as basely guilty as if they had forged the act. -- The guilt as
respects the state of Georgia is the same; and the imposition on the purchasers
is certainly as great and pernicious. I call most of those their confederates
who came from the midst of them, with their pamphlets and misrepresentations:
-- and even they, who were themselves deceived, and who deceived their
neighbors, and are now pressing for great profits to themselves, deserve an
high rank in this brigade of impostors. I should not assert thus positively on
this subject, were I unable to bottom myself on the most subsstantial proofs;
-- and no individuals can be wounded by such obloquies, but those whose known
conduct has fully justified them.

THESE remarks were not designed to add any odium to the fraudulent sellers of
Georgia land; but to lead the minds of the purchasers, who have given their
notes, to reflect on the whole Georgia business as a system of imposture and
swindling -- on the rescinding act as valid and conclusive -- and on the power
and disposition of our courts to do ample justice on the subject. If the hints
suggested will lead to a new train of investigation, they will answer the
purpose for which they were written.

NOTE. -- The compass which I have taken would not admit references to
documents: and the present stage of the business rendered it improper to
discuss very minutely how the notes may be avoided: -- But those who hold deeds
of Georgia land ought to be thoroughly convinced, that all the lands now
claimed under the usurped act, are not worth one cent; and a pretense that the
rescinding act is void, is a miserable delusion.

Georgia Speculation Unveiled.
No. II.
FROM the premises in my first number, I open this with the following
questions, and answers: --

1. DID the state of Georgia ever own the right in fee to the lands described
in the granting act? -- Answer -- No.

2. DID not the pretended claimants under the granting act publish and
circulate a pamphlet, entitled, -- "STATE OF FACTS," -- declaring the right of
the state to have been a right in fee, and the sale of the state to have been
fair and constitutional? -- Answer -- They did.

3. WAS there any truth in these declarations? -- Answer -- No.

4. WAS it not generally represented to the purchasers in these northern
states, verbally as well as by said pamphlets, that the state of Georgia would
not, and could not, rescind said grant? -- Answer -- It was.

5. WAS there any truth in this representation? -- Answer -- No.

6. Is not the grant rescinded in such manner, that the purchasers are wholly
foreclosed of all possible benesit from their purchases, 'till the same
sovereign will and power which rescinded the act, shall be united to restore
it? -- Answer -- Yes.

7. Is there any probability that they will ever voluntarily do this? -- Answer
-- Not the least.

8. CAN they be compelled to do it by any court or power in the United States?
-- Answer -- No.

9. HAS not the state of Georgia by their rescinding act, put at great hazard
the property, limbs and life of any man or body of men, who within the limits
of said state shall in any way attempt to contravene said act, or any clause of
it? -- Answer -- Yes.

10. HAVE they not a sovereign right to make such laws as they judge proper for
the well ordering of the state? -- Answer -- They have.

11. IF the declarations of the sellers and of their pamphlets had been true,
would not the purchases have been profitable to the purchasers? -- Answer --
They probably would.

12. FALSEHOOD having been substituted in the place of truth, and the purchasers
having relied on the declarations of the sellers, and those declarations having
proved uniformly deceitful -- shall it be in the mouth of the sellers to say to
the purchasers -- "You ought to have looked out that we did not cheat you?" --
Answer -- No.

IF any person is disposed to give a different answer to any of these
questions, the question and answer shall be made the subject of a separate
discussion.

SEVERAL powerful delusions have been improved to crown the first delusion.

1st. THAT a grant is in its nature irreversible.

2d. THAT provided the purchasers will ever have any claim on the sellers, they
must first try the title which they have acquired; and if that fails, then they
may come upon the sellers.

3d. THAT these lands were purchased as lottery tickets are, and if they had
turned out fortunately, it would have been well with the purchasers: otherwise
they must bear the loss.

4th. THAT all the book-principles relating to real estate and to notes are in
favor of the sellers, and that contesting the payment will be vain.

5th. THAT our courts will decide against the rescinding act, and then the
lands may be sold in Europe, for a dollar per acre.

6th. THAT the rescinding act was made in the tumult of the people, and that
there is good chance of its being repealed, and the grant restored.

7th. THAT if this rescinding act is good, the state of Connecticut may rescind
the act granting the reserve, and Massachusetts their act granting the
Chenessee country.

BY such chimeras, the advocates of the sales are addressing themselves to the
hopes and fears, to the reason and to the weakness of the purchasers; and are
thus endeavoring to wheedle them out of further payments. But be not deceived;
-- for this irreversible grant is actually reversed, beyond the power of man;
and all the comparisons between the sovereign state of Georgia, granting their
lands, and the province of New Hampshire, then subject to Great Britain,
granting their lands, will be found vain. The distinction must be sustained,
that a dependant power has a power above them, to compel them to make good
their grants and contracts; and that an independent power can make, or unmake
grants at will; because no power can decide on the morality, equity, or policy
of their measures. If the granting act had been constitutional, fair and
honorable, and the rescinding act ever so unfair and immoral, -- yet the
consequence to the purchasers would be equally fatal. The power which has
deprived them of the lands, is beyond their control; and all the advocates in
favor of the sellers, never have and never can suggest one practicable mode of
even beginning to attack the validity of the rescinding act. -- That of
deciding against it in these northern states, has been already shown to be
futile. Some have been disposed to maintain, that if the first act could be
void at all, it must have been so in its own nature; and therefore the
rescinding act, notwithstanding the first, stands to be discussed on its own
merits: -- But this is only a re-production of the first delusion; -- for the
granting act does not stand at all: it is burnt, and that power alone, which
could declare definitively on the validity of it, has put it beyond the reach
of discussion. The power itself is first to be discussed, and if you can once
discuss that out of existence, you well know that the granting act will be good
enough. -- You have the parchments, it is true, large as diningtables, certified
by the secretary. -- Vain shadows of a grant! -- Dare you produce them in the
state of Georgia, to support the title which you pretended to sell us? Of
little worth are they, if they cannot be produced on a trial, where if we
obtain judgment, the execution will invest us with the title which you sold us.
A condition of wrong without redress, or of right without power, is very
undesirable to a landholder. Your own wrongs, your own frauds and violations of
morality, have led up this act, against which you so vehemently cry -- shame,
wickedness, immorality! -- Go cry them in the streets of Georgia, plead them in
their courts, ring them in the ears of their legislators, -- there alone will
they answer our purpose. If this is all a fair transaction, as you declared to
us by words and pamphlets, make it appear so to the world, and let us have the
benefit of your exertions. -- While it appears unfair and wicked, we shall
withhold from you payment -- courts will sustain us in withholding it: -- and
the certain event of the breaking of the bubble, will be your own bankruptcy,
which is even now at the doors. I have not rested entirely on the ground of
power, through any idea that the granting act would be valid on its own merits.
If any man judges that it was valid, and that the sellers have conducted with a
due portion of integrity, let him assert it; and I am willing to take the
burden of proving the act bad, and unfairly obtained, -- and the conduct of a
number of the sellers to have been thoroughly abandoned. -- In this number I
include all those who were themselves deceived, and who in consequence deceived
their neighbors, and who are demanding any profits in the trade. This fact of
demanding profits in such a business, accompanied by a few acknowledged
principles and deductions, will fix the character of such beyond a vindication.

I HAVE thus answered the two first delusions, and pray you to reflect, that
the grant is really reversed and revoked, and that you can never try your title
to any purpose -- that you have lost all shadows of the land -- and that if you
have any defense to make, any money to save, any notes to avoid, or any redress
to obtain, -- now is your time; and the time to avail yourselves will be short.

NEXT, as to the similitude between these sales, and those of lottery tickets,
so often introduced, it may be just as respects a number of the Georgia
bargains, so far as it can apply; but if a man proposes to me to purchase of
him a 100 tickets in the Savannah fire lottery, and shows me a scheme of the
lottery, and assures me that it will be drawn in 60 days, and I buy them, and
give him my note for the payment -- and it afterward appears that there was
neither lottery, managers, nor any scheme published, or that there was a
lottery without a prize, or one which could never be drawn, -- am I to pay my
note? -- Certainly not -- especially not, if I can prove that this same man
contrived with several others, to make out a scheme of a lottery, which could
not in its nature answer any other purposes than those of imposture. But this
comparison with lottery tickets is not just: for in lottery tickets, every man
buys with known hazard of loss or gain. In these bargains every man bought with
the greatest certainty of gain, provided the pamphlets and declarations which
he bought with his deeds, proved true. -- He could not calculate upon loss,
except from those circumstances of treachery and fraud on the part of the
sellers, which would wholly vacate the contract.

BUT 4th. Those who have given notes, are to be frightened by the books!! --
Unfortunately for the sellers, the books give no comfort, no support. Courts
have been trammelled by books at the opening of this business. -- Judge Chase
was trammelled with books in the opening of the famous Connecticut state cause;
but after four days digestion, his mind was relieved, and he declared that the
books did not apply, and that there was no such thing as sustaining an analogy
between protections granted by a sovereign independent state, and those granted
by the dependant courts of Westminster Hall. By citing books and authorities,
and covering the green cloth with folios, the advocates may persuade their
Georgia clients, that much good may come out of evil; but on thorough
canvassing, it will be found, that (strange to tell) the books can afford no
light on a subject of which the compilers had no conception.

5th. LET purchasers be guarded against being amused by the prospect of our
courts deciding against the rescinding act. -- If all the courts in the United
States should decide against it, and all the marshalls and deputy-marshalls,
sheriffs and deputy-sheriffs, should be employed to carry their judgments into
effect, -- the whole would still be a miserable farce and delusion; -- for they
would not in the least prejudice the rescinding act, nor benefit our title, and
the state of Georgia would care nothing about them.

6th. As to the rescinding act being made in the tumult of the people, and that
there is good chance of its being repealed -- there is not one word of truth,
nor symptom of probability about it: -- and this pretense is a mere
continuation of the false and swindling measures, which have been practiced on
you.

AND 7th. As to the hypothetical reasoning, that if Georgia could rescind this
act, then Connecticut and Massachusetts can rescind theirs -- it ought to be
otherwise stated, viz. -- That Georgia has rescinded her granting act, and if
Connecticut and Massachusetts should rescind theirs, they would do as Georgia
has done; -- and what would the claimants do in any such case, where the Indian
title is not extinguished? In a situation wholly remediless, as to title or
preemption, are you who have thought yourselves purchasers of Georgia lands;
and your situation is brought on you by your confidence in those, who sold to
you; -- and this situation is aggravated by the persecutions and law
perplexities, with which these deceivers are hunting you. Your time is devoted,
and your property subjected to the apparent rapacity of the Georgia sellers;
but they in reality, are now only the puppets of the farce -- there is not one
chance in a thousand of their eventually gaining any thing; but still the farce
must be carried on, for the emolument of the craftsmen. Of great importance is
it in this situation, that you possess yourselves of facts -- that you give way
to no delusions -- and that you compose yourselves under these complicated
abuses. If you get rid of your notes, yet the land deeded to you is not worth a
thousandth part of what you have paid -- be that sum ever so small.

As many of the ideas, which have been introduced on this subject, tending to
show that the common law principles and practice cannot be applied to these
cases, may appear inadmissible, -- I beg leave to enforce them by reference to
the reasonings and practice adopted in the South sea scheme, in the year 1721.
See Tindal's continuation of Rapin, under the words, South Sea Trade and
Company.


WHEN the bubble burst, and the stock the subscribers had purchased at 1000 per
cent. fell to 150, and of course the loss of every such subscriber was L.850
out of every L.1000 subscribed -- I say, when this happened, legal suits (of
which very many were commenced) for these debts, due to the company, would have
reduced most of the monied men in the kingdom, to a state of remediless
bankruptcy, and the company must have lost most of their money in the bargain.
The public creditors had lost most of their public securities, which they had
subscribed into that fund, -- and infinite other mischiefs of a like nature
must have accrued of a kind most ruinous and wrong, and of an amount so great
as to affect national interest, honor and credit, and of such an extreme and
extraordinary nature, that no ordinary rules of law could be applied in any
such manner as to afford the least remedy; but would rather increase the evil,
and give the wrong a kind of sanction of the law.

IN this extreme case, the parliament found themselves under an absolute
necessity of assuming the power of sovereign equity, and as supreme chancellors
of the kingdom to supersede the ordinary rules of the law, control its force,
soften its rigor, and adopt such equitable principles as would afford some
remedy of an evil, an injury, a wrong of such magnitude as brought the justice,
credit and safety of the nation into danger. On this principle, they suspended
lawsuits, annulled special bails, discharged numberless debtors who owed for
stock, on paying 10 per cent. of their debts, compelled compensations in favor
of the sufferers, forced dividends and appropriations of the stock of the
company, and even punished many for mismanagement, who seemed to have conformed
themselves to the letter of the law, etc. etc. etc.

VERY strong remonstrances were made against the interference of the
legislature, and that the matter should be left to the course of law, i. e. to
be decided according to the common rule of assignments of all negotiable notes,
bonds, etc. -- but on a close inspection of the matter, it was soon clearly
seen, that the variation of the exchange of these stocks (or their
depreciation, as we call it) was so enormous and extreme, that any application
of the ordinary rules of law and practice, to them, would produce the most
ruinous injustice and wrongs, -- and of course, every idea of that mode of
settlement and adjustment was instantly given up. Their great principle was,
that justice and right was the grand end of law, and paramount to any
particular rules, or established practice, -- and of course, ought to control
them in all cases of so extreme and extraordinary a kind, as could not fall
within the reason on which these rules were founded; but so circumstanced as
that an application of these common rules, would unavoidably produce such
injury and wrong, as was totally destructive of all that right, which was the
essential principle and end of all laws.

AS a further explanation of the interference of parliament, it was said that
collections according to the common rule of assignments, "would bring
remediless ruin on thousands of individuals, and at the same time heap immense
fortunes on others, who had never deserved them."

VERY similar to this, in operation and management, was the Missisippi bubble,
in France, two years before. In both these important and memorable proceedents,
of two of the most enlightened nations in the world, were recognized
specifically the following principles -- "That the ordinary rules of law would
do infinite mischief and injustice, were not the rigor of them to be softened
and corrected by chancery -- that the powers of chancery ought always to
control the common law, whenever in any case the application of the ordinary
rules of law, will manifestly destroy right and justice, or work a wrong --
that law is certainly perverted, and needs correction, whenever it destroys
right or does wrong." That the supreme power of every state, is the supreme
chancery of it, and must have sovereign authority to repeal, to limit or
control every rule of law, and may and ought to do it, whenever that rule
operates by way of destruction or defalcation of right, or producing of wrong,
-- and that justice and security of right can never be perfect or even
tolerable in any state, without the existence of this power and the prudent
exercise of it. For these remarks on the South Sea bubble, see Peletiah
Webster's Political Essays, page 334.


THESE are vital issues from the source of law, calculated to do good, wherever
they flow: -- these are principles, which put to flight all tecknical
distinctions, and furnish us with a truth highly important in these causes,
viz. -- that there are extraordinary cases, where common law principles cannot
and ought not to be applied, by reason of the manifest injustice, which would
result from an application of them.

THESE Georgia causes furnish the strongest instance since 1721, for the
application of these principlies. -- They do not precisely resemble either of
the other bubbles: for in the South sea scheme, the amazing rise of the stock,
originated in their contract with parliament, for taking in the national debt.
Their state of prosperity was overrated, and the funds rose by mere enthusiasm,
from 130 to 330 per cent. -- and from the month of April to August, they rose
from the last sum to 1000 per cent; but it was a reality they were dealing in:
-- and even after the bubble broke and parliament interfered, the stock was
really worth 150 per cent. It will be well seen, that the Georgia bubble does
not precisely resemble that of the South sea; -- for here was no reality at
bottom, and here was great fraud in the means, as I constantly hold myself
responsible to show, whenever it shall be doubted. -- But in one very important
respect, there is a resemblance. The legislature of the state of Georgia, like
the sovereign legislatures of England and France, seeing the wrong and
oppression, which would be caused by the collection of the notes, and combining
this with the other inducements before stated -- have, as they had a sovereign
right to do, destroyed the whole consideration of the notes, and have thus let
them and the holders of them to the ground. The sovereign legislature of the
union, might have suspended the power of their own courts, from any cognizance
of the causes: so the legislatures of the several states might have suspended
the power of their courts; but this would have been only a partial remedy of
the evil. The state of Georgia, whose acts and laws are to be respected
throughout the union, has in a most pointed and peremptory manner declared, that
there is no consideration for these notes, -- and has shown the necessity and
propriety of this declaration more conclusively, than they were shown by either
of those parliaments. Their exercise of sovereignty is not novel, and the
reasons on which it is founded are as old as the world. -- This public act of
the state of Georgia, is the best and most conclusive testimony of a want of
consideration, which can be improved in a court of chancery: and those courts
could never have granted relief against notes for want of consideration, on
more ample grounds.

IN a very important respect also, the Georgia plaintiffs stand in the same
rank with those, who in the South sea business were prosecuting for 850/1000 of
what cost them nothing, and was good for nothing: -- the remaining 150/1000 and
the price actually paid for the lands by the Georgia companies, placing them
both on an equal footing, -- both having a law of a sovereign state, barring
them from an oppressive recovery -- and both equally deserving to feel the
inconvenience resulting to oppressors from the operation of principles of
equity. -- Neither can be in the rank of those, who hold notes for money lent,
or labor done; but both are in the rank of those, who are hunting for money,
on principles destructive to the design of courts, and the existence of
society. It is fortunate for the public, that there should be such a
concurrence of public acts of sovereign legislatures, on subjects so similar --
and that the parties pressing for payment at the bar of our courts, should meet
an obstacle so equally and justly fatal to their unfounded claims: for the
decisions in these cases against the notes, will give to our courts occasion to
assert principles destructive to the fraudulent arts, which have exposed many
of our citizens to severe loss of property.

HAPPILY our courts are not destitute of chancery powers, sufficient to carry
the equitable objects of the rescinding act into full effect: and when the
doctrines of chancery are introduced -- when the original principles of right
are contemplated -- when this bubble is compared with other bubbles -- when the
parties and the causes are known, and the rescinding act is duly plead, -- if
courts can hesitate about pronouncing against the notes, it will be only that
one fiat of the national legislature, may put a perpetual end to the
convulsions and distress caused by the Georgia, Virginia, Susquehannah, Canada,
and all other baseless speculations.

IT will be well seen, that I have not left these notes to depend on the
contingence of such a national measure. The defense of those, who are sued on
their notes, stands most substantially on the chancery powers vested in our
courts: -- and the means of calling those powers into effectual exercise, have
been just shown to be abundant.

BUT merely to get rid of the payment of the notes is not the sole object. --
Large sums of money have been paid, which in equity and good conscience ought
to be refunded. -- In addition to these, great damages have been sustained, by
reason of the falsehood and swindling practiced in these sales. The lands or
deeds in the hands of the purchasers, are not worth a farthing, -- and would be
worth the meerest trifle, if the rescinding act should now be burnt, and the
granting act restored: -- for the granting act restored would not invest you
with the fee of the lands, subject to the right of hunting and fishing, etc. --
which fee you thought yourselves to have bought: and the violent parties, which
have been created in the confusion of this business, would probably prevent
your ever obtaining a right to extinguish the Indian title. -- Indeed the
commotions about the Georgia lands, have led up a serious claim of congress, --
which otherwise would have been as dormant as their claim to the Chenessee
country. -- This claim, however originated, will not be easily relinquished.

BUT if all obstacles were removed, your right to hold a treaty, is merely a
right to buy the land at the full value of it, -- and this you are to do under
the eye of sworn commissioners and interpreters. This treaty is to be opened
with great expense: and your agents are to meet not a few ignorant straggling
Indians, but the powerful, opulent and enlightened nations of the Creeks,
Chactaws and Chickasaws -- headed by chiefs of great fame, information and
influence. -- The object of this treaty is, to buy from them the place of their
birth, their conquests and their residence: -- and you come to them under the
fascinating character of men, representing a horde of impostors, who cheated
the representatives of the state of Georgia, out of their usurped and imposing
right of alone bidding on these lands: and you apply to them, after blood has
been repeatedly and unsuccessfully shed, to force them to retreat. -- You apply
to them for their lands -- not as a place of refuge from persecution -- not as
a soil, where you wish to labor, and to introduce agriculture, and the arts of
civilized life -- not as a place, where you wish to embrace and treat them as a
band of brothers; -- but as a frontier, where you may erect forts, establish
garrisons, stretch the strong arm of the union, and fill, with their ancient
and implacable opressors and enemies. -- With a council such as these nations
will present to you, -- rum, whisky and rusty nails, will not be considered as
conclusive arguments: -- truth, sincerity and a sufficiency of property to
enable them to remove where they may do better, will alone go down. Will you
tell them, that you have already paid large sums of money, to prevent others
from bidding on their lands -- and that therefore you cannot give the full
value of them? -- Will you desire the commissioners to inform them, that you
expect to make immense fortunes out of their lands, and that there is no way of
your doing it, but by purchasing them for far less than they are worth? --
Shall your interpreters expound to them the whole history of this business? --
Or will you smoke with them the calumet of peace, exchange your baubles for
theirs, and call them friends and brothers? Will you tell them, that you came
from a land flowing with milk and honey, abounding in corn and green pastures,
and overflowing in all the conveniences and luxuries of life -- from a land,
where every industrious man may gain wealth -- and that for their sakes you are
come up thither? They know better than all this, -- they have lately told us,
at lake Erie, that they know the arts of the white men: -- and the Georgia
commissioners, but last year, with as much parade as could attend a treaty, and
as plausible talks as you can hold with them, got for answer, that they would
not sell. -- And suppose you get the same answer, after all your expenses, what
is your preemption worth? -- Or suppose they should offer the lands to you, at
such price as you have repeatedly declared them worth, if free from
encumbrance, what would your preemption be worth? As respects the Indians, the
lands are theirs in fee, with all the uses belonging to them; -- and they care
not for preemptive rights -- they can disencumber them at pleasure -- and they
feel and know themselves entitled to as much in value, as the lands are worth
to any purchaser, -- and there is no propriety in their giving you 9-10ths of
the whole land for seiling the remainder: -- and yet a less commission for
doing this business, is hardly contemplated. Perhaps fraud or force may deprive
these nations of their lands, within a few years; but I have no idea, that
within a century they will voluntarily sell them: -- for they are not a
miserable handful, as the Georgia sellers represented, constantly decreasing in
numbers, and rather inclining to retreat than to maintain their ground; but
just the contrary.

SHALL it be said, that the purchasers knew or ought to have known all these
things? -- The best answer will be, that they did not know them, and had not
the means of knowing them, and the whole representation was as I have before
stated -- that there was only an usufruct between the purchasers and a complete
possession of the lands, -- which usufruct might be easily extinguished, as
there were immense tracts farther to the westward and northward, where the
Indians would find better hunting and fishing than on these lands. -- The
commotions respecting the sales have been such, that a restoration of the
granting act, if such an event could be conceived, would be very far from
restoring to the present claimants, what they supposed they had purchased: --
so far from it, that the encumbrances then existing upon the claim, would in
all probability be insurmountable. I have not even taken into my calculation,
the influence which the state of Georgia, or any party among them, might use
against you in case of a treaty, -- nor the probable existence of a great
interference of titles, by fraudulent and multiplied deeds, resting merely on
detached paper or parchment, without any record to support them or discover
their fallacy; -- but we have a fair right to believe, that men who will take
unprincipled means to get rich, will not be less abandoned in the means of
extrication, when the gulf of bankruptcy is before them.

IN VIEW of the premises, I fully believe, that a restoration of the granting
act, would not only wrong the people of Georgia, -- but would prove a serious
evil to the present claimants, and a dreadful misfortune to all who might be
after purchasers. -- It would open a new scene of delusive hopes to the world,
and furnish new daggers to aim at the vitals of morality, fair dealing and
confidence between man and man. Long enough have friends stabbed friends,
neighbors betrayed neighbors -- and the wealth of centuries been wasted by
the delusions of a moment. -- Truth, honesty and commercial credit have
suffered wounds deep enough: and all the friends of society feel grateful to
the legislature, which arrested in its progress the destructive pestilence.
Formerly the enemies of man frequented the public roads -- put pistols to the
breasts of unsuspecting travelers, and robbed them of the valuables they had
about them; but the sufferers could return to their houses and lands, and by
industry repair the loss. -- We live to see robbery in a more refined style.
Men who never added an iota to the wealth or morals of the world, and whose
single moment was never devoted to making one being wiser or happier throughout
the universe -- riding in their chariots -- plotting the ruin of born and
unborn millions -- aiming with feathers to cut throats, and on parchments to
seal destruction, -- these are the robbers of modern days. -- They bring
desolation among our farmers -- they spread distress in towns -- they scorn the
paltry plunder of pocket-books, and watches -- they aim at houses and lands --
strike at the foundation of many generations, -- and would destroy families,
root and branch. Long enough have fraud, falsehood and swindling stalked our
streets: -- often enough have our farmers left their fields and wrecked the
industry of painful and honest years upon the mountains of Virginia: -- often
enough have our jails and dockets witnessed the ruined hopes of the dupes of
Newtown and Stockbridge speculations. -- These last are not imputable to the
Georgia sellers, -- unless by their superior address, and the wider ruin they
have caused, they may claim the honor of ingurgitating these lesser robberies.

I AM not distorting this subject; but am drawing likenesses of which the
originals exist. The indignation of an incensed public, is fast gathering over
you who have sat for this picture. -- The advocates of your impostures, begin
to discover, that they have been led to abet measures which they abhor. The
means of paying fees are nearly exhausted -- the funds to whch you look for
help, will prove as deceitful as the eyes of those, whom you have injured, will
be dreadful to you, after your ruin shall be complete. Your characters, your
hopes of wealth, your all, are tumbling into the pit, which you have dug for
others: -- and if the day of your total poverty, contempt and despair, can be
hastened by what is here written, I shall have paid to you, who deserve this
character, the only debt, which in equity and good conscience I owe you.

New Haven, Oct. 14, 1797. A. B.

[The documents and authorities on which these pages are founded, will in due
time be presented to the public.]


