Fortune's FOOTBALL: OR, THE ADVENTURES OF MERCUTIO. FOUNDED ON MATTERS OF FACT.

A NOVEL, IN TWO VOLUMES.

BY JAMES BUTLER.

VOL. I.

HARRISBURGH, PENNSYLVANIA: PRINTED BY JOHN WYETH. 1797.

ENTERED ACCORDING TO (...)

PREFACE
IN penning the following memoirs, I had no other object in view than my own
amusement. This consideration may, perhaps, be accepted as an excuse for the
familiarity of my style; which, as well as many other imperfections, will, no
doubt, be perceived and condemned by the critic. The candid and indulgent
reader, who reflects, that the piece was not till lately intended for the
public eye -- nor then, without the most urgent solicitations of a number of
friends, will generously pardon any defect he may discover in the perusal.
Having been intimately acquainted with the hero of the piece, in my juvenile
days, I can with confidence vouch for the authenticity of the narrative. It Is
true, I have introduced some persons and incidents which appear to be
unconnected with the foundation of the story; yet, it will be found, that were
any of these withdrawn, the chain of events would be broken, and the congruity
of the piece destroyed. -- Upon the whole, if the style is not florid, it will
not wound the ear of modesty; if she subjects are not sublime, they have a
manifest tendency to propagate sentiments of virtue -- to stimulate youth to an
humble resignation to the dispensations of providence -- and to discountenance
vice.

At all events, I have ventured to lay it before the public, in hopes that, as
a forlorn infant, it may find a foster father, who will not suffer it to sink
in oblivion.

Fortune's FOOTBALL.
BEFORE I enter into a detail of the adventures of our hero, I presume it will
not be unacceptable to my readers, if not expedient, to give a cursory sketch
of his birth and education, in order to illustrate the subject of the following
sheets. This I shall do in as concise a manner as possible -- well knowing that
prolixity creates disgust.

He was the first and only son of a gentleman in London, who enjoyed an
affluent and independent fortune -- was noble, generous, humane and hospitable:
His income not only supported his family in splendor, but also dispensed its
glad'ning streams to the dreary abodes of pain and indigence. This gentleman,
at a a suitable age, with the approbation of his friends, paid his addresses to
a young lady of a distinguished family, and great fortune -- possessed of every
accomplishment to render a man of honor happy: To whom he was shortly married.
Before the anniversary of their nuptials arrived, their happiness was augmented
by the birth of a son, who, from that period, was the delight of every eye that
saw him, and in whom all the rising hopes of his fond parents concentrated.

This son, is the person whose surprising and variegated adventures I intend to
disclose -- heartily tracing him through the various mazes and doublings of his
peregrination: -- He was called Mercutio.

There is a period between infancy and manhood, in which, let our station in
life be what it may, nothing but trifles occur: I should hold myself
inexcusable in detaining the attention of my readers from the more interesting
incident of my narrative, with an insipid relation of those; and therefore,
shall date the adventures of our hero from the commencement of his sixteenth
year. At that period, he became enamoured with a young lady, by an accident,
which laid the foundation of his future fortunes and misfortunes, and of
course, this history.

He had just completed his studies, at Oxford, when he attained his sixteenth
year: He therefore took leave of his teachers and fellow students, and repaired
to London. It would be needless to describe the joyful emotions of his parents,
on his arrival -- Let it suffice to say, that while the fond mother clasped him
with ardour to her bosom, his father's heart expanded with parental pride, to
see his son -- his only son, in full possession of every necessary
accomplishment -- nature as well as art having largely contributed to render
him complete.

His mother, listened with supreme delight to the periods, which, with uncommon
ease and propriety he pronounced, while he described the progress he had made
in his studies, and remarked on the beauties and deformities of the several
authors which had come under his particular observation -- which he did with so
much judgment and candor, that envy herself could have made no exception --
She revolved in her mind the many years of uninterrupted happiness which it was
probable he might enjoy -- the many hours of heartfelt satisfaction she
herself, as well as his happy father were yet likely to experience, not only in
his company and conversation, but also in the pleasing contemplation of his
transmitting his name and virtues to millions yet unborn: But alas! the
happiness of mankind is fleeting and transitory -- like fair weather in an
April day, it is but of short duration; and though so widely different, from
disappointment, pain and slavery, in its nature and consequences, is,
nevertheless, so immediately succeeded by them, as to appear, to human
conception, to be of the same family.

This happy family lived within fifteen minutes' walk of Hyde-Park, and it
being that delightful season of the year in which nature seems to take a pride
in displaying her innumerable beauties -- our hero frequently walked in the
Park for recreation -- sometimes in company with his happy parents, and at
others alone. As he delighted much in reading, he seldom took an excursion
alone without a book, in the perusal of which he often spent an hour or two --
reclining beneath the friendly shade of some one of those venerable trees which
adorn that fine Park. One evening, while he was amusing himself in this manner,
he was roused by a shriek of distress, which was uttered by a young lady, who,
walking too near the serpentine river, where the bank was very steep,
accidentally fell in -- and the stream running rapidly, washed her more than a
hundred yards in a few seconds. Mercutio, being at a considerable distance from
the bank of the river, exerted his utmost speed, and perceiving the young lady
just above the water -- he plunged in -- caught her in his arms, and with much
difficulty, bore her to the shore, almost breathless. He was met at the bank of
the river by two ladies, in tears, who proved to be the mother and sister of
her he had rescued from a watery grave. They gave him what assistance they
could, in conveying her to a convenient situation, then requested him to step
to the end of Piccadilly for an eminent physician, who lived there. He ran
immediately, leaving the young lady to the care of her mother and sister, and
in a few words communicated his business to the surgeon: who instantly
accompanied him to the spot. The young lady, notwithstanding the endeavors of
her mother and sister, was to all appearance dead. The tender parent was hardly
kept from fainting, while the surviving daughter wept immoderately -- so that
the whole exhibited a scene of real distress. While the surgeon exerted his
abilities to recover the almost drowned lady, it required all the philosophy as
well as rhetoric of Mercutio, to keep the other two in any tolerable degree of
spirits; -- however it pleased God to crown the endeavors of the surgeon with
unexpected success: -- Cheerfulness diffused itself instantly over every
countenance, when her resuscitation was announced -- they surrounded her with
an eagerness which plainly indicated their late apprehensions, and present
satisfaction. Our hero was not the last in congratulating her on her recovery;
but the joy of her mother and sister, is easier imagined than described. She,
with a heavy sigh, opened her eyes, which, even in that impaired state, were
equal in luster to the diamond of the most exquisite polish, and looking around
her, eagerly said, where is my mama? -- Where is Charlotte? -- Here we are,
replied the mother and sister together. Be composed, my dear, said the old lady
-- Heaven his interposed in our favor, and all will be well. Madam,
interrupted the surgeon, my advice is to convey your daughter home as soon as
possible -- let her be put in a warm bed, and do not disturb her to night --
give me your address, and I will visit her early in the morning, and prescribe
such things as I shall then judge salutary. The old lady returned her thanks
for his care, and informed him that she lived on the south side of
Cavendish-Square. The patient was then placed between her mother and sister, in
the doctor's chariot, which had brought him and Mercutio, who having promised,
at the instance of the old lady, to accompany the surgeon the next day, took
leave and departed.

Although the foregoing accident and adventure, does not appear to have been
calculated for the foundation of an amor; yet this was absolutely the case:
For no sooner did Lucinda, (the young lady) expand her beauteous eyes, than
love, like the electrical fire, diffused itself through each avenue of our
hero's heart, which being tender and susceptible, retained this first
impression so firmly, that it was never eradicated, until the lovely orbs, by
which it was communicated, were quenched in death.

Mercutio's mind had never been agitated before, in the same manner, as it was
that evening, and the ensuing night. He slept little -- broken slumbers, and
confused ideas, tortured his imagination, till the return of the day. The image
of Lucinda appeared to his imagination in various forms: At one time, he beheld
her pale and lifeless on the bank of the river -- at another, faintly
struggling with the impetuous stream -- and sometimes as a bride, adorned for
the nuptial ceremony, in all the bloom of youth, beauty and native innocence.

Having breakfasted, he hastened to the house of the surgeon, and with him, for
the first time, rode to Cavendish-Square, where he was received with all that
politeness peculiar to persons of exalted rank and refined education. Lucinda,
after a comfortable night's rest, arose, invigorated and cheerful, and having
been informed by her mama, of the particulars of what she had su^^ere^ the
prece^ing evening, and of her miraculous preservation -- she was just
expressing her desire to see and thank her deliverer, when the servant
announc'd the arrival of the physician and another gentleman. Lucinda's
matchless charms blazed forth in their native splendour -- and, her natural
vivacity having resumed its feat, her discourse considerably increased the
satisfaction of the company. The old lady, acknowledged the preservation of her
daughter's life, in the most grateful terms, and added, that she knew Lord S --
r, her husband, would never forget the obligation. Though our hero was fully
recompensed for the service he had rendered the daughter of Lord S -- r, with a
consciousness of having been instrumental in saving such a composition of wit
and beauty from the merciless jaws of death; yet his satisfaction was
considerably augmented, by the acknowledgments of Lucinda herself, which she
expressed in the following manner: Words, sir, are too weak, to describe my
grateful sensibility of the vast obligation, under which, my mama informs me,
you have laid me, by your humane exertions in saving me from impending danger;
but as the only return in my power at present, is a grateful remembrance of the
favor, I hope that may be accepted in part, and I promise to make up the
deficiency, by ever esteeming you as the generous preserver of my life.

Madam, said he, the reward you have promised, and which I accept with joy, and
shall ever strive to deserve, is more than an equivalent to any service I could
possibly render; but you must not suppose yourself under any obligation to me;
for a gentleman who could have done less, on a similar occasion, must have
divested himself of every particle of humanity, as well as violated its common
laws.

The surgeon finding his fair patient in perfect health, and being satisfied
for his trouble, departed. Mercutio was more than once prevented from taking
his leave, by the joint solicitations of the ladies, who ardently requested the
favor of his company till evening, to which he very willingly complied.

Dinner being over, the ladies played a duetto on the harpsichord, accompanied
with their voices: The masterly skill with which they performed, and the
enchanting harmony produced from the lips and fingers of these lovely girls,
increased the infant passion of Mercutio to a degree of ardor not often
exceeded. He listened with rapture, and gazed with silent astonishment! He had
never feasted his eyes and ears so sumptuously before. The evening approaching,
he took leave, having previously, in compliance with reiterated requests,
promised to renew his visit shortly, which he did not fail punctually to
observe, as will appear in the sequel.

As the accident which gave rise to our hero's acquaintance with this family,
proved to be the source of those surprising adventures of which the ensuing
part of this history is composed, I presume it will not be accounted a
digression, to present the reader with a very brief account of the eminent
personages, who gave birth to the empress of his affections.

The father of Lucinda was the eldest son of the duke of N --, whose great
abilities, as well in the field as cabinet, are too well known to need a
repetition in this place: The son possessed not only the estate of his father,
but also his virtues and bravery. At a suitable age, without having run through
those scenes of vice and dissipation, which are too frequently and fatally the
principal objects which our young noblemen pursue, he fixed his affections on
an amiable young lady, daughter of Lord H -- n. They lived, as might be
expected, in all that harmony which never fails a virtuous union, founded on
mutual esteem. The first fruit of their connubial love was a daughter, which
was the same who had captivated the affections of Mercutio. She had received an
education suitable to her birth and fortune, which she improved by every means
possible. The second child was a son, and called Charles, an amiable youth,
then in Naples: He had been taken dangerously ill in that city, and his
companion and tutor having written to his father, to inform him of the
situation of his son, he had embarked, accompanied by a very able physician,
for Italy. -- But to return: --

Mercutio's attention was totally diverted from its usual channel: 'twas
entirely absorbed in the contemplation of the charming qualifications of
Lucinda, and in revolving the happy consequences that would infallibly attend
an honorable union with her -- and began seriously to resolve on matrimony, if
the consent of all parties could be obtained: Of this, however, he had many
doubts and fears; having frequently heard his father reprobate the custom of
marrying at too early a period, and being so young, he imagined would be an
insurmountable obstacle in procuring his consent, which he conceived as
absolutely necessary to his future happiness.

Lucinda's gratitude was, at the first interview, by an easy transition,
converted to genuine friendship: It is no wonder, then, if the exact and manly
features, symmetry of shape, engaging deportment, and natural vivacity of
Mercutio, assisted by so powerful an ally as the most uncontaminated esteem,
should have made an indelible impression on such a heart as here is --
susceptible of the slightest. This was the case -- but each was ignorant of the
attachment of the other, and bore hard on the feelings of both; for it would
have afforded great consolation to them, to have known the real situation of
each other's heart.

Mercutio resolved to love -- he relinquished all his former diversions: The
park, the ball, the opera and play, had no charms for him! he devoted himself
to solitude while at home -- and seldom went abroad but to Lord S -- 's.

It was at one of those visits he had the honor of his first interview with
the father and brother of his beloved Lucinda. They had arrived from Italy the
day before, both in health and vigor. On entering the room, Lucinda with a
charming grace, taking his hand, presented him to her father, saying, This,
papa, is the gentleman (with the assistance of heaven) to whom I owe this my
second existence. He arose instantly, and enclosing him in his arms, said, Sir,
you have bound, by your generosity, me, and every branch of my family, by the
most lasting ties, those of friendship -- let this day be the epoch of our
invariable attachment. My dear Charles, said he to his son, from this day
forward, consider this our worthy friend as a brother -- a beloved and truly
meritorious brother. So saying, he joined the hands of the two young men, who
saluted each other with ardor. Mercutio congratulated his newly adopted
brother, on his recovery and return to England; and he, in return, assured him
of his unshaken gratitude and affection. They then entered into unrestrained
conversation, in the course of which Mercutio's anxiety forsook him -- he
discoursed with his usual vivacity and good sense, and by his judicious
reasoning and remarks, proved himself the finished gentleman. Charles was
enraptured with his discourse, and earnestly wished to cultivate an
acquaintance with one, whose sentiments appeared congenial with his own, and
who had already engrossed a large portion of his esteem.

In the afternoon, they took an excursion in Hyde-Park, and coming to the spot
where Lucinda had slipped into the river, the gratitude of the whole family was
again called into action: They reiterated their former acknowledgments, so that
Mercutio, overwhelmed with a sense of their generosity, entreated them to
desist, adding, that the favors he had received that day, were sufficient to
preponderate all he had done, or ever should be able to do, though his whole
future life should be devoted to their service. This turned the discourse in
another channel -- for, as the whole family entertained sentiments of the
highest esteem for him, they forebore speaking on a subject which they found
gave him pain, though they conceived themselves so highly obliged, that they
held themselves insolvent.

Before they parted, Charles begged the favor of Mercutio's company to Hampton
court, on that day week, adding, he had been so long abroad that he had almost
forgot the beautiful retreats of his own country. Mercutio promised to wait on
him at the time appointed, and taking leave of the whole family, departed. --
His father, having some affairs to transact at Bristol, set out the next
morning for that place, while his son formed the resolution to disclose his
love for Lucinda to his mother, before his father's return: Rightly judging,
that if she approved, it would not be a very arduous task to procure his
approbation also. In consequence of this resolution, one evening, being engaged
in serious conversation with her, he introduced the important secret that
engrossed all his thoughts -- and caused him so much anxiety, and which he had
never communicated to any one before. It happened that his mother was not
altogether unacquainted with the family to which she found her son so firmly
attached, and had he been of riper years, would not have withheld her
approbation a moment; but knowing her husband's tenacity in that point, she
forebore giving a positive answer, for the present; promising, however, to do
every thing in her power, to interest his father in his behalf.

This, though insufficient immediately to obliterate every doubt, was a cordial
to the mind of Mercutio: He, from that evening became cheerful, and before the
day arrived on which he had consented to ride to Hampton, he enjoyed the most
perfect tranquillity of mind, and resolved to acquaint his friend Charles, with
the passion he had conceived for his eldest sister, but previously to enjoin
him to secrecy, if he should disapprove of it. Having settled these things in
his mind, he met his friend Charles at the appointed time and place. It was a
fine day, and Charles entertained him with the many rarities and diversions of
Italy, which afforded Mercutio much satisfaction. They arrived at Hampton about
noon, and having refreshed, ordered dinner to be ready at three, and then went
to regale themselves with the beauties of the elegant gardens which pertain to
the palace.

After ranging those spacious and delightful avenues for some time, the keeper
appeared, to conduct them into the Labyrinth, which is a masterpiece of
ingenuity: It is so very intricate, that it is next to an impossibility for a
person, unacquainted with its various turnings and windings, being once fairly
entered, to extricate himself without the assistance of a guide. Those youths
having entered, the keeper retired, but remained within call, well knowing they
would have need of his assistance. Having attained the center, they sat down
under a fine shady tree to rest, and to discourse till it should be time to go
to dinner. After some preparatory conversation, Mercutio, in a few words, and
in a very diffident style, informed Charles of his violent passion for Lucinda,
and requested him to give his opinion and advice on the subject, as it was a
very important one to him. My dear friend, said Charles, it gives me infinite
pleasure, that the persom whom I so much esteem, has honored me with his
confidence in a matter so weighty and interesting, and must freely confess,
that it is no more than I suspected. I have, since my return from Italy,
observed a degree of singularity in my sister's behavior, which gave birth to
that suspicion: She devotes much of her time to solitude -- appears remarkably
pensive -- except when you honor us with your company, at which time she
resumes her native sprightliness; but no sooner are you gone, than she retires
to her chamber, and seldom appears cheerful till a similar occasion presents
itself. My sister Charlotte has also made the same remark, which she
communicated to me, and imputes it to the real cause, namely, Love: And to give
you my sentiments freely on the subject, I really believe Lucinda to be under
the same perplexities you labor under yourself. But tell me, my dear Mercutio,
have you ever disclosed your passion to my sister? No, my dear friend, your
virtuous -- your accomplished sister is yet unacquainted with the flame which
preys each moment on my heart, and this it is that has rendered me unhappy: --
Unhappy!- exclaimed Charles, I should hold myself guilty of ingratitude, and
consequently unworthy your friendship, if I could harbor the most distant idea
of your being unhappy without sympathizing with you, and contributing all in my
power to restore your peace of mind: -- My sister, or I am much mistaken, loves
you ardently. My advice is, that you reveal your sentiments to her without
delay -- for I am fully sensible that there is not one of the family, but would
be proud of the alliance: -- Banish every apprehension -- explain yourself
without reserve, and my life for it, you will succeed. For my part, you may
depend on all the assistance in my power -- but my opinion is, you have a
friend in the citadel, that will do more execution than all the external
auxiliaries you can command.

Mercutio was so overwhelmed with a sense of his friend's uncommon generosity,
that he was for some time at a loss for words to describe his own feelings on
the occasion. -- My inestimable friend, said he, where have you imbibed this
greatness of soul? Your goodness is so unlimited, that there is not a bare
possibility of a retaliation -- but rely on my unchangeable attachment -- my
willingness to embrace every opportunity of rendering you all the service in my
power -- Come, come, said Charles, hastily interrupting him, no more of this --
let us away to dinner. Mercutio, looking at his watch, found it was four. They
started up instantly, and walked almost an hour at a good round rate, when to
their amazement, they found themselves just where they had been sitting so long
-- they attempted it again, but without success -- they were constrained to
call the keeper, who liberated them in a few minutes.

They hastened to the inn, where they found dinner waiting -- their walk having
created good appetites, they ate heartily; and after taking a cheering glass,
remounted, and set out for London. Night overtook them about three miles from
town, and as they were riding slowly along, busy in discourse, they were met by
a youth, genteely dressed, and well mounted, who presenting a pistol to
Mercutio's breast, demanded his money.

Their servants being armed, rode up and took him, which was easily
accomplished, as he made no resistance; but exclaimed aloud -- Now, my miseries
will soon have an end! I shall die contented, and my dear Amelia will see that
I prefer even an ignominious death, to a wretched life, without her! -- These
words surprised our young friends -- they both wished to know the cause of this
young highwayman's inconsistent behavior. The servants had bound him, and were
riding one on each side, when Mercutio and Charles halted -- The words and
actions of this young man, said Mercutio, surprise me exceedingly -- I feel
desirous to know what has prompted him to take to the highway -- in my opinion,
he is but a novice in the trade; for instead of attempting an escape, he
appeared willing to be taken, and by the words he expressed while the servants
were binding him, I suspect this action the effect of a desperate resolution,
formed in consequence of some disappointment in a love affair -- I think it
would be worth our while to examine him on the subject. You have uttered my
sentiments exactly, replied Charles -- I think there must be something very
singular in his case; for as you observed, he does not appear to have had much
experience. They soon overtook their company, and ordering their servants to
ride forward, took charge of the prisoner themselves.

My friend, said Mercutio, what could induce you, among such a variety of
occupations which exist in this kingdom, to make choice of one, which must
inevitably terminate in ignominy and punishment?

That question, said the prisoner, stabs me to the soul. He paused -- and would
have said no more, had not Mercutio desired him to inform them by what means he
had been reduced to that way: You need not, said he, be under apprehension of
any circumstance, which you may probably discover in your narrative, being
brought against you before a magistrate -- for you may depend upon our honor,
that whatever you disclose to us, shall be buried in eternal oblivion -- and
for this reason we sent our servants forward: Therefore, by giving us a brief
and candid relation of the misfortunes or temptations, which, perhaps, contrary
to your natural inclination, precipitated you into this dangerous course, may
have a palliative tendency, and your affairs, however unpromising at present,
may shortly terminate in your favor.

If you mean, returned the prisoner, that it will have a tendency to divert
your intentions of surrendering me into the hands of justice, I should
willingly refuse, because a person who has no business in this world, should
stay no longer in it than to procure a convenient passage to another, which
however bad, cannot be worse than this; and as I am one of this description, am
willing to meet death in any form and at any time. But, gentlemen, you appear
to be generous, and therefore, whatever pangs the relation of my late
misfortunes may add to my tortured soul, I shall endeavor to gratify your
request.

My father is a merchant of no small account, in the city which now lies before
us. My mother died when I was about eleven years of age, and I being the only
child, was placed at Rule's academy, at Islington, where I remained two years;
when a brother of my mother's, having repeatedly urged my father to send me to
one of the universities, without success, took me from thence and placed me at
Oxford, where, after making ample provision for my education, etc. took an
affectionate leave, previously exhorting me to be diligent, and obedient to my
tutors -- If you are attentive to your studies, said he, you shall find you
have at least one friend. My kind uncle was as good as his word -- for he took
the most scrupulous pains to have me well accommodated for the space of five
years, which was the time I re^ained at the university. When I had finished my
st^^ies, I returned to London, and after returning my affectionate thanks to my
worthy uncle, for his care of my education, as well as many other favors, I
waited on my father, who received me very kin^ly. Well, George, said he, I
understand you intend to practice law; but I wish you would wa^e that
resolution for the present, as I have great need of your ass^stance -- besides,
it may be of service to you hereafter, to have a thorough knowledge of the
mercantile branch. He pa^se -- I told him to command me in any thing he
^leased, and I would convince him, that in my long absence I had not forgot to
pay the most respectful obe^ience to his orders. This answer pleased him
exceedingly -- and from that day to this, I have transacted his business with
the greatest care and punctuality. But how shall I relate the rest? -- Some
time ago, I conceived a tenderness for an amiable young creature, the only
daughter of a very wealthy jeweller, in Cheapside: This tenderness increased
ra^i^ly, and was soon succeeded by the most ardent passion. I declared my
sufferings to the dear object of my wishes -- who con^escended to approve, and
accepted my vows. Our love became reciprocal. But -- since that fatal moment,
anxiety has been my inseparable companion. Our fathers happened to have
sentiments congenial -- yet it was impossible ever to obtain their mutual
consent to our union -- as they had both formed a determination never to agree
to the marriage of their children with any person, but such as had a great
fortune, and imbibed principles similar to their own -- and were resolved never
to part with a shilling, until death should deprive them of the power of
accumulating wealth.

Under such circumstances, conceive, if you can, the torment we endured. Buoyed
up with flattering hopes, however, and having frequent opportunities of
enjoying each other's company, our situation was yet tolerable; but alas! this
was but of short duration. My father, yesterday evening, came into the
compting-house, and appeared remarkably pleasant: -- After some preliminary
discourse -- George, said he, I am surprised that a young fellow of your lively
turn don't endeavor to push yourself into the world; -- I mean, continued he,
by marriage. There is nothing gives a young man so great an opportunity of
making a fortune as an advantageous match. Why, before I was of your age, there
was not a great fortune, maid or widow, in town, or within twenty miles round
it, but I paid my addresses to -- and you see what an est^te I have raised from
your mother's dowry. You understand the law, and if you was married to a woman
of fortune, you might, with the help of ^er gold, soon climb the ladder of
preferment -- might soon be lord chief justice, my boy.

I was astonished at his discourse, as I had frequently, since I left college,
heard him reprobate a married life as being attended with great expense, care
and anxiety, and declaring, that if he was a young man, he never would be duped
into it again. However, I told him I had often thought of matrimony, and should
have no objection to it, with an agreeable young woman. As to her being
agreeable, said he, I suppose you mean handsome, or young -- these are but
secondary considerations: The woman whom I would recommend should be rich -- if
handsome it would be no objection; but for age, it signifies not a button. Now
I have taken the pains to select a woman for you, to whom in my opinion, you
cannot have the least objection -- she is none of your foolish, extravagant
jillflirts, who would ruin you in paint, patches and lace: -- No, no, my boy,
she is a sober, staid body, industrious and frugal -- true, she is about forty or
forty-five; but then she has twenty-five thousand pounds in glittering gold, my
boy: and the greatest advantage of all is, she will not have many children. Now,
George, what do you think of my proposal? -- What do you think you are indebted
to me for anticipating your very hopes -- and providing such a wise for you?

I was so confounded with this last speech, that for some time I was unable to
answer him; but recovering myself a little from the vexation I felt, I
observed, that I was deeply sensible of his goodness, in procuring such a
person as he had described; but thought it probable the lady's affections might
be pre-engaged, as I had never been honored with an interview -- Not at all,
not at all, interrupted my father, hastily: People of sense never suffer their
affections to be engaged contrary to their interest: -- She knows I have no
child but you, and consequently, that you will be very rich at my decease: You
need not be under any apprehension on that score -- I Will introduce you
tomorrow, and my word for it, you will meet with no repulse. I replied, my dear
father, I am sorry it is out of my power to accept the honor you intended me
-- as I am engaged to a person of such beauty and good sense, that you yourself
must applaud my choice, and -- A damned prostitute, interrupted he, in great
rage -- some offspring of extravagance and folly, I dare say; but I don't care
who or what she is -- if you don't acquiesce with my proprosal, prepare to turn
out, for here you will stay no longer, nor ever finger one penny of my estate, I
promise you: -- I would sooner bequeath it to my grave-digger. Let me have a
final answer tomorrow morning; -- but, do you hear, I will be obeyed, one way or
other.

With these words he left me to the most mortifying reflections. I remained
petrified with astonishment for some time; but at length resolved to pay my
dear Amelia a visit to inform her of my deplorable situation. and urge her to
accompany me to my uncle's, where I knew we should be received with affection,
and there tie the indissoluble knot, which would forever frustate the caprice
of an unfeeling parent. With these perplexing ideas, I reached her father's,
who, to my inexpressible anguish, would not permit me to see her. You must
discontinue your visits here, said he -- my daughter is to be married in a few
days to Mr. Ephraims of the old Jewry, a wealthy broker. I was just going to
solicit a moment's interview -- but he cut me short -- George, it is needless
for you to put yourself to any further trouble about her, as it will be
impossible for you to see her until she is married to Mr. Ephraims, who is now
with her in the dining room: Come, will you take a walk to the coffee-house? I
made him no answer, but taking my hat and cane, left the room, pronouncing the
words DAMNED AVARICE! I returned home in dreadful perturbation of mind, threw
myself on the bed in all the pangs of despair. I slept none -- but waited the
return of day, with an anxiety not to be described.

I went this morning to the compting-house, as usual, though undetermined what
answer to give my father. He did not suffer me to deliberate long; for coming
in suddenly, he demanded my answer, with a countenance which indicated his
displeasure, and the storm impending, which soon burst upon my devoted head: --
Don't hesitate a moment, young man, said he, I Am not to be trifled with. In the
tumult which then pervaded my soul, I told him, I had given all the answer I
had to give: -- Then, you infamous scoundrel, said he, begone out of my house
instantly -- you unworthy rascal! if ever I catch you within my doors again,
I Will shoot you. I rose instantly, and he thrust me out the door, in a degree of
rage bordering on madness.

In the height of my despair, I took the fatal resolution which you have just
witnessed. I hired this horse at a livery stable where I was known, in order to
be discovered, and set out in the dusk of evening -- The rest you know; but
when I attacked you, my wish was, that you would have lodged a friendly bullet
in my head, and rid the world of the unhappiest of mortals. Here he stopped,
when Mercutio, with some earnestness, demanded his name: -- My name, replied
he, is George Wright. Gracious heavens! exclaimed Mercutio, is it possible that
you are my friend and fellow-student, with whom I have spent so many delightful
hours at Oxford? Have you forgot Mercutio? -- Mercutio! returned he, greatly
agitated, is this you? No, it is impossible for me to forget him -- but long
absence, and the extreme confusion of mind, had almost obliterated from my
memory every trace of those well known features -- Oh Mercutio! did you ever
expect to see what you have this evening? -- Tears forbid further utterance. He
was immediately unbound, while Mercutio and Charles endeavored both by moral
and philosophical arguments to dissuade him from his desperate purpose -- in
which they happily succeeded. Mercutio offered him his purse, which he refused
-- saying, I have money enough: If that would purchase happiness, I need not be
long without it. Being now pretty late, when they reached Hyde-Park wall, and
having exacted a promise from George, that he would not attempt to shorten his
days, either directly or indirectly, they parted, each taking a different route.

The next day, Mercutio paid a visit to Lucinda, and Charles having introduced
him, retired. She received his visit with manifest marks of satisfaction on her
countenance, which inspired her lover to avow his passion with confidence,
which he did in the most unequivocal, yet respectful terms, and received an
answer, which totally eradicated every sentiment of anxiety from his breast, --
the most perfect tranquillity pervaded his soul. His father having returned
from Bristol, he communicated his case to him in a letter, couched in the most
submissive and respectful terms -- relating, without reserve, every
circumstance which had occurred in the first of his seeing the beautiful object
of his love, until that day, and finally requesting permission to continue his
addresses to the young lady. This letter he committed to the care of his
mother, who was to negociate the matter for him. Having dispatched this part of
the business, it was necessary to communicate his wishes to the parents of
Lucinda. This he resolved to do in person: Accordingly, he summoned up all his
fortitude, and waited on them for that purpose. He was received with the same
degree of kindness which he had experienced ever since his acquaintance in that
family. When the common topics of the day were discussed, the ladies withdrew,
leaving him, Charles and the father together. After a short preface, Mercutio
informed lord S -- the motive of his visit, and earnestly solicited his
permission to address his eldest daughter on the subject of marriage. His reply
was such as might have been expected: -- I should hold myself ungrateful in the
highest degree, said he, and consequently highly culpable, if not unpardonable,
were I to deny your request; but so far from that, I grant it with pleasure, as
to a person, of all others, the most deserving: and, I mistake, or Lucinda
herself is of the same opinion. Mercutio made a suitable acknowledgment of the
honor done him, adding, that the pleasure he experienced on the present
occasion, could only be exceeded by that which he must derive from the absolute
consummation of the desired union.

Not to trouble the reader with a repetition of all the tender epithets, and
languishing speeches, inseparable from negociations of this kind -- let it
suffice to say, that matters were in a short time so forward, that the marriage
articles were drawn -- a day appointed for the celebration of the nuptials, and
the two families united in the strictest amity. So far, then, had Mercutio been
successful; nay, so flattering was the prospect, that he would not have
relinquished his claim, to have been made emperor of the world. But, alas! the
period was approaching, with hasty strides, in which the most gloomy sadness
was to usurp dominion over the empire of his soul -- when all those gilded
scenes which then presented themselves to the eye of his imagination, were to
"dissolve, and like the baseless fabric of a vision, leave not a wreck behind."

A few days previous to that appointed for the weding, Lucinda was attacked
with an extreme pain in her left breast and side. A physician being called, she
was let blood, and was, apparently, in a fair way of recovery; but the ensuing
night, she was seized with an intermittent fever; and, in nine days, in spite
of the most skilful and strenuous endeavors of several of the faculty, eminent
in their profession, the beauteous Lucinda resigned her immortal parts into the
hands of Him who gave it, reclining in the arms of her disconsolate lover, who
had scarcely eat, drank or slept, or even left the house, during her illness.

This was a severe stroke to the afflicted Mercutio! Yet well calculated to
teach him resignation to the will of the Almighty. She was interred in the
family vault in St. James's church, on the very day her hand was to have been
joined to Mercutio's, who followed her remains, arrayed in solemn black, which
but faintly expressed the gloomy situation of his mind.

Having assisted at those rites, which forever separated him from that
treasure, which but a few days before, not all the riches of the east would
have purchased, he betook himself to the most profound solitude -- kept no
company -- never went abroad, except to spend a lonesome hour in St. James
church. One morning early, when he repaired to that owful receptacle, and
having walked backward and forward for some time, with his arms folded
together, supposing himself alone, broke out into the following passionate
exclamations: Oh! my tortured bosom! -- Where shall my soul find peace? Alas,
there is none for me on this side eternity -- no, no, the marble jaws of death
has separated, finally separated me from all the world contained to render me
happy! I shall never more behold those ravishing features which once
transported my devoted soul -- where blooming innocence and inimitable beauty
contended for pre-eminence -- shall never listen to those joy-inspiring
accents, which has so frequently filled my soul with pleasure unspeakable! But
though the cruel tyrant has separated our bodies, our souls can never be
divided -- that tie is too strong -- it cannot -- shall not be broken. Here,
Charles, who had arrived at the mournful spot before Mercutio, and had heard
the foregoing, discovered himself. Though the time, place and other
circumstances, had a palpable tendency to render solitude more solitary; yet it
was a matter of consolation to those young friends to meet, even on so mournful
an occasion: For though it was impossible for one to remove the melancholy from
the other, yet by intermingling their griefs, they were enabled to support the
enormous load more patiently, than they could have done separately. After
discoursing some time on the shortness and positive certainty of the
extinction, sooner or later, of human life, as well as the innumerable avenues
leading to the gloomy mansions of death, that are constantly ^rouded with
persons of all ranks* ages, sex, and denominations, traveling to the
never-ending regions of eternity -- they found themselves inperceptibly
betrayed into a train of cheerful ideas, (the natural consequence of moral and
religious discourses) and their melancholy retreated insensibly. In this frame
of mind, Mercutio requested Charles to spend the day with him. Taking leave of
that awful recess, they dropped a tributary tear and departed. They spent the day
in a manner corresponding with that in which they had began it, taking to their
assistance HERVEY and SHERLOCK, whose inimitable works made no small addition
to that cheerful resignation with which their morning discourse had inspired
them.

Thus did those young men, adopt the most proper measure imaginable, to
frustrate the secret wiles of the great adversary of mankind, who is ever
ready, on such occasions, to suggest doubts of the providence of God, whereby
the afflicted, or rather tempted persons, are sometimes prompted to precipitate
themselves into irretrievable ruin, by r^^^ing, uncall'd-for, into the awful
and immediate presence of God; "with all their imperfections on their heads."

Mercutio, finding no relish for the reigning pleasures of the town, and being
constantly importuned to accompany the youthful and gay in diversions, which to
him were disgusting, resolved to travel, if it should meet the approbation of
his parents. He accordingly proposed it to them -- they freely assented, in
hopes that a diversity of climate, and the innumerable objects, both natural
and artificial, to be met with in making the tour of Europe, might have a happy
effect in reviving those animated marks of a cheerful heart and vigorous body,
which had ever been the leading features in his countenance, until impaired by
grief and disappointment.

Preparations were made for his intended voyage: He visited the parents of the
much lamented Lucinda. But, it would require some of the finest strokes and
strongest coloring that ever proceeded from the pen of the immortal Raphael,
to paint the emotions of the whole family, when the moment of separation
arrived. Not an eye present but shed the tear of real affection! Not a heart
but palpitated, in perfect unison, with the soul-dividing pangs of separation.
Lord S -- and his amiable consort, clasped their departing friend to their
noble breasts, in all the extacy of parental love. Adieu! my dear son they
exclaimed together. Adieu! my beloved friend and brother, repeated Charles and
Charlotte -- It was too much for human nature to bear -- The organs of speech
were mutually arrested -- tears supplied the place of words. He silently and
speedily withdrew, while his agitated limbs were yet capable of supporting him
out.

After taking an affectionate leave of his parents, he set out post for Dover,
and embarked on board a packet at that place, attended by two trusty domestics,
who had been many years in the family, and arrived at Calais the same evening.
It is more than probable, that if Mercutio, or his friends, had barely
conceived the danger, difficulties, hardships and slavery, he had to encounter,
before they were to meet again, they would have guarded against so fatal an
event with all their powers; but it is more wisely ordered: man is not
permitted to penetrate the unfathomable depths of futurity: he is allowed a
faint glimpse of the present: and, while he retains his faculties, he may, by
retrospection, take an imperfect, ideal view, of such of the past as has been
strongly marked, and consequently made a more lasting impression than generally
attend the common occurrences of life; but the incidents and objects of
futurity are concealed behind an impenetrable cloud, until the unceasing,
undeviating order of nature, shall unfold them, individually, in the order in
which they may then lie.

He made no stay in Calais, but proceeded to Paris. As he had not much relish
for coversation, he intended, while he resided in Paris, to act the part of a
spectator only: Of course, he took lodgings at a private house, in a pleasant
situation, where he could enjoy the cool air, undisturbed by the rattling of
chariots, and the vain pomp of Parisian grandeur. He attended all public places
of recreation, but carefully avoided cultivating an intimacy with any person.
He wrote to his father and other friends, by every post: This, and the perusal
of the several epistles from them, (not one of whom neglected to answer
punctually every one of his) employed most of his leisure time, and afforded
him much of that kind of pleasure, in which he then most delighted.

Being present at an auction of pictures, one day, where several persons of
distinction were assembled, his eyes involuntarily caught a face which seemed
familiar to him: He fixed his attention on the object, and after considering
him for some minutes, found it to be his old acquaintance and fellow-student,
George Wright. Mercutio was a good deal surprised at seeing him in that place,
and so richly dressed (it being an elegant suit, fashioned in the Parisian
taste, and richly embroidered) in so short a time after the singular affair
before recited. He found means to discover himself to his friend, who, when he
recognized him, gave a signal to follow, and immediately left the room. When
they had got into the street, Georg, in a very affectionate manner, took
Mercutio by the hand, saying, I have joyful news to communicate to you, my dear
friend; but we will step into a hotel, where we can discourse in private, and
with freedom. There being one within a few steps, they entered, when George
called for a private room and a bottle of Burgundy. I make no doubt, said
George, but you are astonished at the alteration you perceive in me -- but
banish your surprise: The dear girl, of whom I told you the last time I had the
happiness of seeing you in England, and whom I considered as irrecoverably lost
to me, is now in Paris, and mine by every law, human and divine, and death
alone can separate us. Why, you have been very fortunate indeed, replied
Mercutio. Fortunate! Yes, my friend, my good fortune has exceeded my most
sanguine expectations; and, be assured, my heart vibrates with gratitude to
heaven, and you, the happy instrument of my salvation from eternal infamy and
despair! Mercutio expressing a wish to be informed of the particulars of this
apparently unaccountable revolution, George proceeded to gratify it. After I
parted with you and your friend at Hyde-Park wall, I went to a friend in whom I
could confide, and related my story in a few words, concealing only the
resolution I had taken in consequence of my father's barbarity, and requested
his advice and assistance. Why, said he, it is a critical affair -- I Am at a
loss how to advise -- After a short pause -- George, said he, I Will tell you
what -- I will go in the morning to your father, and, without taking any notice
of having seen you, as I am something in his debt, settle and pay him off:
Then, as he will be obliged to examine the account himself, I shall have a fair
opportunity to enquire for you, if he does not start it himself. This will
naturally (as you know our intimacy) bring out the whole transaction, in which
I shall be able to discover how the old man stands affected toward you. If I
find him relenting, I will immediately press him to a reconciliation -- if not,
I shall be silent on the subject: This is all in my power to do, in the present
state of affairs. In the morning he set out -- and it is hard to determine
whether hope or fear was most predominant in my soul during his absence; but
one thing is certain, that I never suffered so much uneasiness in so short a
time before. At length he returned -- and, to my extreme amazement, announced
the instantaneous death of my father! And though it might be supposed, after
experiencing such cruel treatment, I should receive the news of his decease
with a degree of satisfaction, rather than regret: -- But I do assure you, this
was not the case -- I stood astonished for some time, and know not how long I
should have remained so, had not my friend rouzed me from my reverie, by
telling me, my presence was absolutely necessary at home, as my father was a
widower, and having no child but me, the af^airs of the family would otherwise
soon fall into a distracted state. Besides, what would the world say, if you
should so far neglect your duty, as not to provide for and superintend your
father's funeral? -- Although I was fully sensible of the justice and propriety
of these hints -- yet I was so wrapped in the contemplation of the sudden stroke
which had reduced my father to a state of inanimation, that I had forgot every
thing else. However, not to detain you, I repaired home, where I no sooner
perceived him from whom I derived my existence, lying pale and breathless,
than, impelled by filial love and duty, I fell on the venerable corpse, and
bathed it with tears -- lamenting, in the most sincere and pathetic terms, his
premature death, which was occasioned by a fit of apoplexy. To be brief -- in
one month after the funeral obsequies were performed, in consequence of a
letter from my uncle in Venice, requesting me to go thither, I applied myself
to the settling my affairs, which to me who had managed my father's business so
long, was an easy matter.

Upon the whole, after settling and paying every legal demand, I found myself
worth at least forty thousand pounds. Among a number of bonds, which I
discovered in a little box in my father's scrutoire, one for five and twenty
hundred pounds, on the father of my dear Amelia presented itself. I wrote to
him without delay, informing him of my intended voyage to Venice, and
requesting immediate payment. The next day, I received an answer to my billet,
full of consolatory language, expressing much sorrow for the loss I had
sustained in so good a father -- requesting the favor of a visit, and added,
that he could not reimburse the whole sum for a few weeks, owing to some heavy
losses he had met with in the public funds, etc.

As I wished for nothing on earth so much as one more interview with his
daughter, if yet unmarried, should it even be the last -- a gleam of hope
darted through my soul, and suggested the idea, that if she was yet single, I
might one day be so happy as to call her mine.

I waited on the old man in a few days. He received me with much apparent
kindness, and to my inexpressible joy, introduced me to his daughter, as
beautiful, and as much at liberty as when I last parted with her -- though her
father had employed the most rigorous means to force her to wed the avaricious,
superannuated Israelite -- yet it was all to no purpose -- the lovely girl
remained inflexible; she chose rather to endure confinement, nay, even death
itself, than submit to be joined to a wretch of that description. In the course
of our conversation, I gave him to understand, that I should have immediate
occasion for the money, as I intended to embark for Venice in a few days,
having settled all my affairs, and that a failure would be detrimental, and
perhaps productive of disagreeable consequences. He told me, he would endeavor
to furnish it within three weeks, and concluded with a request, that I would
not pass his door as a stranger, in the mean time; for as he ever had a great
veneration for my deceased father, he should think it an honor to be ranked
among the friends of his son.

It was easy to perceive the old fellow's drift. He was well acquainted with my
father's circumstances, and also, that I was sole heir; therefore, he conceived
if he could ingratiate himself with me, I would not only marry his daughter
without a portion, but also release him from the payment of the bond, in which
he was not altogether mistaken; for finding her attachment as strong as ever, I
was determined to renew my visit shortly, and demand her of her father in
marriage, and if granted, I was resolved to have celebrated as soon as
possible, without regard to the motives or conditions of his consent. In short,
at the very next visit I declared myself to him. He consented without
hesitation, and in ten days more, heaven conferred on me the greatest blessing
-- my every wish. We were married, and the same day I resigned the bond into
his own hands, without any consideration, which pleased him exceedingly.
George, said he, you have been a dutiful son to your deceased father, and for
that reason I have given you my only child, and though I have given her nothing
on the day of her marriage, all I have will fall to you both when I die, and
perhaps I shall make as great an addition to my present stock, as you could
possibly, if you had it in your own hands.

I immediately made the necessary preparations for my intended voyage. Having
never been in France, I resolved, in order to show my dear Amelia the manners
of the Parisians, as well as gratify my own curiosity, to take it in my tour:
We have been here a month, and expect to sail for Italy in a few days. -- This
is all I have to communicate at present. Now, I wish you to accompany me to my
lodgings, where, as long as we remain in Paris, you shall be a welcome guest.
Mercutio consented, and on the way informed George of his own sad disaster, and
of the resolution he had taken in consequence. George sympathized with him in
his misfortunes; but at the same time, begged him to be consoled: for, it
argues a debility of mind, to faint under the dispensations of providence; --
true fortitude, you have taught me, consists in a virtuous and cheerful
resignation: It is to your animating and well-timed instructions, I owe all my
present and future happiness: but for them, I might ere now, have suffered an
ignominious death. I beg you will not take amiss what I so freely say, as it
proceeds from a sincere desire to see you happy; for you may rest assured,
there is not a man upon earth, who shares with you an equal proportion of my
esteem. No, replied Mercutio, so far from it, that I deem it as a particular
mark of friendship. Mrs. Wright gave her new visitor a cordial reception. She
was very handsome, and possessed a sufficient share of good sense, so that he
was very happy in having met with such agreeable company, and hearing much of
the beauty and pleasant situation of Venice, which is situated on seventy-two
small islands, in the Adriatic gulf, resolved to accompany his friend thither.

Having dispatched a letter home to advertise his friends of his intention, he
embarked on board an Italian ship, bound to Rome, whither they had a short and
pleasant passage. After staying three days in that once famed capital, to
refresh, they set out by land for Ancona, from whence they sailed in a small
vessel for Venice. On their arrival, they sound George's uncle in good health,
who received Mercutio with the greatest politeness imaginable. He was at first,
overjoyed to see his nephew; but his transport was much abated, when he was
informe^ of the sudden death of his brother.

Mercutio, at the earnest request of the whole family, took up his abode with
them during his stay at Venice. He visited all the islands in the republic, and
every place of public resort in each, so that at length he resumed his former
vivacity, and began to entertain a relish for society. The tranquillity of his
mind appeared visible on his countenance, and he frequently mingled with the
young Venetians of quality, in the diversions peculiar to that country.

The Doge having given an invitation to all the youth of distinction in the
city (to partake of a splendid entertainment to be given in honor of the Doge
of Na^les, who had arrived, with a great retinue, on a visit) with liberty to
introduce all their foreign friends and acquaintances of the same description.
Mercutio was pressed by a young Venetian of the first rank to accompany him. He
complied, and had the honor of dancing with the Doge's daughter, beautiful as
Venus, but not a Diana. He was struck with the brilliancy of her charms, but
was ignorant of her quality -- yet supposed her the daughter of some great
personage. The highest encomiums were bestowed on him and his incomparable
partner by the two Doges, who were present during the whole entertainment.
'Twas late when the company retired, and Mercutio having just turned the corner
of the street where he lodged, was overtaken by a young female, who delivered
him a billet, the substance of which was couched in the following terms:

STRANGER,

HAVING been so happy as to be honored with your hand this evening, I have, for
a peculiar reason, a strong desire to have a short interview in private, as I
have a matter of great importance to communicate to you. If this meets your
approbation, you will attend vespers tomorrow evening, at the chapel of St.
Aloysius, where the person who delivers this will attend, to conduct you to a
proper place for that purpose -- if not, destroy this, and quit Venice speedily
-- Perhaps you may find no reason to repent a compliance.

Mercutio having got home, examined the billet, and perused it attentively
several times over, justly concluded it must be the lady with whom he danced,
that had honored him with this singular epistle. The next morning he showed the
billet to George, and requested his advice, adding, he would fain meet the
author, if he thought he might do it with safety. Why, replied he, I don't
imagine you have any cause to apprehend danger in meeting her; but a refusal,
it appears to me, if you remain here, may be attended with disagreeable
consequences. If I was in your place, I would meet her at all events. In
consequence of this advice, he attended at the time and place appointed, where
he had not been long, before he observed a female, whom he thought the same
that delivered him the paper. She seemed very busy in examining the features of
the whole congregation; at length, fixing her eyes on him for some time, and
having satisfied herself as to the identity of his person, her solicitude
vanished, and she contented herself with a slight glance now and then. It was
growing dusk when vespers ended, yet he still observed the female loitering
about till the congregation was dispersed -- she then beckoned him to follow
her. He complied -- and without speaking a word, followed her through many
turnings and windings, and just as the day closed, they arrived at a small
wicket, which opened into a spacious garden. His conductress having admitted
him, locked the gate, and conducted him to an elegant summer house, where, in a
whisper she told him he must wait a few moments, while she went to inform her
mistress of his arrival -- and departed instantly.

While he was ^uminating on the singularity of his present situation, his
attention was suddenly diverted by the rus^ling of silk, advancing toward the
place where he sat. He rose, and advanced to salute her -- she unveiled at his
approach, and returned his salute with ardor. She prevented him from speaking
by saying: -- Your condescension, sir, has exceeded my expectations, which
induces me to draw the most flattering presage of our future correspondence. My
present conduct may, perhaps, appear to have an air of levity; but I hope I
shall be able to justify it to you, at least; for though custom has rendered it
criminal for a female to make advances toward the other sex; yet nature and
reason mutually conspire, to render a dispensation with this tyrannical custom
absolutely necessary, in some particular circumstances. How peculiarly hard
must that woman's situation be, who, possessing the most unadulterated passion,
and being entirely cut off from all manner of communication with the object of
her love, must, in obedience to an arbitrary custom, linger out her days in the
most excruciating torture -- not daring to employ the means necessary to
restore her peace of mind. Here she paused -- but without giving him time to
reply, proceeded: -- This is the case with me -- therefore, your generosity
will, I trust, plead in my behalf, and stimulate you to pardon me, for
deviating from the common path, as you are the cause, though perhaps never
intended or desired it.

You surprise me, exceedingly, madam, replied Mercutio; I am not conscious of
having, by any means -- No, no, said she, interrupting him, I am convinced you
never intended to inspire me with such tender sentiments, as those I imbibed on
the first sight of you last night, and which now and ever since that fatal
moment pervade my soul -- I should be happy in a conviction of your having come
to the entertainment, with such an intention: for then I should have reason to
hope for a suitable return. But, if some happier maid has already secured your
affections, and the avenues leading to your heart thereby eternally ^arred
against me, I cannot -- will not long survive the discovery.

Mercutio, for the first time since the death of Lucinda, found his heart
powerfully assailed on all sides, by the charms of Leonora, whose movements
were so rapid, that he had not time to collect his forces: What wonder then, if
she carried her point by a coup-demain? She requested that he would accom^any
her into the house -- he complied -- what man could have refused? -- Their love
became reciprocal -- mutual caresses succeeded the most unequivocal
protestations of eternal fidelity, and *********************.

Man, in the course of his peregrination through life, is, and justly* subject
to innumerable disappointments and inquietudes, which act more or less
powerfully, in proportion as his sensibility is more or less refined. The
sensibility of Mercutio was of that kind which is denominated the most
delicate, consequently, real sufferings made more lasting impression on his
mind, than they would probable on one less susce^tible: For though he did not
lack a degree of philosophy, and reliance on providence, sufficient to support
him under the common accidents of life; yet, like all the descendants of A^am,
he had a spark of that frailty, which, in those recesses of reason when the
soul is left unguarded, and open to the hostile attacks of misfortune, expels
both religion and philosophy, and, by debilitating the mental faculties,
absorbs every idea of happiness, represents every object, past, present and
future, in the most gloomy colors, and in the most discouraging points of
view, by which means persons un^e^ such circumstances sometimes become lunatic,
or raving, and too frequently have recourse to suicide, in order to shun
misfortunes which are commonly imaginary. How remarkably kind and indulgent is
Providence in cases of this nature: For when the mind has experienced any
uncommon shock, there is always a counterpoise placed within reach, sufficient
to prevent the dreadful effects of a mind surcharged with grief. This was
exemplified in the case before us: For had Mercutio remained at home, a variety
of objects would frequently have awakened the remembrance of Lucinda, and kept
his mind in a continual state of dreary solitude, if not absolute despair. But
by a mysterious concatenation of events, we behold him reinstated in his former
vigor and gaiety -- involuntarily engaged in an amor, which, though
apparently criminal, is not absolutely so; for his intention was to repair the
error he had been suddenly betrayed into, by an honorable marriage, as soon as
a convenient opportunity should present.

The female confidante, before the dawning of the day, gave Mercutio notice it
was time to decamp. Though this was an unwelcome piece of intelligence, yet a
compliance being absolutely necessary, they parted, with reluctance, Leonora
having previously pressed a very valuable ring on the finger of Mercutio, which
she requested him to wear in testimony of her unalterable attachment.

Having proposed to renew his visit, on an appointed evening, his female
conductress escorted him to the spot where she had met him the evening before,
and on the way, laid down a very judicious and well-constructed plan for their
future operations, and withal, pointing out the most infallible marks whereby
he might find the wicket without difficulty or danger of being discovered.
Having rewarded her honesty with a few pieces, he repaired to his lodgings,
just as the dawn of day began to appear, and went immediately to bed, where the
soft balm of sleep locked up his faculties, while his countenance exhibited a
type of death -- his imagination being steadily fixed on the object of his love.

About noon, his friend George waited on him, to whom Mercutio made known every
particular of his nocturnal adventure -- But pray inform me, said he, if so
much may transpire, in what part of Venice does your fair enamoretto dwell?
Indeed, replied Mercutio, I am not able to solve that question, though I am of
opinion, I could find the house; but the way to and from it is so intricate,
that it would be next to an impossibility for me to point out the particular
spot, until I make a further discovery, which I am determined to attempt this
day. But, my dear George, I must request you to keep this matter a profound
secret, because I have very cogent reasons to suspect that the young lady is of
an exalted rank, and if the affair should inad^ertently be developed,
disagreeable consequences might ensue. Pardon me for giving you this (perhaps
needless) caution, as it does not proceed from a doubt of your fidelity: but
from a conviction of the tenderness of your connections, which will scarcely
admit of the least reserve. For, added he, I have experienced too many proofs
of your sincere attachment, to harbor the most distant idea of your saying or
doing any thing that might prove injurious to me, with design. George assured
him he should never abuse the confidence reposed in him, by any means, adding,
that it would afford him the highest satisfaction to see his friend completely
happy.

After dinner, he sallied forth, determining to explore, by daylight, the mine
which contained the sum of all his earthly treasure. Accordingly, passing through
all those crooked defiles through which he had been conducted the preceding
night, soon discovered the wicket, which he passed with some precipitation, and
passing two angles of the garden-wall, found himself in a spacious street,
where, running his eye along that side of the wall which fronted the street, he
perceived a connection between it and a magnificent building, which he rightly
conjectured must be the house he sought. He was confirmed in this opinion --
for, passing on the opposite side of the street, he perceived two young ladies
at one of the windows, one of whom was Leonora. She observed him, and instantly
retired.

He hurried home, and having described the building, etc. to his friend, was
assured, it could be no other than the palace of the Doge, and that his
mistress must be his daughter. This information was received with manifest
satisfaction by Mercutio, who determined to pursue his amor in consequence.

He carried on his operations with such precaution, that he continued his
nocturnal visits for the space of eight months, when the effects of their
illicit commerce began to appear, and to conceal it much longer, would have
been a difficult task, if not utterly impracticable. This circumstance, which,
in another situation, would have heightened their joys into rapture,
embarrassed them exceedingly: But though difficulty and danger stared them in
the face, neither love, fortitude or invention deserted them in this emergency.

Speedy and effectual measures being absolutely necessary, they devoted one
whole night in deliberating what was most proper to be done; and after
proposing and rejecting several plans, determined, that Mercutio should
immediately provide for their transportation to England, if possible; if not,
to some other part of the world. In the mean time, Leonora, with the assistance
of Margaretta, her maid, should be setting all things in proper train for an
elopement at a minute's warning. These preliminaries being settled, he returned
home, and taking his well-tried friend aside, made known the project, and
earnestly solicited his assistance.

I have a plan in my head, (said George, after pausing some time) which I am of
opinion, if adopted, cannot fail of being successful. I have a light vessel
lying at a small distance from hence, which arrived but yesterday from Valona,
whither she had been with a cargo of merchandise. Now, as the utmost privacy is
requisite, it would be highly improper to attempt sailing in any of the vessels
lying in the gulf, except this, as there is not one bound to any port in
Great Britain: I can have her ready in twelve hours, and will carry you down to
Osimo in eight more, from whence you may travel easily over land to Naples, in
a short time, and remain incog. until your mistress can proceed with less
difficulty, if you think proper; if not, there are generally ships from every
part of Europe, so that you may sail for England when you please. Now, what do
you think of my plan? Why, I think, said Mercutio, nothing could have been so
fortunate, and it shall be put in execution this night, if agreeable to you.
The sooner the better, said he, for it is hardly known that the vessel has
returned, and if we can sail early in the night, I can replace her in her
present situation by sunrise tomorrow at farthest, and shall never be missed.
These reasons appearing perfectly satisfactory, he took leave in order to make
the necessary preparations for his departure. In the afternoon, they went on
board, in order to show the servants where to carry the baggage, as soon as it
was dark, while Mercutio conducted Leonora. After taking a view of the vessel,
and learning the nearest way to it, they returned to George's house, and by the
time they had taken a slight refreshment it was dusk. George, offered it as his
opinion, that it would be most proper to depart without taking a formal leave
of the family, adding, that after matters were settled, and they arrived in
England, he might write to his uncle, and inform him of the reason of his
abrupt departure. This was agreed to, and Mercutio sat out, to pay his last
visit at the Doge's, while his servants conveyed the baggage on board, and
George with his little crew, got up the anchor and unfurled the sails, so that
there might be no delay.

Mercutio found his mistress ready and willing to depart, so that they soon
sallied out at the wicket, and bidding an eternal, though silent farewell to
the Doge, proceeded toward the water side: The faithful Margaretta bearing a
large bundle of wearing apparel, and Mercutio an ebony box, crammed with
ducats, which Leonora put into his hands, just as they were leaving the house,
though he was ignorant of its contents until after their arrival at Naples. --
They embarked safely, having a fine breeze from the westward, and a strong
current setting outward, anchored at Osimo in six hours.

It happened very fortunate for our adventurers, that George had an intimate
friend there, who at that time lay under particular obligations to him. As soon
as they dropped anchor, George went on shore, and repaired immediately to the
house of his friend, and informed him, that there was a gentleman and his wife
on board his vessel, wishing to proceed to Naples, and for particular reasons,
to perform their journey as privately as possible, and requested him to procure
a convenient vehicle to transport them. Here, said he, are thirty ducats -- be
faithful -- be diligent. This is but a trifling earnest of what I will do
further for you. The gentleman will correspond with me during his stay at
Naples -- you will forward our letters with care, secrecy and expedition. His
friend assured him he was happy in being charged with this commission, as it
would afford him an opportunity of demonstrating his gratitude for the many
favors he had already received Well, said George, I rely on your word; now
come with me and conduct them to your house, for I want to sail immediately --
I expect to see you again in a few days -- in the mean time let nothing extort
this secret from you.

George returned on board, and informed his departing friend the substance of
his negotiation: Then taking an affectionate farewell, those adventurers
lan^ed, and followed their new host; while George spread the canvas to the
wind, which at that time had veered round several points in his favor, so that
before the day dawned he had remoored and got home to his own house -- having
performed a trip of more than forty-six leagues, in something less than ten
hours and a half.

Proper apartments being assigned for the reception of our adventurers, they
tetired to rest, whilst the vigilant host went in search of a carriage to
convey them to Naples, the ensuing day. Having succeeded to his wish, he
returned, and informed his guests, who were then up, and taking chocolate with
his wife, a woman of good sense, who informed Leonora, that she had a sister, a
widow, in Naples, an approved and experienced midwife, that kept a commodious
house fitted for the reception of ladies in her situation, where they might be
accommodated with every thing necessary as long as she pleased to remain. This
was an agreeable piece of information; and her husband, in order to fulfill his
engagements with George, in the fullest extent, made a tender of his service to
accompany them to his sister in-law's, and negociate the whole business for
them immediately on their arrival. This proposal was accepted with joy, as it
seemed exactly adapted to their circumstances; for 'twould have been madness to
have taken Leonora to sea, except in a case of the most pressing necessity.

They started next morning with the first light, and arrived at the place of
their destination on the fourth day about sunset. When they were within two
leagues of Naples, their host rode forward to provide for their reception,
which having accomplished, he met the carriage about half a mile from the city,
where they alighted and walked to their lodgings. They received a very cordial
welcome from the mistress of the house, who was a genteel a^^able person. An
elegant supper was served up, of which our young travelers eat hearty; and at
an early hour were conducted to proper apartments for repose.

The next morning, Mercutio wrote to his friend George, to inform him of their
safe arrival, and requested him to write as speedily as possible, as Leonora
was anxious to hear how matters were conducted at Venice, in consequence of her
elopement -- well knowing her father's impetuous temper would, in the first
torrent of his rage, bear down all before it. This letter he delivered to his
generous host, accompanied by a purse of ducats, which, for some time
hestrenuously refused; but on Mercutio's declaring, he should not look on him
as his friend, if he did not accept it, with reluctance complied, saying,
heaven knows, I neither wished or expected any reward for the trifling pains I
have taken to serve you -- you may rest assured, I would not have done and
promised what I have on any other consideration, but that of serving my friend,
who informed me, is deeply interested in what concerns your welfare. He then
departed, with a promise to forward all letters that came under his care, to
and from him, with the greatest secrecy and dispatch.

In five days, Mercutio had the inexpressible satisfaction of receiving the
following letter from George, by the hand of his late friendly host: -- MY DEAR
FRIEND,
I RECEIVED yours by the bearer, who is faithful and diligent, and am happy to
hear of your being accommodated so much to your satisfaction. You wish to know
the consequence of your departure -- I will tell you: I arrived here safely,
before day, the next morning after I parted with you. All things remained quiet
that day -- but there was not a crevice in Venice left unsearched by the
ensuing evening. The success attending the search you are acquainted with. The
Doge finding his endeavors to recover his daughter fruitless, caused strict
enquiry to be made, whether any vessel had failed that night, or since, and was
informed that a certain swift-sailing sloop had weighed, and stood out to sea
early in the morning, but her destination could not be ascertained. He
naturally concluded she was on board the sloop. A young gentleman, a native of
France, had left his lodgings, the house of an eminent merchant which stood in
the same street where the Doge's palace stands, where he had resided for
several months, that very evening. It seems he had contracted an intimacy with
his landlord's daughter, the effects of which began to appear; and although she
loved him to distraction, and was willing to suffer any thing rather than a
separation, yet the unfeeling villain absconded privately, and probably sailed
in the sloop, leaving the distressed creature to a fate, which makes me shudder
at the bare recital. The Doge obtained information of a person of this
description having eloped, gave peremptory orders to have the merchant and his
whole family instantly seized and brought before him, concluding that their
lodger had carried off his daughter, and they of course accessory: For as yet
his seducing the merchant's daughter was not suspected. In vain the Doge
endeavored to extort confession from each of them apart, they persisted in
their innocence: He, therefore, commanded them to be separately confined till
next morning, threatening them with the rack if they should still persist. The
next day it was the same, but their asseverations of innocence served only to
enrage the Doge. He ordered the instruments of torture to be brought into his
presence. The merchant's daughter falling on her knees deplored the Doge to
defer the dreadful punishment for a few minutes, while she disclosed the
secrets of her soul, of which her parents were ignorant. With a look of
indignation he ordered her to proceed. Though my dear parents and my wretched
self stand as criminals in your presence, my lord, yet I trust I shall be able
to convince you of our innocence; yet in so doing, I must publish my own shame.
If M. de Gardelle has robbed Venice of so great a treasure as my lord's
daughter, his treachery to me, and ingratitude to my parents, must forever
acquit us of having been either accessaries or principals in the crime. For,
know, my lord, the faithless wretch had previously effected the destruction of
the hapless woman who now addresses you: -- In a fatal hour I yielded to his
false promises, and by that means rendered myself an object of contempt. It is
probable, by his artifice, he has found means to seduce your daughter, and,
knowing my situation, persuaded her to accompany him to France, where it is
likely, when sated with her company, he will abandon her as he has me, to all
the horrors of infamy and despair! -- Oh! my unhappy parents! Pardon your
wretched daughter -- who cannot, will not survive the publication of her
disgrace! -- As she pronounced these words, she, to the astonishment of all
present, plunged a poignant in her breast, and expired instantly. Such a horrid
scene, could not fail to impress the mind of the Doge and those of the
spectators, with a strong conviction of the sincerity of her confession, as
well as of the innocence of her parents. The Doge retired with manifest marks
of sorrow and confusion, and gave immediate orders for the liberation of the
unhappy parents, who continued bathing the body of their dear, unfortunate
child with tears! The next day, the Doge sent for them, and was closeted with
them for the space of three hours. The result of their conference has not yet
transpired: but the merchant* who is a native of Spain, with the remains of his
family, embarked this morning for Valencia.

Since this unhappy affair happened, there has been very little said about it,
as the Venetians seem willing to consign the remembrance of such a lamentable
catastrophe to eternal oblivion. Let me entreat you to remain as quiet as
possible, during your stay at Naples; and as soon as circumstances will admit,
to take shipping for England. I informed my uncle the cause of your abrupt
departure; concealing, however, my share in the enterprise: He is well pleased
at your escape, and desires me to present his respects to you, together with
his sincere wishes for your future welfare. -- Continue to write every
opportunity, and rest assured of my being, and remaining your sincere friend,

GEORGE WRIGHT.




Mercutio, in consequence of the preceding information, resolved, as soon as
Leonora was able to stir about after her confinement, to sail for England.

At length, the much desired period arrived -- when she was safely delivered of
a beautiful boy, to the no small satisfaction of our hero and his lovely
companion. Leonora being diligently attended by her kind hostess, and the
faithful Magaretta, was soon in a situation to undertake the intended voyage.
Her son, healthful and vigorous, grew exceedingly fast, and his father's
features were strikingly depicted in his face, which circumstance gave birth to
the most pleasing reflections i^ the minds of his parents.

Mercutio began immediately to make diligent enquiry for an English ship; and
finding one bound for Liverpool, bargained with the commander, whose name was
Nicholson, for his passage. The ship waited for nothing but a fair wind,
therefore, he was as expeditious as possible, in providing necessaries for the
voyage, and conveying his baggage on board. Having arranged all his affairs in
ample order, nothing remained to be done, but to satisfy his hostess, and write
a farewell epistle to his friend George. They devoted the last evening to mirth
and hilarity; our hero having previously discharged his reckoning with two
hundred ducats. Just as they were sitting down to supper, they were surpised
by the appearance of George and his friend. Mutual salutations past, George
informed them the cause of his journey as follows: -- "About three days ago, I
was informed by a Venetian gentleman, a friend of the Doge's, that the Doge of
Naples had sent a very pressing invitation to the Doge of Venice, to honor him
with a visit, which, in consideration of the one he received from him when you
were there, as well as the strict amity existing between them, he had accepted,
and is expected in Naples this evening. I was afraid to commit this piece of
intelligence to paper, and therefore set out as soon as I possibly could, in
order to let you know your danger: For a discovery now, might be attended with
dreadful consequences." -- My inestimable friend, replied Mercutio, how shall I
ever make you a suitable return for your disinterested exertions in my favor?
Unadulterated friendship is all you hold worthy your acceptance, and it shall
be my chief care, to preserve that inviolate and undiminished. We are, my dear
George, to embark for Liverpool tomorrow morning -- I have every thing on
board, and if the wind should prove favorable, the ship will sail immediately,
so that if heaven permits, we shall soon be on the British shore; and,
probably, the first letter you receive from me will inform you of the
celebration of our happy union. May heaven grant you a safe, and agreeable
passage, returned George.

At a very late hour they retired to rest, and before the dawn of day, were all
assembled in the common apartment, where they reiterated their former
professions of eternal friendship. Our voyagers taking an affectionate leave of
their hostess, set out, accompanied by George and his friend. The anchor was
weighing by the time they got on board, and George, having seen them safe
through the whole of this dangerous enterprise, wished them a prosperous
voyage, and returned to the shore.

Our hero was as happy at the commencement of this voyage, as the nature of the
circumstances would permit: Leonora too, promised herself the most perfect
felicity in the endearing company of her beloved Mercutio, and with the
enchanting prattle of the dear pledge of their mutual affection. Mercutio had
previously dispatched a packet to England, to inform his friends of the time of
his intended departure from Naples, and in the letter to his mother, he
signified his intention of bringing with him a Venetian lady, whom he intended
to make his wife, with the approbation of his friends, immediately on his
arrival in London. But it is the uncontrolable will of heaven, that man, when
he forgets his origin, and looks up with confidence to supreme felicity as
already within his grasp, should experience the chastising rod of affliction,
in order to bring him to a sense of his duty -- to acknowledge his own
imbecility and the omnipotence of that Being, from whom all happiness, whether
in heaven or on earth, must flow; and to whom all thanks are necessarily due. A
striking instance of this was exhibited in the case before us. Mercutio
conceived that nothing could intervene to blast the flattering prospect which
had just engaged his attention; but which was on the eve of disappearing: The
fatal moment was fast approaching, in which all his imaginary joys were to
vanish, like the fleeting meteor: The cloud was already collected, and
suspending over his head, which was shortly to burst and involve him in misery.
How vain! how trifling! in the view of Omnipotence, are the pursuits of short
^ighted mortals; -- ever anxious to secure happiness which shall be permanent,
our imagination is eternally on the wing; our invention is tortured for schemes
to secure the glittering phantom, and we madly reject the substance, which
through life, is constantly within our reach; and ignorantly pursue a shadow,
which we never can -- never will overtake.

They had just weathered Comin, on the Isle of Sardinia, when a most tremendous
hurricane from the N. W. accompanied with an irresistible current setting out
of the gulf of Lions, and violently passing between Minorca and Sardinia,
drove them, in spite of their skill and industry, into the Streights of
Messina. The day was just closing when they doubled the cape, which tended to
aggravate the horror of the scene which immediately succeeded. The awful bursts
of thunder, and streams of livid lightning, together with dreadful squalls of
hail, rain, and wind, seemed to threaten a final dissolution. The whole
universe appeared in violent convulsions, and the ship was hurled about like an
egg-shell in this elemental conflict, which none but the most insensible being,
could have beheld without horror. To administer comfort to Leonora was the
whole business of Mercutio, during the storm, and it was with much difficulty
he preserved her from fainting.

About day light, however, it pleased that God in whose hand the whole universe
is but as a grain of ^and, to quell the fury of the unfathomable deep -- to
rebuke the winds; and immediately all was hus^'d into profund tranquillity. The
cloud^ dispersed -- the blue concave appeared in its native splendour, and the
beams of that glorious diffuser of light and heat, conveyed new vigor to the
benumbed limbs of the fatigued mariners, and cheerfulness once more reigned
throughout the whole.

As soon as the storm subsided, captain Nicholson ordered all hands to appear
on the quarter deck, when both seamen and passengers beat, in lowly reverence,
to that all merciful Being, whose assistance is ever at hand, to relieve and
support his unworthy creatures, and offered up the acceptable sacrifice of
grateful hearts, in the most unfeigned thanks for his divine protection during
the storm, without which they must inevitably have perished. This done, they
began to repair their shattered sails and rigging, which had suffered much in
the hurricane. Though they were much rejoiced with their late deliverance,
their satisfaction was considerably damped, when the captain found that they
were within a few leagues of Malta, and less of the coast of Barbary; and, as
the wind still blew fresh from the N. W. it would be exceedingly difficult to
keep off the coast; consequently, they would be in continual danger of the
rovers, until they made the Streights of Gibraltar. They instantly braced up,
and laid the ship as close to the wind as possible, stood away for the South
point of Sicily. They had sailed only three hours in this direction, when the
captain, from the main topmast head, discovered a corsair, at the distance of
about three leagues and a half, bearing down on them. Capt. Nicholson
immediately shifted his course, in hopes of making Puzoli, before the pirate
could reach them; but in this he was unfortunately disappointed; though it is
very probable, he might have succeeded, had his vessel been in as good sailing
order, as she was before the late storm; but it was impracticable in the
present shattered condition to escape -- the pirates gained on them every
moment.

When the captain found all his endeavors to escape fruitless, he told
Mercutio, that their liberty, property, and perhaps lives, depended on their
courage and activity: Therefore, added he, I expect you will lend me all the
assistance in your power. There are three guns on board, which I will load with
grape, and bring them to bear in an oblique direction: I have, sixteen hands
besides myself, and you with your two servants will make twenty; -- we have
small arms plenty, with which we must endeavor to prevent them from boarding
us: -- For my part, I am determined never to surrender while I have a living
man, or a load of ammunition on board. We will, continued he, flee fro^^ them
as fast as we can, as well to gain time to arrange matters, as to amuse and
fatigue them -- and when they get within reach of our guns, suddenly tack and
pour in a volley, which, perhaps, will throw them into disorder, and if their
number and metal does not exceed ours, decide the matter in our favor.

Mercutio assured him, that all the assistance in his power should be devoted
to his service, and they immemediately made the necessary dispositions for the
event. The pirate, in the mean time, was not idle, but bore down upon them with
crowded sails and oars; and in a short time hailed captain Nicholson, and
ordered him, if he wished to experience any mercy, to bring too immediately,
and strike his colors. The captain having all things in readiness, clapped his
helm a-lee, and was about in an instant; then poured in a well-directed fire,
which killed four of the Turks and wounded two Christian slaves, who were
chained to the oar. This sudden, unexpected volley, and the execution performed
by it, disconcerted the pirates considerably, but being thirty in number,
besides eight Christians at the oar, they returned the fire vigorously, and
dropping astern, discharged six double fortified fours into the cabin windows,
by which, the unfortunate Leonora, her son, and Margaretta, were at the same
moment, sent into eternity! -- The galley then came along side, and the
commander levelling his piece at the brave captain Nicholson, shot him through
the heart. Mercutio continued the conflict, with great firmness and courage.
The galley having grappled the ship, the infidels immediately attempted to
board her; but were bravely repulsed -- Mercutio, jumping into the mizen
chains, cut off, with his hanger, the arms of two Turks, who fell overboard and
were drowned. The pirates then made a feint of falling off; but just as our
hero was stepping out of the chains, he received a ball in his right knee,
which laid him prostrate on the quarter deck. The pirates immediately grappled
again, and without much resistance, boarded the ship, as there were only two
men left unwounded. Captain Nicho^son, his two mates, the carpenter, Mercutio's
two servants, and five foremast men were killed; and Mercutio, the boatswain,
cook, cabin-boy, and three sailors wounded. The loss on the part of the Turks,
was twelve killed, exclusive of four slaves, and three wounded.

Mercutio's wound bled amazingly, by which means he became insensible, and
remained in that situation till the pirates, perceiving some signs of life, and
judging by his habit, that he was a person of distinction, had conveyed him on
board the galley, and confined him to a ring-bolt, on his back. 'Twas in this
unhappy situation he became sensible, when, making an effort to rise, he found
himself chained hand and foot! -- But what words can describe the intolerable
anguish of his soul, when he was informed, by one of his fellow-captives, of
the dreadful fate of the beauteous Leonora and her lovely infant! Had he not
been chained fast to the deck, it is more than probable, that, in the midst of
despair, he would have leaped overboard; but finding it impossible to move out
of the spot, he gave himself up to immoderate grief! and formed the desperate
resolution of taking no food, in order, as he expressed it, to end his life and
miseries as quick as possible.

The wound he had received having never been attended, grew very painful; and
being overheated in the action, he had caught a violent cold, which brought on
an intermittent fever, so that at the time the galley arrived at Algiers, he
was actually delirious. The renegado who commanded, was a Spaniard, who judging
Mercutio a person of quality, had him taken to his own house, and procured an
eminent physician, who applied such healing medicines, that in about one month
he was reinstated in his health; but still remained disconsolate for his
beloved Leonora and darling son.

The renegado, perceiving the health of Mercutio restored, asked him several
questions relative to his country and connexions, and whether he had any
expectation of being ransomed. Mercutio answered, that if a letter could be
conveyed safely to London, he was sure of being ransomed. This was granted, and
he dispatched one letter to his father, and another to his friend George Wright.

The renegado demanded three hundred crowns for his ransom; and as he had lost
several of his men in the late engagement, he took our hero and three of his
fellow captives on board his own galley, where they were constrained to row
night and day, chained to the thwart they sat on. They had no occasion to
perform voluntary abstinence* for their food was of the coarsest kind, and the
quantities so small as to be but barely sufficient to support them in a life of
wretched bondage. This cruel slavery bore much heavier on Mercutio than his
companions in distress, having never been accustomed to hardships. His hands
were soon stripped of skin, yet his merciless commanders compelled him to labor,
though the blood ran in streams down the handle of the oar. -- He who 'till
then, had been clothed with the finest production of the loom, had no other
covering than a frock and drawers of the coarsest canvas, without shoes or
stockings. His feet began to swell and grow exceedingly painful. Three months
had elapsed without any news arriving from England or Venice, all hands having
been pressed in the Downs out of the vessel that had sailed to England; and the
other having foundered off Minorca, and all on board perished: However, he
obtained leave to write once more to Venice, and, in a^bout six weeks, received
a letter from his friend George, wherein he assured him he should have the
money in fifteen days without fail.

The money arrived at the appointed time, with three hundred crowns more than
he had requested, to furnish him with clothes and other necessaries; and an
invitation, to come and reside in Venice for some time. Our hero would
willingly have waved going there, well knowing that the very fight of the city
would be a dagger to his soul; yet, the regard he had for his friend, and the
great and many obligations he lay under, silenced every objection that
presented itself, and decided the matter quickly. He paid the renegado the sum
demanded for his own ransom, and two hundred crowns for his three companions in
slavery, who, with himself were immediately liberatted. He gave the three poor
fellows ten crowns each, and told them to make the best of their way home; but
they finding him going to Venice; begged permission to sail on board the same
ship, as they had no chance of getting their passage to England, and added,
that, when he was gone, the Turks might seize and enslave them again. This he
complied with, and they all embarked on board the ship in which George had sent
the money, and arrived at Venice in a short time.

Our hero having taken leave of these poor fellows, who expressed their
gratitude to him in the most fervent manner, went to see his well tried friend,
whom he found in health, but not quite so cheerful as formerly, having just
returned from the funeral of his uncle and aunt, who both expired in one day.
He was received, however, with unaffected kindness, which he experienced for
the space of six weeks, the time he remained in Venice; and, having pretty well
recruited his health and spirits, he resolved to embark for England on board
the first ship he could find bound thither. George endeavored to dissuade him
from his purpose, by representing to him the danger of being captured by the
French privateers; that nation having entered into an alliance with the States
of America: Who had thrown off the Hanoverian yoke, and declared themselves
Independent; and, under the auspices of a gentleman of Virginia, (George
Washington) who had given indubitable proofs of his bravery and skill in
tacties, in former wars between France and England, were bravely struggling
against the despotic arms of Great Britain, in support of the indefeasible
Rights of Man.

Mercutio, however; was not to be diverted from undertaking, his intended
voyage: Disconsolate for the loss of Leonora, and weary of the repeated
vicissitudes of his adverse fate, he resolved to attempt a passage to England
at all events.

George finding it to no purpose to persist, urged the matter no further; but
procured a vessel, and furnished him with a sum of money, more than sufficient
to defray every expense. In a short time he was ready to embark, and having
taken leave of his kind friends, with the most grateful acknowledgment for all
past favors, and promising to remit the money George had so freely advanced for
his ransom, etc. by the first opportunity after his arrival in London, once
more bid adieu to Venice.

Fortune favored them with prosperous gales and pleasant weather; and in a few
days, they were imperceptibly wasted within sight of the Lizard. Mercutio, for
the first time, since his redemption from captivity, became cheerful. He
experienced that kind of satisfaction, which the hopless mariner, who, having
been deprived the fight of land or sunshine for many days, and all the time
threatened by the devouring waves, to be buried in the bowels of the deep, is
suddenly wafted into the desired haven.

They arrived, and moored off Deal without an accident. Mercutio proposed
hiring a post-chaise, and to set out for London the next morning. But alas!
Fortune, that fickle goddess, had raised her foot with a design to give him
another kick. Press-warrants were out for raising ten thousand seamen; in
consequence of which, a lieutenant and forty seamen boarded the ship, about
midnight; and, slipping down between decks, made prize of the whole crew, and
among the rest, Mercutio.

Resistance would have been as vain as it was impracticable, they therefore
made a virtue of necessity, and submitted to be conveyed on board the Otter, (a
tender) where they remained for some days, and then put on board the Isis, of
50 guns, at Spithead. They were welcomed on board with three cheers from the
whole crew. The lieutenant who had pressed them, caused plenty of grog to be
distributed among the new hands: This done, he ordered the boatswain's mate to
bring them aft, where he read over the articles of war; after which, he
entertained them with the following eloquent ha^rangue.

"Ship-mates and brother sailors! -- But I speak chiefly to you that is come
aboard last. Though you are pressed, you need'nt think you're kidnapped: -- No,
damme, boys -- you have liberty to enter your names in the ship's books, and
receive the bounty. -- Now, since you're a board, and must stay whether you
will or not, you may as well consent to enter -- The king must have sailors to
destroy them d -- n'd French b -- gg -- rs that is combined with the rebels do you
see; and if we don't kill 'em, take 'em, sink 'em, make 'em run away, d -- n my
eyes, boys. -- Come, my boys, you that is a mind to enter, come aft, and give
your name to the purser -- he is as honest a fellow as ever the devil got --
he will give you the bounty and plenty of grog, by G -- d, -- Huzza! God save the
king! -- Huzza!"

The major part of the pressed men accepted this polite invitation, while he
continued to display his rhetorical powers: -- "Come, my brave mess-mates, now
is the time to EXTINGUISH yourselves in OFFENSE of your king and country --
There an't a man in England but must turn out now, d -- n me, either by sea or
land; and, for my part, I Would rather be an under-turnkey in hell, than a SOGER, d
-- n me if I had'nt."

This animating oration had a great effect on the tar-pawlings; for as he very
justly observed, there they were, and there they were like to remain,
consequently, might as well comply as not -- so they generally took his advice.
Adverse as Mercutio's fate appeared, he did not absolutely despair of procuring
his liberty, if he could gain access to the commander; but found, on enquiry,
that he was on shore. Finding no officer on board superior to this loquacious
son of Neptune, he resolved to solicit his assistance in remitting a letter to
London. Having executed this resolve, this patriotic officer gave him the
following answer: -- "I Will tell you what, mess-mate, you may write a letter to
Lunnan, but I Am d -- 'd if I think it will be of any service to you. However,
if you think it will do you any good, as you have the look of a clever fellow,
I Will speak to the purser for pen, ink and paper for you; and when I go ashore
to night, I Will clap it in the post office. But God knows when or where we shall
sail -- we may sail tomorrow, and mayhap we may not this month, do you see."
Mercutio thanked him for his civility, and told him he would satisfy him for
his trouble. He went down to the purser, and soon returned with a quire of
paper, an inkstand, and a parcel of pens; and beckoning to him, in a vociferous
tone, said, "Mess-mate, come down into my cabin, and there you may write as
much as you please -- here is pen, ink, and paper enough to set the whole world
in an uproar -- Old Singe-the-Devil, d -- n his old frosty face, charged me
four shillin for this roll of paper: He never thinks he has enough for any
thing -- I Would rather be a purser than the captain -- ^^r he cheats the sailors,
the officers, and the king to boo^!"

Our hero put his hand in his pocket, and pulling out ten dollars, presented
them to the lieutenant, which h^ received with much apparent satisfaction,
saying, at the same time -- "By G -- d, messmate, you're the heartiest fellow
I Have met this war. The king, God bless him, owes me five hundred guineas; but I
think money d -- n'd scarce with him as well as us. The admiral says we shall
all be paid off when we come home; but d -- n me if I believe him, do you see."

Our hero paid very little attention to what he said, but sat down on a chest,
and wrote a very pressing letter to his father, informing him of the desperate
circumstances under which he lay, and earnestly requesting him to employ all
possible means to obtain his release. Having delivered the letter to his friend
the lieutenant, he grew cheerful, and began to cherish the hope of being yet
restored to his friends, without being forced to sea again. But Providence, it
seems, had otherwise decreed. The next morning, very early, orders came on
board, for the Isis, with two frigates, and some transports, to weigh, and sail
the next tide. Their destination was to some part of the Continent; but as the
special orders were sealed, and not to be opened till they had got into a
certain degree of latitude, the particular port was unknown.

The captain and officers who had been on shore, came on board soon after the
sailing orders, and Mercutio made application, by letter (through his friend
the lieutenant) for a discharge -- but without effect: In vain he represented
the sufferings he had endured in Algiers, from whence he had been so lately
redeemed -- he was deaf to his entreaties: All the consolation he received,
was, that if he behaved well, he might make his fortune before the war was over.

Finding all his efforts defeated, he consigned himself to his fate. His
countenance became gloomy and thoughtful; and had he remained long in that
state, it is more than probable, he would have degenerated into a most unsocial
being -- so, true it is, that the sweetest temper may be soured by frequent
repulses and disappointments.

The necessary preparations being made, the anchor was weighed; the sails
extended to the expanding gale; and with drums beating, trumpets sounding,
colors flying, and every other demonstration of naval joy, they took their
departure.

Satisfaction appeared conspicuous on every countenance on board, except that
of Mercutio's, which was impressed with marks of the deepest melancholy. His
uneasiness was taken notice of by several of the officers as well as the
seame^, particularly by the first lieu^^^ant, who brought on board the orders
for sailing; but had never taken notice of Mercutio till they had been a full
week at sea. This gentleman observing him in a pensive attitude one day, at the
same time remarking, that he had not the least appearance of a seaman; enquired
of the second lieutenant who he was, and from whence he came.

Being informed of this, and that he had been lately released from the
Algerines, he was impatient to have some discourse with a person of so singular
a description. He wrote a billet, and sent it by the cabin-boy, requesting a
short interview. Our hero, after perusing the billet, ordered the boy to
conduct him to the person who had sent him: He followed, neither knowing nor
caring who it was that desired the interview. On entering the cabin he saluted
the lieutenant with a very low bow, who instantly arose, and taking our hero by
the hand, very politely returned the salute. But what words can paint the
amazement and joy of Mercutio, when in the features of the lieutenant he
recognized those of his beloved friend Charles, Lucinda's brother! Charles
instantly recollected his features -- and rushing into each others arms, they
embraced with mutual transport, without uttering a syllable: The sudden shock
of joy having shackled their organs of speech for several minutes.

Mercutio first recovering his speech said, My dear Charles, my tongue would
but discover its impotence in attempting to describe the pleasing sensations
which pervade my soul, on this occasion -- to meet a friend so much esteemed,
after so long and painful a separaration, is a happiness so unexpected, that my
weak frame, fatigued and emaciated, with trouble, disappointment, and
melancholy, is almost unable to sustain the sudden shock, which, like the swift
winged, livid lightning, has penetrated the very center of my soul -- stunned
my whole fabric -- and unhinged all my senses. But tell me, what good genii
sent you here, to administer the balm of consolation to my distracted soul? My
beloved, respected friend, replied Charles, the superior pleasure which this
happy interview affords me, would have been incapable of augmentation, had it
not been damped by your hint of "trouble, disappointment, and melancholy,"
which your countenance too clearly demonstrates to have been your companions.
What dreadful reverse of fortune can have destroyed the peace of my friend? If
there is any thing within the compass of my power that will, in the smallest
degree, contribute to your ease or satisfaction, only-mention it: Command my
purse -- enjoin me to any thing I am capable of, and you shall see with what
willingness I will exert all my powers to restore your peace of mind.

Mercutio, after making him such an answer as his unbounded, disinterested
offers merited, related the whole of his adventures, from the time they parted
last, in London, till they met on board the Isis: concealing, however, his
amor with Leonora.

Charles generously sympathized with him in all his misfortunes, promised to
render him all the service in his power, and to represent his case to the
captain, who, notwithstanding his profession, was a gentleman of the nicest
feelings, and most distinguished merit; and, added he, if the fleet is detained
on the American coast, I think I have influence enough with him to procure your
dischage, and you can sail from New York to England at any time, as packets are
constantly going and coming. Mercutio made him a genteel acknowledgment for his
intended favors; but declared, that since fortune had brought them together
once more, he was determined to accompany him through the whole course of the
expedition.

Charles expressed the highest satisfaction at this declaration, and protested
that no event could have happened, that could give him equal pleasure. --
Mercutio then desired to be informed of his friend's reason for making choice
of a seafaring life, together with a general narrative of his transactions
during their long separation. I shall with pleasure gratify your curiosity in
that point, replied Charles, but must beg leave to wave it for the present, and
filling a glass of wine, presented it to Mercutio, saying, Come, my friend, you
must endeavor to consign the remembrance of your late misfortunes over to
eternal oblivion -- you are now among as lively a set of fellows as the world
can produce: -- They hope every thing -- fear nothing -- and drink punch, grog
and phlip, like so many fishes.

Having taken a cheerful glass, they went upon d^^k, when Charles, taking him
by the hand, presented him to the captain as his particular friend; and, in a
few words, informed him of the most interesting parts of his adventures. The
captain congratulated our hero on his release from the infidels, and at the
same time lamented the necessity of pressing men indiscriminately: He
concluded, with promising him a total exemption from all manner of duty while
he continued on board; together with permission to return to England by the
first opportunity, and ample protection from all press-gangs during the war.

From that time Charles and Mercutio eat, drank, and slept together; the
officers vied with each other in a genteel treatment to him, and the captain
became his firm friend. These fortunate circumstances produced the most
agreeable change in his countenance and conversation. One fine evening, when
the surface of the immense ocean, calm and serene, reflected the glittering
rays of that glorious luminary, the sun, with redoubled splendour, Mercutio,
with his friend was surveying and admiring the liquid green which every where
surrounded them, boundless! reiterated his request. "Mercutio," said Charles,
"I should ill deserve the tender, the honorable appellation of friend, if I was
capable of refusing so trifling a gratification; and though you will reap no
pleasure in the information, you will at least confess you are not the only
person exposed to the frowns of fortune; for since you set out^on your travels,
I have experienced many hard strokes myself.

"Some time after your departure, Augustus Davenport, son of Sir Edward
Davenport, of Oxfordshire, having seen my sister Charlotte, at my uncle's seat,
which lies contiguous to Sir Edward's, where she was on a visit, came to
London, and resided with his brother in-law, Sir Benjamin Godfrey. As his
journey to the metropolis, was undertaken with a view of setting on foot an
hymeneal treaty between him and my sister, he engaged Sir Benjamin, (knowing
the great friendship existing between him and my father) to introduce him, and
assist in the course of the negotiation with his recommendation and advice. --
He was shortly permitted to pay his addresses to Charlotte -- When matters were
nearly ripe, Augustus took leave for some time. -- He returned, accompanied by
his father and -- a sister -- That sister! -- Oh Mercutio! do not suppose
yourself unfortunate! -- But I Will proceed: The marriage contract being
sanctioned with the approbation of all parties, they were married, to the great
satisfaction of both families.

"After staying six weeks in town, Sir Edward proposed returning to his country
seat; and, as Augustus after tarrying a while at his father's, intended to take
his wife to a seat which Sir Edward had lately purchased and promised to give
him whenever he should enter the bands of wedlock, the old knight requested, or
rather insisted, that I should accompany them thither. I acquiesced, being
prompted by more powerful motives than those produced by his invitation.

"We sat out, all on horseback, and had a very agreeable ride to Sir Edward's,
who treated us nobly for the space of one month, at the end of which, Augustus
prepared to go to his own seat. I, as well as his sister, accompanied them.
But, now, Mercutio, your repeated misfortunes, though great, will quickly
disappear, when you hear the sequel -- I might almost say with the Ghost of
Hamlet: I can a tale unfold, whose lightest word will ^arrow up thy foul!
Freeze thy young blood! Make thy knotty and combined l^cks to part, and each
particular hair to stand a^ end, like quills upon the fretful porcupine!

"This daughter of Sir Edward was, I believe, a model of beauty and apparent
innocence. She possessed every accomplishment necessary to render a woman
lovely, and the undivided possession of her, a peculiar blessing. I have
frequently when in her company, contemplated on her perfections with amazement:
And, I verily believe, if any man had told me then, of the fatal change which
has since taken place in her, I should have been ready to run him through. This
enchanting paragon, without intention, or even suspicion, established so
absolute a dominion over my soul, that the very thought of parting with her,
was as daggers to my heart! -- I addressed her on the subject -- succeeded to
my wish -- and, we were married. But ah! what bitter reflections does the
remembrance of that cursed union awaken in my soul! One year I lived with her
in so great a degree of felicity, that I would not have exchanged my situation
for all the riches of the East.

"She wished to visit her friends at Oxfordshire -- I consented; for what could
I refuse to her whose breast was the repository of my soul? -- We found Sir
Edward in good health; and after staying a few days, proceeded to the seat of
Augustus, where we arrived just as Charlotte had made her first appearance at
church after the birth of a beautiful boy.

"While we remained there, all the neighboring gentry for several miles round,
came to congratulate the young couple on the birth of an heir. Among those who
appeared the most assiduous, was Charles Howard, son to a noble Earl, who I
afterward found, had been acquainted with Louisa Davenport, from her infancy,
but had not seen her during the last five years. This person, though a villain
of the first magnitude, had nevertheless, by long practice in the insidious
arts of seduction, become an adept in dissimulation, so that he had actually
secured the good opinion of every person of condition in and about Oxfordshire
-- consequently, was received into all parties of pleasure with a hearty
welcome; and was never parted with but with regret. He was remarkably assiduous
in congratulating myself and wife on our late union, and at length received an
invitation to pay us a visit in London.

"One evening, as I was sitting with my wife, in one of the side-boxes of
Drury Lane theater, Howard entered the same box, and seated himself over
against us; my wife knew him instantly, and welcomed him to London. He seemed
surprised at this meeting -- I immediately recollected his features, and rose
to salute him -- he returned the salute in a very polite manner, and seating
himself on our side, informed us in a whisper, that he had just arrived in
town. My wife and he began a whispering dialogue; the subject of which was on
her part, an enquiry about the people in Oxfordshire.

"The play being ended, he very politely took leave, having previously received
an invitation to pay us a visit the first opportunity, which he promised to
observe.

"Some short time after, he paid the visit; but as I happened to be abroad, I
was deprived of the opportunity of seeing him; which, I suppose, was no
disappointment: For I have every reason to think my wife entertained him to his
satisfaction*

"It is probable I never should have heard of this visit, had it not been for
the following accident. Having received a letter from a gentleman of my
acquaintance, in South-Audley street, which required an immediate answer, I
stepped into a coffee-house in St. Jame's-street to write one, and just as I
had it seale^, I observed a porter who had frequently carried letters for me,
pass the window; when I ordered the waiter to call him in. When he came, I told
him my business, which he said happened very luckily, as he then had a letter
for my lady, and as he must necessarily pass through South-Audley-street on his
way to my house, could very handily perform both errands at once.

"I was instantly tempted, by some unaccountable impulse, to open the letter
which he had told me was for my wife, and requested him to let me see the
superscription. He produced it; and when I found it was a man's hand writing, I
felt so strong an inclination to peruse the contents, that I communicated my
wish to the porter, -- gave him a glass of wine, and promised him a guinea.
This had the desired effect -- he laid the letter on the table, and told me he
would call in a quarter of an hour.

"I opened it carefully, and to my inexpressible horror and amazement, read as
follows: CHARMING LOUISA,
I received, and read with infinite pleasure, your kind invitation, and shall
not fail to attend at the stated period. We will then repeat those sweet
embraces which are to be experienced in your dear arms only. I have formed a
plan, which appears to me more secure, as well as more convenient than the one
we at first adopted; which is to carry on our intrigue at the house of a friend
of mine, in whom I can confide, where we may meet as often as eager desire can
prompt, and enjoy the bliss of each other's company, without the least danger
of a discovery. Send an answer by the bearer, and rest assured of the eternal
love and attachment of

C. H.




"I was so enraged at this indignity, that if either of the objects of my
revenge had been present, I should have sacrificed them to my injured honor. I
suppressed my rage, however, for that time, sealed the infernal epistle,
resolving to have ample vengeance. The porter returning, I gave him the guinea,
and promised him five more, if he would let me see the answer, to which he
readily agreed, and told me he would meet me at the Horse-Guards exactly at
three o'clock. He departed and I knew not how to dispose of myself until his
return; for this discovery had raised my resentment to such a pitch, that I was
unfit for company or conversation. A hundred times I reproached myself for
breaking open the accursed note; then a sense of the injury I had suffered,
awakened all my indignation, and I was several times going home in order to
pour my vengeance on the head of my perfidious wife. Tortured with such
reflections, I wandered through the Park -- took a few turns across the parade
till the clock struck three. The porter appeared in two minutes after.

"I retired into the passage leading to the treasury: He followed and delivered
his charge to me -- then retiring a few paces, lest me to discover the fullest
proof of my wise's perfidy. The occasion and attention with which I perused it,
made so deep an impression on my mind, that I think I can repeat it verbatim --
'Twas thus: MY DEAR CHARLES,
It affords me the highest satisfaction, to find that your love and attachment
remain undiminished, and at the same time, must assure you, that mine are no
less so -- Your hint of a new plan for the more safe and convenient prosecution
of our amor, excites my curios^ty to be acquainted with the particulars. I am
willing to assent to any proposal, that will ensure us that uninterrupted,
mutual bliss, which only such lovers as ourselves know how to enjoy. Don't fail
to attend according to your promise; for rest assured, I shall impatiently
expect the happy moment. May fortune prove propitious to our wishes.

Adieu. LOUISA.




"Conceive, Mercutio, if you can, the situation of my mind at that instant. I
never experienced such a struggle between love and revenge before. I retired to
a tavern, where I sealed the letter, and returned it to the porter. After
enjoing him to the most profound secrecy, I paid him the promised reward, and
he departed.

"I should certainly have wreaked ray vengeance on the faithless wretch, but
for the desire of punishing her co-partner in guilt, with my own hand. My mind
was so violently agitated for some hours, that I found it impossible to form
any resolution. After taking a serious retrospect of the matter, I determined
to go home -- behave as usual, if possible -- mark critically every
circumstance, and from the result form my determination.

"Having settled this in my mind, I walked about till dusk, by which time I had
pretty well composed myself, and then returned to my faithless wise; who, Judas
like, received me with a kiss. I was obliged to feign a slight indisposition,
in order to avoid suspicion, as well as to procure an opportunity to stifle my
indignation in silence.

"The next day I staid at home till after five in the evening, and perceived as
the evening approached, she grew very uneasy -- frequently asking me if I was
indisposed. She also put me in mind of an assignation I had made, to meet some
friends at White's that evening, and which I had absolutely forgot. When she
mentioned this, I told her I would go. Accordingly I departed, apparently in a
hurry. I walked down the street precipitately, and slipped into a tavern,
posted myself at a window which commanded a full view of my house; so that
nobody could have entered unperceived by me.

"I had not remained long, before I observed a man in a scarlet cloak, knock at
my door: He was admitted instantly; and though I could not be certain whether
it was the mark I was aiming at or not, it being then dusk; yet determined I
was to know who he was, and his business there.

"Just as I got to my own door, I met one of my servants coming out: I asked
him if any company had come that evening. He seemed surprised, but replied, he
knew of none -- adding, that Jenny (the chambermaid) had let somebody in a few
minutes ago, and on his asking her who it was, said it was her master. This was
enough: I made no delay, but going in, shut the street door, locked it, and
putting the key in my pocket, proceeded cautiously up stairs.

"I listened a moment at the door, and heard enough to convince me of my
dishonor. In a degree of rage bordering on madness, I burst open the door! They
were on the bed: -- I drew instantly, and calling him base villain -- cursed
traitor, with many other epithets of the same kind, ordered him to rise and
defend himself; as I was determined to lose my life or punish his perfidy with
death. He rose with apparent reluctance, and drew his sword, which lay on the
table, and put himself in a posture of defense. After a few passes, I left him
for dead on the floor -- having run him quite through the body. Turning to my
faithless wife, Madam, said I, though you deserve a similar fate, yet I forbear
the sacrifice: Perhaps you can find some sub^erfuge to vindicate your conduct
to the world; but conscience will not be imposed on. I therefore leave you to
the stings of that monitor.

"Before I left the house, I ordered a servant to go for a surgeon, that if the
wretch had any remains of life, he might be saved if possible. Whether he lived
or died I know not. I went immediately to my father's, and in as few words as
the circumstances would admit, informed him of the whole transaction. He was
much alarmed, told me I had acted extremely wrong in committing such a rash and
desperate act: However, as the thing was done, and as it was absolutely
necessary for me to disappear speedily, for some time at least, he immediately
wrote a letter to the admiral, with whom he was intimately acquainted,
requesting him to appoint me to some post on board one of his majesty's ships;
at the same time giving him some hint of the cause of his making the request.
He then gave me one thousand guineas, and bank notes to four times that amount;
to which he subjoined his blessing, with tears, as did also my honored mother:
Both of them lamenting with me the fatal cause of the disagreeable separation.

"I instantly took horse for Portsmouth, attended by a servant who is now on
board. The admiral received me in a very polite and friendly manner; and when
he had read the letter, told me, he was very sorry it was not in his power to
supply me with any thing higher than a first lieutenancy, of a fifty gun ship,
having nothing better in his gift; but assured me of the first vacancy. He then
presented me with the commission immediately; and now, said he, I will give you
the orders for sailing, as that fleet must sail with the first fair wind. The
secretary copied the orders, and the admiral, after sealing, delivered them to
me, together with a letter from the captain.

"The wind being fair when I came on board, the captain, on reading the
admiral's letter, hoisted the signal for sailing. What has taken place since,
you know already. And now, you must confess, that I have had no small share of
misfortune -- nevertheless, I endeavor to eradicate the impressions it has
made in my mind; it is true, the reflection gave me much uneasiness for two or
three days, but I find myself quite easy and cheerful now."

Our hero readily perceived, that the misfortunes which he had experienced,
were by no means equal to those of his friend. He highly commended Charles's
resolution of leaving his wife to the severe lashes of her own conscience,
which, he observed, would probably be productive of better effects, than any
corporal punishment that could have been desired.

Nothing remarkable happened in the course of the voyage. They arrived at
Quebec in May 17. After landing their troops, marines, provisions, etc. Sir Guy
Carlton gave orders for the ships to be cleared, and repaired, if necessary,
and to sail into a certain degree, and their cruize in order to intercept the
French fleet. They were ready to sail in sixteen days. Their force consisted of
two fifty gun ships, and three frigates, all well manned and fit for either
offense or defense.

The captain of the Manheim, of fifty guns, dying at Quebec, Charles was
appointed to the command; in consequence, our hero lest the Isis, and
accompanied his friend.

The period was approaching, in which our two friends were to be once more
separated: -- The thick and gloomy clouds of adversity were already collected,
suspended over, and ready to burst on the British nation. Fortune had lavished
her favors profusely on the king of England; but the measure of his iniquity,
being full to the brim, the goddess took offense at the arbitrary proceedings
of the imperious monarch, in conjunction with Bute, North, Sandwich, and
several others of the same stamp, and was determined to humble their arrogance,
by taking into her protection the oppressed, much injured Americans, whose
destruction was meditated, and every measure that appeared likely to effect it,
adopted in London, for no other reason than that they would not tamely submit
to be plundered of the fruits of their virtuous labor.

This favorable turn of affairs reanimated the fainting Americans, who labored
under every disadvantage but want of bread, courage, and a good General.

In England it had a different effect. The King and his sycophantic train were
utterly confounded; for they had never dreamt of resistance in America. They
expected implicit obedience to their commands and demands, however tyrannical
or unjust. But the sequel demonstrated their mistake; and had so remarkable an
effect on George, that he became insane, and it is doubtful whether he is yet
rational or not.

This fleet had not cruized long before they discovered five French and two
Spanish ships of war, bearing down with crowded canvas: The two latter were in
the service of France. A council of war was immediately called on board the
Isis, wherein it was determined to attack the French (they were all under
French colors) as soon as ever they came within gunshot. Accordingly, the
necessary dispositions being made, the two large ships bore up in front, in
order to sustain the first shock of the enemy's fire. The frigates at the same
time dropped astern, with orders to act as opportunity or necessity might
require. Every man stood at his station, with his eye fixed attentively on the
approaching enemy -- not a whisper could be heard on board. The fleets advanced
to the conflict, with silent rapid motion. What an awful situation! where
thousands of human beings stand on the very verge of eternity! stand ready to
discharge the dreadful messengers of death among their fellow creatures!
Surrounded by the devouring ocean: Dreadful abyss! shocking idea!

The French commander called to the captain of the Isis to strike, otherwise to
expect no quarter. He answered, that he wished for no quarter, and that if he
intended to capture the English fleet, he must kill him first, for he was
determined never to surrender while he had a living man on board. He had no
sooner pronounced these words, than he gave orders to pour in a broadside,
which was performed with alacrity, and returned no less vigorously. The fight
soon became general. Chain, grape and langridge, flew like hail. Masts, yards,
fails and shattered rigging, covered the foaming surface of the ocean, which,
from the most beauteous green, was converted to a crimson hue.

The British tars, it must be acknowledged, fought with unparelleled bravery.
Pity it had not been in a better cause. One of the English frigates taking
a^vantage of the smoke to leeward, ran under the stern of a French ship of
ninety guns, poured in a heavy broadside, which raked her fore and aft, and set
her on fire, which was never extinguished till she was burnt down to the water.
The frigate wore as she discharged the broadside, and recovered her position
without injury or difficulty.

Just at that instant, a two and forty pounder penetrated the Blenheim, between
wind and water, and was on the point of sinking before the leak was discovered
-- all hands were employed in repelling the common enemy, and therefore paid no
attention to any thing else. At the same instant, the brave commander of the
Isis was deprived of his head and right hand by a chain-shot. Before there
could be any stop put to the leak, the Blenheim sunk, having three hundred and
fifty met on board. Mercutio and Charles were on the quarter deck when it went
down: The principle of self-preservation prompted the former to seize a large
hencoop, which had worked loose, by some means, so that when the ship sunk, it
bore him up.

After having been tossed about for some time, in the midst of this dire
conflict, he, with nine of his shipmates, was taken into a boat belonging to
one of the Spanish ships, immediately conveyed on board and hand-cussed two and
two.

They had scarcely got on board, when one of the French ships blew up -- and
while a second shared a similar fate with the Blenheim, the fiercest flames
devoured the sails, rigging, and hull of a third. The explosion was dreadful;
and a more horrid scene was never described. Legs, arms, heads, whole bodies,
blood and brains, were hurled in the air, in awful confusion. The distracted
French sailors were seen jumping into the sea, to escape the more excruciating
torments of being consumed by fire. The flames having communicated to another
of the French ships, which increased the horror of the scene. The two surviving
ships took to precipitate flight. The English made a feint of pursuit, but
being in a shattered condition, gave a great shout, accompanied with three
times three cheers, hove about and let them go. On their return, they took up
several of the miserable wretches that had escaped the flames, and some few who
had escaped from sinking with the Blenheim.

The French commander steered away for Breast, and pressed the Spaniard to
accompany him; but he absolutely refused -- so bore away for Bilboa, a rich
seaport in Spain. On their arrival, Mercutio, with his fellow prisoners, were
confined in a noisome dungeon, without light or fresh air; the damp ground for
their common bed, and a very scanty allowance of course bread and water, for
their subsistence. In this deplorable situation, they remained for the space of
three months, in which time six of the unhappy captives expired; for the horrid
stench of their own ordure, which was never removed during their confinement,
added to their want of food and fresh air, introduced a malignant disease among
them, under which, those attacked by it, lingered in extreme torture, about
three days, and then expired. The wretched survivors, envied their departing
fellow sufferers, and earnestly invoked the powers of heaven to hasten their
dissolution -- their bodies were so emaciated by the combined force of grief,
want and disease, that they resembled skeletons more than living men. Mercutio,
however, in spite of all these, su^^ered nothing more than want of liberty and
food; for his appetite still remained, and although reduced almost to nothing,
was still healthy.

It happened, fortunately for our hero, that a Spanish nobleman having heard of
the prisoners, made application to the chief magistrate for leave to send them
to his villa, in order to assist at digging a canal, which was already begun,
through an extensive park, where a number of laborers where then at work.

The nobleman obtained his request, on certain conditions, and dispatched a
domestic with the magistrate's order to release them. When they were brought
out, and their chains taken off, they concluded, they were going to be put to
death. True it is, death never received a more hearty welcome, than these men
would have given him. However, this was not the case, they were conducted
immediately to the villa, whither the nobleman had already gone. When he was
apprized of their arrival, he ordered them to be brought before him.

He was astonished at their appearance, and expressed much indignation at the
treatment they had received, generously commiserated their misfortunes, and
immediately commanded plenty of good food to be given them, after forcing them
to drink a large glass of wine, each in his presence. His orders were
punctually obeyed, and two of the poor creatures instantly fell victims to the
gratification of their raging appetites: They expired in strong convulsions,
while Mercutio and the other wretched survivor, remained insensible for several
hours. The nobleman, however, whose name was Don Diego de Guzman, sent for a
physician, who, in a few days, by the application of salutary medicine, and
nourishing, though simple food, restored them to perfect health. After being
shaved, washed, and putting on clean linen, they began to wear the aspects of
men again; but were still weak.

They were sent in company with several other laborers to digging the canal;
here, though they eat their food by the sweat of their brow, yet, having plenty
that was good, with a quart of wine each man per day, they recovered strength
surprizingly, and began to experience much satisfaction. Mercutio, had he not
been greatly affected with the idea of the death of Charles, would probably
have been tolerably happy; for having experienced so many turns of fortune, he
had become in some measure, habituated to crosses and disappointment, and
therefore, though his situation, at that time, was by no means a desirable one;
yet it effectually secured him from the attacks of envy, and from falling into
those excesses to which young men are exposed; the effects of which, are
galling remorse, tormenting reflections, and very frequently, infamy. He
therefore, in gratitude, returned thanks to the Supreme Disposer of every
event, for the measure of contentment he still possessed, in the enjoyment of
sound and uninterrupted health and increasing vigor.

Don Diego generally devoted seven or eight hours of each day in viewing the
work and in giving directions: Though a native of old Spain, and immensely
rich, yet he was neither indolent nor imperious; but completely affable and
generous; in a word, sympathy and benevolence characterized that noble
Spaniard. He had studied the features, air, and behavior of Mercutio for some
time, with the most acute attention, and rightly judging he was of no vulgar
extraction, resolved to question him on the subject. Accordingly, one day he
ordered Mercutio to follow him, with his mattock, as if to do something that
had been neglected. Having taking him out of the fight of his fellow laborers,
he made him a number of questions; such as, where he was born? how he came to
be captured? etc. The answer he received proved so satisfactory to the Don,
that he began to entertain a very high opinion of our hero's merit, and, after
a pause of some minutes, he asked him, if his liberty could be procured,
whether he would be willing to stay and settle in Spain? Mercutio did not
refuse; his answer however, was evasive. He well knew that, being at liberty, a
desire of returning to his native country would inevitably predominate. He
therefore framed his answer accordingly, and, from the succeeding
circumstances, we may justly infer that the old Don took for granted that he
intended to stay.

Don Diego told him to go to his work, and left him. After the labors of the
day were ended, a female domestic came to Mercutio and desired him to follow
her. He complied, and she conducted him into an apartment he had never seen
before; and, after desiring him to sit, retired. He had not been long, there
before Don Diego made his appearance, and, preventing our hero from rising, sat
down by him.

Mercutio, said he, ever since I first beheld you, I have entertained a
prepossession in your favor: I find that prepossession has not been unjustly
founded. Your behavior in the inferior station to which you have unfortunately
been reduced, with the candid account you have given me of your misfortunes,
confirms me in the good opinion I had conceived of you, and all these
circumstances have concurred to determine me to set you at liberty. To convince
you of the sincerity of my professions, (here he rang a bell and a servant
entered bearing a bundle, which he delivered to his master and departed) take
this, said he, and with it your liberty, presenting the bundle, which contained
a rich Spanish habit, embroidered; and though I proposed in our conversation to
day, your staying in Spain, I did not intend to make that the condition of your
liberty; as that would be only enlarging the place of your confinement. No, I
have procured your liberty, and intend you shall enjoy it in its most extensive
latitude. You are at liberty to go when and where you please. If you choose to
remain some time in Spain, my house and my purse are at your service.

Such a superior display of generosity in an utter stranger, almost petrified
our hero with astonishment: He remained silent for some time. At length he
exclaimed, thanks to Heaven! Thanks to the generous, the benevolent Guzman! May
that power who inspired you with these exalted sentiments, shower down his
choicest blessings on you, and your posterity. May his mercy be liberally
extended to you and them, as you have extended yours to me, exceeding my most
sanguine wishes! Command my life! It Is at your service -- there is no
injunction, consistent with religion and honor, you are capable of laying on
me, that I can, or will, refuse to my generous deliverer -- here he was
interrupted by the Don. Mercutio, said he, I am already more than recompensed
in the real pleasure I derived from a consciousness of having, in this
instance, performed my duty. It argues a sordid, contracted mind, such as I
hope the natives of Spain are strangers to* to confer a favor in hopes of
retaliation: So I desire whatever thanks the effusions of your gratitude may
inspire, may be directed to that Fountain of benevolence, who has commanded us
to love one another, and who graciously enforced the precept by his own
glorious example. -- You will sup with me to night, and if you would oblige me,
divest yourself of all restraint; treating me in all respects as if we were
sons of the same father. Tomorrow I will give you a more convincing proof of
my esteem: Which is greater, perhaps, than you expect. Thus this disinterested
Spaniard suppressed the ardent acknowledgments which our hero was about to
make, and which all mankind would allow him as justly his due: Desiring nothing
but an approving conscience, and wishing to ascribe all the merit of the action
to the Author of all good. -- He then introduced our hero to Donna Belvidera,
his wife, a person of consummate beauty and good sense, by whom he was treated
with all imaginable respect. The Don had two daughters, who were accounted
beauties, but they never appeared before Mercutio unveiled. After one month's
residence there, no opportunity offering of procuring a passage to England, he
resolved to take the advantage of the Don's proffer, and, having an inclination
to go to Barcelona the capital of Catalonia, noted for its trade, riches and
beauty, informed him of his intention. He instantly acquiesced, and, taking him
into his closet, unlocked his bureau and taking out a a purse containing 200
johannes, presented them to him, saying, I insist on your acceptance of this
trifle, as a farther token of my esteem for you: It may perhaps be serviceable
to you in your tour, in which I heartily with you genuine satisfaction:
Barcelona is a beautiful city, and one of the richest in the Spanish dominions.
I shall expect to hear from you in the course of two months, for you may rest
assured I am much interested in your welfare; and shall take a pleasure in
hearing of your health and prosperity.

Our hero was about to make a proper acknowledgment for this and every other
favor he had received at his hands, but was prevented by the Don's begging to
be excused for that time, as he was obliged to meet some gentlemen on an
important occasion. This put an end to to the conference, and Mercutio began to
prepare for his intended journey. Having procured a good horse, and being
properly equipped, he took leave of the old Don and his lady, who did not part
without regret, and set forward attended by a hired servant, mounted on a mule,
a beast more frequently made use of there than a horse.

He made no delay, but kept steadily forward until he arrived at Barcelona,
where he lodged some days at an inn, until he could procure accommodation in a
private house, which best suited his disposition. He went one day into a
jeweller's shop, to look at some trinkets, as well as to enquire for a
convenient lodging; and after some discourse with the jeweller, who was a very
jocular person, and spoke tolerable English, received an invitation to dine. He
accepted the invitation, and was conducted to an elegant back apartment, where
his wife and four fine children were sitting. When the lady was informed that
our hero was from London, she rose and gave him a very cordial reception, as
she was a native of that city herself. Their conversation became general till
dinner was served up. They informed Mercutio, that they were married in London,
and had lived and carried on business near three years; but the father of the
jeweller dying, he was obliged to return to Barcelona, to settle his affairs
and take possession of the estate. The jeweller further informed him, that he
resided four years in London prior to his marriage, in which time he had
embraced the Protestant faith, and added, that he was determined to return to
that city, as soon as the war with America was at an end; as he found it very
difficult to disguise his religious sentiments, though he used the utmost
precaution for that purpose -- which line of conduct he conjured our hero to
pursue as he valued his life.

He spent the evening with his new acquired friends, much to his satisfaction;
and as they had a couple of rooms unoccupied, Mercutio hired them for himself
and servant. He took leave late in the evening, and the next morning,
discharged his reckoning at the inn, and after providing for the accommodation
of his cattle, removed to his new lodging.

Here he began again to taste the sweets of society; his host and hostess being
perfectly frank, social and generous, which rendered his situation very
comfortable -- his kind country-woman proposed a separate table for him; but he
requested as a favor, to be permitted to eat and drink with her and her
husband. This was agreed on, and they enjoyed much satisfaction in the society
of each other. During his residence at this place, he visited every place of
polite entertainment and resort in that beautiful and opulent city, by which
means he contracted an acquaintance with several young Spaniards of
distinction; some of whom professed a very great friendship for him; but among
all those, none had so great a share of the esteem of our hero, as Don Alonzo,
a young Castilian nobleman, who inherited the most happy disposition: To a very
regular set of features, and genteel shape, he added an agreeable and graceful
deportment -- his judgment was found, and his conversation animating, modest
and pleasing. He had just arrived at Barcelona, after a residence of two whole
years in the capital of France, that mart of vivacity and politeness, so that
he retained none of that imperious stiffness of a Spaniard -- neither had he
acquired the extreme volatility which characterizes the French; but that happy
medium, which rendered his company very desirable.

Alonzo professed every sentiment of respect for our hero, who fell nothing
short, so that in a little time a reciprocal attachment took place between
them, which rendered their walks, recreations, and interests of every kind
inseparable.

Alonzo had a very extensive acquaintance, to whom at different times, he
introduced Mercutio as a respected friend; by which means, he became, as it
were, naturalized; -- and as he spoke the Spanish language fluently, his
company was courted by all the most noble Spaniards in Barcelona.

Our hero with his friend Alonzo, and several other persons of distinction,
made an appointment to divert themselves in chasing the wild-boar, a kind of
exercise common in that country. The company met according to appointment, and
set forward in high spirits to the chase. The dogs beat the low grounds for
some time, and at length roused an amazing large boar.

The foaming beast took to an adjacent mountain, and ascended it swiftly. They
pursued him vigorously over the same; but on descending the other side, which
was very steep and craggy, Mercutio's horse was stung so severely by a
tarantula, that he bounded suddenly over a sharp ridge of a rock, by which he
dismounted his rider, though an excellent horseman. This unlucky accident put
an end to the sport, and threw the rest of the company in the utmost
consternation. Every one dismounted instantly, and ran to his assistance. On
examining, they found his right arm broke, and his shoulder dislocated. Alonzo
mounted his horse and ran, or rather flew to a small village, which lay
contiguous to the foot of the mountain, for a surgeon, who dwelt there, and
begging his attendance immediately, went out and procured a horse for him, in
order to accelerate his speed, which he had brought to the door just as the
surgeon had his dressings and implements ready -- They soon arrived at the spot
where he was lying in extreme pain. Alonzo immediately gave him a large glass
of cordial, which greatly revived his spirits. The surgeon then got him removed
to a convenient place, and ordered a palanquin to be sent for immediately, to
convey him to the nearest house, where accommodation could be procured, after
the opperation of setting was performed. Mercutio's servant was dispatched on
this business instantly, as there was not one to be had nearer than Barcelona,
which was full seven English miles.

The surgeon, who was eminent in his profession, having examined, set, and
bound up his arm and shoulder in an exceeding tender manner, told him he need
not be under any apprehension, as he would pledge his life for the performance
of the cure in the space of four weeks, with God's assistance, if he followed
his directions. The young gentleman, said he, turning to the company, must be
carefully removed to some house as near as possible. A young Spaniard, one of
the company, whose father's seat lay but a small distance from the mountain,
proposed his being removed thither, where, he observed, he should be carefully
attended, until his cure should be effected. Mercutio, who by this time, was
considerably relieved from his pain, returned him thanks for his kindness; but
asked the surgeon, if he might not be removed to Barcelona, without danger, and
being answered in the negative, gratefully accepted the offer.

The servant having exerted all his speed, soon returned, followed by a couple
of brawny fellows, bearing a palanquin, in which Mercutio was immediately
placed, in an easy position, and conveyed to the gentleman's house. The son
having rode on before to inform his father, whose name was Don Ferdinando de
Castigni, of the accident.

The old gentleman met the rest of the company at the gate, gave them a cordial
welcome, said he was sorry for the unfortunate interruption in their amusement,
and that nothing should be deficient on his part to render the time of the
young gentleman's stay in his house, as easy and agreeable as possible.

Mercutio was taken out of the palanquin and put to bed, and the surgeon having
desired him to be composed, till the morning, took his leave, as did also the
rest of the company, except Alonzo, who did not leave the house that night.

Our hero was blessed with a good night's rest: His friend Alonzo had been
twice at his bedside in the morning before he awoke -- the third time finding
him awake, eagerly enquired how he had rested. He answered, that he had never
rested better in his life; adding that he had not felt the least pain, since he
had laid down.

The surgeon appearing soon after, dressed his shoulder, but did not open the
bandage of his arm, saying he would let it remain till the evening of the
ensuing day; and assured him, if he kept himself still, he was not afraid but
he should be ab^e to perfect the cure in fifteen days.

Alonzo sat with him the greatest part of that day: In the afternoon he took
leave, with a promise to see him early next morning. Mercutio parted with him
reluctantly, as he was not intimately acquainted with young de Castigni.
However, he did not want for company in Alonzo's absence; for the old Don and
his son, sat with him, until they conceived it time for him to repose.

Not a day passed that he had not two or three of his friends to visit him. In
short he was as well attended, during the three weeks that he was under the
surgeon's hands, as he could possibly have been in England. His arm was
restored to its proper shape and vigor, for which he liberally rewarded his
surgeon.

As soon as he was able to leave his chamber, he made an apology to the old Don
and his lady, for the trouble his unlucky fall had made in their house, and at
the same time returning his most unfeigned thanks for the generous and polite
attention he had received during the time he had resided with them. Don de
Castigini prevented him from proceeding any further, by saying, "Come, come,
Sir, I request you will say no more on this subject -- humanity is a duty
incumbent on every person who professes christianity; to have done less, for a
person in the situation you were when first introduced here, would have
disclosed a very callous heart, an unchristian-like disposition, that would
disgrace a Heathen, and consequently beneath a Christian. But, however, as I
see you are desirous of making a suitable return for the little service you
have received in my house, I will soon give you an opportunity of displaying
your gratitude to advantage." Make your own conditions, replied Mercutio, and
you shall see with what willingness, I will hazard my life, if required, in the
service of my generous and kind benefactor. "Well then," rejoined the Don, "the
condition is this: That you will favor us with your company fourteen days at
least. This is all I ask, and after your professions of gratitude, I expect you
will not refuse me the favor."

To this he very willingly agreed, and the Don introduced him to his three
daughters, whom he had never before seen. They were all beautiful, and each of
them attired in a rich Spanish undress, of blue satin, spangled with silver.
The two eldest were a little inclined to brown, though beautifully featured;
but the youngest possessed all the beauty that could possibly be comprised in
one woman. They drop^ their veils when Mercutio entered the apartment with
their father; but he ordered them to unveil, and converse without reserve, as
though no stranger was present. They obeyed, and the e^^ect of such a sudden
blaze of beauty, flashing all at once on our hero, greatly embarrassed him:
However, he advanced to salute them, and they met him with congratulations on
his recovery. He returned their compliments in a very modest, becoming style.

They had just seated themselves, when Alonzo and young Ferdinando entered.
After mutual salutations and congratulations had passed between them, they
entered into an animated strain of conversation, wherein the young ladies bore
a distinguished part. The agreeable and pertinent remarks which, with the most
engaging modesty they expressed, afforded Mercutio the most superior
satisfaction. Donna Isabella, the youngest daughter, whose personal charms
were, though matchless, totally eclipsed by the real and more lasting beauties
of her mind, made an impression on the heart of our hero, not easily described.
To the most happy turn of wit, she united the sweetest temper, and the most
critical propriety of speech: All these amiable qualifications rendered her
conversation delighting. 'Twas this captivated Mercutio. When Isabella took any
part in the conversation, he was in extacy; with the most profound attention he
listened to the enchanting accents she pronounced, and when she ceased to
speak, preserved his attentive attitude, as if petrified with pleasure by the
ravishing sound.

A collation was served up, consisting of the luxuries of Europe; which was
followed by a desert of the choicest viands of Spain, and the evening was spent
in the most undissembled mirth and hilarity; Don Ferdinando himself being a
very social person, his frank and affable behavior considerably augmented the
satisfaction of the whole company.

The next day, our hero wrote to his friend and benefactor, Don Guzman, at
Bilboa: His letter contained a most grateful acknowledgment of the obligations
he lay under to him -- an account of the accident he had met with, and his
recovery, and concluded with a promise to see him in a short time, being
determined to set out for Bilboa in a few days.

Though Mercutio certainly intended to fulfill his promise in its fullest
extent, yet he soon found (what he might be supposed to have been well
acquainted with before) that nothing earthly is entitled to our confidence; but
that all our actions are guided by an invisible power; and that however
flattering our future prospect may appear to our partial fight, or however
near, yet the clouds of disappointment and adversity, which are driven about by
the uncertain gales of fortune, may intervene and deprive us of the glittering
phantom, if not forever, at least for a season.

It was with the utmost reluctance that Don Ferdinando and his family permitted
our hero to depart, after a stay of twenty four days, nor then, without the
most pressing invitations to pay them another visit shortly. A strict regard to
truth constrained him to inform them of his intention of leaving Spain very
soon. This information had a remarkable effect on the countenance of Donna
Isabella. Mercutio, however, in compliance with the request of the whole
family, promised to pay them a parting visit.

The countenance of Isabella resumed its wonted serenity, and they took a
cheerful and friendly leave of each other; he returned to Barcelona,
accompanied by Alonzo and young Ferdinando. His kind host and his wife were
happy in seeing him safe again, and, in testimony of the pleasure they derived
from his return, devoted the day to mirth and good cheer: The only thing that
occurred to damp their joy, was the reflection of so soon parting with
Mercutio: However, they spent the day very agreeably. In the evening, Alonzo
and his friend took an affectionate leave of our hero, and his host, and
departed. Mercutio having retired to his apartment, began to reflect on the
long series of adventures he had run through since his departure from his
native country, which appeared like a chasm in his life: The result was, he
resolved to stay about one week longer in Barcelona, take leave of his friends
there, and return to Bilboa, where he intended to take shipping for England.
But alas, how vain are the resolutions of man! When the idea of taking leave of
Castigni's family presented itself, the image of the charming Isabella, arrayed
in all the charms peculiar to innocence, youth, and beauty, dissolving in tears
at the separation, accompanied it. However, as he supposed his heart was
entirely disengaged, he persisted in his resolution, and under this impression
endeavored to compose himself to rest, but in vain, the pleasing phantom was
still visible to the eye of his imagination; all his reflections served but to
increase his perplexity; nor could he sleep until Aurora had tinged the
oriental clouds with streaks of the deepest crimson; then the God of sleep
gently advanced, and spreading his downy ^pinions over him, lulled him into a
pleasing ^^^mber, where we will leave him to his repose, and as Isabella is
soon to be introduced, as a principal character, we will enquire how she spent
the night.

We find, from her own confession, that she passed that night in no less
perplexity than Mercutio. When she anticipated the fatal, approaching day which
was ^o separate her from him for ever, her tender bosom swelled with sighs; and
she wet her pillow with her tears. Oh! she would exclaim, how unhappy am I!
Though I enjoy all the advantages of birth, fortune, and education, yet my
prophetic soul forbodes my future misery. I love Mercutio, yet he is ignorant
of it! What then? Perhaps if he was convinced of the love I bear him, he would
not have it in his power to extricate me from the wretchedness which awaits me,
or which would complete my misery. Perhaps some English beauty is now
impatiently waiting his return, to crown her happiness by fulfilling the tender
engagements he entered into, when they parted. And yet, my eyes deceived me, or
I observed something like embarrassment in his countenance to day, at parting.
But what will that avail me? It may be, if unengaged elsewhere, he has become
enamoured with one of my sisters: -- There ruin stares me in the face again!
Would to heaven I was acquainted with his sentiments; my heart tells me he is
sincere, and, if I am not mistaken, would disclose his sentiments on this
subject, if I could find means to propose the question to him. But why should I
wish to know what perhaps would plunge me into the depths of despair? Sleep at
length overpowered her; but all her waking ideas passed in review before her
while sleeping, so that she arose without refreshment or determination. But to
return: --

Mercutio arose without that tr^^quillity of mind with which he had been blessed
for a considerable time before. He concealed his uneasiness from his kind host
and lady during the time they sat at breakfast; and afterward dressed, and
walked out to one of those delightful gardens which are adorned with all the
beauties of nature and of art, and are fitted for the entertainment and
reception of persons of quality only. He walked about, musing on the vision of
the preceding night, for some time. He reflected that the passion which he had
conceived was as yet but in embryo, and might be easily eradicated. Besides he
had no foundation to build his hope on, if he should cherish it. When he
considered the disappointments and dangers he had already experienced, the
losses he had sustained, and the depths of misery to which he had been reduced,
in consequence of his past amors, he resolved to abandon an enterprise which
appeared to be fraught with hazard and manifest difficulty. He became cheerful
again, and determined to leave Barcelona, in a very few days. At dinner he
communicated his intention to his host, without the least hint of the reason of
so precipitate a retreat. He dispatched his servant, in the evening, to Don
Ferdinando's, to inform the family that, if agreeable he would do himself the
honor to pay them a visit early in the succeeding day. His message was
received with pleasure by the whole family, especially by Isabella.

In the morning he set out, on horse back, attended by a servant. He was
received with the same degree of kindness, which he had uniformly experienced
in that family. Though he was treated as usual, yet he perceived that the
apparent cheerfulness of the whole family was only the effect of his presence:
He perceived some latent grief in their countenances, struggling to conceal
itself from his observation: The day, however, was spent very agreeably: A
natural effect of the society of persons of refined and generous sentiments. In
the evening our hero informed them of ^is intention of setting out for Bilboa
in three days, at farthest. This information had an instantaneous and visible
effect on Isabella; (perhaps to Mercutio only:) she withdrew, but returned
shortly, more cheerful, apparently, than she had been that day. The moment of
departure was procrastinated until a very late hour: At length, however, it
arrived. Isabella was the last person of whom ^e took leave. To describe the
agitation of his soul, in that moment, exceeds the power of my pen. His pulse
beat high, and he stood as if riveted to the floor. The lovely Isabella, whose
heart, tender as the orb of sight, had caught the sweet infection, was seized,
when he took her hand, with a sudden tremor, which thrilled like lightning
through the deepest, and most intricate recesses of it. -- In vain she
endeavored to conceal the palpitation of her convulsed breast -- to withhold
the speed of the glittering globes of crystal which privately stole down her
blushing cheeks, -- Cupid had planted one of his keenest darts in her un^ullied
breast, and she tacitly confessed it. Mercutio had address enough to conceal
his perturbation from all but her whose sympathetic soul reverberated each
sigh, and felt each throb that agitated his disordered mind. -- They parted.

Neither his ride home, or a retrospect of his past difficulties, could
extinguish or diminish the flame which that beauteous female Spaniard had
kindled in his breast. I must, said he, I must again see Isabella! -- I behaved
very ill at parting! I must disclose my passion to her! -- She seemed to pity
my distress in the parting moment! Perhaps the little God has been propitious
-- has inspired her with ideas favorable to my wish! -- It must be so! Her
eyes betrayed the secret of her heart, and seemed to say, cruel Mercutio! --
Can you then leave me? Leave me thus! O let me see you once more! Once more,
ever the relentless ocean for ever separate us! -- Thus he wasted the night;
but, ^n being informed by his host that a vessel belonging to Holland was to
sail in the course of four or five days he relinguished the notion of
re-visiting Isabella; and resolved, if passage could be obtained on board the
Dutch vessel, to sail in her, and instead of going to Bilboa, to send a letter
to Guzman, to inform him of his embarkation, and likewise that he would make
him complete satisfaction for all his kindness, on his arrival in England.

He sallied forth without making his intentions known to his host, in order to
go on board the Dutchman, and, if he found things to his mind, to agree for his
passage; but he had not walked fifty paces when a billet was put into his hand
by a female, who told him she would meet him in an hour, on that spot to
receive his answer -- she instantly disappeared. He was surprised at the
incident; but did not open the billet until he had returned to his lodging:
Then locking his door, he opened it, and read as follows.

CHARMING STRANGER,
If, on perusing those lines, you find I have exceeded the limits prescribed to
my sex, I pray you not to impute it to levity, or immodesty; but to a passion
which levels all distinction, and which constrains me to disclose to you a
secret dear to my repose. -- I love you ardently! -- Let me know whether your
affections are engaged or not. Defer your journey a few days -- sincerity in
your answer will be productive of a full explanation of my present situation,
which is a very unhappy one -- Your honor I depend on for secrecy in this
matter. -- Your compliance will afford infinite pleasure to

ISABELLA DE CASTIGNI.


The most frightful spectre that was ever described, entering his chamber at
midnight, could not have deranged his ideas more than this short epistle did.
He saw all his plans disconcerted, and all his late resolutions tumbled into
the dust in a moment. -- Though the epistle was not long, nor the requisition
unfair; yet to form a proper answer to it, in so sh^^^ a time was an arduous
task. -- In the first place, no rightly judged, if he should give her
encouragement, she would propose an elopement; this from principles of honor
he could not agree to, or if he could, it would inevitably draw down the
resentment of her father and brother on his head. In the second, if he should
renew his visits at her father's, and should even procure his permission to pay
his addresses to her, the known di^^erence of religious sentiments between the
natives of England and those of S^ain would naturally produce a scrutiny with
res^ect to his particular profession, which might be attended with disagreeable
consequences. However, time being short, he wrote the following answer.

LOVELY ISABELLA,
To be honored with your attention so much as I have this day, is a happiness
exceeding my most sanguine expectations; but your confidence in a matter so
interesting as that of your love, is felicity too great. -- You ask if my
affections are unengaged? I answer no -- yet -- My affections were perfectly
so, before I saw Don Ferdinando's fair daughter. -- You say your situation is
unhappy! Let me see your explanation speedily -- Whatever is in my power to do
(with honor) to render you happy, shall be done, at the risk of my life. Rely
on my silence. Adieu.

MERCUTIO.


This he sealed, and repairing to the appointed spot, delivered it to the
female messenger, who was already waiting. He (...) into her hand, with a note,
a small present, and she ^nstantly departed.

At all events Mercutio was determined to make enqui^y about the D^^ch vessel.
Accordingly meeting a Dutch merchant at the water side, he enquired of him
whether the vessel bound for Hollan^ had sailed yet, or not? The merchant
informed him that she had no^: But that the captain expected to sail in less
than a week. He ma^e no farther enquiry at that time, except the captain's
name, and where he lodged* Having received this information he repaired to his
lodgings.

The next day, sitting at a window fronting the street, he perceived the same
person who had brought him the letter, pass on the other side of the street: He
instantly followed her, and received the following letter from her hands. As
she had some other business in town, she told him she would return in two
hours, in which time he might have his answer prepared.

Having returned to his lodging, he opened the letter and read: -- ACCOMPLISHED
MERCUTIO,
Your affections, then, were unengaged before you saw De Castigni's daughter --
Oh! might I be that happy daughter! You are willing, too, to risk your life to
render me happy. -- This is kind; but if to establish my happiness requires so
precious a sacrifice, may I live in wretchedness and die in obscurity! -- I
shall now give you my promised explanation, an^ leave you to judge whether my
situation is unhappy or not. -- Five years ago, an old Italian nobleman, of a
vast estate, having rendered my father a very important service, by transacting
some business in Italy, at a critical juncture for him. Having some business in
Barcelona, he paid my father a visit to inform him of, and congratulate him on,
the success of his affairs. My father, naturally generous, consequently
grateful, received him in all the warmth of ecstasy, and thinking no reward too
great for the service he had rendered him, bid him demand any thing he
possessed. -- He answered, that he had no pecuniary views in conducting the
business; but, as it was left to himself to point out a suitable reward, he
requested his youngest daughter in marriage. My father replied, my dear friend,
your request cannot be granted: She is but just turned of thirteen years,
consequently unfit for marriage; I have two other daughters, who are of riper
years, if either of them has charms sufficient to engage your affections, I
promise you my free consent to marry her, and I will give her a ^owry suitable
to her birth and noble alliance. -- He evaded this proposal by offering to
remain unmarried four years longer, if my father would pledge his honor to
deliver me into his arms at the expiration of that term: The time is almost at
an end -- Fifteen days will complete my misery. The supperannuated wretch, who
is near seventy, arrived here yesterday evening with a pompous retinue. My
father has never ceased to lament his rashness in making such an unlimited
promise, and would give a third of his fortune to be released from the
performance of it. -- Oh Mercutio! Do not suffer me to be made wretched,
forever wretched, but contrive some means to snatch me from the gulf of
misery, which, even now yawns to receive me! Delay may prove dangerous -- He is
anxious for the consummation of his imaginary happiness, and may, perhaps, find
means to have the ceremony performed before the long appointed day arrives: If
this should happen, death shall deprive him of his long expected bride. -- I
have a maiden aunt in Barcelona, and have the consent of my father and mother
to visit her tomorrow -- I will see you tomorrow evening, at the place where
you receive this, in order to put your generosity to the ^est. If you are, as
you say, willing to render me happy, you will sympathize in my distress, and
generously afford me your protection. -- I am willing to go to the most remote
quarter of the globe with my dear Merc^^^o -- No dangers, however great, shall
deter (...) -- I will bid an eternal farewell to my native country, to the most
indulgent of parents; to the most endearing brother and sisters, and to all the
dazzling splendour of wealth and grandeur, and, if heaven so decrees, explore
the earth's wide bounds, content and happy, if blessed with the company, and
sweet conversation of my much loved Mercutio. Fail not to meet me about dusk,
mean while pity the distress of the disco^solate

ISABELLA DE CASTIGNI.




This letter awakened all his love for this unha^^y fair one. To see her whom
he loved with the most sincere passion, on the brink of being condemned to
linger out her days in the arms of an old phlegmatic wretch, for whom she had a
mortal aversion. In forming a resolution how to act in consequence of the
contingency, he called to his aid reason, gratitude, honor, and love. With all
those helps he was yet undetermined: He figured to himself the impropriety of
carrying off Don Ferdinando's daughter, without his knowledge or consent; and
though love seemed to triumph over (...) consideration, yet he could not by any
means (...) himself to a breach of honor: Especially (...) a point. He
resolved to meet Isabella, however, according to her request -- He did so, and
every scruple was instantly removed. She came attended by her faithful
confidante -- After the first salutation, Mercutio proposed retiring to his
lodgings. This was rejected, and Isabella informed him that she commanded a
private apartment in the house of her aunt, where they might discourse without
interruption. He eagerly embraced the offer: The more so, as it might convince
her of the rectitude of his intentions. Thither, then, he was immediately
conducted. The maid led them to an apartment in the back part of the house, and
retired.

Isabella then confirmed the contents of her last letter, a^ding that her
suspicions of the Italian's contriving, to hasten the nuptials were not without
foundation; for that he had absolutely extorted a promise from her father, of
shortening the time by eight days. I have, said she, obtained leave to spend
three days with my aunt; in which time, if Heaven shall interpose in my favor,
by pointing out an escape from this detested wretch, my peace of mind will be
restored; if not -- you know my resolution -- I crave your assistance -- There
does not exi^t a person so capable of affording me the same relief and
protection with yourself: If this is withheld, I die miserable. Tears (...)
further utterance. "Weep not, my angel," said "(...), tenderly embracing her:
These tears (...)! Every thing possible shall be done; and even impossibilities
attempted, to restore you to happiness. She brightened at this assurance, and
he began to paint the obligations he lay under to her father, in the most
striking colors. He then expatiated largely on the blackness of ingratitude;
and concluded, by declaring the fervency of his love for her, which be said was
heightened by the reflection of her being a daughter of the generous De
Castigni; but added, that whatever steps a sense of her distress might prompt
him to take in her behalf, he was determined to take none that should be
dishonorable to himself; or by which he might forfeit the esteem of her noble
father: "Such a step," continued he, "would render me unworthy of your
confidence."

Our Hero expected the latter part of his declaration would have been a little
unwelcome to Isabella; but in this he was mistaken: She told him she abhored
the very idea of purchasing happiness at the expense of his honor or integrity,
adding, if she could have harbored the most distant thought of his being
capable of acting in a manner unworthy of a gentleman, she should never have
acted the part she had.

She then produced a letter from her brother, enclosing one from his mother.
This letter promised a faithful attention to the request of his mother, which
was couched in the following terms.

DEAREST FERDINANDO,
My soul is torn with anguish! Your sister Isabella's distress is extreme! Her
misery is decreed! Her future life, if she survives the first shock, will
exhibit nothing but woe! -- Isabella loves Mercutio; Mercutio loves Isabella!
They have declared themselves: This day she has poured out her whole soul to
me, and implored my assistance -- your assistance! Five days more determines
her fate! -- What then? Meet her in Barcelona, at my sister's, on Wednesday. My
confessor, to whom I have imparted the secret, and who approves this step, will
be there. Mercutio is honorable! -- See their hands joined -- the rest is
fixed. -- Remember this is a mother's request, whose future happiness or misery
hangs on this single event. What can be more meritorious than to render an
affectionate mother, sister, and a sincere and honorable lover (who will by
this means become a brother) happy at a stroke? -- There is no alternative.
Adieu.

P. S. Come not here till sent for.




This letter determined ou^ here. Though a thousand different ideas crowded his
imagination at first, yet, when he compared all the circumstances; viewed the
matter in every light in which it was capable of being viewed, he resolved no
longer to refuse a happiness, which, by the long concatenation of events that
had accompanied it, appeared to be the immediate gift of Heaven: But to risque
every thing in establishing that happiness which involved his own. He embraced
her with ardor, and exclaimed, "Is Heaven then propitious to my wishes! And am
I at last to obtain that treasure, which is of greater estimation than the
glittering mines of Colcon^ia! A treasure of which kings would boast with
rapture!" -- Here she interrupted him by observing, that her mother and the
Reverend Father had maturely weighed every circumstance; that he conceived the
Italian, having taken an undue advantage of a rash vow, made in the effusions
of gratitude, his claim had neither religion, reason, nor justice for its
foundation, and consequently was null to all intents and purposes; that if a
countermine could be effected, it would not only be blameless, but meritorious:
As the temporal, and, perhaps, eternal happiness of Isabella was deeply
concerned, it behoved them to prevent, if possible, a union fraught with so
many evils and inconveniences. They also agreed that to deceive the Italian,
without the knowledge or concurrence of the Don would be laudable, for the
reasons above mentioned.

Our hero then enquired if she had seen her brother since her arrival in town,
she answered in the affirmative, and that he should see him shortly. She then
rang a small bell, and Teresa, her maid, appeared: She told her to inform her
aunt and brother that she wished the favor of their company. In a few minutes
they entered, accompanied by the holy Father, a person truly reverend in his
appearance, the serenity of whose countenance spoke the goodness and
tranquillity of his soul.

After mutual salutations. Isabella with her aunt retired into a closet; when
the priest began a very pious and edifying discourse, in the course of which he
made several pertinent allusions to the cause of their meeting. He animadverted
freely, and with great ingenuity on the impropriety of hasty marriages, unequal
matches, rash promises, etc. and concluded by urging in a very pathetic manner,
the necessity of the approaching union, as the lives, and what was of
infinitely more value, the happiness of the mother and daughter, wholly
depended on its consummation. He next enjoined our hero to write a letter to
his intended father-in-law, containing an ample account of the whole affair --
promising to take charge of it himself, and deliver it to the Don, after
preparing him for the reception of the news. This Mercutio promised to do. They
were then re-joined by the old lady, leading forward Isabella, the cheerfulness
of whose lovely countenance but faintly typified the exquisite felicity of her
soul, which heightened her charms to a degree scarcely inferior to absolute
perfection.

The ceremony was dignified by the sincere devotion with which it was
performed. The old lady, for the first time, performed the part of a mother,
and young Ferdinando that of a father, in conferring on Mercutio a treasure
which he would not have exchanged for the empire of the universe. The ceremony
over, the priest and Ferdinando took leave under a promise of taking breakfast
with the bride and her husband the next morning.

The hour for repose arriving, the old lady conducted her niece to a proper
apartment, and retired, leaving her under the conduct of her maid* as the
business of a bride-maid having never fell within her sphere.

The first thing that occupied our hero's attention in the morning, was a
letter to his father-in-law, which he penned agreeable to his promise,
informing him of the rise, progress and consummation of his present happiness:
Explaining, in the most respectful terms, the motives of his conduct, and
humbly requested him to pardon a crime which originated merely from a wish to
restore to happiness a family, for every branch of which he entertained the
highest sentiments of gratitude and esteem. After finishing this letter, he
wrote another to his old benefactor at Bilboa.

The priest and Ferdinando kept their appointment, and they all breakfasted
together very cheerfully; the former, having taken charge of the letter, and
wishing our hero and his bri^e a great deal of happiness, departed. Mercutio
then informed his wife and friends his wish to embark for Holland as soon as
possible. They were well pleased with the information, and Ferdinando promised
to spend every evening with them, until their embarkation, and to see them safe
on board. He then took leave and Mercutio went in search of the Dutch captain.
He found him, and agreed immediately for their passage. The captain proposed
sailing the next day, as he had to touch at Marseilles for some lading; and
observed, that if he thought proper to wait his return to Barcelona, he would
lay too and take them in. This proposal, however, did not exactly tally with
the circumstances of our hero; he therefore, made a virtue of necessity, and
told the captain he had some business at Marseilles himself, and was resolved
to embark very early the next morning. They parted, and our hero immediately
returned to inform Isabella of his determination. He next went to his lodgings,
in order to satisfy his host, as well as to discharge his servant and dispose
of his horse. As the servant intended to return to Bilboa, he committed the
letter for Guzman to his care, which he promised to deliver safe; and then
presenting him the mule he had rode to Bilboa, the servant departed, very
grateful for the liberal treatment he had received.

Our hero disposed of his horse to his landlord, and having taken a parting
bottle together, he took a final leave of them, and returned to the impatient
Isabella, who was afraid some unlucky accident would yet intervene to separate
them; she was, therefore, naturally anxious to leave Barcelona with all
possible speed.

Ferdinando spent the evening with them; indeed they did not go to rest that
night at all -- for as it might possibly be the last they were to spend
together, an^ as they inten^ed to embark with the first appearance of day, they
were busy in making the necessary arrangements, and in concerting a plan for
their future correspondence.

Before the day dawned, Mercutio and his brother-in-law walked down to the
water side, as the former had appointed to meet the ship's boat at that ^our.
In the interim, Isabella waited on her aunt in her bedchamber, who immediately
arose at the sound of her opening the door, and taking her niece by the hand,
led her to a cabinet, from which she took a casket, and presenting it to her,
said: "Accept this, my dear Isabella, as a token of my love to you and my dear
sister. May you be happy! Perhaps I shall never see you more. Your father, when
informed of the innocent deceit that has been practiced on him, will, I am
convinced, search you out."

Just then the men returned, and the boat being waiting, they made ready
instantly; then taking an affectionate farewell, but not without tears on the
part of the women, they set forward. Their baggage, was not very bulky,
consisting chiefly of money and jewels, was easily carried to the water side by
our hero and Ferdinando, who was resolved to see them safe on board.
Preparations were making for weighing the anchor, when they came on board,
where the captain welcomed them heartily, and conducted them to a very
commodious cabin, which had been cleared out and fitted for their reception.
The wind being favorable, the captain left them in order to get the ship under
way as quick as possible. The sails set, and every thing put in order, he
returned to the cabin, and informed Ferdinando that the ship's boat was ready
to put him on shore, he took an affectionate leave of his sister and her
husband, and returned to Barcelona.

Our voyagers were savored with a gentle breeze for some days, during which
time they enjoyed as much happiness as their situation could possibly afford.
They happened to have a couple of French gentlemen and a very agreeable young
lady of the same nation, which greatly increased their satisfaction. Social
harmony, and convivial friendship were imparted from breast to breast, and
uninterrupted tranquillity, a necessary consequence of that friendship, seemed
to be established on a permanent basis. But, as anguish and rapture act
alternately on the human mind, it is folly in the extreme, to drea^ the one or
wish for the other as permanent: For it is observable, that a continual round
of what is generally understood by the word pleasure, becomes by repetition,
disagreeable, irksome, and painful: Loathing and disg^st takes place of desire
-- the taste is vitiated, and the intoxication of the senses renders the agent
incapable of distinguishing the difference between one and the other. Pain,
slavery and chains, by long custom, become less irksome, nay, in a certain
degree, natural; and the anguish of grief diminishes in proportion to the
length of its continuance.

Their tranquillity was not of long continuance, for when they were within two
days sail of Marseilles, they were overtaken by a dreadful hurricane, assisted
by a strong current sitting out of the gulf of Lions, which threatened the
total destruction of the ship, and all on board. The wind blew with
irresistible violence, which carried away the fore-top-mast and bowsprit in the
beginning of the storm, and at length grew so furious, that the mainmast went
by the board, at the same instant the tiller-rope breaking, the man at the helm
was knocked overboard; and it was at the manifest hazard of their lives that
the whole crew ventured to seize the tiller and bend new ropes to it.

Consternation and horror pervaded the minds as well as countenances of all on
board, under a firm persuasion of being shortly buried in the capacious womb of
the tremendous deep. Fortunately the ship hull had suffered no damage, for the
masts and yards which had been carried away, fell clear of the gunwale, and the
rigging was immediately cut away. But as hope is generally the last thing that
forsakes us, so they did not absolutely despair, till after enduring the fury
of the storm for three days and as many nights, they found the ship hurled, by
the combined force of wind and waves, stern foremost into a cavity between two
huge rocks, where she remained immoveably fixed. -- Despair at last stared them
in the face! -- Dreadful situation! -- The ship's keel was jammed in between
the rocks, from which no mortal strength or skill could extricate it: --
Surrounded by the foaming waves, which were hurled about in horrible confusion,
by the yet unabated fury of the tempest, they all betook themselves to fervent
prayer, and instant preparation for eternity! for death appeared inevitable.
Despair was strongly depicted in the faces of the mariners, and every hope of
setting foot on shore again had fled.

Five days and nights they remained in this horrid situation, and the major
part of their provision, particularly bread, was rendered useless, the water
being six feet deep in the hold; however, they made very little use of what
they had -- they eat little, slept less, and in all respects conducted
themselves as persons hourly expecting death.

Mercutio's concern for Isabella triumphed over every other consideration; his
expectations of relief were exhausted, he went seldom on deck, since assistance
had become useless. The two Frenchmen, from similar motives, remained
constantly below, the one being the husband and the other the brother of the
French lady: They found it an arduous task to keep her in any tolerable degree
of spirits; but it must be confessed Isabella supported her fate with a
fortitude that would have reflected honor on philosophy itself. About eleven
o'clock, on the fifth night of their extreme distress, the wind shifted, and
blew so violent, that the waves rolled in succession over this devoted ship and
crew. Their ears were at the same time assailed with the most shocking peals of
thunder, and terrifying flashes of ethereal fire -- floods of rain and
resistless gusts of wind roared in concert -- the whole exhibited a scene of
terror which would baffle every attempt to describe.

As the stern of the vessel lay considerably higher than the head, the cabins
and steerage were yet clear of water; the captain, his officers and passengers
occupied the former, and the common sailors the latter. About daybreak the
storm began to abate, and by nine o'clock, they were blessed with a prospect of a
calm sea and a clear sky. This, hopeless as their situation was, afforded them
a transitory cessation of grief, during which they all bent in gratitude to
that Omnipotent Power, who had mercifully stayed the fury of the wind, and awed
the boisterous waves into subjection.

Though this change in the weather had in some measure alleviated their
distress, yet the cutting reflection on their situation, produced pangs of the
most excruciating woe: The beauteous prospect by which they were surrounded,
served but to inspire them with the dreadful idea of soon terminating their
days by famine. In this state of horrid anxiety, they sat as if benumbed and
stupid, until the captain broke the mournful silence in the following manner:

"My dear fellow sufferers, we are in a dreadful situation I confess, but still
we have the greatest reason imaginable to be thankful to the Almighty, for our
preservation hitherto: And I look on our being cast on this rock as a most
signal mercy, for had the ship continued to float, the storm was sufficient to
have dashed her to atoms in a very short time, and which must inevitably have
been her fate the instant she was thrown into this cavity, had she been in any
other pos^tion. I sincerely believe that our being cast here was a means,
employed by the Almighty, to convince us of our nothingness, and that he is not
only able, but willing, to save to the utmost, those who rely on his
Omnipotence for deliverance and protection: And although I must confess that
appearances seem to contradict it, I really begin to conceive hopes that we
shall all make the shore again with safety."

They listened with rapture to what he said, and eagerly demanded, what
foundation he had to hope for what to them appeared to exceed the utmost
stretch of human probability? "Why, my friends," rejoined the captain, "the sea
is now calm, and the sky clear, I will take an observation, by which means I
shall be able to ascertain the best course to ^^eer to make the nearest land."

The captain found by observation, that it would be most advisable to steer
for Leghorn. "We are," said he, "thanks to the Almighty, all in good health and
vigor, we will get out the boats, and have them sitted (...) with masts and
sails; the carpenter shall fix the binicle in a convenient part of the long
boat; -- let every one take one hundred weight of his most valuable property:
With this burden I am of opinion we can make the port in three days, where I
have a brother, who can, perhaps, assist me in recovering a part of my cargo."

This proposal was embraced with avidity by the whole company, who immediately
began to clear the boats of all encumbrances, so that they soon had them out
and rigged, and then proceeded to embark the most valuable of their effects,
provisions, water, etc. The cap^ain, for fear of being separated by another
squall, proposed making a tow-line fast to the head of each boat, by which, in
case of extremity, they on board the cutter would be enabled to get on board
the longboat.

About four in the afternoon they left the wreck, and stee^ed away under an
easy sail East by South. Every one assisted, so that they went at a great rate,
using both sails and oars. The next day, land appearing on the larboard bow,
they were inspired with new life; the captain assuring them they would be in
Leghorn that night. Joy was imprinted in legible characters on all their
countenances, and they congratulated each other on the signal deliverance, as
if they were already on shore -- they strove to banish the disagreeable
recollection of their late distress, to make room for the more acceptable and
pleasing sensations which they already tasted by anticipation.

About sunset they descried a sloop a head, at the distance of about a league,
which they soon met. They hailed her, and requested the commander to come on
board the long boat, which he immediately complied with. This gentleman proved
to be the captain's brother before mentioned, who expressed much astonishment
at seeing them coming from sea in an open boat; but his surprise vanished when
informed of the particulars, and was much affected with the narrative; but bid
them be of good cheer, as they would quickly be among humane and hospitable
people, who would render them all the service in their power.

In about three hours they anchored before Leghorn. Being late at night, it was
agreed to stay on board the sloop till next morning, except the captain, who
went on shore.

In the morning they disembarked, and our hero hired one of the sailors to
carry his baggage. He had just taken leave of his captain, and received his
brother's directions where to find suitable accommodations for some days, when,
as he was handing Isabella along, he was met by a gentleman in a rich Italian
habit, who, after being informed of their shipwreck, kindly welcomed them on
shore, and invited them to take breakfast with him. They consented, and he
conducted them to a very elegant house, where they were kindly received by the
mistress. Among other enquiries, the gentleman asked Mercutio the place of his
nativity? Finding him an Englishman, which he was himself, he told him he
intended to remove to England in a very short time, and politely offered him
his house, if he would stay with them: He added, that he expected to embark
with his whole family in three weeks at farthest. -- Just then a man entered
the room, the unexpected fight of whom gave Mercutio no small pleasure: 'Twas
George Wright! -- The familiarity of the salutation of those two friends,
amazed the whole family. But George soon removed their surprise by informing
them of the very great intimacy which had subsisted between them.

George embraced the first opportunity of taking our hero aside, to enquire
what brought him to Italy again. When Mercutio had satisfied him in every
particular, he in his turn informed him, that his wife had paid the debt of
nature, shortly after his departure for England. She fell a victim, said he, to
the same disease which carried off my uncle and aunt. She was no sooner
attacked by it than the most unfavourable symptoms appeared. On the eighth day
the fever seemed to abate, which I interpreted as a good omen; but in this I
was mistaken, for that evening I observed the physicians busy in private
discourse, in the course of which, they frequently shook their heads, as if
void of hope. I suspected the truth. -- The eldest of the three, both in years
and practice, beckoned to me to follow him, and when in private, said:
Endeavor, Sir, to collect all your fortitude, to support you under your
affliction -- To dissemble in such a case would be unpardonable -- Your amiable
spouse will soon be numbered with the dead! Six hours, without a miracle, will
be the utmost period of her existence! I am sorry to inform you that her
disease is of so complicated a nature, that it baffles the power of medicine. I
have, with my colleagues, done every thing possible -- we therefore, surrender
her into the hands of that Being, with whom are the issues of life. He added no
more, but turning about, left me in pangs of the most intolerable anguish.

His prediction was truly verified, for exactly at the time he mentioned, she
expired in my arms! I must confess, it was the greatest shock I had ever
experienced. I remained for some time insensible of any thing that passed; in
which situation I was removed to another apartment, where, on recovering my
senses, I found several of my friends at my bedside, kindly endeavoring to
alleviate my grief. Among the number who had collected to solace my melancholy,
were two Franciscans, who entered into a very pious discourse on the subject of
resignation, in which they did not forget to give me a modest reproof for
neglecting to send for the Fathers of the Church, that they might have
administered the sacrament (as they called it) of extreme unction, previous to
her departure. A slight apology and a few ducats, however, silenced them on
that head; but they insisted on celebrating mass on the spot, which I did not
think proper to refuse.

The clouds of melancholy enveloped my mind for a considerable time, and it is
doubtful whether I should have resumed my native cheerfulness yet, had I
remained in Venice. I resisted the solicitations of my friends a long time --
at length, weary of their importunity, I resolved to pursue their advice, and,
as I had some affairs to settle in Naples, I made ready to go thither
immediately.

While I remained there, I went to Mount Vesuvius, at least, as near as the
stones, sulphur, ashes and flames would permit, as there was a most violent
eruption, which covered the neighboring fields and gardens with those
combustibles. From thence, I visited the tomb of the celebrated Virgil, which
stands at a small distance from a subterraneous passage, ^ut quite through the
base of a large mountain, known there by the name of Paufilipo's Grotto. I rode
through this wonderful passage, and could just, when on horseback, touch the
arched roof, (which is perfectly regular, and beautified with millions of
curious stones and shells, neatly arranged in every form that fancy can devise)
with my horse-whip.

However, not to trouble you with a recital of every place and thing I saw, in
traveling from Naples to Leghorn, I took my abode in this house, the owner of
which is now my father-in-law, and as worthy a man as England ever produced. He
then confirmed what the gentleman had told our hero, adding, that he was to
accompany the family to England, and was highly pleased, when he found Mercutio
was to be of the party.

Mercutio desired to be introduced to Mrs. Wright; but George informed him that
she was not in Leghorn, that he lived in St. Marino; but told him he intended
to set out next morning for that place, and requested him and his lady to
accompany him -- declaring that nothing could give him so much pleasure and
satisfaction. Our hero gladly accepted the invitation. They then joined the
company, when George was introduced in form to Isabella, who received his
salute with the utmost complaisance as her husband's friend.

The next morning early, they set forward, and met a cordial reception from
Eliza, Mrs. Wright, who was as complete a female figure, perhaps, as Italy
could afford. The modest and sprightly behavior of this lady to her new
acquaintances, unfolded a sweetness of temper, not frequently equalled, and
never exceeded: In short, her whole deportment reflected the highest honor on
the choice and judgment of her husband.

The dwelling of George was situated at the foot of a mountain, on the summit
of which stands the capital of St. Marino. A beautiful green of considerable
extent, lay in front of the house, terminating in an acute angle at one end,
and widening at the other in a gradual manner, till it passes the end of the
mountain, and loses itself in a beautiful champaign country, divers^fied with
fields, gardens, and delightful villas. At the back of the house, at the
distance of a few perches, the mountain rose with awful magnificence, in
several parts of which stood small villages, and the interstices cons^sted of
rocks, caves and woods, affording the highest gratification to a contemplative
eye.

George, it seems, had since his second marriage and removal to St. Marino,
taken frequent excursions through several parts of the mountain and villages
adjacent. -- In one of his morning rambles, he perceived a path leading toward
a high and craggy promontory, which j^tted over the sea. He could not spare
time to examine where it led to then, returned home, and thought no more about
it, until one evening as they were all sitting, enjoying the pleasant breeze,
and admiring the diversity of the objects which immediately surrounded them.
"Mercutio," said he, "let us take a walk* I stumbled on a path not long before
I went to Leghorn, which, if I am not mistaken, leads to some romantic place,
and I have a curiosity to see it -- what say you, will you accompany me?" --
"With all my heart," said he, "come ladies, favor us with your company." This
was agreed to, and they all set out immediately.

After walking about a quarter of a mile along its base, they began to ascend
the mountain by a narrow path, which led to a small village near the summit.
The path was too narrow to admit more than one at a time; so George led them
on, the two ladies kept the center, and Mercutio closed the rear.

When they had ascended to nearly the midway, George struck off into a smaller
path, which was the one he had mentioned. They had not traveled far on that
course, till they came into a place which appeared to have been once
cultivated: Here they found vines laden with most delicious grapes, of which
they all eat heartily. George was not mistaken in his opinion of the place, for
a more romantic scene was never painted; but his having surveyed the promontory
from the water, and observing the direction of the path, enabled him to found
his judgment truly. They all sat down on a flat stone to discourse on the
amazing scene.

They were about midway between the base of the mountain, which in that part
was washed by the sea, and the summit. The spot were they sat, projected over
the foaming surge, which in vain attempted to wash away its support, a huge
pile of rocks, which rose like a bracket: -- Above their heads, from the side
of the mountain, arose a stupendous rock of marble, which likewise projected,
in form of a semi-arch, making an awful, yet a magnificent canopy over the half
of the old vineyard. What particularly increased their astonishment, was the
number of trees and shrubs which proceeded in all directions from the fisures
of that amazing rock; for the contrast of colors occasioned by the various
species and positions of the trees, gave it the appearance of a spacious arched
ceiling, curiously ornamented with tapestry.

The ladies viewed this piece of natural architecture with the utmost
astonishment. With amazement, they cast upwards their wondering eyes, at the
awful pile which hung over, and threatened to fall and crush them to atoms.
"Let us go down," said Isabella; "my eyes ach looking at this monstrous rock!"
"The prospect is really terrifying," said Eliza. As it was near sunset they
agreed to return, and accordingly began to descend in the same order in which
they had ascended. When they were near the foot, Mercutio, hearing a rustling
at some distance above him, turned about and perceived a man, step nimbly into
the path which led to the old vineyard. He instantly communicated the discovery
to the rest of the company, and they all continued to watch the Mountaineer,
until intervening objects rendered it impossible. They set forward again,
discoursing as they went of the strange adventure of the man of the mountain.
"That man," said Isabella, "is unacquainted with the nature of the place to
which he is going, or is fonder of retirement than I am." "I am of opinion,"
said Mercutio, "that he has some sort of a habitation among those rocks. I will
examine that place closely tomorrow. I intended to have made some further
observations this evening, had not night overtook us, before we were aware.
However, I will ascend tomorrow morning, before he is out of bed; will you bear
me company, George?" "Yes, that I will," said he, "I am anxious to know who he
is, and what he follows for a livelihood: "He must have some singular reason
for taking up his abode in such a place."

At the dawn of day, George and Mercutio arose, and, leaving their beauteous
partners wrapped in calm slumbers beneath the calmy pinions of repose, set
forward toward the mountain, in order, if possible, to explore the rocky
cavern, which contained the person they perceived ascending the preceding
evening.

They arrived at the old vineyard just as the fun beams began to penetrate the
horizontal mists; and with the utmost silence and caution, placed themselves
under a spreading vine, so advantageously, that it was impossible for their
game to escape; nor was it possible for any person to ascend or descend by the
path without discovery. They had not remained in ambush long, when they
perceived the broad stone, on which they had sat the preceding day, rise, as if
by magic art, and from the cave, to which it served for a door, issued a young
man richly dressed, followed by the identical man they had seen the evening
before, who reared the stone against the rock.

"Here William," (said the young gentleman, in good English) "convey this
letter to my dear Teren^^a; do not return without an answer. Be speedy and
faithful! If heaven favors my escape from Italy, I will generously reward your
diligent and trusty services." The servant vanished instantly; but our
ambuscade lay still, in order to make further discoveries.

The stranger, after walking backward and forward in silence, with his arms
folded, exclaimed aloud, with all the marks of grief and anxiety in his
countenance, "Why, O Why! ye immortal powers, have ye bestowed on me every
thing that the world conceives conducive to happiness, and suffer me
nevertheless, to exist here a living monument of thy displeasure, secluded from
the society of mankind? -- If without knowledge or intention, I have merited
punishment extreme, O hasten my dissolution, by hurling the hissing bolts of
thy vengeance on my devoted head; and, at one stroke, reduce me to a state of
nonentity! O that heaven had doomed me to a life of indigence! Had doomed me to
break the stubborn glebe, or to have furrowed the briny wave! The peasant is
unacquainted with the care that hourly torments me; and the cheerful mariner
performs the duties of his station with alacrity and content; but here am I, o^
an eminence, the very idea of which is sufficient to petrify a man with horror,
unmoved at the drea^^^^ situation, because the extreme anguish of my mind is
superior to the greatest corporal dangers."

This said, he advanced to the identical spot where the two friends were
posted, in order to indulge his melancholy under the branches of the clustering
vine. It Is impossible to describe his astonishment, when he saw them both
arise, and heard them salute him in English! He gazed wildly on them for a
moment, then springing backward, ran toward the edge of the precipice, with a
resolution to throw himself into the sea, and would certainly have effected it,
had not Mercutio, who suspected his intention, intercepted him in the midst of
his career, and with the assistance of George, took him by force, to the place
where they had been sitting so long. Having seated themselves, one on each side
of him, Mercutio in the most soothing terms, attempted to set his late rashness
in a proper point of view; desiring him at the same time, to fear nothing, as
they were friends, and would give him all the assistance in their power, and
concluded by requesting him to compose himself a little, to favor them with a
brief sketch of his adventures, and inform them by what means he got into that
dismal retreat.

"Gentlemen," replied the astonished youth, who could yet scarcely believe his
eyes and ears, "before I gratify your request, you must answer me two or three
questions: Your appearance tells me you will do this heartily." They assured
him upon honor they would. "First then, were you ever in this place before this
morning?" They immediately recounted to him the adventures of the preceding
evening, not omitting the most minute circumstance. This information inspired
him with fresh life: He then demanded if they were natives of England? And
being thoroughly satisfied in these particulars, he exclaimed in rapture,
Thanks to the immortal Jehovah! Deign to accept the grateful thanks of an
unworthy mortal, thou glorious and inexhaustible source of benevolence, for
this interval of happiness in the midst of my distress! Pardon my impatience --
I am but mortal!

"Forgive me, gentlemen," said he, "I behave very ill; but I doubt not your
generosity will impute it to the real cause." They requested him to make no
apology for his behavior as it needed none, assuring him they approved his
sensibility, and looked on it as proof of a good heart.

Eugenio, the stranger, perceiving their impatience to hear his story, began
thus: -- "Well, gentlemen, I suppose you have not met with such a scene as this
in all your travels: If you please, we will descend into my subterraneous
habitation, which exhibits a lively epitome of my own wretchedness." The
descent was very craggy, which supplied the want of stairs. After descending
about twelve feet perpendicular, they found themselves in a kind of grotto, the
floor of which was composed of solid marble. The roof was of a concave form,
lined with party-colored shells, and stones of different complexions and
qualities. The cave was about thirty feet long, and fifteen in width: The end
next to the sea was entirely open, forming an arch; and that part which
composed the roof, projected full fifteen feet beyond the mouth of the cavern,
which screened him effectually from rain. The prospect it afforded was really
terrifying: Nothing could be observed at the back part of the cave; but the
terror was greatly increased by casting the eye downward from the mouth to the
dreadful cliffs which hung below. One would be tempted, when viewing this
scene, to suppose that the author of the tragedy of Lear, was sitting in the
mouth of this cave, when penning the description which he puts into the mouth
of Edgar, in order to deter old Gloucester from the desperate act of casting
himself headlong from such a height.

In one corner of the cave lay a mattress and some other bedding; in another, a
small trunk, which served the double purpose of table and cupboard: A small
kegg, and a brace of pistols made up the rest of the furniture, all which had
been procured and conveyed thither by the trusty servant.

Being all seated on the mattress, Eugenio proceeded to relate his story: -- "My
narrative," said he, "gentlemen, will be found barren of pleasure or amusement,
as it consists entirely (the latter part at least) of melancholy, vexation and
despair. My father, one of the representatives of the county of M -- * thought
proper, after I had gone through all the steps of a liberal education at home,
that I should take a tour through France, Spain, and Italy. In consequence of
this resolution, he sought out an elderly gentleman, of good morals, completely
versed in the sciences, a competent judge of the human mind and the passions of
it. He possessed a sweetness of temper peculiar to himself, and his countenance
and deportment would have commanded respect among ruffians. Such a person,
inheriting every endearing qualification, could not have failed to attract my
most profound reverence and esteem: I already anticipated the profit, as well
as pleasure, I should derive from the company of a gentleman, who knew how to
blend the most instructive precepts with the most familiar conversation, from
which I might imbibe principles that would reflect honor on the choice of my
father, the abilities of my tutor, and on my own genius and industry.

"My father's next care, was to engage a faithful servant to attend us through
the whole of our ^eregrination; but fea^ing (...) a fresh hand, who was
unacquainted with the family, might not answer the purpose, he gave us his own
valet, who served him in his travels twenty years ago, and is the same you saw
here today. I had just entered my eighteenth year when I commenced this tour.
Our first move was to Paris, where we remained three months. From thence we
went to Orleans, stayed three weeks; and then proceeded to Lions. We made but a
short stay there, resolving to embark at Toulon for Civitta Vechia. We spent
six weeks in Rome, and then visited Naples, staid there a short time and set
out for Florence, which we never yet have reached. Having missed our proper
road we traveled till we were within an inconsiderable distance of the capital
of St. Marino. My tutor, who had formerly been there, proposed, as we were so
near, to ride into town, put up our horses, refresh, and spend an hour or two
in the evening in the governor's garden, which, he said, was a perfect type of
Eden -- lodge in St. Marino that night, and start for Florence in the morning.
I made no objection but submitted every thing to his superior judgment. The
landlord where we halted, sent a little Italian with us to the porter of the
governor's gardens, to request admission for us in his master's name. He
informed the porter that we were a couple of foreign gentlemen on our travels,
who had rode a considerable distance out of our way in order to take a view of
the gardens, and that his master would esteem the favor as done to himself if
he would admit us. He admitted us without hesitation, for which my tutor
rewarded him with a piece of gold. He then conducted us to a walk which led to
the center. I was struck with admiration at the astonishing struggle between
nature and art, which appeared in the beauteous disposition of the innumerable
surrounding objects. In the center, a basin of marble, well stocked with gold
and silver fish, fifteen yards diameter, had a very fine e^^ct, which was
increased by the figure of a seahorse, gilt, in the middle of the basin, from
the nostrils of which two streams of water projected to the height of thirty
feet. The basin is immediately surrounded by ten beautiful olive trees, planted
at equal distances. Twenty yards from these, another circle of trees afford a
charming shelter to the delightful arbors which occupy the intermediate spaces.
Here persons of the first rank in the republic, usually spend their evenings,
after feasting their sight and smell with the exquisite odours which proceed
from the flowers of every hue; which, by the cultivating hands of the most
celerated florists, are taught to grow in every direction. In each of these
arbors is an elegant organ, which, by turning a small brass cock, plays off
thirty-six favorite Italian airs: They can all be set going together, or one,
two, etc. at pleasure. The contrivance is a master piece of art: By raising a
small gate in the side of a canal at some distance, from which the basin is
supplied, a small trunk is immediately filled with water; at the other
extremity of which are as many brass cocks as there are organs: When these are
turned, the music begins. One of those organs was playing just as we passed the
door of the arbor. We stopped a while to listen to the enchanting sound, an
Eunuch coming out at that moment, my tutor enquired if a couple of foreigners
might be admitted. He desired us to wait a moment, left us, and instantly
returning, desired us to walk in. We complied, and were much surprised at being
saluted, on our entrance, by five ladies" -- (Here he faultered) -- "Five
ladies richly habited and closely veiled." (Here tears interrupted his
narrative. Recovering, "Gentlemen, pardon my emotion," said he, "you will find
in the sequel of my unhappy story, enough to justify my present behavior.

"We returned their salute in a proper manner. The music was suddenly stopped,
and one of the ladies, who by her air and the superiority of her dress,
appeared to claim the precedence, requested us to be seated, with which we
complied. She then asked how long we had been in Italy? My tutor satisfied her
in this particular, she proceeded to ask several other questions concerning our
past travels, and the route we intended to take; to all of which we answered
without reserve. She expressed her satisfaction with the description we had
given her of England, France, and the other places through which we had passed;
and in her turn described in the most animating style, the innumerable rarities
of Italy, adding, that three days would not be sufficient to review those
gardens, as they were very extensive. We passed the highest encomiums on the
taste, magnificence and convenience, which appeared in every part; but urged
the unavoidable necessity of departing from thence the next morning, as our
time was limited, and we had spent a great portion of it in France; therefore,
it required our exertion, in order to finish our intended tour within the
appointed time.

"To this she made no answer, but rung a small bell, which brought the Eunuch,
to whom she whispered a few words: He withdrew immediately, but soon after
returned, bearing two bottles, some glasses, and a casket of the most dilicious
fruits. Having placed these on a table, he was ordered to set the music to
playing. The ladies invited us to partake of this refreshment. The music began,
and the ladies unveiled. -- But ah! The pangs that sight has cost me are beyond
description! The first time my ravished eyes met those of the beauteous
Terentia, my soul experienced emotions to which, till then, I had been a
stranger! Under these new impressions I was much embarrassed, I retired for
some time, for feeling my face flushed with an unusual warmth, I was afraid my
tutor should perceive my agitation; well knowing him to be a man of the most
acute penetration, and apt to draw the most exact conclusions. I was convinced
that the beauteous object who was the cause of my emotion, perceived it
plainly; for whenever my eyes accidentally met here is, I found them rivetted on
me; she would then cast them downwards, and affect to be paying earnest
attention to the music. Having walked once or twice round the basin, I found
myself pretty well composed; I summoned all my fortitude, and returned to my
company. After the organ had played off a round, my tutor made a motion to
retire; accordingly, having made a proper acknowledgement, for the very kind
reception we had met with, we took leave and departed.

"We returned to our inn, and retired early to rest. When I reflected on our
evening's adventure, I began to be well satisfied at leaving St. Marino in the
morning, as the means of obliterating the memory of an infant attachment,
which, if suffered to gather strength, must inevitably draw after it a train of
disagreeable, if not fatal consequences; for by the influence the dear Terentia
had over the rest of the ladies, I concluded, and rightly too, that she must be
the governor's daughter. My sleep, however, was much disturbed by dreams, yet
when my tutor awakened me, which was at daybreak, I found myself in tolerable
spirits. The reason he assigned for waking me so early, was, that it would be
much more agreeable to ride in the morning, than in the scorching rays of noon.
I rose immediately, and though the mandate appeared somewhat disagreeable at
first, yet I dressed briskly: In the mean time, my tutor roused the landlord,
and ordered our horses to be got ready immediately. My chagrin wore off
insensibly, and the visions of the prece^ing night were entirely obliterated; I
became composed and cheerful, an^ began to anticipate the pleasure of viewing
the rarities of Florence. My servant was adjusting my hair, when my tutor
entered and informed us, that our horses were stolen! What then is to be done?
said I. Why, replied my tutor, we must remain here a day or two, in order that
the lan^lord may have an opportunity of making a search for them, and if they
are not to be found, he must pay for them, and we must endeavor to procure
others. We had deposited a hundred guineas, the value of the horses, in the
hands of the owner, but were to be reimbursed in Florence, by the person to
whom we were to deliver them, all but fifteen guineas, which was for their hire.

"Being detained contrary to our wishes or expectations, my tutor, after
breakfast, proposed taking a further view of the Governor's gardens, which
pleased me exceedingly. On our way to the gardens, my tutor pointed to a superb
edifice, which he informed me was the palace of the Governor. We stood some
minutes to view this magnificent structure, and as we were turning to go to the
gardens, I perceived at one of the upper windows, the lady who had treated us
so kindly the preceding evening; but perceiving us, she instantly disappeared.

"This incident gave me some uneasiness; however, I still supported a kind of
feigned cheerfulness, in order to deceive my tutor -- the first time I had ever
felt an inclination so to do. Having gained admittance, we took a different
walk from that of the preceding day, which led us into one of the most
delightful scenes ^n nature, Here, painting, botany, statuary, etc. were
carried to the most elevated pinnacle of perfection: Endless beauty and variety
attracted the fight, and the most exquisite odours pervaded the whole parterre.
If there is a place on earth, descriptive of the primeval residence of our
first parents, this must be the spot.

"We traversed these paradisiacal walks until noon, and the day beginning to
grow warm, we retired into an elegant summer house, so situated as to screen us
entirely from the meridional beams, and at the same time to command a prospect
of the circus, basin, etc.

"We fat discoursing there for some time; my tutor, according to his usual
manner, philosophizing and moralizing on every perceptible object. At length,
growing drowsy, he said he would take a nap, and desired me to awaken him in an
hour. After he had slept some moments, I found myself weary fitting alone, I
got up, and bent my steps toward a small grove of trees, cut in the form of
cones, and planted in narrow rows, which formed a very refreshing retreat.

"I had not been long in this sequestered spot, when I saw four or five young
ladies cross the walk I was in, at the distance of about a hundred yards. They
turned their faces full on me as they crossed, but passed along without
hesitation. Though I was not sure they were the same I had been in company with
the evening before, yet I found an unusual flow of spirits on their passing,
and was anxious to have a full view of them, for something whispered me, There
goes the cause of your late uneasiness. I immediately, I know not by what
impulse, advanced to the spot where they had thwarted my fight. When I arrived
there, I desoried them at a distance taking leave of each other, after which
each took a different route. I was convinced that I had guessed rightly, for
she whose image had haunted me all the foregoing night, was then walking slowly
before me, toward the farther end of the walk. Prompted by a motive too
powerful for me to resist, I followed, without approving of my own conduct, and
soon overtook her. Hearing some body walking behind her, she looked round and I
advancing, saluted her, ^he returned my salute very ingenuously, and we joined
conversation to the end of the walk, and entered an elegant rotunda, by which
it terminated, where we discoursed familiarly on several matters, with the
relation of which I shall not trouble you; let it suffice to say, that we not
only e^changed vows of eternal fidelity, but formed an assignation to meet,
that very evening, in order (...) enlist ourselves under the sacred bonds of
hymen.

"I know, gentlemen, you will condemn my precip^^^ncy; but if you reflect that
love was the acting spring, my unhappy case will have a claim to you pity, at
least. We parted, and I found my tutor still sleeping. I awakened him, and we
returned, to the inn to dinner. In the afternoon the landlord returned, and
informed (...) that he had got intelligence of the horses; but desired one of
us to go with him, as he had taken very little notice of them, and consequently
would not be able to prove them, if required. My tutor said he would go, and
accordingly set out, and I have not seen (...) since.

"In the evening, I repaired to the spot where I was to meet the object of my
love; 'twas at the entrance of a wood at the foot of this mountain. She
appeared at the time appointed, and we at her request penetrated the wood about
half a mile, to the mountain brow, where we were met by an old Friar, who
conducted us to a cell, in the side of the rock, and, shutting the door,
desired us to sit down. My charming bride told him she was in haste, and
requested him to perform the c^^^mony immediately, as he had promised.

"He then represented the imminent danger to which he should expose himself,
and the magnitude of the offense; adding, that he trembled at the fatal
consequences that must inevitably follow a discovery. She told him there was
not a person on earth privy to it but those who were present, and that as she
intended to sleep in her own apartment that night, there was not the least
shadow of danger. To these arguments she added a purse of gold, which
effectually silenced the reverend father, and secured his service.

"He then proceeded to the nuptial ceremony, which he performed in a very
devout and becoming manner. After the ceremony was ended, he laid the strictest
injunctions on us never to discover the place nor the person by whom we had
been married. This we both promised religiously to observe; then, having
thanked him and wished him a good night, we were about to leave the cell, when
we were much alarmed at hearing the sound of human voices, approaching. Our
consternation was increased, when the Friar, who went out on the first alarm,
came in and informed us, that a party of the Governor's life guards, with an
officer at their head, were within two hundred yards, advancing briskly, by
torch-light. Imagination cannot shape to itself a situation more alarming than
mine was at that moment. The Friar said, "Fly my son! Your being found here
will be fatal to us all. I have a private way to escape under ground; perhaps
if you are not found, all may yet be well." There was no time for deliberation;
I was constrained to comply, Heaven knows with what reluctance! So, after
taking a parting embrace, I fear for ever, of my dear Terentia, he gave me a
burning, waxen taper in my hand; then lifting a trap door, bestowed on me his
benediction, and I entered the dismal gulf, overwhelmed with all the horrors
which such a dreadful vicissitude was capable of producing. He shut down the
door and left me to penetrate the bowels of this mountain for near a mile,
under the most excruciating torture of mind. At length, I emerged once more
into open air, through a crevice of a rock barely wide enough to admit me. I
wandered about through the thickets, sometimes missing my steps and falling
many yards down the rugged side of the mountain, till day light, when I found
myself on the uppermost declivity of this promontory, which affords a much more
horrid prospect than you now behold. In that inhospitable spot I sat down,
weary and faint with climbing from one ridge of rocks to another, all night, to
bemoan my adverse fate, ruminating on the dreadful situation to which, in the
short space of two days and two nights, I was reduced, the circumstances which
produced, and those which accompanied this change; I became as it were,
petrified with grief and astonishment, and remained insensible of every thing,
and should probably, never have recovered, had not my man, who providentially
through curiosity watched us to the cell, and lay perdue till the guards were
gone, discovered my retreat. He, observing that they took my dear spouse and
the Friar with them, suspected I was slain, and as soon as they were out of
sight, entered the cell.

"After he had called me several times by name, he began to search diligently,
and finding a waxen taper, light it, and as he has since informed me, searched
every part of the cell with great minuteness. He was exceedingly surprised, and
could not believe his own eyes: Looking again, however, very narrowly, he
espied the trap door, which he raised and descended instantly* He continued
pursuing and calling me until his taper was exhausted, and then groped his way
to the hole through which I had passed. It being then broad day, so that in
some places he could trace my footsteps along. Observing something white, at a
distance on an eminence, far above him, he advanced toward it, thinking I had
laid down, and hung my handkerchief there as a signal to him in case he should
search for me. However, in this he was mistaken; for though it was my
handkerchief. I was not there, but had dropped it by accident. But it happened
through the providence of God, that as he stood debating with himself whether
he should proceed, or return back by the way he came, and inform my tutor of
what had happened, that he perceived me at the distance, he supposed, of three
quarters of a mile, climbing over a ridge of rocks. He had once a mind to call;
but reflecting, that as I was ignorant of his having followed me, I might
conceive it to be some of the guards in pursuit, and conceal myself where he
would not be able to find me, determined to follow in silence.

"He found me in the situation I have before described, and having after a long
search, found a spring issuing from a rock, he washed my face and temples, by
which means I recovered my senses again. Miserable as I was, a transient gleam
of joy ran through my soul on beholding my trusty, affectionate servant; but
gloomy reflections took place of that, and I fear will pervade my soul till
death puts a period to my life and miseries together.

"The place in which he found me, afforded no shelter from the fury of a storm,
which was collecting, we therefore set out in search for a situation that
would, and chance directed us to this cavern. About noon the clouds dispersed,
and the weather became serene, my man declared he would endeavor to find the
way to town, in order to gain some intelligence of my tutor, if possible, and
to procure some provisions for me. Though I ardently wished to know how matters
had been conducted since the unhappy affair of the preceding evening, and
though we could not exist long without some refreshment, yet it was with
reluctance I permitted him to go. A thousand doubts and fears possessed my
mind, until he returned, and informed me of his success. On his arrival in
town, it was his intention to go to our (...) but fear being ever watchful,
before he ventured to approach, he took care to have a watchful eye about him,
le^t he should be discovered, and was no sooner within sight of the house than
he perceived it surrounded by guards. He retreated with some precipitation,
down a narrow lane, which led to a remote part of the town. Slackening his pace
a little, he accidentally met an old acquaintance, with whom he had contracted
an intimacy when attending my father in his travels. His friend invited him to
partake of a bottle of wine, to which he complied, and while drinking, they
enquired of each other the particulars of their travels, employment, etc. They
both answered without reserve. "My friend," said the other to my man, "I am
sorry to find you are in the service of a person, who if found, will meet the
most rigorous treatment, if not an ignominious death. The old gentleman, his
companion, is now in a dungeon, as well as the Friar and landlord; and I am
afraid that will not be the greatest punishment the Governor will inflict on
them, for he is much enraged against them. I was present at their whole
examination, and though there does not appear any cause of accusation against
any but the Friar, they will share the same punishment."

"My man then requested him to tell every circumstance he knew, which he did in
a few words. He informed him, that an ancient Duenna, who had nursed Terentia,
and had a real affection for her, seeing her set out toward the Friar's cell,
resolved to follow and accompany her home, but on seeing her so familiarly give
me her hand and enter the wood with me, returned instantly, and informed the
Governor of the discovery she had made, who immediately ordered his guards to
go to Friar John's cell, and bring every person he found there instantly before
him. The dear creature disclaimed all manner of knowledge or acquaintance with
me: That she had met a gentleman on her entering the wood, she confessed, but
denied having any discourse with him. The Friar also persisted in having seen
her come alone to the cell, and that there had been no other person there that
evening.

"Notwithstanding all their asseverations of innocence, the Friar was committed
to the dungeon, and my dear bride to the care of the Duenna, with orders to
keep her closely confined from the sight of every person but herself. "Your
horses," continued his friend, "were found in the possession of a man, who
would not deliver them to any person but some of the Governor's household: The
landlord, and the old gentleman took him by force and conveyed him to town late
last night, confined him in a room till this morning, when they obtained an
audience of the Governor, and had their prisoner examined. His examination
developed the whole affair, for he produced a note in the hand writing of
Terentia, charging him to keep the horses safely, until the bearer or some
other of her father's domestics should demand them, and not then without her
orders in writing. On being asked who delivered the horses to him, he answered
he believed it to be one of the Governor's Eunuch's, and that he was sure he
should know him if he could see him again. All the Eunuchs were then brought
into the presence of the governor, and the man instantly pointed out the
culprit. He denied the fact positively, and bore the rack a considerable time
before he disclosed the truth. He confessed that his mistress had given him
orders to watch two gentlemen from the gardens to their lodgings, to find out
whether they traveled on horseback or not: That having performed this, he
informed her of every circumstance, and that she gave him money and the note,
charging him to go in the night, take the horses out of the stable, and convey
them to the place where they were found. The Governor ordered him to be
strangled immediately. The man in whose custody the horses were found, was
severely scourged, for not giving immediate notice to the Governor of these
proceedings:" A guard was sent to the inn to search for me, with orders not to
return without me; and my tutor and the landlord closely confined, till I
should be found.

"This was all he could collect at that time, and being well assured of the
fidelity of his friend, informed him of my concealment, and begged he would
assist him in procuring some necessaries for my support: This he complied with*
and they parted, having previously agreed to meet the next day at the same
place.

"My man returned in the evening, much fatigued, having carried this mattress
and cover, besides provisions enough for a week's subsistence, and a large
flask of wine.

"When I reflected on the concatenation of circumstances by which my late
happiness, and present misery was effected, I could not but admire the power of
love, which surmounts every difficulty, and maugre consequences, braves every
danger to attain its end. It is obvious, that our horses were taken for no
other purpose than to detain us in St. Marino some day^ longer. But to proceed:
--

"From the information of my man, respecting the fidelity of his friend, I
began to entertain hopes of yet regaining my dear Terentia, if there was a
possibility of conveying a letter to her. I communicated these ideas to my man,
which he said exactly corresponded with his, and added, that but for the
shortness of the time, he would have sounded his friend on that subject, but
would not fail to try every expedient to procure me the satisfaction I desired.
He met his friend according to appointment and found every thing to his wish.
His friend is in the service of an English gentleman, who lodges in a house in
a back street, the back windows of which overlooks the Governor's private
garden, which is immediately attached to the palace. -- His friend further
informed him, that he had formed an intimacy with a female domestic of the
Governor's, by whose means he could be informed of every particular relative to
my af^airs. He said, the Duenna attended the young lady as the shadow the
substance; but that he did not doubt finding means to convey her a letter, if
committed to his charge. My man assured him of an ample reward if he succeeded;
but with all conjured him not to communicate the secret to his fair enamoratta.
He then, with the assistance of his friend, procured pen, ink and paper; flint,
steel and candles, and returned to me full of the success of his negotiation. I
was overjoyed at the prospect of returning happiness, and embraced him as a
brother -- indeed he has manifested the most unshaken attachment, and unwearied
diligence in soothing my misfortunes, which demands my utmost regard,

"The next morning I wrote a letter to my dear girl, wherein I described my
dreadful situation -- painted the anguish of my mind on her particular account,
and my sorrow for the fate of my beloved tutor. I conjured her by the sacred
ties which united our souls, to let me know the situation of affairs there, and
gave her a hint of the fidelity of the person who forwarded the letter. I
sealed and delivered this to my faithful servant. "Now, sir," said he, "don't
be alarmed, if you should not see me for a day or two* as it is impossible to
hurry this kind of business, because it depends entirely upon circumstances,
and must be conducted with the greatest caution." He was gone four days and as
many tedious nights: I began to look on my ruin as inevitable. I saw already my
man stretched on the rack -- saw the guards ascending the mountain, and was
several times preparing to take the desperate leap, from which you prevented me
to day. It was my determination to escape my enemies by that means, if ever
they should discover my retreat.

"At length, however, he arrived with a letter from her dear hand: (Here he
read the letter:) He said his friend bid him tell me, that he had never run
such a hazard in his life, as he did in procuring it. He had taken an
opportunity of dropping my letter into the walk before her, when her keeper was
at some distance behind. Terentia, saw it fall, and casting her eyes upwards
and perceiving him, seemed to hesitate; however, she picked it up and thrust it
hastily into her bosom. Her keeper overtook her presently and passed her, and
after some time went into the palace. During her stay in the house he observed
my wife, seated in a shady spot, reading the letter, with much apparent
emotion. She suppressed her agitation, and seemed anxious to speak to him; but
that was impossible, as the Duenna just then returned. The next morning, very
early, he posted himself at the window, and though it was but just day light,
she was there. She perceived him immediately, and showed him a billet which she
seemed anxious to convey to him. He made a sign to her to throw it down, and
retire, giving her to understand that he would descend for it, she understood
him and immediately complied. He then, by the help of a rope-ladder, which was
kept in the house in case of fire, descended speedily, took up the letter, and
returned to his post; then taking up his ladder he stood some minutes, till the
dear creature, who had been observing his motions, returned to the spot where
she had left the letter, and perceiving it gone, looked up at him with a glow
of satisfaction on her countenance, and retired into the house. His friend
further said that he did not conceive it impossible to deliver her entirely
from her confinement, and if I could devise means to convey her out of Italy
immediately, he would freely undertake it.

"You see gentlemen," said he, "that my worthy tutor is condemned to linger out
his days in a miserable dungeon, and self preservation will not permit me to
take any step toward effecting his liberation. This thought afflicts me beyond
measure. If he had incurred his punishment by any misconduct of his own, I
should have been sensibly afflicted; but the reflection of his being entirely
innocent, and of the whole crime being mine, distracts me, and, I fear, will
make such an impression of grief on my mind, as will never be effaced.

"My servant is now gone with a letter to inform my dear Terentia that I am
determined to free myself and her quickly, or perish in the attempt. He is also
to request his friend to assist him in procuring beasts to convey us to
Leghorn, where, if we succeed, I will embark for England immediately. This,
gentlemen, is the sum of my unhappy story, and I think you must acknowledge my
misfortunes to be peculiarly distressing: such as, I hope, you will never
experience."

They confessed he had been unfortunate, but exhorted him to be cheerful, for
that his case, at present, was by no means desperate; that he had now reason to
expect that his affairs would take a favorable turn. They informed him of
their intended voyage, and promised him every possible assistance. Just at this
instant the servant arrived.

The servant started at the sight of strangers, and was going to retire, but
his master, perceiving his intention prevented him, saying, Fear nothing, here
are none but friends: Come forward, how have you sped? At that instant Mercutio
and George arose, with an intention to retire; but Eugenio insisted on their
stay until his servant should have disclosed the result of his negotiation.
They acquiesced, and he desired the servant to inform them, without reserve, of
all his transactions since his departure from thence: He began as follows: --

"I met my friend at the appointed place, who informed me that the Governor of
St. Marino intends paying a visit to the Doge of Venice, in a very short time:
He added, that the lady is not so closely confined as she has been, being now
permitted to walk in the garden alone. He advises you, sir, to remain here
until her father sets out for Venice; in the mean time, he promises to arrange
matters so as to effect the liberation of the lady immediately after the
departure of her father."

He then delivered a letter which, he said, his friend had procured from the
lady's own hand. Eugenio seized it, and read it with avidity, then presenting
it to Mercutio, said, Behold a slight specimen of her mental accomplishments,
and tell me whether the communication of happiness appears to be intimately
connected with such perfection, or not.

After perusing it attentively, our hero and his friend could not withhold
their assent to his proposition: They bestowed the greatest encomiums on the
amiable and beloved writer, who, by the spirit, ease and elegance with which
she wrote, would have arrested the attention, and extorted the approbation of
the most surly critic. To the most ardent vows of eternal fidelity, united with
wishes for her deliverance, she added an intimation of her father's intended
journey to Venice, and a minute account of the particular rout he designed to
take.

Mercutio enjoined Eugenio to make himself perfectly easy, as from the present
face of his affairs, he had every reason to hope they would shortly terminate
to his entire satisfaction. George heartily joi^ed in the admonition, and
added, that his house and purse were at his service, together with all the
personal assistance in his power. "My beloved friends," said the astonished
Eugenio, "how shall I render you a proper return for your unparalelled
generosity? The liberality, and extensive latitude of your offers, when I
reflect on my present critical situation, and the danger to which you expose
yourselves in case of discovery, really amaze me! Of one thing I am sure -- if
the whole of my future (...) should be devoted entirely to your service it
would fall infinitely short of a suitable return." Common humanity, replied
George, is sufficient in this case to prompt us to contribute to your relief,
therefore we can have no claim on your gratitude; for all the good offices we
can possibly perform in behalf of each other will entitle us to no other
reward, than a consciousness of having performed a part of that duty, which, as
men, we owe one to another. If by any thing in our power, your happiness is
secured, we shall participate with you in the conviction of having acted with
propriety; and the only acceptable return you can make, is your friendship,
independent of acknowledgments.

This effectually silenced Eugenio, and George proposed to retire: "In the
evening," said he, "I will send a person to conduct you and your servant to my
house, which is but a short distance from hence, where you shall be properly
accommodated, and may remain in as much privacy as here, till your affairs are
brought to an issue." Eugenio was about to return an answer full of grateful
acknowledgments; but they politely taking leave, and bidding him fear nothing,
departed.

As they descended the mountain, their discourse naturally turned on the
amazing revolutions of human affairs. "Eugenio," said George, "was beginning to
grow desperate yesterday, and if we had not discovered his retreat, it is more
than probable he would have attempted the regaining his wise by means which,
perhaps, might have terminated in his destruction." "Very likely," replied
Mercutio; "the sense of his misfortunes had nearly overcome his reason and
fortitude: How often are we prevented, by the interposition of Divine
Providence from the commission of that, which, if permitted, would involve us
in inevitable ruin! Then how thankful ought we to be to that mighty Being which
spoke all things into existence, for his merciful condescension in restraining
us from actions which, if committed, his justice must have severely punished."

Having regained the foot of the mountain, they were joined by their ladies,
who were taking a walk along the sea shore, the ground between which and the
mountain being covered with a delightful verdure, with fine tufts of trees
interspersed, on the boughs of which millions of birds sat singing; the azure
concave was beautifully clear to the extremity of the horizon, and every obj^ct
conspired to render their excursion agreeable. It was in this delightful spot
that George (...) of the discovery his friend and he had that morning made.
They listened with astonishment and expressed the utmost solicitude for the
success of Eugenio and Terentia. They next consulted on the most salutary
measures to be employed with regard to their intended journey, and after
rejecting several propositions, agreed, that preparations should be made for a
sudden departure, horses provided, ready to start at a minute's warning, and
all things packed up ready to lay on them. It was also thought requisite that
Eugenio and Terentia should assume the appearance of servants, at least till
their arrival at Florence, in order, by concealing their quality, to prevent
discovery. These preliminaries being agreed to, George instructed a servant how
to ascend the mountain and to conduct Eugenio down thither in the twilight.

Eugenio arrived attended by his guide and servant just as candles were
lighting. The reception he met with, reflected the highest honor on the
feelings of his new found friends: He was introduced to the ladies by Mercutio;
they received him with marks of the most profound respect.

Eugenio was a handsome person, perfectly well shaped and extremely polite; his
complexion fair, his features manly; and though his late misfortunes had, in
some measure, checked his natural vivacity, yet returning hope rendered his
company very agreeable, which, added to his mental qualifications, secured him
a strong prepossession in the affections of his new friends, who now actually
consulted the ease and safety of their guest more than their own.

After supper, George informed Eugenio of the plan which had been adopted,
which he highly approved, expressed much surprise at the promptitude of his
friends to serve him, and promised eternal friendship in return.

Early on the following day, Eugenio dispatched his man with a letter to
Terentia, informing her of his fortunate situation, and of the plan projected
by his friends: He likewise sent a handsome present to his agent in town,
requesting at the same time, his every assistance to release the lady as soon
as the Governor should depart, assuring him of an ample reward. The man had
orders to conceal himself in town till an answer was procured. George instantly
began to make the necessary arrangements for the intended journey, in which
Mercutio assisted him. The house in which George resided was ready furnished,
therefore his movables could be easily packed in portmantaus, which was
immediately done, while our hero and George went in quest of horses, to
transport them whenever they might be called for. In the mean time, Eugenio's
servant arrived with a letter from Terentia, in substance as follows: BELOVED
EUGENIO,
My heart vibrates with joy, at hearing the news of your present safety, and of
your acquisition of such noble friends as those described in (...) epistle. The
person who has promoted our (...) is, though a servant, a person of exalted
(...), and has formed a plan for my deliverance which, with the assistance of
Heaven, cannot fail^. Your servant will acquaint you (...) the particulars. --
Three days more will, I trust, restore me to my dear Eugenio; for my father
sets out the day after tomorrow. -- Father John, your tutor and the keeper of
the prison have all absconded -- My father is in a violent rage on the
occasion, and they are pursued with avidity* The person who forwards our
letters gave me this information, for all my discourse is with my nurse, and
she informs me of nothing. -- Adieu! Hope and fear alternately possess my soul,
till that blissful hour when heaven shall kindly restore Eugenio to the arms of
his faithful

TERENTIA.




Eugenio was transported beyond measure on the perusal of this epistle, and
already anticipated the pleasure of folding his beloved Terentia in his arms.
He submitted the letter to the perusal of the ladies, who heartily
congratulated him on the apparent prosperous turn of his affairs; and George
and Mercutio returning shortly after, informed them, they had horses and every
other necessary accommodation at command on the shortest notice: "And now,"
said Mercutio, "banish anxiety, since the good old gentleman, your (...) has
made his escape; three days, I hope (...)

(...) and if fortune favors us, as many weeks (...) you both out of the reach
of danger." These (...) inspired Eugenio with new life, and the visible change
on his countenance indicated a heart elate with joy. Agreeably to his
appointment with his friend, Eugenio's servan^ (...) to town the next day, and
had the satisfaction of seeing the Governor set out; and of hearing that the
scouts who had been sent in pursuit of the keeper of the prison, and his fellow
travelers, had returned without having been able to procure the least
intelligence of their rout. It was then concerted between him and his friend,
that on the evening of the ensuing day, he should conduct his master to the
spot where he had met Terentia in order to proceed to Fri^r John's cell, and
there wait the arrival of the lady. His friend informed him that Terentia was
to feign a slight indisposition some hours before that appointed for the
intended enterprise, and retire to her closet on pretense of trying to compose
herself to sleep. That ^her window overlooked the garden, and was not more than
four feet from the ground, so that she might descend with safety: In the mean
time, he would fix the abovementioned ladder of ropes to his own window, with
which she was well acquainted, where he would stand sentinel and instantly on
her approach, drop the ladder, receive her into the window and, throw a man's
long riding cloak over her, conduct her to the appointed spot: He added, that
his master's being out (...) for a few days would greatly facilitate the (...)

Having placed every thing in a proper train in town, Eugenio's servant
returned with a billet from the lady, wherein she assured him of her perfect
willingness, and even impatience to accompany him to any part of the globe.

Eugenio communicated these welcome tidings to his friends, who partook of his
satisfaction on the occasion. They then concluded, that it would be prudent to
send for the horses in the afternoon; to have the baggage laid on as soon as it
was dark, then set forward and travel all night, and, as George knew the whole
road perfectly, to halt as seldom as possible until they should arrive in
Leghorn.

The next day all hands were busy in making the necessary arrangements for
their departure: Eugenio, in a sta^^ of the utmost anxiety, thought it the
longest of his lif^; nor were his friends less anxious. At two o'clock, the
servants were dispatched for the beasts; at five, Eugenio and his man began to
ascend the mountain, and our hero and his friends waited their return in calm
suspense, as though something fatal hung on the event. The whole hemisphere was
involved in darkness, when Eugenio and his faithful servant arrived at the
place of assignation. After waiting about half an hour, full of hopes and
fears, Eugenio was relieved from all his anxiety, by the appearance of her whom
he esteemed more than empires: He clasped her in his arms with ectasy, at the
same time exclaiming, "And do I once more embrace my love! Thanks to all
gracious heaven! Such bliss would be cheaply purchased with an age of toil and
suspense." Terentia manifested her satisfaction by the most tender caresses,
and tears of joy.

After the first emotions had subsided, Eugenio turned to her conductor,
saying, "And you, my much esteemed friend! How shall I ever reward your merit
as it deserves? You have rendered me a kindness which I can never repay. But
(pulling out a purse of gold and presenting it) accept this trifling testimony
of my esteem, until an opportunity shall offer when I may have it in my power
to do more justice to your worth. " He refused it peremptorily -- persuasions
were vain, he would not touch a single ducat, and it was with some difficulty
that he was prevailed on to accept a ring which Eugenio forced on his finger,
saying, "Wear this, as a token of my friendship, till you return to London,
when you must return it; and I will supply its place by something more worthy
of your acceptance."

They then took an affectionate leave of each other and parted. Eugenio's man
led the way bearing a very weighty casket belonging to Terentia: They were a
considerable time descending the mountain, but arrived safely at George's just
as supper was served up. Terentia was received with politeness and affection;
and, after resting herself a little, sat down to supper with them. Preparation
was instantly made for their departure, Mercutio and George undertook to equip
Eugenio, and the ladies disguised Terentia, who consented to personate
Isabella's waiting woman. In the mean time, the servants saddled the horses and
laid on the baggage, and, after imploring the assistance and protection of
heaven, they mounted and set forward.

They arrived at Leghorn without meeting with any material occurrence, where
they were received with the most unaffected cordiality by Mr. Wilcox and his
amiable spouse, who, though somewhat advanced in years, was possessed of the
most perfect good nature, added to a superior degree of good sense, and a most
pleasing vivacity combined with an elegant form and unacceptionable features.

Mr. Wilcox had two sons, the eldest commanded a stout merchant ship in the
Levant trade; the youngest was factor to his father, in Amsterdam; and two
daughters, the youngest was then in Holland with her brother; and the eldest
was married to George Wright.

The old gentleman had already provided a ship to transport them to Holland,
which he had freighted himself: He intended to remain in Amsterdam a few weeks,
till his son Robert should have disposed of what merchandise he had on hand,
expecting the return of his other son from the Levant, and then to return to
Liverpool with his whole family. They remained but ten days in Leghorn, for
George having informed his father and mother-in-law of the adventure of Eugenio
and Terentia, they judged it the most expedient to keep them in disguise while
on shore, and to embark as soon as convenient. In the mean time Mr. Wilcox and
his son-in-law were busy in seeing their effects embarked and safely stowed on
board the ship. One day they found the captain engaged in discourse with a
stranger, who seemed to press earnestly for some favor: The Captain perceiving
Mr. Wilcox, interrupted the stranger, somewhat hastily, saying, here is the
gentleman of whom I was speaking, if he is willing to grant your request I have
not the least objection.

"What is your request Sir?" said Mr. Wilcox, in the most unreserved manner, "I
shall think myself happy in having it in my power to oblige a gentleman of your
appearance, therefore pray let me hear your request, and rely on my willingness
to serve you." "You do me a great deal of honor, Sir," said the stranger, "and
I cannot enough admire your frankness and generosity, in so freely tendering me
your service. Not to keep you longer in suspense, I am a native of England, and
have been transacting some affairs in Italy for a certain nobleman in London:
Having lately received letters from thence pressing me to return on a very
important affair, I am in haste to get thither. After having, in vain enquired
for a vessel bound for England, I was informed of this being shortly to sail
for Holland; I therefore made application to the commander, who informs me,
that you have already engaged his ship entirely, and that without your consent
he could not pretend to take any passengers on board. Now Sir, if you will be
kind enough to permit me to sail with you to your destined port, as my affairs
are very pressing, I shall esteem it as a favor of the first magnitude, and
will comply with every requisite for my passage." "Say no more, sir," said Mr.
Wilcox: "You are not only welcome to your passage, but, as I promise myself
much satisfaction in your company, I shall make that the only condition." "Your
generosity," returned the stranger, "demands all my gratitude, and you may rest
assured of my eternal acknowledgment of the obligation." He would have
proceeded, but Mr. Wilcox prevented him by informing him, that he intended to
embark his family early the next morning, and sail whenever the wind should
serve, therefore, advised him, if he had any business to transact^on shore, to
be as expeditious as possible.

They then politely took leave of each other; Mr. Wilcox and George returned to
their friends, and the stranger having no business on shore, remained on board
with the Captain.

Three hours before day, our little community arose, and being collected in the
common apartment, united in imploring the protection of that God who gave them
existence, in their intended voyage. They then began to prepare for
embarkation: Eugenio and Terentia put of their menial habits, and appeared in
their proper characters. At dawn of day, being all ready, they set forward
toward the waterside, where they found the ship's boat waiting. They
embarked, and the ship was immediately got under weigh: The canvass being
spread to the fresh breeze, they were, in a few hours, wafted out of sight of
the city of Leghorn.

Soon after they went on board, Mr. Wilcox enquired for the stranger, and was
informed he was not stirring yet. They were all sitting on the quarter deck,
congratulating each other on the extreme pleasant weather with which heaven had
favored them in the commencement of their voyage, when the stranger appeared
upon deck, and advancing, saluted the whole company in the politest manner. But
how shall I paint the astonishment of Eugenio, when in the person of the
stranger, he perceived his beloved tutor? He sprang forward, and eagerly
embracing him, exclaimed aloud, "Do I behold, once more, my honored, my much
loved master, friend and companion, alive and at his liberty." Then falling on
his knees, earnestly entreated him to pardon the folly of his youth, which had
nearly involved them both in irretreivable ruin.

"Rise my child," said his tutor, with a countenance that discovered the
goodness of his soul, "and may heaven pardon every inadvertency of your future
life as freely as I do this first: As to the inconveniences I may have met
with since our separation, they were of no consideration with me, when compared
with the anxiety I experienced on your particular account, lest you should be
discovered. After all I am happy in the reflection of having your company to
England; and of having in my power then to present you safe to your noble
parents."

"My dear sir," replied the youth, "your generosity, from our first interview,
has been familiar to me; but in this particular instance manifests itself in so
superlative degree, that it leaves me a bankrupt, by conferring an obligation
too vast for me ever to acquit myself of." He then took Terentia by the hand,
and presented her to his tutor, saying, "behold, dear sir the innocent, beloved
cause of our late troubles; and seal my pardon by admitting her to a share of
your esteem." The old gentleman prevented her from kneeling, by catching her in
his arms, as she was taking that posture: He assured her of his warmest
friendship, adding, that he had never imputed the least part of his late
troubles to her intention. She declared her satisfaction in being honored with
the regard of so worthy a person; and promised to respect him as one of her
best friends. Breakfast interrupted the conversation for some time. When over,
Mr. Savigny, Eugenio's tutor, requested of his pupil the particulars of his
adventures since they parted in St. Marino. Eugenio accordingly related, in the
most connect manner, every circumstance, as it has been communicated to the
reader already: Painting, in the most striking colors the favors he had
experienced at the hands of his new friends. "Mr. Savigny listened attentively
to every part of his narrative, not without emotion, and when it was ended,
remarked, that the hand of Providence had been visibly exerted in favor of
them both; adding, that nothing short of a complete affiance in the protection
of the Supreme Being, could have encouraged him even to hope for an escape from
the horrid dungeon in which he had been confined. The whole company then
requested a similar favor of Mr. Savigny.

"My adventures," said he, "in so short a space, cannot be supposed to have
been many or important; and though interesting to me, will afford neither
pleasure nor amusemement to the company present: Yet, it would argue the most
unpardonable ingratitude in me, to refuse so slight a gratification to persons
who have so generously contributed to my present happiness, and that of my
pupil, in so extensive a latitude. The day I parted with you," turning to
Eugenio, "You know I set out in company with our host, in order, if possible,
to recover our horses. The person in whose possession we found them, refused to
deliver them without a written order from the Governor or some of his household:
We were much surprised at this repulse, and demanded his reasons. He answered,
that they were delivered to him by one of the Governor's Eunuchs, who charged
him to keep them safely, feed them well, and that he should be amply rewarded;
and moreover delivered him a billet from the Governor's daughter:" (Here
Terentia withdrew with Isabella,) "which contained peremptory orders not to
deliver the horses to any person without the aforementioned order.

"This answer did but involve me in greater perplexity, for, what business the
Governor of St. Marino could have with our horses, or how he came by them, was
to me, an inexplicable mystery. I told him the horses were mine, that I
suspected he wished to impose on me; that the story he had vamped up appeared
to me a fiction, and the note a forgery. I told him further, that if he would
deliver up the horses immediately, I should give myself no further trouble; if
not, that I would make immediate application to the Governor, and have him
severly punished for his obstinacy.

"Finding that all I said had no effect, I left him, and with my landlord,
returned to St. Marino, and soon obtained an audience with his Excellency: This
was the next day about ten o'clock. After having made my complaint, he promised
me ample satisfaction and instantly dispatched an officer and twelve men with
orders to bring the delinquent before him immediately. He was brought there in
a few hours, when the Governor proceeded to interrogate him: He immediately
produced the billet. The Governor having perused it, asked who delivered him
the horses? Antonio, replied the prisoner. He then asked him if Antonio had
assigned any reason for bringing them to him; he answered in the negative.

"The Eunuch was sent for, and examined. He trembled exceedingly, his tongue
faltered, and his answers were short, broken and ambiguous. The Governor
commanded him to the torture -- He confessed the whole, corroborated what the
prisoner had said, and completely unravelled the whole affair. The Governor,
having obtained all the information the unfortunate Eunuch could give, ordered
him to be strangled: My feelings revolted at this piece of cruelty, and I could
not refrain soliciting pardon for the trembling victim; but in vain: He flew
into a violent rage and began to interrogate the landlord and me concerning
you, at which we were astonished, not doubting but you was still at our
lodgings.

"In vain we assured him we had neither seen nor heard from you since we had
set out in search of the horses: He insisted our answers were all evasions;
that we had all conspired together to rob him of his daughter, and perhaps his
life. One miscreant, said he, has atoned for his crimes by death, and, if that
heretic, meaning you, is not speedily discovered, you may rest assured of a
similar fate: Drag them away, said he to the keeper of the prison, confine them
closely; if you suffer them to escape, your life shall pay the forfeit.

"Accordingly we were conveyed to the common prison, where we were confined in
a most horrid dungeon, denied the benefit of light or air, and in continual
expectation of being strangled or broke on the wheel. The second day of our
imprisonment, the landlord was released, in order (as the jailer has since
informed me) to detect, if possible, you or your servant, who it was supposed,
would be keeping a look out for me. Dreary as my habitation, and gloomy as my
future prospect was, my ardent prayer to heaven was, that I might be permitted
to endure the utmost vengeance of the Governor, rather then you should be
discovered.

"One night, as I lay, enveloped in the most gloomy darkness, ruminating on my
unhappy situation, and praying for your safety, I thought I heard somebody
discoursing in a very low key. I raised my head and listened very attentively.
-- I soon perceived, through a very small crevice, the Jailer and a person in a
canonical habit (who afterward proved to be the Friar who married you) in
close conversation together: They were forming a plan for abandoning the prison
the ensuing night, and to post away to the dominions of Spain with all possible
speed.

"Hopeless as my situation was, a ray of hope darted through my soul with the
idea of converting the discovery to my own advantage. A variety of resolutions
presented themselves to my distracted imagination, between that time and the
dawning of the day. At al^ events, I resolved to hint the matter to the Jailer,
let him know I had discovered their whole plan, and finally, request a
participation in their adventure: I was encouraged to this measure by an idea
that he would never (if he could help it) return to Italy, consequently would
be regardless of the consequences which might attend his elopement: He might
also be apprehensive of my discovering their rout.

"I slept very little that night, and that little was interrupted by dreams, by
no means agreeable, and when I awoke, my heart palpitated violently; my whole
frame was much agitated, though unconscious of any crime, either committed or
meditated.

"Morning, if the appearance of the Jailer may be termed so; for light never
intruded my apartment, at length dispelled the perturbation of my mind; my
keeper appeared more civil than ordinary, which I interpreted as a good omen.
He presented my usual modicum of food -- I received it with a heavy sigh,
exclaiming at the same time, When Oh Lord! shall I be released from this
racking situation? -- Thrice happy, said I, turning to the keeper, are you my
friend, in the enjoyment of that liberty, of which I am unjustly deprived! How
happy should I be now, could I be permitted to b^eathe, once more the fresh
air! Once more enjoy the light of heaven! -- But alas! I am, I fear, if not to
suffer an ignominious death, doomed to linger out the remainder of my days in
this loathsome d^n, excluded from the society of men, with a mind tortured with
the most racking anxiety, without having committed even the shadow of a crime.

"I really commiserate your distress, but you know, said he, the nature of my
employment will not admit of my contributing to the alleviation of it. Oh y^s,
answered I, it is in your power to rescue me from the impending mischief which
awaits me. If you intended to remain here, I should not put your fi^elity to
the trial. He appeared much embarrassed. But be not offended nor surprised,
when I inform you, that your intentions are well known to me: I overheard every
word that past between you and the reverend father last night; and all I
request in consequence is, that you will admit me a partner in your intended
enterprise.

"His countenance changed, and he was about to reply; but I prevented him, by
saying, only reflect, my dear friend, on the consequences resulting from your
elopement: You see how rigorously I am already trea^e^, without any cause, and
is it not more than probable that when the Governor is informed of the step you
have taken, he will wreak his whole vengeance on me: -- I see humanity in your
countenance -- I am convinced you have not a wish to be accessory to my death,
which will inevitably follow your departure. Oh consider this, my dear friend,
said I, taking his hand, you are sensible my present confinement is unmerited;
therefore, let me take my lot with you this night, let what will befall me, I
will be your everlasting friend. -- Here I paused. Your request shall be
granted, said he, I am going to Father John now; and will return to you
shortly; in the mean time, make yourself easy: If we succeed, this night you
shall be at your liberty; if not, inevitable ruin attends us all.

"He left me, and I must confess I wronged him; for I was doubtful of his
integrity: He returned, however, according to his promise, and informed me,
that he had consulted with the Holy father; that he was well satisfied for me
to accompany them to some distance from the town; but that then I must shift
for myself. -- I will, continued he, furnish you with a horse of my own, which
you may dispose of as you think proper, and twenty ducats to bear your expenses
till you are out of danger. With these words he presented me with this purse,
(showing it) containing the aforesaid sum and this dagger: You may, perhaps,
find this your best friend, said he. Farewell -- hold yourself in readiness --
doubt nothing.

END OF VOLUME FIRST.

