PORCUPINE's POLITICAL CENSOR, For March, 1797.

PORCUPINE's POLITICAL CENSOR, For March, 1797.

CONTAINING, An interesting Letter from a Gentleman in Switzerland, to his
friend in America, describing the situation of France, PAGE 53 Noah Webster's
attack on Porcupine, PAGE 75 Porcupine's Answer, Letter I, PAGE 79 Letter II,
PAGE 81 Porcupine's Last Will and Testament, PAGE 107 Index to the Gazette for
March, 1797, PAGE 117


There is no Censor for February, this year.

PHILADELPHIA: Published by WILLIAM COBBETT, opposite Christ's Church. Where
all Letters to the Publisher are desired to be addressed, Post paid.

Price, One Quarter of a Dollar.

A LETTER FROM A GENTLEMAN IN SWITZERLAND, TO HIS FRIEND IN AMERICA.
THE following Letter is so striking a picture of France and French Liberty,
and has met with such universal approbation, that I thought it right to give it
a place in the Censor.
LAUSANNE, (SWITZERLAND) Feb. 24th, 1794. My dear Sir,
I AM just returned from a very interesting tour, and will employ the few
moments I remain in this place in giving you a short, and probably a very
imperfect sketch of it. In my last I mentioned having a letter from the Marquis
de la Fayette to March.
his wife. -- I had without consideration undertaken to forward it to Mr.
Morris, our minister at Paris; but on reflection I was struck with the
impropriety of enclosing him a letter from a man whose name alone was treason
in France, and at a period when all letters were opened, and when the slightest
and most innocent correspondence with emigrants, continually brought numbers to
the guillotine. -- I endeavored both at Lausanne and at Geneva, to find some
person going into France, who would promise to deliver it, but I easily
preceived there was no one who would expose himself to such a risk -- In this
situation, the interest I felt for the character who wrote the letter, and a
desire of seeing France at a period so critical, induced me, though still
indisposed, to resolve on being the bearer of it myself. I applied to Citoyen
Soulavia the French Resident at Geneva for a passport. He told me the one I had
from Mr. Pinckney was better than any he could give me, but that in a time of
revolutions the merest trifle might irritate the people, and with my English
accent and appearance, he thought it advisable to give up entirely the idea of
going to Paris. Not satisfied with his advice, I determined to apply to higher
authority, and to wait on a representant du peuple, A member of the Convention.
who had lately arrived in the department bordering on Switzerland. The curious
accounts I had heard of of this man made me desirous of seeing him; and I was
fortunate enough to meet him a few days afterward at Versoy. A representant du
peuple is a sort of viceroy chosen in the bosom of the convention and sent into
the departments by the Committee of Public safety.
Comite de Salut public, with the power to kill, burn and destroy, at the
risque of losing his own head at his return. I was ushered into a room where
this animal was summoned by his officers: his dress was curious; a Bonnet Rogue
Red cap.
with the motto, "Liberte Egalite etc." A woolen jacket and trowsers, an
enameled Liberty cap.
Bonnet de la liberte tied round his neck, with the tricoloured ribbon, and a
card with his name "Gouly" hung at his button hole, as a member of the Jacobin
club; his hair cut short and without powder. I was received with What do thou
want, brother?
"Que veux tu mon friar?" "To know whether I could safely go to Paris under the
protection of a passport from the American minister in London" That Is none of
my business, get thee to the committee of seperintendance.
"Ce n'nest pas mon Affair Va au Comite de Surveillance." The president of this
comite proved to be an uncle to the professor Pictel of Geneva. -- He was
pleased to find that I was acquainted with his relation, showed me much
politeness, signed my passport; and when I asked him what the representant had
done since his arrival, he wispered me in the ear, He has changed every thing;
the rich are imprisoned, all who were in office are dismissed; ah, my friend,
the end of of the world is at hand.
"Il a tout change -- Les gens riches sont arretes. Ceux qui etaient en place
ne le sont plus, mon ami, c'est la fin du monde qui va arriver." In the mean
time the Citoyen Gouly sent to inform him that he would answer with his head
for what he was about, that many agents of the infamous Pit had been detected
in France with American passports -- Instead of "Monami" from my friend the
president, it was now, Ah, wretch, thou shall be put in the rat trap.
"Ah Scelerat on te metira dans la ratti ere." and I was on the point of being
hurried to prison. I insisted on seeing the representant, gained admittance,
and so perfectly satisfied him respecting my being an American, that he
insisted on my dining with him. -- He put his seal of office to my passport,
and told me I might now go to Paris without fear. -- The scene that succeeded
was curious, servant and master, officer and soldier, all sat down to table
together, with their hats on. Gouly gave us an account of the descent that was
soon to take place in England, and that in two months time, he it was that
would be sent to destroy Carthage, and to cut off the heads of George and of
Pit. He declared that we had treated the Citoyen Genet very ill, that he he
had been joined by the true patriots, but that Hamilton and his set were sold
to Pit. -- I observed that though traitors were very easily to be found in
some countries of Europe, I flattered myself that America had not yet got to
that degree of corruption, and that the representative of a nation should never
adopt any party. -- He then gave us a dissertation on the blessings of Liberte,
Egalite, and Fraternite, swore that the people in the departments into which he
was sent were all aristocrats or egotists -- that they had no esprit
Revolutionaire, but before he left them, with the asistance of the guillotine,
they should be Well screwed up to the height of existing circumstances.
"bien montes a l' hauteur des circonstances." I got up to take my leave, and
was not a little surprised at his throwing his arms around my neck, and giving
me the Baiser fraternel: this was an unfortunate compliment for me -- it gave
me so much consequence in the eyes of the people, that before I got out of
Verloy I was kissed by the Mayor and all the municipality. -- The day after, I
set out on my journey to Paris, and notwithstanding the ridiculous scene I had
been witness to, I flattered myself that I should return with many arguments to
support my favorite opinion, "that after all their follies, and the horrors
they had committed, the French would end by rendering themselves not only
feared but respected."

I left Nyon on the 10th of Jan. but my chaise breaking down on the top of the
Yurd, I was exposed for near two days to the most inclement weather at a small
village called " les Roupes, the first French port, in Franche count." I found
a great degree of tranquillity: they were happy in having the Swiss for their
neighbors, and in the protection of their mountains. -- At Dijon, Auxere,
Sens, etc. the Esprit revolutionaire was in full force. -- Crosses were broken,
chapels burnt, many churches entirely destroyed, and those that remained had
some part or other torn down; the celebrated convent of the Chartreux, near
Dijon, a heap of ruins; -- all the bells collected together to be turned into
cannon; every house with the tri-coloured banner at the window, and the motto,
"Lib. Ega. etc. etc." on the door, chaises, wagons, carts, all with their
little flags; -- the cap of liberte sculptured on the mile-stones, and the
national colors painted even on the trees that line the Great road to Paris.
-- I had frequently been conducted by the guard to the comite de Surveillance,
but had never met with any detention. -- On my arrival, however, at Ponthieny
about 30 miles from Paris, my fears began to increase, and I was agreeably
surprised to hear that Saint Port, the country residence of Mr. Morris, was
just opposite on the other side of the Seine. -- I was happy in getting under
the protection of his roof, and determined to wait for his advice before I
proceeded. The next day I received a polite note from him, informing me that I
should meet with no difficulties; and on the 20th I entered Paris for the first
time. Instead of the noise and bustle I expected, there was a dead calm, the
road appeared deserted, and not a carriage was to be seen in the streets. -- I
waited on Mr. Morris, and heard with regret that Madame de la Fayette was
confined near her country seat in the South of France, with circumstances even
of cruelty and indecency. -- He had made a private application in her favor to
the minister for foreign affairs, and was answered, "That she was fortunate in
being so far from Paris, and that the greatest service her friends could render
her, would be never to mention her name.

He smiled at my observations respecting the French revolution, and said he
would leave me to form my opinion from experience.

I began by attending regularly the debates of the Convention -- I entered the
Tribune for the first time, with that respect one naturally feels at the idea
of seeing the rulers of a great nation. -- I found the President ringing his
bell with all his might -- half a dozen members speaking at the same time, and
when they could not be heard from the chair, they attacked each other. It
proved to be a quarrel respecting a member who had been denounced. The figures
of the Roman worthies ornamented the walls, the busts of Brutus, Le Pelletier,
and Marat, surrounded the President's chair, opposite was a large thing like a
trunk -- It was the Ark of the Covenant, covered with tri-coloured ribbons. I
had an opportunity some days afterward of seeing on the place of the Bastile a
great stone figure of Liberty and an immense trough, out of which the deputies
drank large draughts of water to the Goddess on the adoption of their last
constitution. There was a poor fellow who narrowly escaped being guillotined
for observing, that no doubt many wished it was wine.

The National Convention I soon perceived to be a farce; of the 749 members of
whom it was first composed -- 155 had either given in their dismissions, were
guillotined, confined, assassinated, or taken prisoners: 228 from the 17
different comites for the transaction of business; a considerable number are
sent into the departments, and those who set in the convention appear to meet
merely for the purpose of giving an apparent sanction to the measures of the
comite de salut public. The President is continually engaged in receiving
addresses, patriotic donations, and in giving the honors of the sitting and
the Baiser fraternel. I was witness to a laughable scene of this kind; -- a
deputation from St. Domingo entered the hall, it consisted of a white man, a
mulatto and a negro. La Croix moved that the circumstance should be
distinguished by the Embrace.
accolade of the President. The white man first flew into his arms, and was
embraced most tenderly -- the mulatto was hugged with still more affection --
but when he came to the negro, had it been a mistress, he could not have
pressed her more ardently -- there was no end to the kisses that were given and
received amidst the repeated applause of the Convention and the Tribunes -- The
next day, they voted the emancipation of the slaves, and declared, that they
would form with all negroes and mulattos a TRICOLOR'D COALITION which would
soon destroy the combined powers of aristocracy and tyranny -- An old negro
wench, who was in one of the tribunes, thought this so fine, that she fainted
away, she was immediately brought into the bosom of the Convention, -- the
members crowded round her, and again fell a kissing, not only the negro's, but
each other. -- I next attended the Jacobin club; they met about 7 o'clock, but
the tribunes were filled before 6, with the vilest collection of people I think
I ever saw, mostly women and children. The fitting opened by reading the process
verbal Journals.
of the preceding evening, by which it appeared that a deputation of Blacks had
been received most fraternally, and that it had unanimously decreed, that a
flag should be hung over the chair of the President, on which should be a
negro, a mulatto, and a French man holding up together the banner tri-coloured.
Some bad verses were afterward read in favor of the mountain, made by a
woman, who attended the debates, and to this succeeded the epuration
Purification.
of the members. The questions asked on this occasion are where were you on the
10th of August? How did you vote in the case of Marat? Were you ever a banker
or an agent de change? Broker.
Among others that were to be examined, was one Chambertoy; as soon as he began
his answer, a black-guard looking fellow who was sitting next me got up, bawled
out for the "parole" The right to speak.
-- He swore that Chambertoy was a rascal and an aristocrat; another declared
him to be as much of a patriot as the king of Prussia; Chambertoy said a few
words, when a woman got up behind him, and gave him the lie in plain terms. The
most violent noise and uproar succeeded, and I was convinced that Chambertoy
would be turned out; at length, a child about thirteen or fourteen years old, a
member of the club, mounted the tribune, made a long speech, observed that no
person should be condemned, without being heard, and gained Chambertoy an
opportunity of making his defense; he proved that he was one of the party who
proposed the events of the 10th August (for they now consider as the greatest
merit in themselves, what they attributed to their king as the greatest crime.)
He showed a wound he had received at the Thuilleries, and was readmitted with
unbounded applause. -- I was indebted, afterward, to my being taken for an
Englishman, for the pleasure of seeing Robespierre -- they were satisfied, on
my showing a certificate from Mr. Morris, signed by the minister for foreign
affairs, and made way for a "brave American" -- I had thus an apportunity of
approaching very near Robespierre at the Jacobin club. He is a little man, very
pale and thin, decently dressed, in general, a light colored great coat, and
powder in his hair, much the appearance of a petty-foging attorney: He was
listened to with great attention, and brings out his words with an almost
affected slowness, while every other person speaks with violent passion. --
They distributed in the tribunes, The galleries.
a most ridiculous essay on the English constitution; when one Brichet got up
and moved, that the club, before it debated the great question of a descent
into England, and the vices of the British government, should occupy itself in
destroying the "toads that had crawled up the mountain," and that at least
thirty members of the Convention should be guillotined. Robespierre observed,
that he was an Intrigant and an ultra revolutionaire. One who ever exceeds
revolutionary limits.
and moved that he should be turned out, which was immediately decreed; a
friend of Brichet got up to take his part; Robespierre moved that he should
share the same fate, and they turned him out also.

Frequently on leaving the convention, I past through the garden of the
Thuilleries to the place de la revolution, in order to get there after the
executions had taken place, and was once or twice so unfortunate as to be a
witness of them. It is out of my power, my dear friend, to give you a competent
idea of this scene. Near the door of the convention you see two men with great
fur caps and long beards, reading to the people the crimes of the kings of
France and abusing them all from Charlemagne to Louis XVI. A little further is
a woman singing patriotic songs and giving lessons of morality; on the other
side, is a man preaching against Jesus Christ. Every where you are pestered
with journals and the productions of Pere Ducheine and Camaille des Moulines.
At the entrance of the gardens, are two restauratives Eating-houses, or
ordinaries.
filled with people, eating drinking and laughing -- opposite is the
guillotine, and at ten yards from it is a puppet show, where punch is
guillotined! Here you see figures dancing on wires, there an exhibition of
pictures, and a calf born with a national cockade on its forehead -- a crowd of
women, and a collection of dogs immediately under the guillotine; children
peeping into the hampers that hold the bodies, and men selling the names of
those who have just suffered, and crying out " Venez domain n'y manquez pas,
vous en aurez plusieurs, vous aurez des femmes Come again tomorrow, don't fail,
you will have several more, you will have some women guillotined.
. It is difficult to say which are most mad, the spectators or their sufferers.
I have heard people in the streets observe to each other, "ou allons nous,
voulez vous aller au caffe ou a la guillotine?" Where shall we go? will you go
to the Coffee-house or to the guillotine?
I have seen women go to be executed, as if to an entertainment, chattering and
paying compliments to each other, even at the scaffold; some laughing, cry,
vive la republique, the people call for the head, to see whether it still
smiles. But what adds the greatest horror to the scene, is the gaiety, that
reigns on every countenance!

I attended many of the trials at the tribunal revolution; you there find the
forms of justice, but none of the reality. It consists of two courts, the salle
de la liberte and the salle de l'egalite; each composed of three judges,
besides the president and an accusateur public -- all dressed in black gowns,
and black feathers in their hats; round their necks a national ribbon, to which
hangs a gold medal. -- The jury consists of ten persons, the clerk reads the
accusation. The witnesses are examined, the accused is asked if he has any
thing to say for himself, the accusateur public speaks, and is answered by
the defender chosen by the prisoner. The president declares the debate to be
finished. The accused is carried out, the jury give in his verdict, and the
accused is brought back to hear his sentence; if he is condemned, he wishes the
company a good morning, and goes away to be executed within 24 hours. If he is
acquitted he embraces the whole court; some of the spectators are pleased when
this happens to be the case, but I have heard others say, "je n'aime pas les
voir echapper a la guillotine;" I don't like to see them escape the guillotine.
not only the judges, and the accusateurs publiques, but the jury also, are
nominated by the convention, that is, by comite de salat public, and you may
easily conceive the spirit which they receive; accuser, judge and jury, all
appear anxious to find the prisoner guilty, and if he is noble or has property
he is almost sure of being condemned.

Paris is perfectly quiet! One part is a desert, the other is plunged into the
profoundest apathy; and no where is there so little appearance of interest in
the affairs of France as in its own capital. There are from sixteen to twenty
spectacles (theaters) every evening, and once each Decade all the theaters are
opened gratis, to the populace, when some patriotic piece is given. The
guillotine was generally the best attended; but to render the piece
sufficiently amusing and wind up the esprit revolutionaire, they are obliged at
times to execute women, or some remarkable character. There are a set of people
paid to attend the Convention, the Jacobin club, the Tribunal revolutionaire,
and the guillotine, to keep up an appearance of popularity.

There is no truth of which I am so perfectly convinced, as that the great
majority of the people in France are already against the revolution, and would
be happy to change for any government whatever, the horrid tyranny under which
they suffer. One of the members of the comite de salut public has been heard
to say, "We know that nine out of ten are against us; but the tenth man shall
make the other nine march." A president of a jacobin club not far from Paris,
has whispered to me A weak king is a scourge
"Un roi foible est un fleau;" and I have never had an opportunity of
conversing with any person above the lowest class, who did not execrate the
tyrants of the day. In the mean time, the military disposition of the French,
the attention which is paid to the army, the unlimited powers of the comite de
salut public, and the immense riches on which they have siezed, will give the
ruling faction the means of making the strongest resistance, and it is possible
they may involve in their own destruction the ruin of all France. There was a
time when, besides the Vendee, Bourdeaux, Toulon, Marseilles, Lions, Strasburg,
were all for a counter revolution, and had the combined powers, instead of the
detestable policy of dismembering France, been seriously occupied with the idea
of putting Louis XVII. on the throne, it might have been effected. The Vendee
was left to be destroyed by numbers after giving repeated proofs of the most
astonishing bravery. Bourdeaux was on the point of declaring, but the mayor,
who was a man of property, hesitated, Lions became a lesson, Bourdeaux escaped,
but the mayor was guillotined; Marseilles still suffers under the wrath of the
convention; Lions, though obliged to adopt the language of the day, fought for
royalty, she expected assistance, but was cruelly disappointed; Strasburg
offered itself to general Wurmser, if he would accept it for Louis XVII. His
orders were to take it for his master: in the mean time the representatives of
the people entered the city and guillotined all who were suspected. The
opportunity has been neglected and humanity shudders at the approach of the
next campaign. For two years past it has been expected, and even wished by
some, that the want of provisions would put an end to the exertions of France.
Those who entertained such hopes did not reflect that the army would be the
last to suffer and the innocent the first victims. The papers mention but 5450
persons, but I know from good authority that there are at least 15,000 confined
at Paris, and those who are arrested in the departments may amount to about
250,000. Would not these as the "Bouches inutiles" Useless mouths.
be the first sacrificed? In some places already, the soldiers receive good
bread while the people are obliged to eat that which is made of potatoes and
bran. The prospects of a famine in France were probably never more serious than
at the present moment, and the French may suffer greatly before their harvest;
but they will not starve. In many cantons the bread is good and cheaper than in
Switzerland: in Paris it is bad, but is sold at the maximum; in some few places
the wheat was expended: the occasion of this difference is that all grain
remains in requisition in each canton -- wheat is in general scarce. I have
seen some of the people laugh at their own wants, and cry There is no misery in
France.
"il n'y a point de misere en France," and when I have asked the postillion
which was the best inn, at the place I was going to, he answered in the
greatest levity, "There are two, but there is no bread. "What do people do in
that case?" "They warm themselves."
" Il y en a deux mais on n'a pas de pain, et que fait on alors? On s'echauffe!
There is one circumstance which after much inquiry I found to be certain, that
in the department through which I past, there was as much corn planted as at
any former period.

I went to Paris by the northern road, and returned by Nevers, Moulins and
Lions; at the first of these places many of the populace were intoxicated, and
I could hardly get any person to examine my passport; they had just taken up
about 70 priests; these unfortunate men had conformed to all the decrees of the
Convention; some of them had married -- many were old and some invalids; they
were crowded with great inhumanity on board a batteau to be sent to Breast. I
asked one of them who attended, what was to be done with them? I believe, said
he, they are going to drown them -- this they call the New Baptism of Priests.
Moulins was formerly famous for its manufactories in cutlery; its commerce was
destroyed as well as that of every other city in France. But imagination cannot
conceive the miserable situation of Lions; all that was beautiful in building,
rich in commerce, or respectable in inhabitants, is totally destroyed: the
place de Belle Cour, formerly one of the most beautiful in the world, does not
exist. The noble range of buildings near the Rhone, a heap of ruins, and the
dust that arises from the hordes they continue to demolish, renders the air
almost suffocating. They had just torn to pieces 60 persons with grape-shot;
the bodies were afterward shifted by women and children, with the utmost
degree of indecency. The Guillotine had been illuminated on the anniversary of
the king's execution. It had cut off 28 persons the day before my arrival, and
was again prepared. Adjoining to it is the grand Autel de la patria, Altar of
the country.
where there are fetes every decade. I went into the Hotel de Ville to get my
passport examined; I was surrounded by officers -- here a crowd were waiting to
be married, there they were waiting to be divorced. I saw a burial; the corpse
was on a bier half uncovered, with the bonnet rogue on the head; all those who
attended had their heads ornamented in the same manner, and followed the body
singing the carmagnole. The executions at Lions, had already amounted to above
3000 persons, and to those who spoke of mercy, the representans had answered,
"that there were 10,000 more to suffer." There are two tribunals continually
employed in condemning. The "commission militaire and the tribunal populaire."
and women, have been carried to the guillotine, to be witnesses of the
execution of their husbands, merely for having solicited their pardon. I was
obliged to remain at Lions near two days from the difficulty of getting horses,
and was happy to get out of it and relieve my eyes from such a scene of horror
and madness. The great instigator of all the cruelites that are committed in
this unfortunate city is Collot d'Herbois; this man was not long ago an
inferior comedian, and has often acted at the theaters of Lions and Geneva; he
was the president of the comite that formed the last constitution; at present
heads that party which is called by some Ultra Revolutionaire, and as the
people here always join those who go to the greatest excesses, it is probable
that Collot d'Herbois, Hebert, the author of the Pere Duchene, and their set,
may treat Robespierre and the Marates as they did the Brissotines. When any man
gets to the top of power, he naturally feels himself interested in the welfare
of the country, and unwillingly adopts moderation as one of the means of
increasing his popularity. Robespierre wished to have a motion past for
liberating all those who had been arrested without any grounds of accusation;
the number of whom you may easily conceive to be very great, when for some time
every person who denounced another received 100 livres. Such however was the
clamor, that he was obliged to abandon the idea. He next, without appearing
himself, set Camille des Desmoulins to write against the violent party: he
begins by declaring himself a votary of the divine Marat. He was however
expelled from the Jacobin Club for having mentioned comite de clemence: and
before he could be readmitted, was obliged to confess his error. It is the
violent party, who, to amuse the people, have started the idea of a descent
into England. Robespierre declares, that the English only merit their contempt;
that if they are desirous of having their liberty, they are capable of gaining
it for themselves, and if they are not, a descent into England would only be
throwing themselves into the snares of Pit.

March.
The Jacobin Club is the source of power, and those who lead it govern France.
It keeps up an intimate correspondence with all the inferior clubs in the
different departments, and takes care that they shall be formed of none but the
vilest and most ignorant of the inhabitants, entirely devoted to itself. It is
the seat of information, gives what impression it pleases, and a defeat in the
north is represented in the south as a victory. It has caused all the miseries
of France, and composed as it is at present, no good can ever be expected from
it: God knows what will be the end, and we are at a loss what to hope. The
French appear incapable of being free; the government of an usurper only leads
to new convulsions; the people when fatigued with the present mode of
government may change it for something new. Liberty is at present the fashion
in France; you meet it at all the corners of the streets; it is stuck up in
large characters on every house; it spouts at the theater; it struts at the
opera; it is become a byword -- I never heard so much, and never saw so little
of it. The "Ancien Regime" has totally disappeared, and decade is as much in
vogue as if Sunday had never existed. But will not a people who have, with so
much levity, abandoned their religion, forget in the same manner their liberty?
Such appears to be the character of the French, a soil where every thing
flourishes for a time but nothing takes root; if well or ill directed, a
character capable of the greatest extremes of virtue or of vice.

I entered France one of the warmest advocates of the revolution; I firmly
believed that the great body of the people had just ideas of liberty, were
acquainted with their rights, and after defeating the attempts of their
enemies, would then establish an equal and well regulated government. I left it
with sentiments of indignation, disappointment, and disgust, convinced that
there never was a people in the world so little calculated to enjoy the
blessings of freedom.

During my stay at Paris, I found nothing so interesting as the conversation of
Mr. (...) He had been so obliging before my arrival, as to take lodgings for me
near his own hotel; and I had the pleasure of seeing him every day. He was
formerly exceedingly well received at court, and possessed in a great degree
the confidence of its ministers, and has since been able to render himself,
though not liked, yet respected by all the parties that have succeeded: though
a man of great abilities, he must have found it difficult to have steered so
far with safety, through the storm: and America is indebted to him for
remaining in a situation, which, though none can fill it with more capacity,
cannot but be particularly irksome to him. All those for whom he could have
felt any consideration, have either emigrated, been arrested or guillotined,
and from being in the most agreeable society, he is left with hardly an
acquaintance in France: the conduct he has pursued was the only one of avoiding
all parties and maintaining in every respect the dignity of his situation. He
particularly detested the Brissotines, whose policy it was to draw America into
the war, and had they not been guillotined, Genet might have done us
considerable mischief. Mr. (...) read me some of his correspondence, and I was
surprised at the accuracy with which he had foretold the principal events of
the revolution. These letters have fallen into the hands of persons, who from
being, I believe, prejudiced in favor of the French, have neglected to pay
them the attention which they so highly merited.

A party of Americans have petitioned the Convention in favor of Tom Pain;
they were invited to the honors of the sitting, but could not be much
flattered when a few days after a set of negroes were received with far greater
attention. As the French have no farther occasion for Common Sense, or the
Rights of Man, Tom Pain still remains in prison, where he abuses Mr. Morris
for not claiming him as an American, and amuses himself, I Am told, with writing
a book against Jesus Christ.

It is difficult to meet with beauty at Paris, all the pretty women are in
requisition; they are confined and employed in making shirts for the army. I
endeavored to console myself at the Gallery of Paintings, which is without
exception the finest in the world -- a collection of all the most valuable
paintings that existed in France. Many Americans have been arrested on their
first entering the Republic, and you are searched half a dozen times before you
are permitted to leave it. I returned by Geneva and found the violent party
worthy imitators of their neighbors -- they had found that their last project
of a constitution was impracticable, and accepted a new one, which the day
after was violated. As there was a Vendee in France, they were determined to
have one also. It consisted of one house and of one man, a Mr. Miquily; his
house was surrounded, his furniture destroyed, and himself thrown into prison.
The Comite provisoire accompanied the Marsellois who went on this expedition in
order to prevent mischief, but such was their impotency, that a poor man was
torn to pieces, before their faces for refusing to put on the Bonnet Rouge. On
entering Switzerland I felt as if I had at length escaped from a mad house and
again got into the society of reasonable beings.

I have without thinking, permitted my letter to run on to an immoderate
length; you will I flatter myself, excuse not only the length of it, but also
the hurry in which I have written it.

The active life I led at Paris, and the excellent table of Mr. --, have been
of service to my health, and since I have found that exercise is a remedy, I
shall not remain idle; I leave this place immediately for Milan, where my
carriage horses have been arrived near two months. I expect to pass the Holy
week at Rome. The heat will soon oblige me to leave Italy, when I propose going
to Vienna, to which place I have excellent letters.

I am anxious to hear from you, pray write to me frequently. There is no
expressing the interest I feel in whatever passes in America.

I remain most sincerely, your affectionate --.

MR. NOAH WEBSTER's ATTACK ON PORCUPINE.
FROM THE MINERVA, Of New York, March 21, 1797.
IN a late paper, we inserted sentiments of this kind, that the putting up in
the Coffee House, a card, on which was painted the English flag, was a low
pitiful business, equalled only by the meanness of putting up a French flag,
and that it is servile to be bandied about between the flags of different
foreign nations. We ought to unite under our own flag and learn to be a nation.

Peter Porcupine has copied the paragraph with disapprobation, and says it
contains more of vulgar prejudice, and mistake, than of justice or good policy.
He observes that it is the quo animo, the intention of the act that stamps its
character. He would have no foreign flag hoisted, as a rallying point for
malcontents against their own government; but to unite the American Eagle with
the British Lion against an ambitious enemy, he thinks, would be an act that we
need not be ashamed of. He then speaks of an alliance of that kind, as
honorable and advantageous to both parties.

No comment will be made on the insinuation of "Vulgar Prejudice," against the
Editor of the Minerva. When Peter becomes acquainted with the editor's real
character, he will learn, that in a combat of that kind, he himself must
certainly be the loser.

But we contest Peter's principles. It was strongly suspected many months ago,
that his principles are not very friendly to the independence of America, and
still less so, to the form of our government. This suspicion has been greatly
increased by the manner in which his gazette has been conducted. His retailing
abuse against la Fayette, whose sufferings (even suppose him to have been in
fault, which is doubtful or not admitted) are far too severe, and call for the
sympathy of all mankind, denotes a man callous to the miseries of his species,
and extremely disrespectful to the opinions of the Americans, who entertain
friendship and gratitude for la Fayette. We observe also whole columns of some
of the first numbers of Peter's gazette, filled with apologies for the old
government of France, that is, for the feudal system, though in a relaxed
state, and for as corrupt a system of despotism as Europe ever witnessed.

The success of Peter's pen, in attacking the democratic factions of our
country, has perfectly intoxicated him; and he mistakes the sense of America
extremely, when he supposes the danger we have escaped of being prostrated at
the feet of France, will urge us to lay our country at the feet of
Great Britain.

No, Peter; your abusing the men who fought for our Independence, and your
recommending the old Government of France, are not the means by which your
popularity is to be maintained. The old government of France was not so bad, as
the Jacobin government, it is true; but there is a government different from
both, which la Fayette sought, and which the people of this country will
rejoice to see introduced, that is, a Free Government.

As to an alliance with Great Britain, we want none except what is dictated by
commercial views. Here our interest, calls for mutual aid and protection. So
far as Great Britain will protect our trade, for her own sake, we shall gladly
receive it, and no farther.

We ask no favors of Great Britain, nor of any other nation; for this would
lay the foundation for more claims of gratitude, with which we have been
outrageously tormented by the French, and their hirelings. The United States
and Great Britain are allied by interest. Setting aside sameness of language,
habits and private connections, no two countries are so closely united by
commercial advantages. Nor can this union of interest, for a long time to come,
have a competitor. It is as much for Great-Britain's interest (not to say more)
to protect our vessels, as it is ours to have them protected. So far an
alliance will arise out of necessity and convenience, which will require very
little modification by express agreements. As to any thing like a general
treaty, offensive and defensive, God forbid. Sooner may the United States be
doomed to encounter March.
another eight years war for Independence, than hold the blessing at the mercy
of any foreign nation.

No, Peter; the man who writes this, once voluntarily bore arms to defend
Independence, in pursuance of the same principles, he first proposed publicly
the plan of a National Constitution, persevering in the same principles, he
assailed the monster, FACTION, the moment it appeared, in the insidious form of
popular clubs: and from that moment to this, he has never ceased to expose the
artifices of the French agents to lay this country at the feet of France. With
the same determined zeal and firmness, Peter, he now openly declares war
against the man who dares to vilify the defenders of American Independence, or
to propose an alliance that would commit that independence to the power of a
foreign state, or to the fate of European contests.

Americans desire peace, and rejoice that the flags of all nations stream in
their harbors. But the man who unites a foreign flag with that of his own
country, on the territory of the United States, without an order of government,
is a factious man, and has not the honor of his country at heart. This little
emblem of national honor ought no more to be the signal for mobs and for
violence in a neutral country.

Such, Peter, is my political creed -- I know no party, but that of MY COUNTRY.
My country is INDEPENDENT; it is for our interest, the interest of Great
Britain, and of all Europe, that it should be so; and the man who seeks to tack
it on any foreign country, to involve it in European broils, or make its
independence the sport of European policy, is conceived to be an ENEMY. As
such, his intrigues will be exposed and his influence resisted, by all those
decent and legal means, that distinguish the gentleman and the good citizen.

P. S. If Peter Porcupine's views are mistaken, it belongs to him to remove the
impressions which his writings made on the genuine friends of this country.

PORCUPINE's ANSWER.
LETTER I.
PHILADELPHIA, 25th March, 1797. To Mr. NOAH WEBSTER, of NEW YORK. SIR,
YOU tell me and the public, that you, "with determined zeal and firmness, now
openly declare war against me;" and that I must certainly be the loser. Softly,
'Squire Webster: it is not so certain, perhaps, as you may imagine. If you had
remembered the fable of the man who sold the lion's skin, and was afterward
killed in hunting him, you would not have cried victoria! before you had given
your antagonist time to return your fire.

This, Sir, I desire you to look upon as a counter-declaration; as a
preparative for repulsing the unprovoked attack. Your long, familiar, and
modest address should have been answered this day (notwithstanding the
certainty of my being the loser) did not the very extraordinary remarks it
contains call for delay, in order to afford time for a full and fair discussion
of a subject, of much greater importance than the "political creed" of a
news-monger. In the mean time, Sir, be not too confident of victory. Atchieve
me first, good 'Squire, and then sell my bones.

For your attachment to the government under which we live and prosper, and for
the services (however trifling) you have rendered it, accept the respects of

Your humble servant, P. PORCUPINE.

LETTER II. TO MR. NOAH WEBSTER OF NEW YORK.
"Vain, fickle, blind, from these to those he flies,
"And every side of wavering combat tries;
"Large promise makes, and breaks the promise made;
"Now gives the Grecians, now the Trojans aid."
POPE'S HOMER, LIB. V.
SIR,
SOME days ago I promised you an answer to your Address (or whatever else you
may please to call it) of the 21st of March. It luckily matters little how this
answer begins. Aware I suppose of the uncouth manners of the man you were about
to assail, you kindly contrived that the rudeness of your attack should furnish
an ample apology for his want of politeness.

Your Address treats of your important self, of me, and of the proposed
alliance between the United States and Great Britain. This alliance is a
subject of two much consequence to be blended with an enquiry into your and my
character, principles, and conduct, I shall therefore reserve it for a separate
letter; not losing, however, the present opportunity of declaring, that your
reasoning, instead of convincing me that I was mistaken, has strengthened, as
far as any thing in itself contradictory can strengthen, the opinion which gave
so much offense to your wisdom.

You set out with telling the public, that, in a late paper, we inserted
sentiments of this kind, that the putting up in the Coffee House, a card, on
which was painted the English flag, was a low pitiful business, equalled only
by the meanness of putting up a French flag, and that it is servile to be
bandied about between the flags of different foreign nations. We ought to unite
under our own flag and learn to be a nation.

You then complain of my having quoted the passage "with disapprobation," which
with the application of the words vulgar prejudice, was, it seems, a stretch of
presumption which your pride could not forgive.

I must confess, that, to venture to quote "with disapprobation" the oracular
precepts flowing from the lips of the high priest of Minerva, was rather bold;
but (and with due submission be it spoken) it was not so much your advice as
your partiality, your versatility, that I disapproved of. You have uttered such
cartloads of sentiments, that it is absolutely impossible you should recollect
one half of them; and as, in politics particularly, you are led by no fixed, no
polar-star principle, it is as impossible that you should ever be consistent
long together. Your saying that the putting up of an English flag "was a low
pitiful business," sounds well; but did you say this when the French flag was
put up? No; you called that neither low nor pitiful: it was even honored with
your applause, as far as a man, who looks upon himself as the exclusive
possessor of all that is praiseworthy, can applaud the actions of others. The
hoisting of the French flag was attended with feasting and noise, little
inferior to what we have witnessed at the celebration of the murder of the
Swiss Guards: yet it escaped your censure: it was suffered to hang very
peaceably, and to receive the adoration of the devout sans-culottes of
New York: folly was permitted to revel at the foot, as it were, of the shrine
of wisdom, for the space of three whole years, without receiving either
chastisement or rebuke. But, behold the difference! The moment a representation
of the British flag appears, though painted on a bit of paper only, and
intended merely to produce a little sport, you cast off your lethargic
forbearance. Your patriotism, that patriotism, which slept like a dormouse,
while the French flag was not only hanging up in the Coffee-Room, but was borne
about your streets to elections and town-meetings; that drowsy patriotism,
which seemed scarcely to perceive a banner of two yards square, though it
brushed its very nose, became all alive, took fire in a moment, upon sight of a
British flag in miniature.

You do, indeed, now talk about the meanness of putting up a French flag; but
when do you find courage to do this? At the moment the people around you are
got tired and ashamed of their bauble. Far were you from calling it a meanness,
and so far from it that your voice was one of the most sonorous in the
ridiculous and disgraceful hue-and-cry, raised against those who pulled it
down, in the month of May, 1795. -- On that occasion you very patrioticly
observed, that it was hoped that the flags of the sister republics would have
remained undisturbed by the enemies of our peace; and then, on you go to
express your abhorrence of the conduct of the sacrilegious wretches whose
impious hands had removed them. And, recollect, that you took special care not
to utter a syllable against the savages, who attempted to murder a British
Officer, to avenge "the mighty wrong." To intrude your precepts, therefore, at
this time; to strut and hector over the poor fallen Tricolor, and to call on
your readers to unite under their own flag, and learn to be a nation, entitles
you to but very little praise. Your advice comes too late. The patient was in a
state of convalescence, before you ventured to prescribe: French privateers,
jails, whips, and irons, had effectually removed the malady of the public,
while you stood fumbling its pulse. Had the same stupid admiration of the
French, that prevailed, and that you participated in, for several years; had
this admiration and its concomitant partiality still existed, you would never
have dared (with all your heroism) to call the hoisting of their flag "a low
pitiful business:" you would prudently have left that to a writer of less
caution and more sincerity, reserving to yourself the agreeable task of
endeavoring to disfigure his motives and blast his fame.

And, was it then such a heinous offense to quote a writer of your stamp with
disapprobation, or apply to him the charge of vulgar prejudice? It would be
curious to hear, on what it is that you ground your right of exemption from all
censure and criticism. Besides, to say that a man has adopted a vulgar
prejudice, is calculated to give offense to no one but an illiterate booby, who
does not know the meaning of the words, or a captious, inflated self-sufficient
pedant. Yet it is this phrase, and this alone, that has provoked you to seek
retaliation, and retaliation, too, of the most base and malicious species. --
We contest (say you, after declaring that I am unable to cope with you) We
contest Peter's principles. It was strongly suspected many months ago, that his
principles are not very friendly to the independence of America, and still less
so to the form of our government.

The grammatical inaccuracy of this last sentence, though fallen from the pen
of a language-maker, it would be foreign to my purpose to remark on: it is the
slander it conveys, that it is my duty to expose. -- "It was strongly
suspected." This is the true gossiping, calumniating style. All verbal
assassins speak in the passive voice, that, what they cannot prove, they may at
last throw on public report. If you had said, I suspected many months ago,
though it would have led to a detection, you would have acted more like a man;
and this might have been expected too, in a volunteer of your determined zeal
and firmness.

However, as you are very fond of the pompous plural number and passive voice,
perhaps, it is but fair to suppose, that you mean to intimate, March.
that you suspected my principles many months ago; and, if this was really the
case, pray how came you to recommend my pamphlets to the perusal of your
readers, as the best antedote to the anarchical principles of the enemies of
the government? How many months ago was it that your penetration made the grand
discovery? When I proposed publishing a paper, which was no more than about six
weeks anterior to the date of your Address, you told the public in an exulting
manner, that I should prove a terrible scourge to the patriots, meaning Bache,
Greenleaf, and all the antifederal crew. Six weeks 'Squire Webster, is not many
months. If you really suspected my enmity to the government, and to the
independence of America, you were a very great hypocrite, if not something of a
traitor, to applaud my undertaking; and, if on the other hand, you had no such
suspicion, and have now feigned it merely for the purpose of revenging what
your haughtiness has construed into an affront, I leave the public to determine
what name you are worthy of.

But, you do not stop at suspicions. You seem to have foreseen that your
readers would require something more than mere surmise, and you were determined
to furnish it. When a man is once got into mischief, he does not stick at
trifles. -- This suspicion, say you, has been greatly increased by the manner
in which Peter's Gazette has been conducted. -- Now, who, upon reading this,
would not imagine, that my Gazette had discovered a departure from the
principles which I had before professed; a spirit hostile to the government of
this country, or at least unfriendly to it. Who would imagine that you, or any
other man who wishes to preserve the least pretensions to candor, would have
ventured to accuse another of enmity to the government upon a foundation
slighter than this? Yet you can produce no such thing. After having turned and
rummaged my poor gazette over and over again, pryed into every paragraph, and
weighed each single expression, all you can collect to "increase" your
suspicion, is, my retailing abuse against la Fayette, and my publishing whole
columns, filled with apologies for the old government of France! as if the
sentiments of a man, respecting la Fayette and the French monarchy, formed a
criterion whereby to estimate his attachment to the Constitution and
Independence of the United States! Futile indeed must be the charge, that has
no other support than such round-about kind of evidence as this.

I certainly might pass over with silent contempt, what, if strictly true, goes
not an inch toward justifying your malignant insinuation; but, as you have
been mean enough to take shelter under the popular, the vulgar prejudice, that
prevails in favor of la Fayette and against monarchical governments, I shall
take one step out of my way, in order to convince the public, that I shall
never decline a combat with Noah Webster, though backed with the misplaced
partiality of millions.

What you are pleased to term, retailing abuse against la Fayette, and, in
another place, vilifying the defenders of American Independence; all this put
together, is, the publishing of a speech of Mr. Burke, on the motion brought
forward in the British Parliament, for the purpose of prevailing on the king to
intercede for la Fayette's release. This speech was published in my Gazette, of
the 7th March; and, so far from its being an abusive, vilifying harangue,
though it is one of those pieces of oratory, that will for ages be an ornament
to the proceedings of the British Commons, it is not more remarkable for its
eloquence than for its truth.

You, indeed, tell us, that la Fayette's being " in fault, is doubtful, or not
admitted:" -- and in this short sentence, you have given a more complete
specimen of the equivoque than is to be found in Boileau's famous poem on the
subject. In the first place, we know not whether you express the opinion of
others, or your own: next, if you are understood as expressing your own
opinion, you declare the question doubtful, you do not admit the fault, and yet
you do not venture to declare your friend innocent: lastly, should some warm
partizan, whether royalist or republican, call you to account for hesitating on
the subject, still you have a shift left; for you do not say, or even hint,
whether it be la Fayette's crimes against the king, or those against the
assembly, that you doubt of. -- It was in the wars, I presume, that you learnt
this precaution, of always securing a safe retreat.

To one, who so carefully disguises his sentiments, it is next to impossible to
make a satisfactory reply: however, supposing you to doubt of la Fayette's
fault with respect to his sovereign, I would ask you, where you have lived for
these ten years last past? To hear you start doubts on this subject, one would
imagine you had dwelt in a dormitory or a hermitage; that you had been absorbed
in heavenly meditation; that your vessel (as the puritans call it) had been a
resevoir of godliness, in place of being what, alas! it is, a mere channel for
news.

To enter into a minute examination of la Fayett's conduct, during his
short-lived career in the French revolution, would be giving an importance to
his character which it does not deserve. It is true that he always was an
underworker, like many others; and, therefore, is not to be reckoned among the
miscreant Mirabeaus, Condorcets, etc. whose puppet he was; but, he nevertheless
comes in for a considerable share of that censure which is due to a combination
of ambitious men, determined to build their own fame and greatness on the ruins
of a mighty empire, without remorse for the miseries it must produce. One fact,
when the merits of la Fayette are to be tried, ought never to be forgotten: it
was his revolutionary brain that conceived the French Rights of Man, of which
no more need be said, than that they are the very text from which Tom Pain has
ever since been preaching the duty of holy insurrection.

I would willingly believe that gratitude for the services which la Fayette
rendered America, has now called forth your compassion for his sufferings, and
your resentment against my paper, or rather against me. I would willingly trace
your asperity back to this amiable source; but your past conduct tells me that
I should attempt it in vain. How come you to be grateful to la Fayette alone?
Has no other friend to the American revolution lain on the damp floor of a
dungeon? Never did you, (with shame be it spoken, Webster) never did you utter
a word of compassion for the unfortunate friendless Louis XVI. when this same
la Fayette was leading him in triumph from prison to prison. Never did you talk
of cruel treatment, when the Queen of France was dragged in slow procession to
Paris, while the myrmidons of this same la Fayette carried the ghastly heads of
her murdered guards before her. No; you rejoiced at all this; and yet, I
believe, no one will have the impudence to pretend, that la Fayette's services
to this country, were a millionth part so great as those of poor Louis and his
consort. -- Nay, you saw the head of this fallen prince roll from the scaffold;
you saw his family cut off one by one; you saw his innocent child lingering in
a dungeon, robbed of sleep, terrified four times an hour with orders to prepare
for death, and at last you saw his bloated and livid corpse stretched in a
dungcart. -- On all this you looked with a philosphic eye. Not a tear escaped
you; not a groan, not a sigh, was heard from the tenderhearted Minerva, who
now tells us that " la Fayette's sufferings call for the "sympathy of all
mankind."

No, Sir, nor did you ever feel any thing worthy the name of compassion for la
Fayette himself, or you would have expressed your abhorrence of the cruel and
savage measures adopted against him and his family by the pretended republicans
of France. That was the time for your gratitude and friendship to have shown
itself. You, who once voluntarily bore arms to defend independence, and who now
with determined zeal and firmness openly declares war against the man who dares
vilify the defenders of it, among whom you count la Fayette; you, Sir, should
have stood forth against the then popular Convention, who had fixed a price on
the head of your friend; who had, by law, authorized the citizens to shoot him,
or knock his brains out, like a dog; nay, had imposed it on them as a duty.
Then was the time for the blue-eyed Maid to grasp her javelin, and shelter the
injured hero beneath her ample shield. As she neglected to do this; as she
shrank from the encounter with popular fury; as she tamely yielded to the
vulgar prejudice that then prevailed in favor of every act of the mock
legislators of France, however cruel and infamous, she will now receive but
little applause, from men of sense, for her censure of the Emperor of Germany,
whose title alone, she well knows, will, with the gross of her readers, be a
sufficient apology for any departure from decency and truth.

No, Sir; it is too clear, that a desire to ingratiate yourself with the
deceived part of the public, together with that of injuring me, led you to
bring forward the stalking horse la Fayette, and not any friendship, gratitude,
or compassion that you entertained for him. This your manner of proceeding
incontestibly proves. First, you pretend to suspect my enmity to the
independence of America; then you artfully produce my publition of Mr. Burke's
censure of la Fayette, as a proof of that enmity, leaving your readers to draw
the natural conclusion, that I had "retailed abuse" against him, merely for his
having fought in the cause of Independence. -- Never did envy and revenge
suggest a baser insinuation, or one, the falsehood of which was more easy to
detect.

If I bear malice against la Fayette, if I have published a censure on him, if
I have " retailed abuse against him," as you are pleased to call it, on account
of his having served here, during the revolutionary war; pray, does it not
follow, that I must bear the same malice, and feel the same inclination to
censure every one who aided the cause of Independence? If such be the motive
from which I act, I certainly could look round among those who did more injury
to the cause of Great Britain in one day, nay in one minute, than la Fayette
did during the war, or could have done in his whole life time. I call on you,
then, to say whether I have ever, directly or indirectly, discovered an
inclination to defame any man, merely because he was instrumental in
establishing the independence of this country. Have I ever attempted to
asperse, have I ever hinted any thing to the dishonor of, Mr. Jay, Mr. Adams,
or General Washington? These gentlemen, the most eminent actors on the great
drama of the revolution, have all been attacked, slandered and abused, by those
who are among the eulogists of la Fayette; and I leave the public to determine,
who has shown the most diligence, zeal and courage, in defense of their
characters, Peter Porcupine or Noah Webster.

In pursuance of the same view it was, that you chose to comment on my having
published an apology for the old government of France, which you assert to be
as corrupt a system of despotism as Europe ever witnessed.

To call the old government of France, which all the civilians have reckoned
among the limited monarchies; to call this government a despotism, argues a
mind strongly tinctured with the principles of liberty and equality; but, to
say that it was as corrupt a system of despotism as Europe ever saw, puts you
upon a level with the slanderous haranguers of the suburbs of St. Antoine and
St. Marceaw. He that can call the monarchical government of France the worst of
despotisms, would make little scruple to imitate the venerable Pere Du Chene,
in branding St. Louis, Henry IV. and Louis the XVI. with the name of tyrants.

You do, however, allow that there is one species of government still worse
than that of the French monarchy; and here your consistency is well worth
attention. First the old government is as bad a one as Europe ever saw; then
the Jacobin government is worse. This is not amiss; but you do not let us off
so. After having thus acknowledged that the Jacobin government is worse than
the worst, you have the conscience to quarrel with me, to wage eternal war with
me, for censuring one of the principal founders of this very Jacobin
government! You had forgot, or you never knew, the history of the first years
of the French revolution. You contemplate your friend in the dungeon of Almutz
only; you do not look back, and behold him in the tribune of the Jacobin Club
at Paris. la Fayette was one March.
of the very first, that took the name of Jacobin: he was a founder of the
sect, and continued to be a member of it, till July, 1792. Even then he did not
withdraw himself, but was expelled.

The old government, say you was not so bad as the Jacobin government, it is
true; but there is a government different from both, which la Fayette sought,
and which the people of this country will rejoice to see introduced; that is, a
Free Government. -- Now, sir, what do you mean by a government that la Fayette
sought? To hear you, one would imagine, that he had been foiled in some
precious project for the good of his country; that his councils had been
rejected, and himself persecuted on account of his probity and wisdom; whereas
the very reverse of all this was the case. His projects succeeded to the utmost
of his wishes. The famous rights of man, of which he was the proposer, became a
fundamental law, was sanctioned and sworn to by the whole nation. The
Constitution, grounded on those rights, he saw completed, and he retired from
the legislative scene well pleased with his work. In short, the government he
sought, he obtained, and a most stupid, base and cruel government it was. A
government that acknowledged the horrid act of insurrection to be a sacred
duty, and that, in its practice, made a beginning in that career of sacrilege,
plunder and assassination, which has been so unremittingly pursued by
succeeding and more successful usurpers. And this is what you call a Free
Government; one that the people of America will be glad to see established in
France! If the people of America are silly or wicked enough to entertain any
such wish, I sincerely hope it may not be accomplished. The government they
have now in France, is certainly a most abominable despotism, but it is not so
destructive either in principle or practice, as that which la Fayette sought
and assisted to form.

What involves you in these inconsistencies and contradictions is evident
enough: you were a long time a very great admirer of the French revolution. I
will not say that I could make you blush, but I am certain I could make your
friends blush, by a quotation from your paper in approbation of Tom Paine's
Rights of Man, the manuel of Jacobinism. Exactly how far you went hand in hand
with the revolutionists, I know not; nor do I be-believe that you yourself
know. You are in the predicament of a great many others, who, when they are
asked what they approved and what they did not approve, answer, that they went
as far as la Fayette, but no farther; and God knows that was far enough.

You, and all those who thus pinned their political faith on the sleeve of this
unfledged statesman, would still have been revolutionists in the fullest sense
of the term, had not the usurpers been preparing to extend their fraternal
grasp to this government and country. Till then you carefully avoided saying a
word against them: all their most atrocious deeds were smoothed over; their
plundering decrees, their invitations to rebellion, were all right, till they
cast their looks this way: then your eyes were opened at once: like Bailly and
la Fayette, you adored the holy right of insurrection, till it began to operate
against yourselves.

From this digression, which your straggling from your subject invited, I
return to examine more closely the accusation of having published "an apology
for the old government of France." This apology is contained in certain
extracts from Gifford's answer to lord Lauderdale's letters to the Peers of
Scotland. The writer observes with great justness, that one of the most
successful modes of exciting sentiments favorable to the French Revolution,
has been the imputation of every vice creative of disgust to the old government
of France. He then notices the scandalous neglect of candor and truth, that
has been displayed in the performance of this task: the unfair mode of arguing
that has been adopted, and the exaggeration and calumny that has imposed on the
uninformed. The object of all this, it is evident, has been not only to justify
the revolutionists in destroying the monarchy, but to inculcate a belief, that
the people, notwithstanding their present misery, are still gainers by the
despotism that has been raised on its ruins.

To expose the falacy of this reasoning, to rectify the misconceptions of the
weak, and to detect the misrepresentations of the wicked, Mr. Gifford enters
into a candid examination of the subject, during which he proves, and that most
satisfactorily, that the acts of oppression imputed to the French government,
were generally, not to say always, exaggerated; that in many instances the
charges were totally unfounded, and even ridiculous; that in short, to the
happiness of France, no revolution was necessary; and of course, that this
dreadful scourge is to be ascribed to the ambition and treachery of the
usurping legislators.

With respect to the extracts, in themselves considered, the facts they contain
are of indisputable authenticity; as to the style, it is as far above the
criticism of Noah Webster, as it is beyond his imitation; and I defy you to
cull out a single sentiment, from beginning to end, which, by the most violent
contorsion, can be called hostile to true liberty. The elegant and convincing
writer is an Englishman, and consequently knows how to estimate the blessings
of freedom full as well, if not better than you. He is a scholar, and, which is
more as to the present point, the author of a history of France, which has
received the applause of the whole literary world, and which is the fruit of a
long and painful research, during many years of residence in that country: of
course his knowledge (particularly of whatever relates to the monarchy of
France) is not to be sunk to a competition with that of a man, the greatest
extent of whose travels has been from Connecticut to New York, and the utmost
exertion of whose talents is to be sought for in the compilation of a
school-book. Lastly, the author of the Apology for the old government of France
is an independent gentleman, whose sole object in writing must be the
attainment of honest fame; and who is not therefore, like a retailer of wisdom
and news, obliged to vary his politics to the more than female caprice of the
multitude.

But, to do you justice, I really believe, you possess too much good sense not
to be, in the present instance, charmed with what you pretend to disapprove of.
Whether you will be pleased to hear your judgment thus complimented at the
expense of your sincerity, I neither know nor care; but it certainly was me,
and not the extracts in my paper that you were angry with, and that it was your
object to decry. You wished to propagate a belief that I was an enemy to the
Independence of America, and also to the form of the federal government. The
former charge, which has already been refuted, was to be looked upon as proved
by my publishing Mr. Burke's censure on la Fayette; and the latter by my
publishing, from Gifford, an apology for the old government of France.

The same shameful abandonment of candor, the same jesuitical spirit of
perversion, that you discover in your comments on what respects la Fayette, is
still more apparent in what you say of the apology. -- You tell your readers,
that you suspect my enmity to the form of government under which we live; and
add, that this suspicion is increased by my publishing an apology for the old
government of France. Here you stop without saying that my intention is to
introduce the latter form of government here: however, lest you should be
misunderstood, of which you seem to have been much afraid, you afterward
revive the subject, and, addressing yourself to me, very gravely and very
maliciously observe, that my popularity, is not to be maintained by
recommending the old government of France; thereby intimating that I had
actually proposed the old government of France, which you call the worst of
despotisms, as a substitute for the Federal government of the United States!
What a wretched attempt at imposition. This may well be termed, in your own
flag language, a a low pitiful business. -- You best know what stock of
stupidity the readers of the Minerva are blessed with, but this I am certain
of; that the clumsiest and most impudent vagabond Jugler never ventured to play
off so barefaced a deception to the gaping clowns at a country fair. -- And
were you, could you be, so completely infatuated as to hope that any man in his
senses, any thing in human shape, would become the dupe of your spiteful
insinuation? The thing is beyond the compass of belief: to attempt to disprove
it would be useless: to give it a formal denial, or even to call it a lie,
would be doing it too much honor.

After having shown the absurdity, the malice, of your pretended suspicions
with respect to my political principles, you will permit me to ask you once
more, why those suspicions were never awakened 'till lately? -- Many of the men
who fought for American Independence have been treated, in my writings, with
much less mercy than Mr. Burke's speech treats la Fayette. Nay, I have never
spared la Fayette himself, when I have had occasion to speak of him (and that
has been very often) either individually or as a member of the Constitution
making Assembly. And, as to the old government of France, I have often passed
higher commendations on it, than Mr. Gifford does in the extracts you complain
of. To be sure I never recommended it to the people of America, as you sillily
insinuate I have done in publishing those extracts; but I have ventured to
predict, that, sooner or later, the French will return to that form of
government under which they were happy, and under which alone they can ever be
so again; and this I did in my Life and Adventures. -- How came these things to
escape your awful censure so long? How came you never before to think it your
duty to represent them as an indication of my enmity to the government and
Independence of your country? You let me go on uninterrupted, pamphlet after
pamphlet, for three whole years; yea, and even applauded my efforts all the
time; and now, at last, you find me to be a dangerous fellow, and burst out
upon me all at once, like a thunder from a summer cloud.

In vain would you make me believe, that any real suspicion, that any
apprehension of my insincerity, has caused this change in your conduct toward
me. It is possible, and barely possible, that your vanity has been unable to
support the charge of vulgar prejudice, and has stimulated you to this unmanly
mode of revenge. But, are you sure, Webster, that envy, cursed envy, has had
nothing to do in the " low pitiful business?" Are you sure, that the 150
Porcupine's Gazettes, daily sent to your city, together with those which may
probably have supplanted yours round your neighborhood, through New England,
and the Jerseys: consult your heart and tell me, if you are sure, that it is
not the spread of these innocent papers, and not any thing which they contain,
that has roused your lethargic patriotism.

It is ever painful to be obliged to think ill, and much more so to speak ill,
of those that we have been accustomed to esteem, and I should hardly bring
myself to impute your enmity to so dishonorable a cause, were I not well
assured that the imputation is just.

Unfortunately for your reputation, it so happens, that you possess a more
satisfactory proof of my attachment to the government, than perhaps, any other
man in the country does. The letter which I wrote you, when I requested you to
publish the proposals for my Gazette (a letter written in the fullest
confidence) must have convinced any man, of a mind not endued with the quality
of turning its nutriment to poison, that the American government had not a more
sincere, more zealous, or more devoted friend than I. This letter, whatever
reluctance I might on any other occasion feel to suffer its appearance in
print, I now call on you to publish in your paper; and, if you have one single
grain of candor or justice left, you will not hesitate to comply with my
request.

Here I should close, but there are two or three passages more in your Address,
which so strongly invite attention, that your vanity might, perhaps, take the
alarm again, were they to pass totally unnoticed; and, after having tasted so
severely of the effects of your wrath, it is not to be wondered at, if I feel
no inclination to brave it a second time.

You are so good as to inform me, that you once voluntarily bore arms to defend
Independence; that, in pursuance of the same principles, you first proposed
publicly the plan of a National Constitution; that, persevering in the same
principles, you assailed the monster faction, the moment it appeared in the
insidious form of popular clubs; and that, from that moment to this present
writing, you have never ceased to expose the artifices of the French agents to
lay this country at the feet of France. March.


How all this got into a letter written about an English flag, I cannot for my
soul conceive. However, it is news, and as such I am, in common with the rest of
the trade, obliged to you for it.

I have read the history of the American war over and over again, but I do not
recollect ever having seen the name of Noah Webster in it. That you were not
very famous is therefore certain, and it is more than probable that you were
looked upon as mere food for powder, a situation that, whatever might be the
cause you were made use of in, is nothing at all to boast of.

Your being the first who publicly proposed a National Constitution, is a
curious anecdote enough; and I cannot say but I am glad it is come to light, as
it will tend to quash, or at least to moderate, the exhorbitant pretensions of
that unconscionable dog Tom Pain, who puts in an absolute claim to the whole
credit of the invention. Tom does, indeed, confess, that he was anticipated by
one writer on the subject, who insisted, that thirteen staves, without a hoop,
would never make a barrel; and if you can make it out, as I have not the least
doubt you can, that you were the real legitimate author of this shrewd and
learned observation, Tom must give way to you, or, at least, you must be
permitted to come in with him for a share of the honor.

Thus you see I do not dispute your pretensions to military or constitution
making fame, but as to your boldness in assailing the monster FACTION; as to
your perseverance and success in exposing the artifices of the French; these I
do dispute, and not only dispute, but positively deny. You have, indeed, as far
as you have found it prudent to go, latterly espoused the cause of order, and
consequently that of the government; but, to do this with effect, you should
have begun long enough before you did, and should have assumed a tone that
never has been heard from the Minerva. At first you were a warm partizan of
insurrection; you were among the abusers, the calumniators, of Burke, and the
eulogists of Pain. At this epoch you were bold, because you acted with the
crowd. When Genet's insolence awakened the suspicions of the people here, then
you began to veer, to shuffle and to trim; and, from that time to the present
moment you have been playing that double handed game, which, however profitable
you may contrive to make it, entitles you to the character of a Vicar of Bray.
If my worthy patron, Bradford, is to be believed, your old friend, and partner
in the language trade, Doctor Franklin, was six weeks in Congress, before any
one could divine whether he was a Whig or Tory; and I have frequently been at a
loss to guess, such a compound is your politics, whether I ought to class you
among the Federalists or Democrats. If these words have any meaning, as applied
to you, you are a Democrat in principle, and a Federalist for convenience.

Not content with a malignant misrepresentation of my motives and the meaning
of my words, you must insult me with your advice. You tell me that I do not
proceed in the right way to preserve my popularity, and caution me against
publishing what is " disrespectful to the opinions of Americans;" and thus you
discover a servility of mind, that would be disgraceful even in a mendicant.
When you form a jugment of me, Master Webster, and of what is likely to produce
a change in my conduct, be so good as not to consult your own heart, for it
will assuredly deceive you. Popularity may be your God, as indeed, it evidently
is: so is it not mine. Small is the sacrifice that I would make at its shrine.
A volume of the best of praise is not, with me, worth its weight in bread and
cheese; and as to the stupid plaudits of a partial and prejudiced throng, I
should think that they covered me with infamy instead of honor.

According to your notions of the liberty of the press, a man must not publish
a word against la Fayette, though it be extracted from some other writer;
because, forsooth, it is extremely disrespectful to the opinions of Americans!
In other words, nothing must appear in a news-paper that does not perfectly
chime in with the prevalent prejudice, however preposterous that prejudice may
be, or however dangerous its tendency; and thus the press, in place of a
censor, is to be a parisite, to the public; instead of being a terror to evil
doers, it is to be the pander of folly and of vice.

That this has, for a long time, been the character of the American Press, as
far as relates to newspapers, is but too true. Every one seems to have been
upon the watch to find out the humor of the public, and to accommodate his
sentiments and even his news accordingly: hence it is that we have seen
hundreds of eulogiums upon Robespierre and Marat, and have been seriously told
that the French gained a victory over Lord How on the 1st of June, 1794. The
motto of the Philadelphia Gazette, "THE PUBLIC WILL OUR GUIDE," would suit the
whole of you, with a very few exceptions. The people are not told what is their
interest, but what it is their wish, or rather the wish of the multitude, to
hear. If any one dares to speak what he thinks; to publish what he conceives to
be useful, if it happens to be contrary to the vulgar prejudice, he is told
that he is disrespectful to the opinions of Americans.

According to the cant of the day, the people of a state, not governed by a
monarch, is called the sovereign. For my part, I never hear talk of a sovereign
people, of a society every individual of which is liable to the grasp of a
catch-pole; I never do or can hear talk of such a sovereign without laughing.
But, as such you look upon the people. Well then, to have an idea of your own
servility, tell me what you would say of a news-printer in England, who should
censure another for publishing sentiments extremely disrespectful to the
opinions of the king? Would you not call him a slave, a poor rampant
spaniel-like sycophant? And, where is the difference, I would be glad to know,
between crawling to a sovereign with one head and a sovereign with many? -- No,
Webster, your insinuations that I treat the people of America, or rather their
opinions, with disrespect, will never deter me from following the bent of my
own inclination. In my publications, I hope, I shall always be guided by truth:
how few I may please, or how many I may displease, is to me a matter of very
little moment. I entertain, I trust, a due respect for the real people of this
country, and a grateful sense of the liberal encouragement I have received from
them; but neither this respect nor this gratitude will ever lead me so far as
to flatter, what I look upon as a foible or a prejudice. I have no pretensions
to patriotism, and as to disinterestedness, it is nonsense to talk of it; but,
though gain be one principle object of my labors, I scorn to pursue it by the
base means of trimming and truckling. No, Webster, the public will is not my
guide: when my readers become so unreasonable as to require a suppression of
every sentiment that does not accord with their own, I will quit the trade of a
news-monger, hire a garret, write Carmagnole ballads for the diversion of the
sovereign people, and elegies on the departed liberty of the press.

You conclude by declaring your resolution to annoy me by all those decent and
legal means that distinguish the gentleman and the citizen. This I highly
approve of, and on my part, I solemnly promise to oppose your annoyance by all
those decent and legal means that distinguish the Porcupine; that is by
pricking you every where and in every way that I can come at you. -- After this
candid declaration, you will undoubtedly look upon me as

Your most humble and obedient servant, P. P.

WILL AND TESTAMENT.
SINCE I took up the calling that I now follow, I have received about forty
threatening letters; some talk of fisticuff, others of kicks, but far the
greater part menace me with outright murder. Several friends (whom by the bye
I sincerely thank) have called to caution me against the lurking cutthroats;
and it seems to be the persuasion of every one, that my brains are to be
knocked out the first time I venture from home in the dark.

Under these terrific circumstances, it is impossible that Death should not
stare me in the face: I have therefore got myself into as good a state of
preparation as my sinful profession will, I am afraid, admit of; and as to my
worldly affairs, I have settled them in the following WILL, which I publish, in
order that my dear friends, the Legatees, may, if they think themselves injured
or neglected, have an opportunity of complaining before it be too late.

IN the name of Fun, Amen. I PETER PORCUPINE, Pamphleteer and News-Monger,
being (as yet) sound both in body and in mind, do, this fifteenth day of April,
in the Year of our LORD, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-seven, make,
declare, and publish, this my LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT, in manner, form, and
substance following; to wit:

IN PRIMIS, I LEAVE my body to Doctor Michael Lieb, a member of the Legislature
of Pennsylvania, to be by him dissected (if he knows how to do it) in presence
of the Rump of the Democratic Society, In it they will find a heart that held
them in abhorrence, that never palpitated at their threats, and that, to its
last beat, bade them defiance. But my chief motive for making this bequest it,
that my spirit may look down with contempt on their cannibal-like triumph over
a breathless corpse.

Item, As I make no doubt that the above said Doctor Lieb (and some other
Doctors that I could mention) would like very well to skin me, I request that
they, or one of them, may do it, and that the said Lieb's father may tan my
skin; after which I desire my Executors to have seven copies of my Works
complete, bound in it, one copy to be presented to the five Sultans of France,
one to each of their Divans, one to the Governor of Pennsylvania, to citizens
Maddison, Giles, and Gallatine one each, and the remaining one to the
Democratic Society of Philadelphia, to be carefully preserved among their
archieves.

Item, To the Mayor, Aldermen and Councils of the City of Philadelphia, I
bequeath all the sturdy young hucksters, who infest the market, and who to
maintain their bastards, tax the honest inhabitants many thousand pounds
annually. I request them to take them into their worshipful keeping; to chasten
their bodies for the good of their souls; and moreover, to keep a sharp
look-out after their gallants: and remind the latter of the old proverb: Touch
pot, touch penny.

Item, To T -- J -- son, Philosopher, I leave a curious Norway Spider, with a
hundred legs and nine pair of eyes; likewise the first black cutthroat general
he can catch hold of, to be flead alive, in order to determine with more
certainty the real cause of the dark color of his skin: and should the said T
-- J -- son survive Banneker the Almanack-Maker; I request he will get the
brains of said Philomath carefully dissected, to satisfy the world in what
respects they differ from those of a white man.

Item, To the Philosophical Society of Philadelphia, I will and bequeath a
correct copy of Thornton's plan for abolishing the use of the English language
and for introducing in its stead a republican one, the representative
characters of which bear a strong resemblance to pot-hooks and hangers; and for
the discovery of which plan, the said society did, in the year 1793, grant to
the said language maker 500 dollars premium. -- It is my earnest desire, that
the copy of this valuable performance, which I hereby present, may be shown to
all the traveling literati, as a proof of the ingenuity of the author and of
the wisdom of the society.

Item, To Doctor Benjamin Rush, I will and bequeath a copy of the Censor for
January, 1797; but, upon the express condition, that he does not is anywise or
guise, either at the time of my death, or Six months after, pretend to speak,
write or publish an eulogium on me, my calling or character, either literary,
military, civil, or political.

Item, To my dear fellow labourer Noah Webster, gen"tleman-citizen," Esquire and
News-man, I will and bequeath a prognosticating barometer of curious
construction and great utility, by which, at a single glance, the said Noah
will be able to discern the exact state that the public mind will be in the
ensuing year, and will thereby be enabled to trim by degrees and not expose
himself to detection, as he now does by his sudden lee-shore tacks. I likewise
bequeath to the said "gentleman citizen," six Spanish milled dollars, to be
expended on a new plate of his portrait at the head of his spelling-book, that
which graces it at present being so ugly that it scares the children from their
lessons; but this legacy is to be paid him only upon condition that he leave
out the title of 'Squire, at the bottom of said picture, which is extremely
odious in an American school-book, and must inevitably tend to corrupt the
political principles of the republican babies that behold it. And I do most
earnestly desire, exhort and conjure the said 'Squire-news-man, to change the
tittle of his paper, The Minerva, for that of The Political Centaur.

Item, To F. A. Mughlenburg, Esquire Speaker of a late house of Representatives of
the United States, I leave a most superbly finished statue of Janus.

Item, To Tom the Tinker, I leave a liberty cap, a tri-colored cockade, a
wheel-barrow full of oysters, and a hogshead of grog: I also leave him three
blank checks on the Bank of Pennsylvania, leaving to him the task of filling
them up; requesting him, however, to be rather more merciful than he has shown
himself heretofore.

Item, To the Governor of Pennsylvania, and to the late President and Cashier
of the Bank of the said State, as to joint legatees, I will and bequeath that
good old proverb: Honesty is the best policy. And this legacy I have chosen for
these worthy gentlemen, as the only thing about which I am sure they will never
disagree.

Item, To T -- Coxe, of Philadelphia, citizen, I will and bequeath a crown of
hemlock, as a recompense for his attempt to throw an odium on the
administration of General Washington; and I most positively enjoin on my
executors, to see that the said crown be shaped exactly like that which this
spindle-shanked legatee wore before Genesis How, when he made his triumphal entry
into Philadelphia.

Item, To Thomas Lord Bradford (otherwise called Goosy Tom), Bookseller,
Printer, News-man, and member of the Philosophical Society of Philadelphia, I
will and bequeath a copy of the Peerage of Great Britain, in order that the
said Lord Thomas may the more exactly ascertain what probability there is of
his succeeding to the seat, which his noble relation now fills in the House of
Lords.

Item, To all and singular the authors in the United States, whether they write
verse or prose, I will and bequeath a copy of my Life and adventures; and I
advise the said authors to study with particular care the 40th and 41st pages
thereof; more especially and above all things, I exhort and conjure them never
to publish it together, though the bookseller should be a saint.

Item, To Edmund Randolph, Esquire late Secretary of State, to Mr. J. A. Dallas,
Secretary of the State of Pennsylvania, and to his Excellency Thomas Mifflin,
Governor of the said unfortunate State, I will and bequeath, to each of them, a
copy of the sixteenth paragraph of Fauchet's intercepted letter.

Item, To Citizen John Swanwick, member of Congress, by the will and consent of
the sovereign people, I leave bills of Exchange on London to an enormous
amount; they are all protested, indeed, but if properly managed, may be turned
to good account. I likewise bequeath to the said John a small treatise by an
Italian author, wherein the secret of pleasing the ladies is developed, and
reduced to a mere mechanical operation, without the least dependence on the
precarious aid of the passions. Hoping that these instances of my liberality
will produce, in the mind of the little legislator, effects quite different
from those produced therein by the king of Great Britain's pension to his
parents.

Item, To the editor of the Boston Chronicle, the New York Argus, and the
Philadelphia Merchants' Advertiser, I will and bequeath one ounce of modesty
and love of truth, to be equally divided between them. I should have been more
liberal in this bequest, were I not well assured, that one ounce is more than
they will ever make use of.

Item, To Franklin Bache, editor of the Aurora of Philadelphia, I will and
bequeath a small bundle of French assignats, which I brought with me from the
country of equality. If these should be too light in value for his pressing
exigencies, I desire my executors, or any one of them, to bestow on him a
second part to what he has lately received in Southwark; and as a further proof
of my good will and affection, I request him to accept of a gag and a brand new
pair of fetters, which if he should refuse, I will and bequeath him in lieu
thereof -- my malediction.

Item, To my beloved countrymen, the people of Old England, I will and bequeath
a copy of Doctor Priestley's Charity Sermon for the benefit of poor Emigrants;
and to the said preaching philosopher himself, I bequeath a heart full of
disappointment, grief and despair.

Item, To the good people in France, who remain attached to their sovereign,
particularly to those among whom I was hospitably received, I bequeath each a
good strong dagger; hoping most sincerely that they may yet find courage enough
to carry them to the hearts of their abominable tyrants.

Item, To citizen M -- oe, I will and bequeath my chamber looking-glass. It is
a plain but exceeding true mirror: in it he will see the exact likeness of a
traitor, who has bartered the honor and interest of his country to a
perfidious and savage enemy.

Item, To the republican Britons, who have fled from the hands of justice in
their own country, and who are a scandal, a nuisance and a disgrace to this, I
bequeath hunger and nakedness, scorn and reproach; and I do hereby positively
enjoin on my executors to contribute five hundred dollars toward the erection
of gallowses and gibbets, for the accommodation of the said imported patriots,
when the legislators of this unhappy state shall have the wisdom to countenance
such useful establishments.

Item, My friend J. T. Callender, the runaway from Scotland, is of course a
partaker in the last mentioned legacy; but as a particular mark of my
attention, I will and bequeath him twenty feet of pine plank, which I request
my executors to see made into a pillory, to be kept for his particular use,
till a gibbet can be prepared.

Item, To Tom Pain, the author of Common Sense, Rights of Man, Age of Reason,
and a letter to General Washington, I bequeath a strong hempen collar, as the
only legacy I can think of that is worthy of him, as well as best adapted to
render his death in some measure as infamous as his life: and I do hereby
direct and order my Executors to send it to him by the first safe conveyance,
with my compliments, and request that he would make use of it without delay,
that the national razor may not be disgraced by the head of such a monster.

Item, To the gaunt outlandish orator, vulgarly called the Political Sinner,
who in the just order of things follows next after the last mentioned legatee,
I bequeath the honor of partaking in his catastrophe; that in their deaths, as
well as in their lives, all the world may exclaim; See how rogues hang together!

Item, To all and singular the good people of these States, I leave peace,
union, abundance, happiness, untarnished honor, and an unconquerable
everlasting hatred to the French Revolutionists and their destructive
abominable principles.

Item, To each of my Subscribers I leave a quill, hoping that in their hands it
may become a sword against every thing that is hostile to the government and
independence of their country.

Lastly,
To my three brothers, Paul, Simon and Dick, I leave my whole estate, as well
real as personal (first paying the foregoing legacies) to be equally divided
between them share and share alike. And I do hereby make and constitute my said
three brothers the Executors of this my LAST WILL; to see the same performed,
according to its true intent and meaning, as far as in their power lies.

PETER PORCUPINE.
Witness Present, Philo Fun, Jack Jockus.


INDEX TO PORCUPINE's GAZETTE, FOR MARCH, 1797.
A.
ADVERTISEMENT, singular one from a French paper Page. 27 -- Extraordinary, by
the Capt. of the Asia Page. 63 -- for sale of ships, Cutthroat and Plunderer
Page. 95 -- sale of Notes, Engagements, etc. with chance of collateral security
on new discoveries, by Touch the half-ready, and Co. Page. 51 Americans, not
distinguished by works of imagination Page. 38 -- remarks on that observation
ibid Anecdote of a Miser Page. 50 -- a shepherd and the Marquis of Spinola ibid
-- of a young woman Page. 90 Antigallican Page. 94
B.
British Commerce and Finances Page. 2 -- continued in the succeeding Numbers
-- Government, answer of -- to the Spanish declaration of war Page. 58 Baptism,
new, of Bache's paper Page. 10 Bache's observations on the late President's
retreat from Government, with P. Porcupine's remarks on the same Page. 10 --
country correspondents communications on the same Page. 27 -- Paper, progress
of -- from Truth, Decency, and Order Page. 47 Bastile, account of taking the --
with note on the same Page. 14 Bankrupt Law, hint to Legislature of
Pennsylvania on Page. 42
C.
Crisis, Alliance with Great Britain or France compared Page. 50 Cherin's
address to the army returned from Ireland, translated into plain English Page.
74 Contrast between the conduct of the American and French governments, by Mr.
Wilcocks Page. 87 Cooper, Mr. Criticism on his performance Page. 90
D.
Dream Page. 50
E.
Elephant, curious occurrence at the exhibition of one Page. 43
F.
French piracies Page. 3 -- continued in the succeeding Numbers -- fleet, Capt.
Bembridges account of the number of Page. 19 -- fraternity, evidences of ibid
-- Amity, a little of Page. 51 -- Flag, taken down from the Tontine
Coffee-House, New York Page. 47 -- paragraphs relative to, and remarks on --
taken from New York papers of 1795 ibid -- Removal of, displeases King Mob
Page. 55 French Agents in the West Indies -- infamous arret of Page. 38
Observations on the same ibid -- Emigrants, remarks on a further subscription
proposed for them, and how they recompense us Page. 54 -- Honesty and
Friendship Page. 55 -- Observations on their conduct toward this country Page.
83 France, Gifford's apology for former government of Page. 14 continued in the
succeeding numbers -- immoral philosophy of Page. 59 -- state of, in February,
1794 Page. 86 Flags, American and English printed together, with remarks
thereon Page. 43 Fennel, query respecting the animal which snarls at Page. 15
-- Remark on the query Page. 19 Foreign news, general sketches of, up to 20th
December Page. 42
G.
Great Britain, King of -- his Manifesto Page. 51 -- the deranged state of that
unhappy Country Page. 55 Gold -- Effects of -- a Poem Page. 90
H.
House of Representatives of the United States -- Resolution of, on the account
of E. Randolph, late Secretary of State Page. 11 Hoche's Proclamation to his
Raggamuffins Page. 66 Harper, Robert G. his letter to Bache on the publication
of his confidential letter on the character of Mr. Jefferson Page. 74
I.
Ireland -- French attempt to invade Page. 63, 66 -- Loyalty and active spirit
displayed on that occasion -- by the troops and people of ibid Ireland, Account
of the preparations made by the French for the expedition against Page. 91 --
Lord Chancellor of -- his account of the state of the country Page. 70
K.
Kehl -- surrender of Page. 66
L.
La Fayette -- Burke's speech in the British House of Commons on imprisonment
of Page. 10, 11 Louceum -- Questions proposed for the Page. 19 Liberty Cap --
Lines at Newport on seeing the sign of Page. 42 Liberty -- French -- a mere
counterfeit Page. 46 Lock jaw -- cured by STROKING!!! Page. 59
M.
Merchants' Daily Advertiser's account of proposed change of British
administration, with P. Porcupine's remarks on the same Page. 11 Magpie and
Robin red breast, a Tale, by Peter Pindar Page. 34 Massacre of the Danes in
England Page. 54 -- observations on the same ibid Munroe, Mr. his recall from
France Page. 71 -- Answer to -- from Barras, President of the French Directory,
on his presenting his letter of recall ibid -- Observations on Barras's answer
Page. 71, 75 -- His letter to the French Directory previous to his departure
Page. 79 -- remarks on the same Page. 83, 90, 94 Malmsbury -- Lord -- his
account of the negotiations for Peace, between the government of Great Britain
and French Directory Page. 78 Continued in the succeeding Numbers
N.
Northumberland -- people of, vindicated from a charge of being enemies to the
late administration Page. 38 Naval-force -- of Great Britain, distribution of
Page. 78 Newspapers, impartial ones -- Remarks on Page. 83
P.
Porcupine's address to the public Page. 1 -- Letter to Franklin Bache Page. 3
-- To the Public on the publication of a pamphlet, the author of which assumed
his name -- Letter to Tredwell Jackson, acting hangman to the Democratic
Society of New York Page. 31 President of the United States -- Speech on his
inauguration Page. 6, 7 -- Vice, of the United States -- Speech on his
inauguration Page. 6 Pain Tom -- Anecdote of Page. 10 Patriotism -- Detected
and Mr. Anonymous discovered, Page. 46 Pennsylvania, Governor of, his
communication to the State Legislature on the offer of a House to the President
of the United States Page. 23 Remarks on the same ibid Perkins, Dr. --
Observations on his Metallic points Page. 35 Priestly, Dr. -- His works, a
recommendation to buy and burn them and all Tom Paine's together, instead of
subscribing for the publication of more Page. 39 Proclamation of Gordon Forbes,
at St. Domingo Page. 43 -- of the President of the United States Page. 79 Peace
-- British proposals to French Directory for Page. 50 -- Negotiation with the
same ibid -- Official papers respecting that negotiation Page. 66 Pinckney, Mr.
-- Refusal of French Directory to receive him Page. 67
Q.
Query, interesting Page. 10
R.
Republican Fraternity Page. 43, 75 Russia, -- New Emperor of -- Paul I. Page.
50, 51 his character, etc. Page. 71 Report of the Secretary of State, on French
captures of American vessels, etc. etc. Page. 54 continued in the succeeding
Numbers
S.
Spies, foreign and sower of sedition, should not be elected to posts or
offices of importance Page. 39 Spy, Western -- of our allies Page. 91
Sans-culotte Country Page. 55 Sans-culotte Armada Page. 66 Spanish vessels
taken Page. 59 Smith, General, capture and releasement of his ship by the
French Page. 90 Remarks on the same ibid Sheridan's patriotism Page. 46
T.
Trinidad taken by the British Page. 71 -- Proclamation of the Commander Page.
94 Tree of Liberty -- a fragment Page. 74
U.
United States -- Congress of -- Randolph and Gallatine, remarks on
V.
Versatility -- different characters given of European Monarchs Page. 91
W.
WASHINGTON, General -- Feast given to, by the Merchants of Philadelphia Page.
7 -- Account of Entertainments and rejoicings at Salem, Beverly, and
Stockbridge, on his Birthday Page. 15 -- Tribute of applause paid to him --
from a London Sans-Culotte Gazette Page. 19 -- 's Reception at Wilmington, Del.
Page. 27 -- Letter of, concerning the forgery of Letters in his name ibid --
Charge of assassination by Page. 30 -- Observations on, and refutation of same
Page. 30, 35 concluded Page. 39 -- Reception at Baltimore Page. 47 -- Address
to, from the Mayor and Corporation of that City, with his answer ibid Willcocks
William, Address to the people of the United Sates respecting the French
Minister Adet Page. 30 -- Contrast between the conduct of the American and
French Governments Page. 87
END OF THE CENSOR FOR MARCH, 1797.

