AN INAUGURAL DISSERTATION ON THE BILIOUS MALIGNANT FEVER. READ AT A PUBLIC
EXAMINATION, (...)LD BY THE MEDICAL PROFESSORS, BEFORE THE REV. JOSEPH WILLARD,
S. T. D. PRESIDENT, AND THE GOVERNORS IN THE UNIVERSITY AT CAMBRIDGE, FOR THE
DEGREE OF BACHELOR IN MEDICINE, JULY 10, 1797.

BY SAMUEL BROWN, A. M.

The putrid steams, or some corroding venom,
In countless pores, over all the pervious skin
Imbibed, soon poison the balsamic blood,
And rouse the heart to every fever's rage.
PRINTED AT BOSTON, BY MANNING and LORING. 1797.

AN INAUGURAL DISSERTATION.
IN August, 1796, the town of Boston was visited with a contagious disease of
unusual malignancy, the circumstances and marks of which were such as
threatened great calamity; and the alarm spread, and became almost universal.
This still increased, on observing that in many of its symptoms it bore great
resemblance to the fever which had so recently raged at Philadelphia and
New York.

IN the preceding fall and winter, inflammatory diseases were frequent in
Boston, and in many of the towns in the country, particularly the scarlatina,
scarlatina, anginosa, and measles. And in the months of June, July and August,
or immediately previous to the disease we have mentioned, a species of
dysentery was frequent; and now and then cases of cholera morbus occurred.
These were in some places unusually mortal, and prevailed more or less in
different parts of Boston till the time of the bilious fever; after which they
were known no more.

BEFORE entering more particularly on the subject of the fever, I shall
introduce some observations on the effects of poisons, and their laws of
operation on the human system.

OF POISONS.
THESE are substances which either instantly destroy the life of a part or
parts of the system, or change the natural functions into morbid actions; and
thereby, suddenly or by degrees, affect the whole constitution.

THEY are either mineral, vegetable, or animal. -- The damps or mephitic
vapors often met with in mines and deep wells, are mineral poisons. Of
vegetable poisons we have a remarkable instance in the Bohan Upas, which grows
on the island of Java, belonging to the Dutch. It is so destructively
poisonous, we are told, as that the soil for several miles in circumference is
whitened with the bones of birds and animals, that have been arrested while
attempting to pass through the atmosphere of this shrub of death. Animal
poisons are of two kinds; original, as that secreted by the viper; and such as
are generated by disease. The latter are, by Mr. Hunter, and afterward by
others, denominated morbid poisons.

POISONS are communicated either in a gassous or vaporous state; or by contact,
in the form of pus, or ulcerous matter. Fevers are an example of the former,
the venerea of the latter.

THE constitution is never affected, or never takes on the morbid action of the
poison, except it be in a state of predisposition. Thus, at the time of any
raging epidemic, the miasma or putrid effluvia is generally dispersed, and
different ages, sexes and constitutions are alike exposed; yet comparatively
but few will be infected, while the others escape. How the same constitution
should possess different susceptibilities to disease, is best understood from
Dr. Brown and Dr. Darwin.

ANIMAL existence, according to Dr. Brown, is endowed with a quality which he
names excitability, and Dr. Darwin the spirit of animation, or sensorial power,
on which the phenomena of life depend. Every thing which supports life, exerts
itself on this principle; and vice versa. It is capable of different degrees of
accumulation and exhaustion: it is accumulated by the abstraction of stimuli,
and is exhausted by excessive stimuli, or the long application of others acting
more moderately. A due proportion between the exciting powers, such as heat,
food, air, mental exertion, etc. and the excitability or sensorial power,
constitutes health; and every variation from either is disease.

"There is, they say, and I believe there is,
A spark within us of the immortal fire,
That animates and moulds the grosser frame,
And when the body sinks, escapes to heaven,
Its native seat.
Meanwhile this heavenly particle pervades
The mortal elements, --
And in its secret conclave, as it feels
The body's woes and joys, this ruling power
Wields at its will the dull material world,
And is the body's health or malady."
WITH many diseases of the variolous kind, there is a certain period between
the time the infection is received, and the appearance of the disease; and in
this interval scarce any alteration in the actions of life can be perceived.
Thus, in the casual small pox, we find a space of about twelve days between the
reception of the poisonous effluvia and the first symptoms of the disease.
Travelers frequently leave the country where they received the miasma of ague,
long before any symptoms of it appear; yet the disposition having been formed,
and the poison received, the disease after a certain period makes its
appearance.

IT sometimes happens, that after the disposition is given and the poison
received into the system, the period of eruption, or the time when the disease
usually appears, is protracted beyond the usual time, in consequence of the
action of other diseases, as the measles, scrophula, etc. This is confirmed by
various histories of the small pox.

FURTHER -- We have great reason to believe, that not only the morbid action or
symptoms of a disease may be suspended, but also that the susceptibility may be
entirely prevented after the poison is applied. There is a striking proof of
this afforded us in the effect of the Harmattan wind, as recorded in the
Philosophical Transactions of London. -- Seventy negroes were inoculated for
the small pox three days after the Harmattan set in: none of them had the
symptoms of the disease. In a few weeks afterward, fifty of the same were
inoculated, and had the disease; the rest had taken it in the natural way.
Here, though the infectious matter was applied to seventy, all of them (as
appeared afterward) constitutionally susceptible of the disease, yet even the
local disposition was superceded, and of course the constitution was not
infected. Adams on the phagedena, etc.


THE immediately preceding propositions are in proof of a medical axiom
established by Dr. Hunter, viz. That the constitution never supports the
operation of two distinct diseases at the same time.

IT is a law with most of those poisons which produce their effects by a
critical fever, that a constitution which has once gone through the action
excited by them, is no longer susceptible of it. This is accounted for upon the
principle, that the poison is so powerful and active as to destroy the
sensibility or life of the part; or that the constitution becomes habituated to
the particular stimuli of the poison, and therefore upon a second application
to the part or parts of the system, they are undisturbed by or are insensible
to it. This will account for the sudden and seemingly miraculous disappearance
of epidemics, as was the case at Philadelphia and New York; for all those who
had a susceptibility to the disease have taken it and are not liable to be
again affected by it, and those who have not this susceptibility cannot receive
it; of course, the prevalence of the disease must suddenly cease.

POISONS, miasma or morbific effluvia are of too subtle a nature for chemical
analysis; their constituent materials, and the prevailing or distinguishing
principle of each, whether an acid or an alkali, septon or nitrous acid gas, or
any other gas, is totally unknown.

VENEREAL and phagedenic poisons, though in the form of fluid discharge and
subject to observation, and even to be experimented upon; yet it is equally
unknown what material quality constitutes their nature, and renders them
capable of their specific effects. Do not most poisons contain a principle of
life, which occasions their activity, and by means of which their deleterious
effects are produced, when taken into the human system?

Dr. Hunter has long since discovered and demonstrated that the digestive
organs have no power over substances which have within them the principle of
life. There are many circumstances which render probable this opinion
respecting poisons, contagious ones in particular. In the itch, animalculae are
probably the cause of this affection. And why may not the syphilis be produced
in a similar manner, viz. by an accumulated and mixed quantity of seminal
animalculae lodged in those reservoirs and recesses peculiar to the parts
concerned? Lodged in this abundance, they may by their own activity insinuate
into the system, and form nidi; or they may become putrid, and thus produce the
specific venom of the syphilitic disease. Thus also with other animalculae,
introduced by respiration or cuticular absorption.

IN the tropical regions, where death has almost an undisputed reign, the
atmosphere is generally loaded with myriads of animalculae; so much so, at
certain times in the rainy seasons, as nearly to suffocate the inhabitants. It
is then that diseases mostly prevail. Life is always found where there is a
congeniality of matter for its reception; and every object in nature, animate
and inanimate, healthy or diseased, has its particular sphere of exhalation.
This exhalation always partakes of the nature and life of its subject.

HOWEVER homogenous poisons are while they form the atmosphere of the subject
from whence they were exhaled; yet being in contact with other spheres of
exhalation, they are blended with other substances which form the common
atmosphere; and at length are so equilibriated, by entering into new forms and
states, as to lose their activity and power to injure.

IT is a universal truth, equally applicable to poisons as to other things,
that the more simple and homogenous a substance is, the more powerful and
active; and vice versa.

THE atmosphere in which we live is made up of exhalations from every
individual substance in all the three kingdoms of nature -- the animal,
vegetable, and mineral: these substances form a perpetual intermediation of
less and more subtle, until they reach the sun himself, the great sensorium of
material nature, which by them is nourished and fed, in return for the activity
which it imparts. Our atmosphere, in all its extent, becomes blended also with
the atmospheres of other planets, and they, in union, form one common
atmosphere of the whole system. This idea might be extended so far as to form
one general atmosphere for the universe; but this would be filling up Newton's
VACUUM, which might expose us to the imputation of philosophical skepticism.

THIS blending the common atmospheres of each planet, and giving them
reciprocal influence on each other, may be of use in explaining many of the
diseases and affections of the human body, subject to periodic returns and
regular intervals, viz. intermittent fevers, the various species of
maenorrhagia, epistaxis, and haemorrhois. A late writer has observed, that the
paroxysms of fevers show themselves in a greater degree of violence about the
full and change of the moon, that is to say, about three days and an half
before and after, including at each period a space of about seven days, than
during the interval between these periods. Also -- That the paroxysms of fevers
occurring during the periods described, are constantly more violent about
midday and midnight, than during the intervals between these spaces. -- That
some remarkable abatement in the violence of the paroxysm never fails to take
place, upon the expiration of the full and change of the moon. -- That the
paroxysms of fevers, whilst they abate in violence upon the expiration of the
full and change, shift also their attack to a later hour. -- That epilepsy,
insanity, paralytic affections, asthmas, phthisical coughs, with a variety of
other complaints, often assumed an intermittent form, and returned regularly
with the full and change of the moon, and disappeared or diminished during the
intervals.

THIS sol-lunar influence has been noticed by the ingenious author of Zoonomia;
and perhaps better accounted for than by any predecessor.

MOST of the above observations are capable of satisfactory proof, and have
long been acknowledged by the best medical writers; so that they may be
considered as so many medical axioms. They may be of use in considering our
subject -- on which I now enter.

I HAVE observed, that the fever, when it made its first appearance, showed
strong marks of malignancy. The patient, after some hours of unusual dullness
or dead heavy sensation in the head, and great reluctance for any voluntary
motion, felt great commotion and uneasiness at the stomach, which constantly
increased till vomiting commenced. At each of the several vomitings, attended
with severe wretchings, much bilious matter was thrown up; and there was found,
in many instances, a porraceous substance, resembling the settlings of coffee.
The stomach showed unusual symptoms of irritability, it being almost impossible
to keep down for a moment the mildest medicine that could be administered. In
the intervals of vomiting, particularly, a constant and greatly exhausting pain
was felt; most exquisite at the small of the back, and extending along the
spine and its connexions quite up to the occiput. Pain of head continuing,
especially over the eyes and under the temporal bones, sometimes with a
sensation as if some instrument had passed the head. Respiration extremely
difficult, often with a feel of suffocation. Heat very great, especially in the
thorax and region of the liver. Pulse morbidly rapid. Pores closed. Skin
smooth, and apparently distended with the expanded fluids and heat within;
having a tinge, somewhat resembling that of chlorotic patients. The cornea
albuginea most resembling, in color, that of dusky glass when held up to the
light. The eyes, however, expressed much concern, and often moved with a
furious rapidity in the early stage of the disease. These all increased, if
possible, in violence till death put an end to the patient's sufferings; or
gradually subsided, when the fever vanished, and health was restored.

THOUGH these were the characteristic symptoms of the disease, yet they were
generally variant in their commencement, progress and termination, according to
the difference of temperament; and also according to the difference in the
predisposing causes.

SLIGHT symptoms, scarcely noticed by the patient or his friends, were
sometimes the harbingers of this fever: Also, languor, yawning, dejection of
spirits, sleep disturbed and not refreshing, appetite impaired, disagreeable
taste and smell, and uncommon sensibility to cold, were sometimes among the
early symptoms of the disease. In others the symptoms were more rapid and
intense; persons sometimes being roused from sleep by a most torturous
sensation in the stomach, near its connection with the duodenum, resembling
liquid fire spreading over this viscus and extending, in the direction of the
arteries, quite through both upper and lower extremities.

SOME were affected with alternations of heat and cold; with others, the heat
was continual. The appearance of the tongue was various; sometimes it was
moist, as in catarrhal defluxion; at other times was parched and dry. The
breath, however, was invariably disagreeable, and sometimes so offensive as to
be almost intolerable to the patient himself. Pulse often various in the same
persons; sometimes having the regularity and force of synocha; at other times
weak, fluttering, indistinct and vibratory; manifesting very great debility.
Costiveness prevailed with the most, especially in the first stages of the
fever; and all the secretions and excretions partook of the great disorder of
the system. None were in a healthy state; all either in a high degree of
excess, or greatly diminished.

OTHER symptoms, more particular, might be enumerated; but they would neither
direct to a rational indication, nor assist to form a probable

PROGNOSIS.
THE symptoms which might be considered as the heralds of approaching death,
were excruciating pain in the loins, through the spine, and in all the larger
or principal muscles. Excessive irritability of the stomach, so much so as to
refuse all access to medicine. Great pain over the eyes and in the eyeballs;
this pain increasing to delirium or madness. The pupil of the eye dilated, and
the patient stretched on his back -- limbs extended and motionless.

ON the contrary, if these symptoms were neither excessive nor lasting, the
patient's strength retained, and spirits supported by the exhilarating power of
hope, and a confident expectation of recovery, and no deficiency of duty in
doctor or nurse, he was seldom disappointed: the termination was favorable.

PROXIMATE OR EXCITING CAUSE.
THIS, in my opinion, is morbid effluvia, first lodged in the saliva; thence
conveyed and lodged in the stomach and intestines; here either perverting or
totally destroying the digestive powers of these viscera: thereby a putrid and
highly corrosive mass is generated, instead of a mild and bland substance to
give nourishment to animal life. The surrounding blood vessels feel the change
and are affected. The mysenteric veins, especially, from contiguity, become
loaded with a putrid mass of indigested substances, which are conveyed through
the venae portarum into the liver. This important viscus becomes disordered;
the bile is thrown into the intestines and up into the stomach in unusual
quantities and in an acrid state. This still increases the difficulty; the
stomach and bowels are heated and inflamed, and puking ensues. The venae
haepaticae empty a heterogeneous mass of black damaged fluid into the right
ventricle, which is immediately thrown into the lungs. The lungs, in turn, are
affected by the disorder; the patulous mouths of the absorbing vessels are
closed by pressure on the substance of the lungs from the fluid within. The
blood no longer receives its congenial nourishment; but is conveyed by the
veins of the lungs into the left ventricle of the heart; and, if this Alpha and
Omega of animal life has not lost its power, is thence distributed in a highly
putrid state into the several parts of the body. The whole vascular system is
thrown into irritation and commotion by unusual stimuli; the mass of blood is
destroyed, and the patient dies: Or, the powers of life, collected as in a
focus, act with accumulated force, subdue the offending causes, separate and
discharge the impurities by the several emunctories, and the patient recovers.

THAT the miasma is first lodged in the saliva, and thence carried into the
stomach and bowels is probable from this circumstance; we often hear persons
complain, after being over an infected subject, that they not only smelt the
putrid exhalations, but tasted them for a long time afterward; and that
nothing would remove the disagreeable taste. Probably, however, a part of the
contagion finds a direct way into the mass of blood through the absorbents of
the lungs.

THAT the morbid miasma, when thrown into the body, in the manner we have
mentioned, are capable of the effects we have ascribed to them, is not
difficult to conceive, especially if they contain a principle of specific life.
Life acting against life, is like the meeting of two opposite powers in nature,
in which case the one will destroy the other; and where life is destroyed
putrefaction will take place, whence a contagion may arise too great for the
remaining power of life to reject or remove, which of course will in its turn
be either impaired or destroyed. Besides, we know that persons are often thrown
into the most distressing disorders by worms and animalculae lodged in the
stomach and bowels in an oviform state, in consequence of eating raw fruit and
other uncooked substances. These also may and often do concur to make human
contagion more fatal.

THAT the stomach and bowels are the first affected, is evident from the severe
pain that is early felt in the loins, and from the early tendency to puking.

THAT the liver is affected is evident from the large discharges of bilious
matter by the stomach and stool; and that the lungs are, is plain from the
difficult respiration, which was always an attendant symptom of the disease. In
all the subjects dead of the yellow fever, that have been dissected, the liver
and the lungs had almost universally a morbid appearance. The lungs were
inflamed, and the liver either greatly swollen or very much shrunk.

THAT the heart is greatly affected, is plainly manifest from the rapidity of
the pulse.

THAT the life of the blood is either greatly impaired or totally destroyed, is
manifest from the pains in the muscles and in the head; from delirium and coma;
from vibices, petechiae and yellowness of the skin, etc.

DR. Anthony Fothergill, however, says, in opposition to Drs. Harvey, Willis,
Hunter, and others, that "the blood is not alive, but is a mere passive
inorganic mass." Thus he proves it: "Life, he says, is allowed on all hands to
be the attribute of an organized body alone, and if blood be an organized body,
then it is an animal; and if so, here is a living animal destined to circulate
within the vessels of another living animal!" This is an attempt by a few words
to dissipate a numerous train of facts and arguments, and to render
illegitimate an opinion which I did think was the result of close observation
and skilful experiment.

IF, however, life is the attribute of an organized body alone; yet this
organized body is composed of parts, of which the blood is one; and therefore
has its share of life. But,

FURTHER on, Dr. Fothergill, in his ingenious treatise, (for such we esteem it
in general) denies his major proposition. He says, "The nervous influence,
sensibility, or as Dr. Darwin elegantly expresses it, the spirit of animation,
cannot be a secreted fluid, since the brain is no longer allowed by anatomists
to be a secretory organ. Neither can its origin be proved to be coeval with the
unformed rudiments of the embryo DR. Darwin is fully of the opinion that the
rudiments or living ens of the future embryo is derived wholly from the male
parent; that this ens or rudiment consists of a living filament or stamen, and
that this filament, of whatever form it may be, is endued with the capability
of being excited into action by certain kinds of stimulus. Roused into activity
by the stimulus of the nutritive and congenial fluid in which it is received
from the male parent, it receives new adaptations or accretions of substances,
and thus becomes organized. With every new change of organic form or addition
of organic parts, a new kind of irritability or of sensibility [which is only a
more general sensation] is produced; these varieties of irritability or of
sensibility exist in our adult state in the glands; [perhaps in all the parts
of distinct functions] every one of which is furnished with an irritability, or
a taste, or appetency, and a consequent mode of action peculiar to itself.
These changes increase, and additions of parts with their peculiar
irritabilities or appetences and consequent modes of action, continue in
progressive order till the embryo is complete in form. The parts most essential
to life are first produced. Thus, the brain to dispense the powers of life,
next the heart, then the lungs, and from these all the parts of the system,
according to the importance of their functions in the animal economy. Sec. 39,
Vol. I.

THUS then it seems to be the opinion of Dr. Darwin that the esse or essence of
the embryo is from the male parent, and that the existere, or existence, is
from the female parent; of this there is no want of proof convincing. This
esse, or as Dr. Darwin names it, living ens, always possesses the conatus or
endeavor to assume a form similar to the male parent or progenitor, which it
always will do when lodged in the proper matrix or mould, and supplied with the
congenial nourishment; this, with animals, is always from the female. Perhaps,
Dr. Darwin means the same thing by "the capability of being excited into action
by certain stimuli." This conatus or endeavor of the seminal germ to produce
or assume the form of its progenitor exists not only with every order, genera,
species and creature of the animal kingdom, but also with every order, genera,
species and thing of the vegetable kingdom. Thus every creature and thing is
preserved in its order and distinction. This preservation by generation and
prolification, production and reproduction, and consequent increase and
multiplication, suggests and impresses most strongly the idea of infinity and
eternity, and clearly evinces the wisdom and goodness of the "CAUSE OF ALL
CAUSES! PARENT OF PARENTS! ENS ENTIUM!"


when the " dim speck of entity" first becomes visible, for then no vestige of
brain or nerves can be discovered." Nervous influence before any nerves or
brain can be discovered!! -- But he asks, Must it not be referred then to vital
air or spirit of the atmosphere, emphatically termed in the sacred page, the
breath of life, and by ancient philosophers, "divinae particulae aurae," drawn
into the lungs at the first effort of respiration?" Here the Doctor takes the
life from the organized body, of which he before asserted it is the attribute
alone, and transfers it to vital air or spirit of the atmosphere, which is not
proved to be more an organized body than the blood. IT is not to be denied that
the passages in the sacred writings referred to by Dr. Fothergill may indeed
admit of the construction he puts upon them, it being customary in those
writings to assume the cause instrumental for the cause principal; and the air
is the medium by which respiration exists, and the active life of the body. But
then this cannot be all that is signified by those words, as is evident from
the text being in the plural number, and hence they have been more properly
considered by divines, as having relation to the life of the soul, from which
the life of the body is derived, and which consists in the perception of what
is good and what is true, or the will of good, and the perception of truth;
thus, a soul of lives. The expression of this soul of lives being breathed into
Adam by the Almighty, seems also fully to denote, that man is only an organ of
life, and not life itself; for life and light are not creatable, but man was
created a form receptive of life, as the eye is a form receptive of light.


WE might here interrogate the Doctor how it is that the foetus moves itself
and makes various exertions in utero, if it is without the spirit of animation
before the first effort of respiration?

SOME medical gentlemen object to our method of accounting for the introduction
of contagious miasma into the system, and say that it is more probably applied
immediately to the powers of life or nervous influence. What is the nervous
influence? whence is it derived? and through what medium do we reach it? These
are questions I never have yet seen satisfactorily answered by any medical
writer that has made the attempt.

WE have seen, above, the reasoning of an ingenious and learned physician on
this subject. He asserts that the nervous influence exists before any vestige
of brain or nerves can be traced, and therefore concludes that it must be
derived from oxygen, or spirit of the atmosphere!

DR. Cullen says, "the nervous power seems different from every thing else in
our body, and seems not peculiar to it, but a general principle in nature
particularly modified in our system." What produces this particular
modification? the nervous power? for he acknowledges none higher; if so,
nervous power modifies nervous power!

HE again says -- "The vital power is intimately connected with the sensorium
commune, and this with the soul, which certainly is of use in the medical
system, though by no means a rational conductor." Here I cannot comprehend the
Doctor's meaning; but I suspect his thoughts at this time were electrified; and
if by his soul, I agree that it is not always a rational conductor.

DR. Cullen thinks also, that "the soul influences the body not as a prime
mover, but as a modifier of external senses." What higher power than the
modifier of external senses, which all exist from interior life? But again --

THE Doctor is of opinion that "all our functions are governed by certain laws,
that we may observe and distinctly mark, so as to know their consequences; so
that the consideration of the soul, in a medical view, is of no weight." And
why not? By what power are those laws established, which govern all our
functions?

ONCE more -- "Medicamentum non agit in cadaver," says the Doctor; which is, in
English phraseology, Medicine operates only on life; and yet he agrees with Dr.
Boerhaave, that "when a problem is traced up to the connection between soul and
body, there we ought to stop, and consider it as resolved." Some of the above
problems cannot be either solved or resolved, even by this connection. But I
think this is the very point from which we ought to set out, if we ever expect
rightly to investigate the phenomena of life.

WHAT is the soul but life? and again, what is life? "Cogito ergo sum," said
Des Carts -- We can only know it by its operations, principally within
ourselves. It is the soul or life which sees, feels, hears, tastes, is sensible
of pleasure or pain, determines our limbs to motion, etc. wills, thinks and
knows. If it be asked how and whence it is derived to the body? I can at
present only reply by pointing to some of its more interior effects. Observe,
then, the dominion and influence the mind has over all the most important
functions, which support the economy of life. It actuates the body in all its
parts at pleasure. The mind directs the ear to hear, disposes the eyes to see,
moves the tongue and lips to speak, and the hands to do whatever it pleases.
Thus the body is nothing but obedience to the mind; but can it be thus unless
there were a most intimate connection between the mind and the body? not such a
connection as is between what is above and what is below, as oil on water, but
such a connection as exists between cause and effect, the one produced from the
other. Every one, the least skilled in anatomy, must have learnt how entirely
every part and function of the human system is actuated and lives by the
cardiac and pulmonic motions. But these two motions are entirely subject to the
two constituent principles or powers of the mind, viz. the will and the
understanding. The will is immediately operative in all the series of catenated
motions denominated involuntary; but the heart exhibits most distinctly the
will's influence in the system. Its motions are slow or rapid, calm or
tumultuous, according to the various affections of the will; of this we have
sensible proof by means of the pulse.

EVERY one who has seen the force of love, (which resides wholly in the will,
and, as a general principle comprehending every kind of affection, is in fact
its life) knows how it actuates the body by its power over the heart's motions;
producing, when intense, delirium, phrenzy, apoplexy, and sometimes death. When
the love glows, the body is warm, the variations of the heat of the body always
tallying with the variations of love or affection, whatever be its object, from
the freezing point, or the extinction of love, to any indefinite degree of
intenseness.

THE understanding or thinking principle of the mind influences mainly the
pulmonic motions. Thus, if we think tacitly, we breathe tacitly; if we think
deeply, we breathe deeply; we draw in and relax, compress and elevate our lungs
either slowly, eagerly, mildly or attentively, in perfect conformity to the
different states of the thoughts. Now it is a maxim of true philosophy, that
what is superior in power is prior in existence, and that the controlling force
does not originate from the thing controlled: This is also agreeable to every
rule of just conclusion. Where the residence of the mind is fixed, we have no
other way of investigating, but to trace the nerves to where they begin and
end; for all our sensation is transmitted by means of those nerves called
sensory nerves, to the inward sensorium, and so to the understanding. Thus the
sensations go by the optic nerves from the eyes; and from the nostrils by the
olfactory nerves, or processus mamillaris; from the ears by the auditory
nerves, and so on. Therefore, that the beginning and ending may be sound, we
must examine all the brain, and not desist till we find the ends and beginnings
of the nerves. Having, therefore, dissected the brain, we meet with little
spheres, round, or fully wrapped inward and outward, commonly called the
cortical glands, where the nerves begin and end, and where the mind in its
principles resides, and acts from the beginnings of all the nerves; for to
these spheres, as to their ultimate ends, all the nerves are centered. Thence
the mind deduces and collects all the modes of appearance and operation
transmitted by the senses, and thence distributes them round to the interior
perception and understanding. All the nerves, whatever be their office, are
formed and produced from these glands; wherefore this is our common sensorium:
from hence also proceeds our intimate sense, or understanding, which perceives
by its senses, thinks on what it perceives; and judging on what it thinks,
chooses what is judged best; from what it chooses, desires; and lastly, from
the will of its desire, acts. That the mind or spirit thus resides in its
principles in the brain, and in its principiates in the body, is manifest from
experience; for the glands being affected, the whole appendix of the brain and
body languish in proportion, the power of imagination is stupefied; the
cogitations languish; the memory fails; the determinations of the will
hesitate; the desires fail, and the senses are dulled. But notwithstanding this
defect in the operations of the mind in consequence of defect in the
organization of the brain, it is not to be thence inferred that the mind itself
is nothing more than material organization, however highly sublimated; for we
hold the soul or mind, though giving life to the body, to be perfectly distinct
from it in degree, bearing the same relation to it as what is prior to what is
posterior, or, as cause and effect; so that one is in the other not in
continuous but in discrete order. Hence it follows, that though the latter can
have no existence without the former, yet the former can exist without the
latter, as is the case when the body is entirely rejected at death. But till
then the mind is so far dependent on the body, that it cannot manifest its
operation in outward nature, unless by rightly disposed organs; and if there be
impediments in the corporeal organs, the perfection of the mind will also be
impeded during its connection with them, through a want of afflux and re-agency;
for it is a received law, that influx is proportioned to afflux, agency to
re-agency, etc.

THE powers of life then which manifest themselves in the body, we have just
reason to conclude are derived wholly from the mind, and flow solely from a
spiritual origin, the mind itself or soul being probably an organized form, but
spiritual, perfectly distinct from the natural, though in it in every part
throughout, and communicating life thereto; which life the soul itself receives
by continual influx from Deity, "in whom we live and move and have our being."
Thus much on the question, What is life, and whence derived? If the above
observation be true, how evidently does the fallacy of that reasoning appear,
which, not distinguishing the discrete degrees of the operation of life, but
stopping at proximate causes from the inductions of analysis only, makes no
distinction betwixt the life of a man and that of a brute. For if it be
admitted, (and nothing can be more easily admitted, nor more fully confirmed
from the united testimony of revelation, reason, and experience) that man is
distinguished from the brutes by the faculty of thinking, not only analytically
but synthetically, and thereby of living not only the sensual and natural, but
also the moral and spiritual life, it may be rationally concluded, that the
same distinction prevails in regard to the faculty of living eternally. For it
must, on the same ground, be inferred, that he possesses a superior degree of
life or a form receptive of life more immediately from the Deity, whence he
derives the capacity of being conjoined with the Deity by acknowledgment and
affection, thus, by re-agency on his part; whence he consequently also
possesses the faculty of retaining the influent life, and in this retention
consists the ground of his eternal existence.


LIFE then is in all and every part of the body; but some parts are endowed
with a much greater share than others. In the brain it is as it were drawn to a
focus. Indeed it is here, as we have just observed, that fiber begins and
circulation ends; consequently here also is the connection between fiber and
blood. No doubt, when the blood arrives at the brain it becomes highly refined,
and imparts a sublimate matter, which becomes the immediate recipient of life,
whence it is distributed by the nerves to all the parts in the curious
mechanism of man down to the ultimates of life. Now we have already observed,
the less simple and homogeneous any substance is, the more liable it is to
injury and perversion. Dr. Hunter has shown that the serum of the blood is a
mass of heterogeneous substances, and is the lowest form of animal life;
therefore is the most liable to be affected by disease. The serum is derived
immediately from the alimentary canal. There it is that contagion first plants
itself, and therefore the alimentary canal may well be called the storehouse
of contagion. Here, like the skilful but cautious enemy, it commences its
operations by progressively invading the weaker parts, until the inner
fortresses of life are endangered.

THERE are many directly and indirectly debilitating powers, which prepare the
constitution for the reception of disease, and are therefore called

REMOTE OR PREDISPOSING CAUSES.
AMONG the directly debilitating powers, we reckon cold or the absence of heat,
the greatest; its fects, however, are always proportionate to the degree of
intensity, and the state of the constitution on which it acts.

A LARGE variety of injecta are of a sedative or debilitating nature; plants in
particular; all kinds of raw sallads, except those of a spicy or aromatic
nature. Vegetable food, when too dilute; drinks in large quantities, that are
not spirituous; an impure atmosphere; sloth, ennui, a habit of inactivity, a
mind unemployed, etc. etc.

EVACUATIONS, when immoderate or unnatural, are greatly debilitating; such as
the various species of epistaxis, menorrhagia, hemorrhois; also from the
excretory organs and alimentary canal.

SLEEP, that is not forced, is occasioned by the abstraction of stimuli, and
therefore, when too much indulged, produces weakness. There are also a variety
of mental qualities, which operate as sedatives on the body. Fear is the
greatest: It has been known totally to unhinge the mind's fabric, suspend all
motion, and in fact every animal faculty, insomuch as to produce syncope or
swoons, and even death; disappointments, of whatever kind; also despondency,
with many others. These are the most common among this class of directly
weakening powers.

THE indirectly debilitating powers are -- First, of the mind. Immoderate
desires of whatever kind; great mental exertion; a fixed attention to one train
of thought; anger in excess. Unlimited indulgence of sensual appetites is
highly pernicious to the body, and certainly destructive of the mind's
happiness. An excess in eating, or, as it is better expressed, gormandizing,
especially upon food that is loaded with the richest spices and most powerful
stimulants, is certainly injurious to the constitution, and prepares it for the
invasion of almost every species of disease.

WHAT a mass of heterogeneous substances are thrown into the stomach at even a
common meal! The consequences are -- Bellum internum; "the war of elements and
the crush of" life at least.

"For other ills the ambiguous feast pursue,
Besides provoking the lascivious taste.
Such various foods, though harmless each alone,
Each other violate; and often we see
What strife is brewed, and what pernicious bane,
From combinations of innoxious things."
THE powers of life, by this mode of living, are strained to the highest pitch,
and when exposed to disease, the constitution has no new or unemployed force to
repel the enemy. The strength collapses, debility or exhaustion, with all its
sad consequences, ensue. It is to this circumstance, mainly, we are to ascribe
the unusual mortality of contagious diseases which have of late prevailed in
several capitals of the United States.

HEAT, in excess, is the greatest stimulus that operates on life; indeed it is
the most powerful agent in nature; by it "rocks fall to dust, and mountains
melt away." When above 80 of Farenheit, it always injures.

ALL spirituous liquors, if used with frequency; also labor, when it induces
fatigue; and indeed great bodily exertion, of whatever kind, impairs the
strength and gives susceptibility to disease.

BUT we pass to the

TREATMENT, OR METHOD OF CURE.
THE symptoms of the fever which we have described certainly manifest a very
high degree of vascular irritability and excitement; the first and leading
indication, therefore, is depletion by powerful evacuations, even to bleeding;
and this with all possible speed. Jalap and calomel were early used for this
purpose by the most celebrated practitioners of Boston, who I believe can give
fresh testimony of the propriety and benefit of the use of this medicine, first
recommended by Dr. Rush, of Philadelphia. Myself have witnessed the most happy
effects of this cathartic, when used agreeably to the judicious directions of
my preceptor.

IT is now generally thought that mercury, as used in this disorder, produces
its salutary effects chiefly by operating as a quick and powerful cathartic,
when combined with jalap; thereby causing a large and sudden depletion of the
intestines and the excretories that here empty themselves. It is moreover
certain that mercury in all its operations, always affects the liver more or
less. I believe that in the bilious fever it has almost a specific effect upon
this viscus by changing its morbid actions and restoring its healthy functions,
which, it cannot be doubted, are greatly deranged.

DR. Rush enumerates the effects of the use of jalap and calomel in this fever
as follows. 1. It raised the pulse when low, and reduced it when it was
preternaturally tense or full. 2. It revived and strengthened the patient. 3.
It abated the paroxysm of the fever. 4. It frequently produced sweats when
given on the first and second day of the fever. 5. It sometimes checked that
vomiting which occurs in the beginning of the disorder; and it always assisted
in preventing the more alarming occurrence of this symptom about the 4th and
5th day. 6. It removed obstructions in the lymphatic system. 7. It prevented in
most cases a yellowness of the skin, by discharging the bile through the bowels
as soon and as fast as it was secreted.

THE usual dose, and I believe the best proportioned for an adult, was jalap
25gr. calomel 10gr. The intention for which this was given was not answered
unless it produced four or five discharges.

No other regard is to be paid to time in the administration of this medicine
than that it be given as early in the disease as possible. If it should be
rejected, or is slow in the operation, opening injections should be
administered every one or two hours. One dose was sometimes sufficient to open
the bowels; several, however, were more frequently necessary, as the dose was
often thrown up by puking. In bilious fevers, there seems to be a constant
reproduction of morbid bile; once cleansing the bowels, therefore, is not
sufficient; it will be proper to give a purge once a day as long as the fever
lasts. After one or two effectual doses of jalap and calomel, as circumstances
require, other cathartics may be used; such as Glauber's salt, cremor tartar,
rheubarb, sena, manna, etc. either separate or combined.

To assuage the great heat of this fever, cloths dipped in cold vinegar, or
vinegar and water, applied to the surface of the body have been found to do
great service.

SOME have recommended flannel shirts wet in this manner to be kept constantly
applied. And it has been practiced by many physicians, particularly Dr.
Trotter, of England with manifest advantage. It certainly has a tendency to
extract the heat from the body, which always, in proportion to its intensity,
expands the teguments, thereby closes the pores by increasing the density; of
course perspiration ceases.

THE pain of the head, very distressing in this complaint, was greatly
moderated by similar applications of cold water, or vinegar and water, to the
pained part, neck and back.

DRINKS should be freely used during the inflammatory state of the disorder, to
assist the operation of the physic, and to lessen the heat within. Almost any
kind of tea is proper, such as marsh mallows, balm, etc. lemonade, tamarind
water, toast in water, apple in water, may be drank with safety and advantage.

FOOD of all kinds is extremely improper until the crisis, unless it is
unusually protracted; and even then it should be of the most innocent kind, and
very cautiously administered.

THE utmost pains should be taken with the patient in respect to cleanliness.
Stools should be immediately removed; the linen well aired and shifted as often
as once a day. The chamber should be as large as can be had, and constantly
ventilated.

BLEEDING in the first stage of the fever is strongly recommended by Dr. Rush
and others. It was practiced by them with much apparent success. But in Boston,
the last summer, it was not so much relied on as a necessary part of the cure:
I believe because the fever was less inflammatory. The jalap and calomel in
large doses was found, in most cases, sufficiently depleting to take off the
excitement and irritability of the vascular system.

DR. Chisholm, in his treatment of the fever at Grenada, found that bleeding
was by no means admissible, and different antiphlogistics were ineffectual. His
whole dependence was upon mercury, which he gave in pills, composed of five
grains of calomel, two of antimonial powder, and one of opium. This was
repeated to the same extent, eight times in twenty-four hours. The propriety of
this practice was justified by the success, for if salivation was speedily
raised, the danger was removed and the patient recovered.

NEXT to calomel in this form Dr. C. reckons vitriolic ether the most
beneficial. He gave it in the following manner: a teaspoonful in half a wine
glass full of cold water. After this the patient was kept undisturbed for two
hours, when the dose was repeated; and, in this manner, it was continued every
two or three hours, till the spasm of the stomach was entirely overcome. Given
as above he found it extremely grateful to the patient, and that thirst,
nausea, and oppression often fled before it.

SHOULD the fever change, in consequence of the excessive stimulus of the
morbid miasma, from the inflammatory or synochus type, and become typhoid, then
the tonic and stimulating plan must be pursued. The signs of this change are
the loss of voice; tremulous motion of the tongue, or putting it out; the
patient muttering to himself; catching at the bed-clothes, sighing, weeping,
and sometimes laughing; difficult deglutition; paralysis of the sphincter
muscles; tremors; convulsions; syncope on being raised upright; gangrene of
blistered parts; profuse diarrhoea; dark colored urine; eye balls fixed and
sunk; the countenance shrunk, lengthened, ghastly, and discolored; inside of
the mouth and tongue black and parched; deafness, or hearing very acute; the
jaw fallen; immobility of the joints; watchfulness or constant sleep; heaving
of the breast; rattling of the throat; pulse felt only at intervals.

I WOULD, however, interpose a caution against the use of the diffusible
stimuli, unless an immediately favorable turn of the disease can be gained by
them.

THIS subduing one stimulus, (especially if it has gained ascendency even over
life, which is always the case when an inflammatory fever changes to a typhus)
by the superior force of another stimulus, is like placing a person in time of
battle between the two fires. It is much safer to let the powers of the
constitution become quiescent for a time, until they recover force to withstand
the disease: Or, let the stimulus of the disease act till the constitution,
from the power of habit, can adapt itself to the peculiar nature of the
stimulus, and thereby escape destruction.

BRANDY and water, or porter and water, when agreeable to the stomach,
snake-root tea, now and then a cup of chicken, veal, or mutton broth, may be
used in restoring the tone of the system.

IN most cases of debility it is proper to wrap the limbs in flannel dipped in
warm spirits; also to apply cataplasms of bruised garlic or onion with mustard
seed to the feet. But the principal dependence, next to the use of mercurial
medicines, for exciting a healthy action in the arterial system, should be on
mild and gently stimulating food.

" -- While the vital fire
Burns feebly, heap not the green fuel on;
But prudently foment the wandering spark
With what the soonest feeds its kindred touch:
Be frugal even of that; a little give
At first; that kindled, add a little more;
Till, by delib'rate nourishing, the flame
Revived with all its wonted vigor, glows."
To allay the puking, always greatly exhausting to the patient in the bilious
fever, a blister applied to the pit of the stomach often had the desired
effect. Liquid laudanum with sweet oil applied to the same place, gives relief
where the stomach is affected by pain only.

THAT I may be sure of something valuable on the disease of which I am
treating, I insert the following cases taken from Medical Observations by Dr.
JOHN WARREN, my preceptor, whose medical abilities are deservedly in high
public estimation; communicated first to the American Academy of Arts and
Sciences, and by their order to the public. July 1st, 1797.

CASE I.
THE first appearance of the disease was on the 25th of August, 1796, in a
family at the easterly part of the town of Boston, near a considerable extent
of flats, which are daily exposed for some hours to the action of the sun.

A LADY of this family was the first victim to the disease. She was seized with
rigors, a general distress throughout the whole system, with a white and moist
tongue, dry skin, frequent and weak pulse; but without any very alarming
appearance until the third day, when the pains, which now became more severe,
with laborious respiration, a slight redness of the eyes, a sleepiness and
insensibility, followed at night by a sudden sinking, and intermission of the
pulse, announced the extreme hazard of her situation. Active cathartics were
prescribed in the beginning, and a blister was applied over the whole anterior
part of the thorax, but no benefit was derived from either, and she died at the
end of the fourth day.

CASE II.
THE next person attacked was a female of the same family. She was taken sick
within twelve hours of the first, with pains in the head, back, and lower
extremities; a vomiting, which continued incessant through every stage of her
illness, great oppression at the breast, a weak and quick pulse, moist skin,
and yellow tongue. Opium and calomel, with other purgative medicines, were
administered, without having been a moment retained in the stomach. Her pulse
became intermittent on the third day; and on the fourth, a fatal termination
ensued.

VARIOUS CASES.
ON the 2d September a son-in-law of the above mentioned lady, was seized with
a fever of the same kind; and within three days from that time, his wife, and
her two brothers, all of whom had been closely attentive on their deceased
mother. Three of these were treated with large and repeated doses of jalap and
calomel; two of the three took emetics; one of them was bathed with cold water,
dashed over the whole body on the third day from the attack, and having been
kept cool, they all recovered. The fourth was in a situation peculiarly
unfavourable when attacked; she took such doses of jalap and calomel, as were
thought best adapted to her state; and on the fourth day she died.

THE case of Mr. Newell, who was taken with the disease, 18th September excited
much aprehensions in town. On the fourth day the skin became yellow; on the
sixth petechiae were discovered over all parts of his body; and a most
obstinate dysentery followed by colliquative diarrhaea proved fatal on the 8th
day.

WITH many patients, after slight rigors, and obtuse pain in the head, for the
first twenty-four hours, together with a sense of heat or burning at the
stomach -- a haemorrhage from the nose often took place, and continued to be a
troublesome circumstance for several days, without any remarkable mitigation of
the symptoms. In these cases, spontaneous vomitings rarely occurred -- but when
they did, large quantities of bile were thrown up from the stomach. In two
cases only, what is called the black vomit, took place.

PROPHYLAXIS.
TO prevent infection, all those things which are reckoned predisposing should
be carefully avoided. Some of these I have enumerated, under the head of
predisposing causes.

DIET. -- All gross food, especially meats, when prepared with spices and
pepper stimuli, which greatly inflame the blood, and fit it for disease, are to
be avoided. Food should be chiefly vegetables, cooked in a simple manner.

DRINKS should be mostly of the acid kind. Porter is good; tamarind water;
cream of tartar in water; apple in water, etc. But the drink which most
effectually allays thirst, and perhaps is as safe and healthful as any, because
both nutritive and diluting, is simply milk and water, equal parts. These
drinks will serve to keep the body in a regular order, neither too lax, nor too
costive, a point which should be closely attended to. Should either of these
states of the body prevail, it must be remedied by the proper medicines.

THE exhalations of putrid or putrefying matter, also pools and puddles of
stagnant water, must be carefully shunned.

ALL possible attention must be paid to cleanliness of body, by frequently
shifting the linen, and washing off perspiration by frequent bathings in water
of a middle temperature, or the temperature of the surrounding air.

THE purity of the common atmosphere should be preserved with all possible
diligence, by emptying and cleansing the cellars, streets, drains, ditches,
vaults, etc, etc.

THE chambers of the sick must be visited as much as humanity and the
convenience of the sick require, and no more. When the sick are visited, all
the windows and doors should be opened.

DR. Chisholm, who has written a treatise on the yellow fever, as it appeared
in the island of Grenada, 1795, thinks that the effluvia of infectious diseases
do not extend themselves beyond a limited distance from the person or thing
from which they are emitted, so as to produce disease: This distance he thinks
may be fixed at the utmost from six to ten feet.

HE observed, 1 stly, That when the disease had entered a dwelling, avoiding
the chamber of the sick, prevented the infection. 2 dly, That merely entering
the chamber of the sick, without approaching near to the diseased person, never
communicated infection. 3 dly, That approaching so near the diseased person as
to be sensible of the foetor of his breath, or of the peculiar smell which is
always emitted from the bodies of the sick, or touching the bed clothes on
which he lays, generally occasioned nausea, slight rigors, and often headache,
at the moment, and some hours afterward, produced the disease itself. 4 thly,
That actual contact, so that the perspired fluid of the sick person might
adhere to the hands, etc. of the healthy person, more certainly produced the
disease. 5 thly, That touching the wearing apparel of a person actually
diseased, or who had just recovered from the disease, communicated infection as
certainly as actual contact of the skin. 6 thly, That the merely passing an
infected person, or one who wore the clothes he had on, when laboring under
the disease, if the effluvia proceeding from them were blown upon him, produced
the disease.

FROM the united testimony of Dr. Warren, Dr. Rush, and Dr. Chisholm, it
appears, that the contagion always acts within four days after its application
to the body.

WHETHER THE MIASMA OR CONTAGIOUS MATTER OF THE BILIOUS MALIGNANT FEVER, OF
WHICH WE HAVE TREATED, IS AN IMPORTED OR A HOME PRODUCTION?

A NEW doctrine has lately been broached by Dr. Mitchill, of New York,
respecting the cause of malignant diseases, making it septon, or septous acid.
IN Dr. Mitchel's nomenclature, we find septon substituted for azote or
nitrogene: septous gas for azotic gaz or atmospherical mephitis; gazeous oxyd
of septon, for dephlogisticated nitrous air, septic gas, for nitrous gas;
septous acid for nitrous acid, septic acid, for nitric acid, septate, septite,
for nitrate, nitrite, etc.


AN inaugural dissertation by Dr. William Bay, citizen of New York, has just
come to hand, and is declaredly a branch of this doctrine. His subject is the
Dysentery. The work is worthy attentive perusal. But we are not convinced, as
the author seems to be, that the diseases arising from the exhalations of dead
animal and some vegetable substances are not putrid; not that the principle of
putrefaction is not putrefactive; not again, that septon is antiseptic. See
pages 9 and 10 of the introduction.

THESE notions, however, Professor Mitchill himself advances and endeavors to
support, as may be seen from the following paragraph, taken from the above
treatise, page 99. appendix, A.

He says, -- "I reject altogether the notion of putridity, as it is very
generally supposed to be going on in the blood vessels; I have no faith in the
introduction of putrid ferments into the mass of fluids. A putrefactive process
taking place in the contained parts of the living body except among the
contents of the alimentary canal, is incompatible with life more than a few
minutes. Putrefaction is a resolution of an organic body into its elementary
atoms or into new compounds. Now many of these are gasses whose extrication in
the blood vessels would extinguish life in a very short time. Besides, the
fluids produced by putrefaction having already undergone that operation, cannot
be any more susceptible of it. They not only do not putrefy the muscles, but,
in the common acceptance of the term, they retard putrefaction in other
substances. Thus, fixed air, nitrous acid, and volatile alkali, which are
reckoned among the most active products of putrefaction, are known to be the
most powerful opposers of it. And it may be laid down as a pretty broad fact,
that such substances as are septic in their origin, are antiseptic in their
effects; and this from the nature of things."

I AM not satisfied with this reasoning, neither do I think it conclusive. "A
putrefactive process taking place in the contained parts of the living body is
incompatible with life for more than a few minutes." The duration of life,
while the putrefactive process is going on in the body, is wholly according to
the violence or rapidity of the process. But if the putrefactive process is so
incompatible with life, why reject the idea of putrid ferments in the mass of
fluids? and why not call these diseases so suddenly destructive to life,
putrid? and why say, that the very principle or cause of these diseases, which,
from its supposed effects, is called septon, is antiseptic?

WE grant that putrefaction is incompatible with life; and if it becomes
general, the whole life is extinguished. But it may exist in a part of the body
without a total and immediate extinction of the whole life. If this were not
the case, how came the idea of ulcerous putrefaction? It is allowed by all,
that putrefaction may exist in the alimentary canal; perhaps always, in some
degree. It is here, however, that those substances are selected and taken up,
which afterward receive and retain life, and become a part of the body. This
lacteal fluid, when there is a high degree of putrefaction in the prima via,
may in all probability become putrid, as it comes from the source of
putrefaction: next the serum; and so on, till the whole mass of fluids becomes
corrupted, and life escapes. Or, in the Doctor's own words, "Can it possibly
happen that pestilential fluids shall come in contact with the lungs, skin and
intestines, whose surfaces are thickly beset with absorbent vessels; and that
their noxious matters shall remain around the orifices of those inhaling tubes
for a very long time, and yet no atom or particle of them be taken in? Will not
a portion of them be sucked up by the lacteals from the intestines, and by the
lymphatics from the other exposed surfaces of the body, and through their
channels be conveyed into the mass of blood? will not the blood, on receiving
these foreign materials, assume new qualities, and, as it travels the round of
circulation, carry with it mischief and venom to the nervous system." p. 92.
More than this I conceive was never understood by putrid ferments in the mass
of fluids.

IN page 98, the Doctor seems to admit the same idea (if possible more fully,
perhaps too much so) for he there gives it as his opinion that "the septic gas
does not produce death by its inflammatory action on the superficial muscles,
but by its being mixed in a certain quantity with the blood; and after
conversion to septous or septic acid, by conjunction with oxygen in circulating
through the lungs, STIMULATING THE HEART TO DEATH, and utterly destroying all
the irritability of that muscle." Greater phenomena were never expected or
known from the most rapid putrefaction in its most violent stage; and all this
the Doctor allows is done within the vessels of the circulating fluid. First
the septic gas is converted into septous or septic acid, and then the
deletereous effect is not by an inflammatory action on the superficial muscles,
but by STIMULATING THE HEART'S MUSCLES TO DEATH! This, it is observed in the
same page, can be done in the course of half a minute!

HE observes further, "that it must not be imagined, that, after pestilential
venom is inhaled into the blood vessels, death will in all cases be the
consequence. The offending matter may be carried from the body through the
excretory outlets; or it may circulate a long time with the other fluids, and
so season both the vessels and the heart to its action, that after a while,
they, like the external parts, will grow insensible to its stimulus, and no
longer have their motions disturbed by it." -- How can Dr. Mitchill deny the
existence of putrid ferments in the mass of fluids, after saying all this?

BUT I do not fully understand, how it is that the offending matter seasons
both the vessels and the heart to its actions, when just before it killed them
both!

WE grant that the life of a part, which has been destroyed by deleterious
stimuli or putrefaction, may be restored or renewed by the application of
congenial matter, and abstracting the offending cause; but otherwise the
interior organization will be deranged, and the whole life destroyed.

I HOLD it as a truth that there is no life but in some form; AN eminent
Swedish author, to whose writings I acknowledge myself indebted for the ground
of some other observations made in this work, reasons thus: Not only animal and
vegetable life have their peculiar forms, but also spiritual existences; even
thoughts and affections have their appropriate and distinctive forms. These
latter, viz. thoughts and affections, are commonly but unintelligibly
denominated abstract things, when in fact they are no more abstracted from
their appropriate, spiritual, or substantial forms, than vision is abstracted
from its organ the eye, or hearing from its organ the ear. But these forms,
however, have nothing of gross materiality in them, therefore are not discerned
by bodily sight. But it may be asked, what is affection and what is thought, in
their substantiate forms or subjects. A satisfactory answer may be deduced from
all and every thing in the body, where there are many viscera, each fixed in
its particular situation, and which operate their functions by changes and
variations of their state and form. That the viscera are severally employed in
their respective operations, is well known; the stomach in operating its
functions, and so the intestines, the kidneys, the liver, the pancreas, and
spleen in theirs; and likewise the heart and lungs, each in its respective
office: and all these motions are operated only intrinsically or within
themselves, and to be moved intrinsically is to operate by variations of state
and form. Hence it may appear, that the purely organic forms or substances of
the mind are of a similar nature, only with this difference, that the
operations of the organic substances of the body are natural, and those of the
organic forms of the mind spiritual, and that both of these act as one by
correspondences. There can be no ocular demonstration of the changes and
variations of state and form in the organic substances of the mind, which are
affections, but yet they may be seen as it were in a glass, by the changes and
variations of the state of the lungs in speaking and singing, there being a
correspondence, inasmuch as the sound of the voice in speaking and singing, and
also the articulations of sound, which are words in speech, and the modulations
of the voice in singing, are effected by the lungs; sound corresponds to
affection, and speech to thought; they are also produced thereby, and this is
done by changes and variations of the state and form of the organic substances
of the lungs, and from the lungs by the trachea or windpipe in the larynx and
glottis, and afterward in the tongue, and lastly in the mouth and lips. The
first changes and variations of the state and form of sound are produced in the
lungs, the second in the trachea and larynx, the third in the glottis by
various openings of its orifice, the fourth in the tongue by its various
applications to the palate and teeth, the fifth in the lips by disposing them
in various forms: Hence it may appear, that the mere changes and variations of
the state of organic forms, successively continued, produce sounds and the
articulations thereof, which are speech and singing. Now, forasmuch as sound
and speech are produced from no other source than from the affections and
thoughts of the mind (for from the latter the former exist, and never without
them) it is evident that the affections of the will are changes and variations
of the purely organic substances of the mind, and that the thoughts of the
understanding are changes and variations of the form of their substances;
similar to what has just been instanced in the lungs.

FORASMUCH as affections and thoughts are mere changes of the state of the
forms of the mind, it follows, that the memory is nothing else but the
permanent state thereof; for all changes and variations of state in organic
substances are of such a nature, that when once they become habitual they are
permanent; thus the lungs are habituated to produce various sounds in the
trachea and to vary them in the glottis, to articulate them in the tongue, and
to modify them in the mouth, and when those organs are once habituated to them,
they are in them and can be reproduced. See treatise on Divine Providence,
No.279. Published by Thomas and Andrews at Boston, 1796.

To me the above reasoning is satisfactory. Something, in a degree similar, may
be seen in Dr. Darwin's Zoonomia, vol. 1st sect. 4 to 12. His ideas, however,
are not new; but his experiments are original and ingenious, and his proofs
more in detail.


and the animal life of man has its peculiar form; this form consists of almost
an infinitude of parts, all possessing a vita propria, or a life peculiar to
their functions, which is derived from the common life which resides in the
sensorium or brain; for the life of all the parts is one, as much as all the
parts are one body. Now let any venomous substance be applied to any one of
these parts, and the whole life is affected from the injury done to the part;
and this, because the whole is connected with every part, and every part with
the whole. This, however, is greater or less in proportion as the part is
connected either remotely or nearly with interior or central life. Thus,
poisons applied directly to the heart, soon destroy its motions, and produce
death; applied to the brain, the effect is still more sudden. But poisons,
however active, never can affect these organs, except through fluid media: I
doubt whether there is any perception by the nerves, but in this way. Now,

DEATH never happens, or in other words animal life never leaves its material
form, until this form is impaired by having its more subtle and animate
principles or materials perverted or corrupted; especially those which reside
in the brain and are derived from the blood or through this medium. This
certainly is the case with all malignant diseases. Nor does this idea differ
widely from Dr. Mitchill's notion of putrid ferments or putrefaction, which he
defines, "a resolution of an organic body into its elementary atoms."

WHETHER septon or septic acid really is the cause of malignant diseases, is
problematical; experiments and future observations have yet to decide. Neither
the affirmative nor negative is yet clearly or satisfactorily proved.

I SUSPECT Dr. Mitchill has been led to adopt his opinion of the cause of
pestilential diseases mostly from appearances: Thus it is found that all those
spots and soils, where nitre is produced in greatest abundance, are unhealthy,
viz. Egypt, Persia, and the East Indies. But it does not follow, that because
diseases are connected with the soil in which nitre is found, that it is, in
any shape or form, the cause of these diseases. Nitre is commonly thought to be
the result or residuum of putrefactions, and is very seldom found in a vaporous
or unsaturated state, in which it must be when taken into the system by
cuticular absorbents, or inhaled by the lungs in respiration. But I shall be
answered, that septon or the radical of nitre is saturated by oxygen or vital
air, which is taken from the atmosphere, and thereby made unhealthy. But this
would make hydrogen (inflammable air) the cause of these diseases; for then
this gas would be in undue proportion.

SOME probable reason might be brought in support of the opinion that oxygen or
vital air, whatever be the substance with which it is combined, may be highly
injurious, if not the cause proximate of many diseases, when in over
proportion; although it is in other circumstances undeniably the great
supporter of life and health. It is certain that it gives causticity to every
preparation that acts as such on the human system. Without oxygen there is no
putrefaction, no change or waste of substance; no corrosion, rust, or decay of
metals or minerals.

GREEN peace, green corn, etc. when gluttonously eaten, have been known to
produce a most distressing diarrhoea; and not unfrequently a cholera morbus.
These substances are said to contain much oxygen.

WHICH, therefore, of the above principles has the greatest share in the
production of diseases, will not be decided, until some standard, or Gasmetre,
shall be invented, by which it can be known what is the peculiar state of the
atmosphere when they prevail.

IT is somewhat singular that the same principles, which by physicians in
America is considered as the cause of pestilential diseases, in Europe is
extolled as a sovereign remedy for their cure and prevention.

BUT more directly to the point in question. -- By some physicians it has been
strenuously contended, and with much ingenuity of reasoning, that the fever of
Philadelphia, New York and Boston had its origin in those places. Others say
that it originated from fomes of foreign import.

THE same causes must every where produce the same effects; and the same
noxious substances in one place will produce the same disorders as in another,
all other circumstances being the same.

THAT there may be, in either of the above mentioned capitals, such a peculiar
state of the atmosphere, or such a combination of noxious substances as will
give rise to contagious diseases, cannot be disputed. But it is within the
southern or middle latitudes that these diseases most commonly have their
origin. It is here that we find material qualities in a more naked and
uncombined state, consequently more powerfully active. Here putrefaction is
sudden, and vegetation rapid. Here also is the region of elementary contention
and violence; hurricanes, tornadoes, sulphurous explosions, volcanoes, and
earthquakes. Every species of tropical wind has its peculiar diseases, the
Monsoons, Harmattan, Samiel, etc. The winds of these regions vary their
terrors; sometimes involving all things in a suffocating heat; sometimes mixing
all the elements of fire, air, water, earth together; sometimes with a
momentary swiftness passing over the face of the country, and destroying all
things in their passage.

AT Minorca and Gibraltar the winds which at times blow there from the interior
of the country are very destructive, and at the Falkland Islands an
extraordinary wind is felt, occasionally, so blasting as to cut the herbage
down, equal to the raging of fire; the leaves are parched and crumbled to dust.
So at Goree, on the river Senegal, there is an easterly wind from the inland
parts, with which those who are suddenly met by it in the face are scorched, as
by a blast from a furnace.

BUT beyond all others in its dreadful effects, is the Samiel, or mortifying
wind, of the deserts near Bagdad. The camels, either by instinct or experience,
have notice of its approach, and are so well aware of it, that they are said to
make an unusual noise, and cover up their noses in the sand. To escape its
effects, travelers throw themselves as close as possible to the ground, and
wait till it has passed by, which is commonly in a few minutes. As soon as
they, who have life, dare to rise again, they examine how it fares with their
companions, by plucking at their arms or legs; for if they are destroyed by the
wind, their limbs are absolutely mortified, and will come asunder. See Adams's
Philosophical Lectures.

In northern latitudes the atmosphere is uniformly temperate and neutral; and
if there are malignant diseases, here originated, it must be more in
consequence of idleness, neglect of cleanliness, internal and external, or some
moral default, than of situation.

All this being agreeable to fact, the opinion that the miasma of malignant
diseases, more especially the one of which we have treated, is imported from
some sultry climate, seems most probable.

FEW capitals, perhaps none, are more heathfully situated than Boston. It is on
a peninsula, and constantly ventilated on all sides by water breezes. The
streets almost all are so much inclined as to be washed and cleansed by every
shower. None -- or very few places where filth can collect and stagnate without
great neglect of scavenger duty. On the west side is a large common of 20 acres
or more extent covered with verdure, with a mall adjoining: A spot more
beautiful and recreative is not found in any country. A walk here may well be
called a healthful luxury.

AN elegant State-house, and other rich buildings; the surrounding back
country, with its hills and vales; the intervening waters, and other agreeable
objects which diversify the prospect, all unite to render this place extremely
delightful.

THUS favorably circumstanced, to what must it be owing, should Boston be
again visited with contagious malady? No doubt to street filth and other
impurities which adulterate and destroy the healthy qualities of the air, and
render it a fit vehicle for the circulation and extension of the pests of
diseases, here originated, or, introduced from southern climates.

FINIS.

