PORCUPINE's POLITICAL CENSOR, For Jan. 1797.

CONTAINING, Remarks on the Proceedings in Congress, PAGE 3 Mr. Pickering's
Letter, PAGE 4 Attack on the same by the sans-culotte Bache, PAGE 5
Observations on Citizen Adet's complaints respecting the French flag and the
Almanack-makers, PAGE 8 An account of Mr. Adams's Election, with remarks on the
conduct of the French emissaries subsequent thereto, PAGE 15 The Festival of
Fools. Their toasts, with remarks, PAGE 30 Mr. Adams's farewell address to the
Senate, with the Senate's answer, PAGE 45


PHILADELPHIA: PUBLISHED BY WILLIAM COBBETT, OPPOSITE CHRIST CHURCH; Where all
Letters to the Publisher are desired to be addressed, Post paid.

Price, One Quarter of a Dollar.

PORCUPINE's POLITICAL CENSOR, FOR JANUARY, 1797.
REMARKS ON THE PROCEEDINGS IN CONGRESS. JANUARY 20.
THE following message from the President of the United States was communicated
to the two Houses.

Gentlemen of the Senate, and of the House of Representatives,
AT the opening of the present session of Congress, I mentioned that some
circumstances of an unwelcome nature had lately occurred in relation to France;
that our trade had suffered, and was suffering, extensive injuries in the West
Indies from the cruizers and agents of the French Republic; and that
communications had been received from its minister here which indicated danger
of a further disturbance of our commerce by its authority, and that were, in
other respects, far from agreeable: but that I reserved for a special message,
a more particular communication on this interesting subject. This communication
I now make.

The complaints of the French minister embraced most of the transactions of our
government in relation to France, from an early period of the present war;
which, therefore, it was necessary carefully to review. A collection has been
formed of letters and papers relating to those transactions, which I now lay
before you, with a letter to Mr. Pinckney, our minister at Paris, containing an
examination of the notes of the French minister, and such information as I
thought might be useful to Mr. Pinckney, in any further representations he
might find necessary to be made to the French government. The immediate object
of his mission was to make to that government such explanations of the
principles and conduct of our own, as, by manifesting our good faith, might
remove all jealousy and discontent, and maintain that harmony and good
understanding with the French Republic, which it has been my constant
solicitude to preserve. A government which required only a knowledge of the
truth, to justify its measures, could not but be anxious to have this fully and
frankly displayed.

G. WASHINGTON.
UNITED STATES, January 19, 1797.

To give the letter, accompanying this message, is impossible; nor would its
insertion here, perhaps, answer any useful purpose; as it has already been
published both in the public papers and in a pamphlet. It is, however,
necessary to observe, that it should be read and well remembered by every one,
who is interested in the honor and happiness of this country. Adet's charges
against the Federal government, which were combatted in the November Censor,
have here met with a more ample refutation; reasoning that never can be
overturned, because founded on facts that never can be denied. The motives of
the insidious friendship of the French, from first to last, are completely
unveiled: in place of a debt of gratitude, it is now clear that America owes
them nothing but resentment and contempt: resentment for their treachery and
contempt for their threats.

As a composition, this letter reflects great honor on the writer. Mr.
Pickering as been contemptuously called a successor in form to the late
Secretary of State; but, the judicious arrangement, the perspicuous style and
the manly sentiments of this voluminous state paper, shows that he is not a
successor either in form or in substance to the bungling and prevaricating
Randolph.

Upon the reasonable supposition, that very few, if any of my readers, ever see
the Gallician Gazette of Benjamin Franklin Bache, it may not be amiss to take
notice of the censure with which this clumsy tool of an unprincipled faction
has honored the publication of Mr. Pickering's letter.

The Executive pretended that they wish to preserve a good understanding with
the French Republic, and yet they are pursuing every mode which can have a
tendency to embroil us with that country. The letter of man Timothy to Mr.
PINCKNEY is a strong evidence of this intention. This letter endeavors
insidiously to criminate the Republic for the conduct of the monarchy, and
contains as much irritation as could be conveyed from the administration. What
is most remarkable is, that the letter is designed as a guide to our minister,
and yet is published here before it can have possibly reached France, and
indeed when it must be believed that the publication and the letter itself will
reach that country at the same time. Is the matter or manner of this letter in
the style of conciliation?

Does it not, on the contrary, breathe a disposition to excite new
recriminations on the part of the Directory? Does it not seem designed to close
the door of amicable accommodation? Would the publication have been made,
unless there existed a disposition in our government to put France at defiance?
If accommodation was the object, would the reflections have been made public
against the French nation? That a letter designed as a kind of instruction to
our minister should have been made public before it reached him, is one among
the absurdities which have characterised the administration. -- If a
restoration of harmony was in the serious contemplation of the Executive, he
would have transmitted the letter and have kept the Directory ignorant of its
irritating contents until every prospect of accommodation was at an end, and
then it would have been time enough to make it known in justification of the
administration; but to do it at this time strongly implies a disposition to
excite such resentments as shall put reconciliation entirely out of the
question. It has ever been the opinion of those who observed the conduct of the
Executive, that they were the enemies of the French Republic, their
declarations to the contrary notwithstanding, and if any additional evidence
was necessary to establish the belief, the letter to Mr. PINCKNEY will not
leave a doubt on the mind of any unprejudiced American.

Does not this sound well from the man, who justified Citizen Adet's
contemptuous appeal from the government to the people? Who published that
appeal, and who, lest its seditious tendency should be defeated by delay,
published an abstract of it, with a commentary still more inflammatory than the
appeal itself?

The French have a right to do whatever they please: insult, beat, tread upon:
brave the government, accuse it of every crime that malice can invent; but the
government of the United States must not think of retaliating, nor even of
justifying itself to those, before whom it has been so falsely and insolently
accused! The suspended Adet tells the people of America, and the whole world,
that the Federal Government has issued a declaration of insidious neutrality;
that it acts by chicane; that from the courts of justice no justice is to be
expected; that the treaty with France has been violated; that, in short, the
conduct of the government has been marked by every trait of cowardice and
perfidy. The President would have been fully justified in a perfect
retaliation; that is, in causing the refutation of these calumnious charges to
be published in France, and that too in a language equally daring with that of
Citizen Adet; but he has thought this beneath the respect due to himself and to
the nation with whose confidence he has so long been, and yet is, honored. He
has, therefore, been content with justifying his conduct in the eyes of his
constituents. Yet this is too much for the full grown grandchild of Doctor
Franklin: it is "irritating," and calculated to "close the door of amicable
negotiation." It is irritating for a man to deny the falsehoods that have been
vomited forth against him, and to prove, to those who has invested him with
power, that he has not betrayed his trust.

Novel as this doctrine appears, neither Mr. Bache nor any of his friends can
claim the honor of the invention. It is borrowed from the code of the
Revolutionary Tribunal of France, that hopper of the famous national mill,
vulgarly called the guillotine. In this bloody court, no evidence is heard in
favor of the accused. As much against him as you please, so that there be no
loss of time.

This was the form of process intended for the President and his officers of
state. Citizen Adet discharges his duty as accusateur public, consigns them
over to the "national justice," and his advocate Citizen Bache now complains,
that they have had the impudence to reply.

I shall leave guillotine lawyer Bache to continue his pleadings and to receive
his merited reward, bundles of assignats and millions of honest curses, and
shall just take notice of one or two articles of accusation which were not
contained in the Diplomatic Blunderbuss, but which have come to light through
Mr. Pickering's letter. -- Indeed, says he, the French Minister has discovered
an aptitude to complain. I may cite, as instances, his letters of the 9th of
January and 3d of March 1796: the former, because the colors of France, which
he had presented to the United States, were not permanently fixed and displayed
before Congress: the latter, because some printers of almanacs or other
periodical publications in the United States, in arranging the names of the
foreign ministers and agents resident amongst us, had placed those of
Great Britain before those of France and Spain! Mr. Adet desired my declaration
in writing that the government of the United States had no concern in printing
the works in which the agents of the French republic were registered after
those of Great Britain, and that the works themselves might be suppressed. I
gave him an answer in writing with my consent to his publishing it in the
newspapers, agreeably to his request. The answer states that in matters of this
kind the government did not and could not interfere. With regard to the
colors, I must observe, that in what concerns our foreign relations, the
President being the sole representative of the people of the United States,
they were properly presented to him. He received them with all possible
respect, and directed them to be deposited with our national archives, that
both might be preserved with equal care.

The flag should, by right, have been permanently displayed before the eyes of
Congress, to remind them of their duty toward the "terrible nation;" but then,
the Citizen did not perceive that a great difficulty would have occurred from
our having two chambers. To have cut asunder the emblem of fraternal love would
have been a portentous sign; and, though the members of the Senate, who would
have wished to rally under a sans-culotte rag, were few in number, yet there is
no reason to believe that they would have patiently left their friends of the
other House in the sole enjoyment of the honorable ombrage. They would have
wrangled like the Goddesses for the apple, or, rather, like dogs for a bone.
The President, undoubtedly, foresaw this, and therefore he wisely determined to
take it from them altogether, and to lock it up safely with the Archives of the
United States, where neither moth nor rust, nor any thing else, does corrupt.
How different would its situation have been, had it remained continually
displayed in the Hall!

If my memory does not deceive me, the American flag was carried to the
Convention by Citizen Barney. This man has ever shown an uncommon zeal for the
honor of the flag of his country; for, I remember, that he wrote a very
pathetic letter from Jamaica, addressed to a member of Congress, expressing the
grief of his at once noble and tender heart, at seeing the American flag hung
up reversed under that of Great Britain, while he himself was in irons, and
consequently unable "to avenge his dear country's wrongs." Since those unhappy
days Citizen Barney is become a French commodore of two frigates, and will
probably rise to the rank of Admiral, if contrary winds should not drive him in
the way of the cruizers of the enemy. He was sometime skulking about the
West India seas, and to be revenged of the British for insulting the American
flag, what does the brave commodore do, but seize an American merchantman,
swing her flag up reversed under that of France, and clap the captain in irons.
There Is retaliation for you. There Is avenging his "dear country's wrongs."! --
A few such instances of patriotism will, I hope, convince the British, and
every other insolent overbearing nation, that, however vengeance may sleep for
a time, the American flag will never be insulted with impunity, while there are
Barneys in existence.

To return and take farewell of the French colors; it is well enough to
observe, that, on the day or day after, the French Minister made his complaint
to the Secretary of State, respecting the fate of the colors, the very same
complaint was made in Bache's Gazette. Not that I would insinuate that Mr.
Bache is in the pay of the Convention, and that his paper has no other support:
the minds of the public have long been made up as to that point. But it is
something worth observing, as it strongly tends to prove, that exactly the same
thought may strike, at the same moment, two persons who have not the least
connection with each other.

The complaint against the Almanac-Makers has more of the ridiculous in it than
any thing to be found on the records of upstart apishness. Because the despots
of Paris had styled themselves the legislators of the Universe, it entered into
the sapient skull of Citizen Adet, that they were so in reality, and that, of
course, it was a species of treason to rank their agent beneath those of other
powers.

This complaint shows how narrowly they watch us. They dog us like our
murderers. They are every where, and in every shape. They insinuate themselves
into all companies, among every description of the people. They tent all our
actions, words and looks. To rate the number of their spies, spread over the
United States, at five thousand, is keeping far within compass.

The demanding of a positive declaration, that the government had no hand in
the publications in question, proves clearly that the Citizen looked upon that
government as in a state of absolute dependence on his own; and his requesting
that the Almanacs, etc. "might be suppressed," gives us a tolerable idea of
that liberty of the press, which we shall enjoy, when we fall under the
jurisdiction of the French. -- "That the works themselves might be suppressed"!
It would appear that the sunbeams of liberty, that have lately broken in upon
the French, have had no very great effect on Citizen Adet. I have always said,
that they know nothing of freedom but the name, and here we have a proof of it.
The Citizen thought that our government was like his own; that the laws were a
mere mockery, and that we were as completely in bondage as the slaves of Paris,
who are led to the guillotine for printing the Lord's Prayer or the Decalogue.
Poor minister of the "terrible nation"! How must he have smarted at my answer
to his Blunderbuss, and how will he smart if he should remain here till I print
an Almanac! I will put his name beneath those of the Envoys of the Savages of
America; for I am sure every one will allow, that the nations they represent
are far more reputable and humane than his. I will range him after Citizens
Complanter, Bull-Dog, and Dog's-Head. Should we receive a minister from the
Hottentots, who wear unemptied guts round their carcasses, as the more brutish
fonctionaires publics in France do their tricolored scarfs; should we receive a
minister from this polite people, that of regenerated France shall come after
him in my Almanac.

If the Citizen was ignorant enough to suppose, that the government could
suppress one publication, he certainly must believe that its power extended to
others also; and then, how comes it to pass, that he had not demanded the
suppression of some other works, that I could mention (if I dared), which seem
to be better calculated for giving offense than a poor inoffensive Almanac.
But, in these, I suppose, the Citizen found nothing to wound that little
something, which, it seems, tickles the hearts of republicans as well as those
of royalists. It is diverting enough to see the vanity of a democratic citizen
breaking out into complaints about precedence; about the post of honor in a
two-penny Almanac, and an Almanac too of the "Old Style." The reptiles that
have sprung up out of the ruins of the French nobility, are ten thousand times
more bloated with vanity than that nobility, or any other, ever was. They know
they are despised, and they wish to obtain by force what the will refuses them.
They have fully verified the old maxim: "Set a beggar on horseback, and he will
ride to the devil."

There are some other facts that Mr. Pickering's letter has brought to light,
which will command attention another time; for the present I must leave them,
to record an event that reflects as much honor on the people of America as it
promises them prosperity: I mean the election of Mr. John Adams to the office
of President of the United States.

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES. FEB. 8TH.
The Speaker informed the House that the hour was come at which they had
appointed to meet the Senate, for the purpose of counting the votes for, and
declaring the election of a President and Vice President of the United States;
and that the Clerk would inform the Senate, they were ready to receive them.

The Clerk accordingly waited upon the Senate, and the President and Members of
the Senate, soon after entered and took their seats, the President on the right
hand of the Speaker of the House of representatives, and the Members of the
Senate on the same side of the chamber; when the President of the Senate (Mr.
Adams) thus addressed the two Houses:

Gentlemen of the Senate, and Gentlemen of the House of Representatives,
The purpose for which we are assembled is expressed in the following
Resolutions [He here read the resolutions which had been entered into by the
two Houses relative to this business]. I have received Packets containing the
Certificates of the votes of the Electors for a President and Vice President of
the United States from all the sixteen States of the Union: I have also
received Duplicates of these returns by Post from fifteen of the States. No
duplicate from the State of Kentucky is yet come to hand.

It has been the practice heretofore on similar occasions, to begin with the
returns from the State at one end of the United States, and to proceed to the
other; I shall therefore do the same at this time.

Mr. Adams then took up the packet from the State of Tennessee, and after
having read the superscription, broke the seal, and read the certificate of the
election of the Electors. He then gave it to the Clerk of the Senate,
requesting him to read the report of the Electors, which he accordingly did.
All the papers were then handed to the Tellers, viz. Mr. Sedgwick on the part
of the Senate, and Messrs, Sitgreaves and Parker on the part of the House of
Representatives; and when they had noted the contents, the President of the
Senate proceeded with the other States.

All the returns having been gone through, Mr. Sedgwick reported, that,
according to order, the Tellers appointed by the two Houses had performed the
business assigned them, and reported the result.

Then the President of the Senate addressed the two Houses thus:

Gentlemen of the Senate, and Gentlemen of the House of Representatives,
By the Report which has been made to me by the Tellers appointed by the two
Houses to examine the votes, there are 71 votes for John Adams, 68 for Thomas
Jefferson, 59 for Thomas Pinckney, 30 for Aaron Burr, 15 for Samuel Adams, 11
for Oliver Ellworth, 7 for George Clinton, 5 for John Jay, 3 for James Iredell,
2 for George Washington, 2 for John Henry, 2 for Samuel Johnson, and 1 for C.
C. Pinckney. The whole number of votes are 138; 70 votes, therefore, make a
majority; so that the Person who has 71 votes, which is the highest number, is
elected President, and the Person who has 68 votes, which is the next highest
number, is elected Vice President.

The President of the Senate then sat down for a moment, and rising again, thus
addressed the two Houses:

In obedience to the Constitution and Laws of the United States, and to the
commands of both Houses of Congress, expressed in their resolutions passed in
the present session, I declare that JOHN ADAMS is elected President of the
United States, for four years, to commence on the 4th day of March next; and
that THOMAS JEFFERSON is elected Vice President of the United States, for four
years, to commence on the 4th day of March next. And may the Sovereign of the
Universe, the Ordainer of Civil Government on Earth, for the preservation of
Liberty, Justice and Peace amongst Men, enable them both to discharge the
duties of those offices, with conscientious diligence, punctuality and
perseverance.

Thus ended the triumph of the cause of order over that of anarchy and
confusion; and thus Citizen Adet's Blunderbuss was proved to be an instrument
of sound and not of execution.

The friends of America, all over the world, will congratulate her on this
event; will applaud the wisdom of her choice. Mr. Adams's learning, his wisdom,
and his integrity, are universally known, and as universally acknowledged,
except by the partisans of democratic tyranny. To this he has long been a
declared and formidable foe, and that he will ever continue so, the steady
perseverance exhibited in his past life is a sufficient security.

At any time whatever, to see such a man at the head of the Federal Government,
must have been a source of satisfaction to every well-disposed mind; but at the
present crisis it is particularly so. Well assured that he is neither to be
deceived nor intimidated, the at once insidious and insolent enemies of our
prosperity and independence will put on the appearance, at least, of
moderation: and though justice for the past is not in their power, they will be
deterred from any further commission of injustice. How much they dread his
administration is best determined by their efforts to keep him from the
Presidential Chair. They foresaw that his election would be the death-stroke to
their intrigues at Philadelphia, and eventually to the propagation of their
abominable principles in this extensive country. That infidels may for once
prove prophets, is my sincere and hearty wish, as I believe it is of
nine-tenths of the community.

Regarding, as I do, the elevation of Mr. Adams as a national blessing, I
should think myself wanting in justice to those, to whom (under heaven) we owe
it, were I to omit giving their meritorious exertions as much publicity as it
lies in my power to give. Under this persuasion, and with this view, it is,
that I here insert a return of the votes of the several states; that the reader
may see at one glance the proportion of gratitude due to each. -- It will be
sufficient to give a detail of the votes for Adams and Jefferson only, the rest
having been distributed more from policy than choice.

ADAMS. JEFFERSON. N. Hampshire 6 Vermont 4 Massachusetts 16 Rhode Island 4
Connecticut 9 N. York 12 N. Jersey 7 Pennsylvania 1 14 Delaware 3 Maryland 7 4
Virginia 1 20 N. Carolina 1 11 S. Carolina 8 Georgia 4 Kentucky 4 Tennessee 3
71 68

It is a notorious fact, that in this election, the partisans of France, or
rather of the French tyrants, were ranged in opposition to the friends of the
Federal Government. I do not insinuate that Mr. Jefferson would now wish to see
this government subverted; but, it is well known, it has been often asserted
and as often proved, that he has ever been opposed to the principles on which
it is established, and on which it must stand, if it stands at all. His
partiality for the destructive system of the upstart rulers of France is also
well known. His philosophy and politics perfectly harmonize with theirs. His
partisans, so far from denying his being a deist, defend it: and his public
recommendation of the infamous Tom Paine's Rights of Man, as a means of
opposing the political heresies which have sprung up amongst us, sufficiently
explains his political creed.

That the French regicides looked to him as a proper instrument for
facilitating their encroachments on the independence of America, no one can
doubt, that has read Fauchet's intercepted letter and the menacing notes of
Citizen Adet, and that has been a witness of the electioneering intrigues of
their hirelings.

Proof has been too often given to need repetition here, that the great object
of the French has ever been, and still is, to cut off all communication between
this country and Great Britain, as the only effectual means of rendering us
totally dependent on themselves. Conscious of their own inability, in a fair
competition, to supplant Great Britain as the manufacturer for America; and
conscious also that the inseparable and growing interests of the two countries
must produce a perfect reconciliation, and may finally lead to an alliance that
would for ever frustrate their projects, they have missed no opportunity of
exerting their influence to destroy an intercourse, dangerous to their ambition
and to that alone. The endeavors of their partisans have uniformly tended to
this point. They have, indeed, varied their means, but the end has always been
the same. -- First, it was proposed (and the proposition was brought forward at
a favorable juncture) to discourage the trade with Britain by imposing heavier
duties on goods imported thence than on those imported from France. The
pretext, the miserable pretext, for this, was, to force Great Britain into a
commercial treaty with America! Duplicity unmatched, and almost incredible! The
men, who brought forward this proposition, have by the current of subsequent
events, been led to declare, that America stands in need of commercial treaties
with no nation on earth, and particularly with Britain! It was hoped that the
Senate would adopt the regulations, proposed and passed in the other House, and
it was naturally expected, that an attempt to force a treaty down the throat of
the British would produce just a contrary effect. The Senate saw through the
veil of disguised hostility, and the Executive took the necessary measures to
accomplish, without force, what the insidious proposals professed to have in
view, but what they were in reality intended to prevent.

But we must not quit this subject without hearing Citizen Fauchet, of
treacherous memory, who is a most excellent expositor of dark points. The
sessions of 1793 and 1794, says he, had given importance to the republican
party [vulgarly called the French faction], and solidity to its accusations.
The propositions of Mr. Madison, or his project of a navigation act, of which
Mr. Jefferson was originally the author, sapped the British interest, now an
integral part of the financiering system. -- Thus we see, then, that the famous
resolutions that were to sap the British interest, or trade, the revenue
arising from which was become an integral part of the financiering system, were
ascribed to a wrong person; and that patriot Madison, who has been honored
with such loads of democratic applause on this account, was no more than the
passive instrument of the then Secretary of State; he was no more, in the
opinion of Fauchet at least, than the fore-horse of the French team, that the
Virginian Philosopher, with his long whip, was driving through the mire of
opposition. Full well I remember the time. The little man bridled up and
assumed a vast deal of self-importance; but we are now told that the trappings
were not his own, and are left to suppose, that his vanity was nothing more
than that of a quadruped leader, whose head the partial clown has hung with
bells or decorated with garlands. -- I do not like this comparison. The horse
is a noble, majestic animal; and we all know how offensive such ideas are to
republican minds, though figuratively used. They do not go in teams, otherwise
I might have been led to one of those sagacious and ever honored, though
comparatively diminutive creatures, on which the Redeemer of the World made his
public entry into Jerusalem.

Mr. Jefferson quitted the field before the stormy times of sequestration and
total prohibition came on; but, if we may believe Fauchet (who certainly was in
all the secrets of the antifederal party), we shall find that retirement was
not the only thing he sighed for. "Consult Munroe" (says Fauchet, in his letter
to the Convention), Consult Munroe; he had apprized me of the men whom the
current of events had dragged along as bodies devoid of weight. His friend
Madison is also an honest man [in the French sense of the word, of course].
Jefferson, on whom the patriots cast their eyes to succeed the President, has
foreseen these crises. He prudently retired. -- For what? -- To enjoy the
tranquil pleasures of a country life? To become one of God's chosen people, if
he ever had a chosen people, as he himself calls the cultivators of the land?
-- It was not for this. He did not retire merely to wander through the groves,
to listen to the oaten reed of the smutty swains, nor to solace his limbs in
the silver brooks of his modern Arcadia; no, nor to inhale the fragrance of its
tobacco-fields neither. He prudently retired, to avoid making a figure, against
his inclination, in scenes, the secret of which will soon or late be brought to
light. -- Thank ye, Fauchet. Had it not been for the clue, which you have here
given us, some artful people might yet continue to assert, and some silly
people to believe, that Mr. Jefferson retired from the foppery of the
monarchical court of Philadelphia, with no other motive than that of adding to
the stock of philosophy, to the literary honor of America, and the good of
mankind.

Mr. Jefferson did, then, foresee "these crises," these troublesome times; he
foresaw the violent conduct of the House of Representatives: he foresaw that
the opposition to the excise law would end where it did, in open rebellion; and
foreseeing all this, he prudently retired, to avoid making a figure against his
inclination, on the side of government (which, as Secretary of State, he must
have done), lest thereby he should lose the future support of the "patriots,"
who had cast their eyes on him to succeed the President. The partisans of Mr.
Jefferson say, that such was the opinion of Fauchet only! This is precisely
what I want them to allow. The opinion of the French minister assuredly became
the opinion of his masters; and, it is their opinion respecting Mr. Jefferson's
principles that I am endeavoring to make appear. Whether they were deceived by
appearances, or not, is of little consequence now. It is from what they thought
of Mr. Jefferson, whether right or wrong, that we are to form an estimate of
their motives in attempting to impose him, as President, on the people of the
United States.

Now that the electioneering maneuvers have failed, the hirelings of France
pretend, that Adet's Notes were by no means intended to have the effect which
has been looked upon as their principal object; and that it is the height, the
very summit of absurdity, to suppose any such thing, to suppose what is now
reduced to a certainty as indisputable as any that ever was established.

The Notes in substance declare, that the French are offended at the conduct of
the President and his council, that they have resolved on seizing our vessels,
and on breaking off all diplomatic communication with us, till the government
returns to itself; not forgetting to hint at the same time, and that in terms
comprehensible to the meanest capacity, that a change of men as well as
measures, is the only means of reconciliation.

As to nominating the successors of General Washington and his officers of
state, that could have answered no useful end; that part of the business was
prudently left to their faithful stipendiaries, who immediately exclaimed, as
if from sudden inspiration, that Mr. Jefferson was the only man capable of
making our peace with the justly enraged, "terrible republic." However, lest we
should despise the vociferations of this vile herd, Citizen Adet takes care to
drag Mr. Jefferson into his first Note, and that in such a way as leaves not
the least doubt as to his object in so doing.

Still, however, there would be some little latitude for dispute, were the time
and manner of communicating these Notes left out of the question.

All the pretended grounds of complaint, among which I include the ratification
of the British treaty, existed in the month of July, 1795. How came it to pass,
then, that the Convention of France, whom I hope no body will accuse of an over
degree of lenity and forbearance; how came it to pass, that these vengeful
despots, who scent the blood of disobedient nations from afar, and are ever
ready to rush upon their prey; how came it that they should reserve their
threats till the 2d of July 1796? Again; supposing for a moment, that their
wrath had lain dormant all this while, how did it happen that the determination
to menace us with chastisement, which was taken on the 2d of July, was kept a
profound secret till the 27th of October, four entire months all but five days,
in a season of the year when even two months is a long passage from France to
the United States? Mr. Pickering expressed his surprise, and well he might,
that the violent resolutions of the Convention should be notified at so late an
hour, and without any new subject of complaint. Had a redress of the injuries
complained of been the object of the Notes, and of the measures they
communicate, why were they delayed for a year and four months, and then poured
out upon us all of a sudden, on the 27th of October, 1796, seven days previous
to the election?

The manner, too, of the communication clearly proves its intent. If reparation
of wrongs had been the real end proposed, why was the communication not left
with the government, which alone could make that reparation? Why did Citizen
Adet treat with the people? And why did he do this before it was possible for
him to know what answer he should receive from the government? His appeal from
the government to the people was an outrage of decency, a violation of the law
of nations, and a direct attack on the sovereignty of the United States; it was
an act that the Convention itself had recalled Genet for talking of only; and
why should they now authorize its commission, unless to answer some end of
extraordinary importance? It was easy to foresee that the President would not
publish these Notes, till accompanied with a refutation of the charges they
contain, and then they would not only have appeared disarmed, but also too late
for effecting their purpose.

To the conclusion, necessarily resulting from these observations, it has been
objected, 1st, that the Convention could not be informed of Genesis Washington's
intention to resign, at the time when they gave their minister his
instructions, and therefore could not possibly do it with a view of frightening
the people into a choice of Mr. Jefferson: and 2dly, that Adet could have no
such intention, or he would have published his notes at an earlier day, to give
them time to reach every quarter of the Union, before the election came on.

With respect to the first of these objections, I allow that it is possible,
that the spies of the Convention had not been able to apprize them of the
President's design; I allow that that arch fiend, formerly bishop of Autun, who
had wound his protean form into all the circles of Philadelphia; I will allow
that even the devil, their constant crony, had not apprized them of it; but
what is that to the purpose? Citizen Fauchet, though apprized of a good deal,
was not apprized of it; yet he was apprized, that the patriots had fixed their
eyes on Mr. Jefferson to succeed the President; and of this he informed the
Convention. It was not, therefore, necessary that they should be apprized of
General Washington's intention to resign. Mr. Jefferson was to be opposed to
whomsoever should appear as a candidate for the office, whether Washington, or
Adams, or any body else; and as the French knew when the election must take
place as well as we did, time was all they had to attend to. So that this
mighty objection is at once so completely done away, that even fools may walk
over it blindfolded.

As to the second objection, that Adet could not publish his menaces with an
intention of influencing the people in their choice, because the publication
did not take place time enough to reach every quarter of the Union, previous to
the day of election, every man, however careless an observer he may be of the
politics of the different states must see that the publication took place soon
enough and not a moment too late.

There were two notes, the first was intended to influence the people in their
choice of electors, and the last to influence the electors in their choice of
the President. One was published seven days only before the people met, and the
other about as many days before the assembling of the electors. That this was
not time enough for them to reach every state is evident, and it is as evident,
that, to accomplish their object, it was not necessary they should. The
sentiments of the people to the north of the Delaware, and of those to the
south of the Potomack, were as well known before the election as they are at
this day. Pennsylvania and Maryland alone were justly looked upon as balancing
between the two candidates; and seven days was a space of time just sufficient
to give circulation to the threats, without leaving time for the people and
their electors to recover from the panic, that it was hoped they would produce,
before the election was over. The Jacobins, as Burke observes, are very
accurate calculators. They never miss the nick of time. They know to a moment
when to look big, and when to fawn: when to give you the fraternal hug, and
when to knock you down.

The result has proved, that all that was to be feared or hoped for, by either
party, lay in these two States, and therefore the Frenchman's blunderbuss was
discharged just in time to have all the influence that it was probable, or
possible, it should have. I feel a satisfaction, however, in asserting, that it
had none at all. The votes for Mr. Adams in Maryland prove that French
principles have lost, in place of gaining ground, in that State; and, as to
poor Pennsylvania, though appearances are against her, though fourteen French
votes to one American one brand her with ignominy, yet I hope, with the
indulgence of the reader, to prove, that this unfortunate State, this fairest
sister of the family, appears much more culpable than she really is, and that
her transgression has proceeded from her amiable weakness rather than from any
radical vices.

In this state the electors are not chosen for separate districts. Each
district does not begin (...) close the election of its electors; but, fifteen
persons become candidates for the electorship of the whole state. The same men
are put up and voted for in all the districts; the whole number of votes for
each man are at last collected by the governor (whose conduct in the present
election I would applaud, were I not afraid the honest reader would kick me for
it), who then issues his proclamation declaring who are the persons chosen.
From this regulation it follows, that a majority of a single vote, upon the
whole number of freemen, may give the state the appearance of unanimity on a
point on which it is nearly equally divided. This was not far from being the
case in the election we are now speaking of. According to the return, one would
be led to imagine, that fourteen out of fifteen Pennsylvanians were for
Jefferson; whereas the fact is, that, out of twenty thousand votes, his
electors had a majority of no more than about one hundred and seventy, number
that, when compared to the whole mass, is hardly worthy of being called a
casting voice. So that the people in Pennsylvania may be looked upon as having
been equally divided between the two candidates.

It is fair also to observe, that this state labors under disadvantages, in
this respect, that no other state does. Hers is precisely that climate that
suits the vagabonds of Europe: here they may bask in summer, and lay curled up
in winter, without fear of scorching in one season or freezing in the other.
Accordingly hither they come in shoals, just roll themselves ashore, and begin
to swear and poll away as if they had been bred to the business from their
infancy. She has, too, unhappily acquired a reputation for the mildness, or
rather the feebleness, of her laws. There Is no gallows in Pennsylvania! These
glad tidings have rung through all the democratic club-rooms, all the dark
assemblies of traitors, all the dungeons and cells of England, Scotland and
Ireland. Hence it is that we are overwhelmed with the refuse, the sweepings, of
those kingdoms, the offal of the jail and the gibbet. Hence it is that we see
so many faces that never looked comely but in the pillory, limbs that are
awkward out of chains, and necks that seem made to be stretched.

Among all this refugee, renegade, and felonious crew, Mr. Adams was not
dishonored with a single vote; and yet, after all, he would have had a great
majority, had it not been for the unanimity with which he was opposed by the
counties so lately in a state of open rebellion, and by the county (not the
city) of Philadelphia. Next to the honor of having the support of all the men
of property, sense and virtue, in this populous state, the President must
esteem that of being rejected by the constituents of a Findly, a Gallatin and a
Blair M'Clenachan. Often he two former I have said enough in other places; of the
latter I have no need to say any thing; it will be sufficient to transcribe
from the public papers, an advertisement that was published a few days after
his election.

CAUTION.
WHEREAS very large and heavy debts are justly due and owing from Blair
M'Clenachan and Patrick Moore, of the city of Philadelphia, merchants, trading
under the firm of Blair M'Clenachan and P. Moore, and from Blair M'Clenachan,
in his separate capacity -- to which, by the laws of the land, all the joint,
as well as the separate property of the said gentlemen, is and ought to be
liable. And whereas, it is clearly and satisfactorily ascertained, that Mr.
Blair M'Clenachan, one of the said firm, has conveyed away to Mr. John H.
Huston, his son in law -- to his daughter Miss M'Clenachan -- and to his son
George M'Clenachan, several large and very valuable real estates, as well as
considerable personal property in the city and county of Philadelphia, in the
county of Lancaster, in the county of New Castle on Delaware, and elsewhere,
with a view, as it is apprehended, to defeat the creditors in the recovery of
their just debts. This is therefore to forewarn all persons, whomsoever,
against the purchase, from the said parties, or either of them, of any portion
of the said real or personal property, as the most rigorous measures will,
without delay, be taken, to render the same liable to the just demands of the
creditors.

By order of the Creditors, Committee.
THOMAS FITZSIMONS, PHILIP NICKLIN, ISAAC WHARTON, WILLIAM M'MURTRIE, SAMUEL W.
FISHER,

Philad. December 19, 1796.
There Is a fine Congress-man for you! -- This was the man who, in the presence
of his many-headed sovereign, in town meeting assembled, proposed to kick the
British Treaty to hell; and it was for this patriotic motion, I presume, that
his gracious liege chose him for a representative. Discreet choice! immaculate
delegate! infallible sovereign! If there is a damned rotten rascally borough in
the universe, that ever made such a choice as this, I Will be bound to cut my
throat, and suffer the sans-culotte sovereign of the county of Philadelphia,
the hob snob sniggar-snee-ers of Germantown, to kick me about in my blood, till
my corpse is as ugly and filthy and disgusting as their living carcasses are.




I now dismiss the subject, well assured that there is not a man capable of
putting two ideas together, who is not well convinced, that the Notes of
Citizen Adet, and even the plundering decree that they announce, were intended
chiefly, if not solely, to frighten the people of these States into a choice
agreeable to the tyrants of France. From the intended effects of this
nefarious, this detestable project, we have been preserved, not by the counter
endeavors of the friends to government, for these were at once tardy and illy
conducted; not by the influence of the public prints, for three-fourths of them
aided the cause of the treacherous foe; not by that pretended light which we
have acquired in these illuminating days, for in all those places where men are
most conversant in what is called politics, there the French have received the
greatest support; but by that plain good sense, the natural effect of
experience operating on a sound mind. It is this quality, in a people far
preferable to all the brilliancy of wit and talents, that has saved America in
so many perils, in spite of all the vile and subtle arts of enemies foreign and
domestic, and even in spite of national passions and prejudices.

THE FESTIVAL OF FOOLS.
On Thursday, the 6th of February, at O'Eller's Hotel, the Anniversary of
Alliance between the American and French Republics [that is to say French
Monarchy] was commemorated by as respectable an association of citizens as was,
perhaps, ever convened, on a similar occasion [well put in]. -- The company
consisted of a large number of members of the Federal and State Legislatures,
of citizens of acknowledged patriotism, and foreigners of distinction, among
whom was Dr. Priestly, [and Citizen Adet.] -- Chief Justice M'Kean, and Mr.
Langdon [Old Johnny Langdon] presided. -- The enthusiasm, convivial gaiety, and
elevation of patriotism, inspired by the celebration of an era interesting in
the annals of liberty, shed through the whole company a glow of light, which
every one felt and expressed with ardour. The repast was enjoyed with
moderation [bless us!], and without even an approach to intemperance.

Now, hang me, Mr. News-Monger, if I believe this last assertion; for, though I
am none of the most incredulous; though I know the magic, and more than magic,
power of liberty; though I might even raise my mind to the conception of
nonsense, and really believe that this enchantress did shed a glow, and a glow
of light too, and that that light was felt; though it is possible that I might
be elevated or stupid enough to believe all this, or rascal enough to pretend
to believe it, yet I never can or will believe that there was no "approach to
intemperance" at this civic festival; unless want of cash prevented it. -- When
I enter on the pious office of Gazette-Man, I will observe a stricter adherence
to truth.

But, to proceed; "After dinner the following TOASTS were drank;" that is to
say, in English drunk. -- But why do I attempt to criticize? We all know, that,
in literature, a News-monger ranks next after a dray-horse.

Now to the Toasts that were drank, and that I have kept too long from the
thirsty reader.

1. THE DAY -- may it ever be a festival to freemen; and the alliance which it
gave birth to, be regarded, as a key stone in the arch of liberty -- Music,
Yankee doodle.

2. The People -- knowledge to discern their rights and spirit and firmness to
assert them. -- Reveil du Peuple.

3. The United States -- may they ever be an asylum for the oppressed, and
become a terror to oppressors.

As they are now to the vile, infamous gallic oppressors of our commerce, I
suppose?

4. The Republic of France -- may she be as distinguished in peace, as she is
formidable in war -- that her happiness may allure other nations into an
imitation of her example. -- Ca Ira.

5. The Batavian Republic -- may her experience instruct other nations to shun
a tyrant's grasp, far a freeman's embrace. -- La Carmagnole.

Excellent irony!

6. The Revolutionary Army of the United States -- may the fruits of their
labors be no longer enjoyed by the enemies of American Independence --
Lexington march.

That is to say; "rise, sans-culottes, and seize on the property of the rich!"

7. The memory of those heroes, who fell in defense of American Liberty -- may
the inscription upon their tombs, call a tear from gratitude, and a blush from
apostasy. -- Solemn music.

8. The philosophers and patriots, who planned and conducted the American
Revolution -- may the splendour of their actions and the dignity of their
measures, teach governments, that honesty is the best policy.

9. The Constitution of the United States -- may it prove an effectual, and not
a nominal check on the designs of ambition.

We understand all this perfectly well. The charge of apostasy, the hint at
dishonesty, and the check on the designs of ambition, are taken from Paine's
most impudent and infamous letter to Genesis Washington. Would that their beer had
been drugged with something that would for ever, aye for ever, have silenced
their factious tongues!

10. The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, may she be as distinguished in the cause
of republicanism, as she has been conspicuous in that of humanity.

"Poor Pennsylvania keeps no gallows!" says a modern poem, in which gallows,
with singular elegance and harmony, rhymes to Dallas. Poor unfortunate state!
Look at the men who extol thy humanity, and then blush at it.

11. The Freedom of the Press, may this palladium of our rights ever remain
uninfluenced by power, unbiassed by party, and unseduced by corruption.

This last toast might have been spared in tenderness to the feelings of
Citizen Adet, and Mr. Bache.

12. The memory of Franklin and Rittenhouse -- may their example instruct the
philosopher and the statesman, that true glory consists in doing good to
mankind. -- Solemn music.

That deism is philosophy no one will deny, and therefore I cannot dispute the
claim here preferred to the title; but what good did Rittenhouse do to mankind?
Dr. Rush, indeed, says, that he did a great deal, and particularly to his own
country; but, with all due submission to the hyperbolical bombast of Dr. Rush,
and his eulogium on the politics of Mr. Rittenhouse, I never heard of any good
to mankind, and particularly America, that he did, except determining the
boundaries of some of the States, which he did with great precision? and which
I could have done as well as he, had I received the same pay for it. One
singular service, indeed, he rendered his country, and that gratis too: he
volunteered as president of that seditious club, the Democratic Society of
Philadelphia, and he himself signed the inflammatory resolves against the
excise law, which encouraged the malcontents to rise in open rebellion, for the
quelling of which, reader, you and I have paid, and still pay, a portion of our
earnings. -- The devil take such " good to mankind," I say! -- Doctor Rush is a
very fine man, to be sure, and he writes in a fine Doctor-like manner; but the
remorseless Doctor Rush shall bleed me till I am as white as this paper, before
I Will allow that this was "doing good to mankind."

Mr. Rittenhouse's real friends have too much discretion to compliment his
understanding at the expense of his heart. They confess that his simplicity and
want of political knowledge exposed him to the duplicity of those subtle fiends
in human shape, who were at the bottom of the democratic institution, and who
only wanted the weight of his name. But his eulogist will insist that he was so
profound, so farsighted a politician, that he even scented the delicious days
of republicanism twenty years before they arrived! Nay, such is the zeal of Dr.
Rush, that he vows and declares his friend was born a republican; though every
one knows, that he was born under the royal government of Britain. But, don't
let us misconstrue the Doctor. He means a mental republican. Born a mental
republican! Upon my soul it is a wonder he had not traced his republicanism a
little further back, and turned the eulogium on his deceased subject into a
lecture of anatomy.

Either Mr. Rittenhouse was the dupe of the Democratic Society, or he was not.
If he was, the eulogium on his politics was as unjust as it was absurd; if he
was not, the eulogium on his goodness of heart was more so. In short all that
is said, in this performance, of Mr. Rittenhouse's philosophy, should have been
better said, and all that is said of his politics should have been omitted. The
former is a dry uninteresting narrative, and the latter so glaring a departure
from truth, that it will attract but little more respect for his memory, than
the hog's-wash toasts of the factious Society of which he was President.

We now come to Doctor Franklin's good to mankind. -- As a politician, his
wishing to give up the fisheries and Western Posts, for fear of offending
France, is a convincing proof of his merit, and must render a toast to his
memory particularly pleasing to Citizen Adet. As a moralist the Doctor's
"example" is certainly a useful one; more especially in a country like this
that is thinly inhabited. "Increase and multiply," is an injunction that this
great man had continually in his mind; and such was his zeal in the fulfillment
of it, that he paid very little attention to time or place or person.

13. The Arts and Sciences; May the former be cultivated for our comfort, and
the latter for our security.

14. The sister Republics of America and France; As the exertions of France
contributed to our freedom, may the exertions of America never tend to her
oppression. Marseillois hymn.

15. Peace, Liberty and Independence; may we cultivate the one as necessary to
our prosperity; cherish the other as essential to our happiness; and never
prostitute the latter to ambition or tyranny.

16. The Republic of Great Britain; may the present year witness a jubilee, as
necessary to the happiness of Britons as to the tranquillity of mankind.
Britons strike home.

I presume that Doctor Priestly gave this toast; that same loyal Doctor
Priestly, who in justifying himself to the people of Birmingham, told them that
he had toasted "the king and constitution." -- About this gentleman I shall say
more by-and-by; at present I would ask, how it happens, that all the declared
enemies of Great Britain, pray that she may become a Republic! Is this a proof
of their looking upon such a change as a blessing, or as a curse? -- "Britons
strike home." That is, to the heart of your sovereign. -- No; you spiteful,
bloody-minded sans-culottes; Britons, true Britons, scorn your insinuation, and
reject your sanguinary precept with horror. When they strike home, it is
against those foes of their king and their country, who have the courage to
face them: as for impotent enemies like you, whose prowess is confined to
malicious wishes, spued out over your muddy beverage, you are too much honored
by their contempt.

18. Spain, the friend of France, and the United States; may our treaty with
her, never give way to Mr. Jay's.

This friend of the United States, has just declared war against Great Britain,
and one of the reasons, is, that Great Britain, in her treaty with America, has
sacrificed the interests of Spain! There Is friendship for you now! Did you ever
hear of such friendship in your life?

19. The Governor of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

20. A speedy relief to Thomas Muir, that suffering friend of liberty.

"Pennsylvania keeps no gallows," either, for sedition or overdrawing at the
Bank. Huzza! Huzza!

21. The combined fleets of France, Spain and Batavia.

And may they quit their ports, and come within gunshot of John Bull.

After Dr. Priestley retired.

22. May liberty be as immortal, as science and the name of Priestley.

23. Thomas Jefferson, the illustrious philosopher, patriot and statesman.

24. National Gratitude; may it ever be recognized by freemen, and denied by
none but apostates.

After Mr. Adet retired.

25. Mr. Adet, late Minister of the French Republic.

This toast alone would have characterized the festival. Citizen Adet has
heaped insult upon insult on the government and on the whole country, and yet
he was entitled to the applause of these people. Such applause, however, must
be but a poor compensation for the cold reception that the Citizen meets with
every where else. It was a sort of dumb peal to his departed rank. Since his
self-suspension, his diplomatic suicide, he is become a mere carcass; a carcass
that does still walk about, it is true; but the ministerial soul is fled, and
perhaps, already animates some luckier mortal. -- He is, or rather he was (poor
man!) a member of the Philosophical Society of Philadelphia, and, as such, I
make no doubt that the Eulogist in ordinary is now preparing his funeral
oration. His having departed this life three months ago, is of no kind of
consequence with these philosophers, who always think that it is time enough to
begin weeping for a deceased brother when his body is half devoured by the
worms.

The chief justice being retired.

26. Thomas M'Kean, Chief Justice of Pennsylvania.

Reader, comparisons are odious you know, and therefore don't you go to ask me
what the people of Westminster would have thought, if they had seen Lord
Mansfield boozing and bawling in a public-house along with thirty or forty of
the rabble, headed by a foreign agent, at open enmity with the government. What
suits very well in one country, does not suit at all in another; and therefore
I beg you will not ask me any such sneering questions as this.

However, every one may speak for himself, and I will say, that if ever I
should become a judge (of which I see no reason to despair), and should so far
forget the dignity of my station as to become the companion of a herd of
sottish malcontents, may all the world that moment forget what is due to me.
May my family disown my sway; may my own rib rise up against my lawful
authority; may she be the cursedest shrew that ever wielded a broom-stick; may
she belabour me with the tongs, cut me over the eye, rib-roast me, till I am
obliged to call in the neighbors to shelter me from the effects of her wrath.

Mr. Langdon having retired.

27. John Langdon, an old whig.

Do you know what an old wig is, reader? It is a very ill-looking, nasty,
despised and neglected thing, fit for nothing but to be trodden under foot, or
thrown to the dunghill. Wigs, when new, are passable; and, some years age, they
were very fashionable, and very useful too; but of late years, whether new or
old, they have been found to be of no kind of utility, either in England or
this country. The fact is, that the wigs, at last, thought themselves heads,
and from that moment, every man, who had too much spirit to be wig-ridden,
threw off the cumbrous companion.

I shall now dismiss the toasters, but not without remarking, what is well
worth remarking, that, as Doctor Priestley assisted at the Philadelphia
commemoration of the French alliance, so Napper Tandy assisted at the same
commemoration at New York, where the toasts breathed just as much foul air
against the Federal Government as those of Philadelphia did. This would prove,
if proof of the fact were yet wanted, that men of faction will still be
factious in whatever country and under whatever government they may live. Here
is no established hierarchy for Doctor Priestley to rail at, nor are there any
tithes for him to wrangle for; and yet he cannot be quiet. Wherever the
standard of discontent is hoisted, there the Doctor is a volunteer, ready armed
and accoutred, whether it be in a conventicle or a club-room, whether the
attack be to be made with scraps of scripture, mangled and profaned from the
quivering lips of malice, or with blackguard toasts roared forth from the lungs
of gluttony and drunkenness.

After this instance of hostility (as far as exhausted powers can lead him)
against the General Government of America, I hope we shall hear no more of his
peaceable disposition, of his coming amongst us to enjoy that toleration which
his native land denied him," and of his wish to continue unmolested those
pursuits of various literature to which, without having ever entered into any
political connections, his life has been devoted. If he never before entered
into political connections, he has done it now, at any rate. If his present
intimacy, I say intimacy, with Citizen Adet; his toasting success to the fleets
of France, Spain, and Batavia, and the insulting sarcasms on the Federal
Government, contained in the above list; if his herding along with all those
who hate, who oppose and who slander this government, and whose only object is
to overturn it, and render the country dependent on France; if this be not
entering into political connections, I do not know what is.

I hope also, that those who were simple enough to believe the Doctor, when he
professed his attachment to the royal government of his country, and solemnly
declared that neither he nor his friends thought of, or wished for, a
revolution, will be convinced of his duplicity, when they hear him toasting
"The Republic of Great Britain," and wishing that the present year may witness
the jubilee; the revolutionary jubilee, the jubilee of plunder and carnage, of
incendiaries, thieves, philosophers and cannibals.

The conduct of this persevering demagogue, and that of all those who, like
him, have fled from Britain to America, is the best justification that the
strong measures of Billy Pit can have. While on the other side of the water,
they only wanted a reform, a gentle reform; a very little would have done; a
correction of abuses or so. They only wanted to restore to the constitution its
primitive purity, its ancient integrity and excellence. The tools of power had
insinuated that they wanted to pull down, when their only intention was to
repair, the goodly fabric. This was their plaintive cant while in England; but,
once arrived in America, once removed from the dangers of Botany Bay, the jail
and the halter, they have no scruple to confess, nay they boast, that if
tyranny had not disappointed their projects, they would, e're this, have
repaired the goodly fabric, into a republic, and buried king George under the
rubbish.

Let this, then, be a warning to you, Englishmen (if ever these remarks should
fall into your hands): beware of the pit that these subtle fiends are preparing
for you; be blind to their pauper exhibitions, and deaf to their crocodile
cries. If you follow them but one step, you are gone, you are engulphed for
ever. Under your government, whatever faults it may have (for none ever was
without), your property and persons are in safety; under the change that they
would operate, neither would be of long existence: first they would take your
money and goods, and then, for fear of your revenge for the robbery, your
lives. This is the sure and certain progress in which they advance, and to this
tend all their words and all their actions. We know them better than you do.
The sight of the gibbet kept them in awe, imposed a restraint on their tongues;
we have seen their bosoms bare, and have had the discretion to profit from the
discovery.

When in Britain, they, like their apostle of sedition, Pain, held up our
government to your imitation, and dunned your ears with the rare talents and
virtues of our Chief; but now, behold! they slander both. Our government is but
a copy of yours, and General Washington is become an apostate, a hypocrite, a
George Guelph. This "land of liberty," (and which is truly such, if ever there
was a land of liberty in the world) This "land of liberty," to which they fled,
as they pretended, from the rude arm of lawless power, is now become a den for
slaves, where the proud tyrant, aristocracy of wealth, lords it over the honest
but indigent citizen. -- The same tone, the same language, the very same
expressions, are now applied to this government, with which you were formerly
amused, and, I am sorry to say it, of which you had nearly been the dupes. If
this does not rouse you from your credulity, if this does not open your eyes,
you deserve to be plunged into all the horrors of revolution, into desolation
without bounds and miseries without end.

Recollect that this lesson comes to you from the United States of America,
from Philadelphia, the spot to which your deceivers resorted in hopes of
meeting men of their own minds. It is with pleasure and with pride that I
assure you, they were disappointed. A tyrant crowd does not govern here, as
they were taught, and as they taught you, to believe. To say that they have
fallen into neglect would be too much, for they never were noticed. Poverty,
though rarely visible here, is generally their lot. A threadbare coat, a dirty
shirt and a long beard are, with us, the distinctive marks of a Republican
Briton. And these are the wretches, oh! credulous Englishmen! that were leading
you about in crowds at their heels. These were your oracles, the expositors of
your laws and the defenders of your rights. These scrofulous philosophers,
these political lepers, whom we sicken but to see, you were hugging to your
bosoms.

"Wisdom is in age;" but, it seems, this maxim does not hold good with respect
to nations. In the calendar of states, America was born but yesterday; yet she
has had the discernment to see through, and to frustrate, the designs of those
men, who have destroyed the fairest part of Europe, and have shook the rest to
its very base. There they had to encounter adamantine institutions grown
stronger with time: here there seemed nothing to oppose them, the whole
continent lay open to their demon-like assaults; yet have they been completely
defeated by the peaceful operation of the national good sense. In vain did they
attempt to cajole us; in vain did they assume the language, and put on the
garb, of liberty; it was soon perceived that their liberty and ours was not the
same thing. Republicanism, was the next bait; but we also perceived that it was
French and not American republicanism; we saw that as our stock could not be
augmented, no good could come from a partnership with them. In short, (and let
the emigrating demagogues hear it to their confusion), as we love order, so we
detest its opposite, anarchy: as we love a free real republican government,
with power to protect and none to oppress us, so we detest that mockery of a
republic, a base, mob-like, pillaging, murderous democracy.

I shall conclude this Censor with Mr. Adams's farewell address to the Senate of
the United States, and the Senate's answer. Such pieces every reader of taste
must wish to possess in a portable form.

SENATE, February 15.
On request, the Vice President of the United States being excused from further
attendance in Senate during the session, addressed them as follows:
Gentlemen of the Senate,
IF, in the general apprehension of an intention to retire, in that most
eminent citizen, to whom all eyes had been directed and all hearts attracted,
as the center of our union for so long a period; the public opinion had
exhibited any clear indications of another, in whom our fellow citizens could
have generally united; as soon as I read that excellent address which announced
the necessity of deliberation in the choice of a President, I should have
imitated the example of a character, with which I had co-operated, though in
less conspicuous and important stations, and maintained an uninterrupted
friendship for two and twenty years. But as a number of characters appeared to
stand in the general estimation, so nearly on a level, as to render it
difficult to conjecture, on which the majority would fall; considering the
relation in which I stood to the people of America, I thought it most
respectful to them, and most conducive to the tranquillity of the public mind,
to resign myself with others, a silent spectator of the general deliberation,
and a passive subject of public discussions.

Deeply penetrated with gratitude to my countrymen in general, for their long
continued kindness to me, and for that steady and affecting confidence, with
which those who have most intimately known me, from early life, have on so many
great occasions entrusted to me, the care of their dearest interests; since a
majority of their electors, though a very small one, have declared in my
favor, and since, in a republican government, the majority, though ever so
small, must of necessity decide, I have determined at every hazard of a high
but just responsibility, though with much anxiety and diffidence, once more to
engage in their service. -- Their confidence, which has been the chief
consolation of my life, is too precious and sacred a deposit ever to be
considered lightly. As it has been founded only on the qualities of the heart,
it never has been, it never can be, deceived, betrayed, or forfeited by me.

It is with reluctance, and with all these emotions of gratitude and affection,
which a long experience of your goodness ought to inspire, that I now retire
from my seat in this house, and take my leave of the members of the Senate.

I ought not to declare, for the last time, your adjournment, before I have
presented to every senator present, and to every citizen who has ever been a
senator of the United States, my thanks, for the candor and favor invariably
received from them all. It is a recollection, of which nothing can ever deprive
me, and it will be a source of comfort to me, through the remainder of my life,
that, as on the one hand, in a government constituted like ours, I have for
eight years held the second situation under the constitution of the United
States, in perfect and uninterrupted harmony with the first, without envy in
one, or jealousy in the other: so, on the other hand, I have never had the
smallest misunderstanding with any member of the senate. In all the abstruse
questions, difficult conjunctures, dangerous emergencies, and animated debates
upon the great interests of our country, which have so often and so deeply
impressed all our minds, and interested the strongest feelings of the heart, I
have experienced an uniform politeness and respect from every quarter of the
house. When questions of no less importance than difficulty, have produced a
difference of sentiment (and differences of opinion will always be found in
free assemblies of men, and probably the greatest diversities upon the greatest
questions), when the senators have been equally divided, and my opinion has
been demanded according to the constitution, I have constantly found, in that
moiety of the senators, from whose judgment I have been obliged to dissent, a
disposition to allow me the same freedom of deliberation and independence of
judgment which they asserted for themselves.

Within these walls, for a course of years, I have been an admiring witness of
a succession of information, eloquence, patriotism and independence, which, as
they would have done honor to any senate in any age, afford a consolatory hope
(if the legislatures of the states are equally careful in their future
selections, which there is no reason to distrust) that no council more
permanent than this as a branch of the legislature will be necessary, to defend
the rights, liberties, and properties of the people, and to protect the
constitution of the United States, as well as the constitutions and rights of
the individual states, against errors of judgment, irregularities of the
passions, or other encroachments of human infirmity, or more reprehensible
enterprise, in the executive on one hand, or the more immediate representatives
of the people on the other.

These considerations will all conspire to animate me in my future course, with
a confident reliance, that as far as my conduct shall be uniformly measured by
the constitution of the United States, and faithfully directed to the public
good, I shall be supported by the senate, as well as by the house of
representatives and the people at large; and on no other conditions ought any
support at all to be expected or desired.

With cordial wishes for your honor, health, and happiness, and fervent
prayers for a continuation of the virtues, liberties, prosperity and peace of
our beloved country, I avail myself of your leave of absence for the remainder
of the session.

IN SENATE, Wednesday, February 22.
The answer to the address of the Vice President of the United States on his
retiring from the Senate, was yesterday agreed to as follows:
SIR,
The Senate of the United States would be unjust to their own feelings, and
deficient in the performance of a duty their relation to the government of
their country imposes, should they fail to express their regard for your
person, and their respect for your character, in answer to the address you
presented to them, on your leaving a station which you have so long and so
honorably filled as their President.

The motives you have been pleased to disclose which induced you not to
withdraw from the public service, at a time when your experience, talents, and
virtues, were peculiarly desirable, are as honorable for yourself, as from our
confidence in you, Sir, we trust the result will be beneficial to our beloved
country.

When you retired from your dignified seat in this house, and took your leave
of the members of the Senate, we felt all those emotions of gratitude and
affection, which our knowledge and experience of your abilities, and
undeviating impartiality ought to inspire; and we should with painful
reluctance endure the separation, but for the consoling reflection, that the
same qualities which have rendered you useful, as the President of this branch
of the legislature, will enable you to be still more so, in the exalted station
to which you have been called.

From you, Sir, in whom your country have, for a long period, placed a steady
confidence, which has never been betrayed or forfeited, and to whom they have
on so many occasions entrusted the care of their dearest interests, which have
never been abused. -- From you, who holding the second situation under the
Constitution of the United States, have lived in uninterrupted harmony with him
who has held the first.

From you we receive with much satisfaction, the declaration which you are
pleased to make of the opinion you entertain of the character of the present
senators, and of that of those citizens who have been heretofore senators. This
declaration, were other motives wanting, would afford them an incentive to a
virtuous perseverance, in that line of conduct which has been honored with
your approbation.

In your future course, we entertain no doubt, that your official conduct, will
be measured by the constitution, and directed to the public good, you have
therefore a right to entertain a confident reliance, that you will be
supported, as well by the people at large as by their constituted authorities.

We cordially reciprocate the wishes which you express for our honor, health,
and happiness: we join with yours, our fervent prayers for the continuation of
the virtues and liberties of our fellow-citizens; for the public prosperity and
peace; and for you we implore the best reward of virtuous deeds, the grateful
approbation of your constituents, and the smiles of heaven.

The reply of the Vice President of the United States, to the Address of the
Senate. Feb. 23, 1797.
AN address so respectful and affectionate as this, from gentlemen of such
experience and established character in public affairs, high stations in the
government of their country, and great consideration in their several states,
as the senators of the United States, will do me great honor, and afford me a
firm support, wherever it shall be known, both at home and abroad. Their
generous approbation of my conduct, in general, and liberal testimony to the
undeviating impartiality of it, in my peculiar relation to their body, a
character, which, in every scene and employment of life, I should wish above
all others to cultivate and merit; has a tendency to soften asperities and
conciliate animosities, wherever such may unhappily exist; an effect at all
times to be desired, and in the present situation of our country, ardently to
be promoted by all good citizens.

I pray the senate to accept my sincere thanks.

JOHN ADAMS.

END OF THE CENSOR FOR JANUARY 1797.

