JOHN CALLENDER's ORATION.

AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED JULY 4, 1797, AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF THE
TOWN OF BOSTON, IN COMMEMORATION OF THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY JOHN CALLENDER.

OH! could I worship aught beneath the skies,
That earth has seen, or fancy could devise;
Thine altar, sacred LIBERTY, should stand
Built by no mercenary vulgar hand,
With fragrant turf, and flowers as wild and fair
As ever dressed a bank, or scented summer air.
COWPER. BOSTON: PRINTED AND SOLD BY BENJAMIN EDES, Kilby-Street. -- 1797.

At a Meeting of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Town of BOSTON,
duly qualified and legally warned, in public Town-Meeting, assembled at
Faneuil-Hall, on Tuesday the 4th Day of JULY, A. D. 1797: -- VOTED,
THAT the SELECTMEN be and hereby are appointed a Committee to wait on JOHN
CALLENDER, Esquire. and in the Name of the Town to thank him for the spirited and
elegant ORATION this Day delivered by him, at the Request of the Town, upon the
ANNIVERSARY OF THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA -- in which,
according to the Institution of the Town, he considered the Feelings, Manners,
and Principles which led to that great National Event -- and to request of him
a Copy thereof for the Press.

Attest, WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk.

GENTLEMEN,
THE polite Request of my Fellow-Citizens, consigns to the Press, the ORATION
which was yesterday honored with their candid attention.

With sentiments of respectful consideration and esteem, I am, GENTLEMEN,

Your most obedient and very humble servant, JOHN CALLENDER.
JULY 5 th, 1797. SELECTMEN of BOSTON.



AN ORATION.
THE ingenuity of man diligently searches for the authority of precedent, to
sanction the propriety of a favorite measure; but the revolution which produced
the cheerful hilarity of this day is entitled to our grateful commemoration,
not from a servile imitation of ancient customs, but from its own abstract and
intrinsic merits. The preservation of our independence is intimately connected
with a preservation of those sentiments and opinions which gave birth to it,
and the experience of one and twenty years affords an ample conviction that the
spirit which an imated our countrymen at the glorious epoch we celebrate, still
warms our bosoms -- nor has an uninterrupted enjoyment of the desired boon,
lessened in our view its inestimable value. Those testimonies of lively
recollection which have marked each successive return of this anniversary,
unequivocally demonstrate that time has not cooled the fervid glow of
patriotism, which characterized the ever memorable period of seventy-six.

"THE feelings, manners and principles" which led three millions of our species
disdainfully to repel the insidious approaches of tyranny, form a subject for
sublime speculation and dignified discussion -- the frequent elegance and
ability, however, with which it has been treated, preclude every attempt at
originality; scarce leave a novelty of expression to the speaker of the present
day. But the joyous festivity of the occasion and the impressive candor which
beams from every countenance instruct me that the severity of criticism has no
part in the object of this assembly.

THE baleful spirit of religious persecution which chased our forefathers from
the land of their nativity, compelled them to take refuge in the dens and
caverns of a wilderness -- greatly preferring the inhospitable wilds of America
with freedom of sentiment, to the luxurious abodes of cultivated Europe when
shackled by oppression. Here then we discover the source from which arose that
delicacy of feelings, that purity of manners, that rigid inflexibility of
principles which gave birth to our admirable republic. Degenerate indeed must
have been their offspring had they suffered the hand of tyranny, to stifle in
their bosoms, the glowing spirit of such progenitors. It were needless to
repeat the various perils which our settlers encountered in their infant
establishment; to describe a warfare with the treacherous inhabitant of the
woods, novel in its manner, and cruel in its conduct. Suffice it, that under
every impression of difficulty and danger, still their settlements flourished;
and by progressive improvement, became at the commencement of the present
century, the strongest arm of the British empire. The inhabitants of the, then,
American colonies, were filled with sentiments of loyalty to their king and
veneration for the constitution of Great Britain. Thanks to the foolish policy
of her ministers, those sentiments so inimical to our national grandeur were
not permitted to remain.

MANY oppressive acts of government had inspired the people of America, with
the most dreadful apprehensions. The safety of those darling rights and
privileges for which they were ready to sacrifice their lives, appeared
imminently endangered. Still, however, they entertained a lively hope that a
submissive deportment and a modest representation of their grievances would
obtain from the justice and generosity of the parent country, ample reparation
for injuries which they had sustained, and security against the infliction of
others, in future. But the humble petitions of America were answered with
insult, her agents treated with the foulest contempt, and the right of taxing
us "in all cases whatever," at length, avowed as a principle equitable in
itself, and strictly conformable to the political constitution of
Great Britain. A declaration at once so oppressive and absurd, discovered to
America the precipice on which she stood. The tyrannic measures of a British
ministry, and the obsequious devotion of a British parliament, roused in every
breast a merited detestation of the government, and a resolute determination to
resist.

THE agents employed in the favorite plan of subjugating the colonies
endeavored not by lenient measures, to mould and fashion the minds of the
people to their purposes; but a system of terror and intimidation appeared to
promise a more speedy success and more permanent effects. Unawed however by the
threats, and undismayed by the many outrages which they suffered, the
inhabitants of the different States, associating more intimately in the hour of
danger, discovered ample resources in that spirit of unanimity which pervaded
all ranks of society, and determined by a decisive declaration of their
Independence to shiver the disgraceful manacles of slavery which were prepared
for them. How august is the spectacle which they exhibited to the world. An
infant nation struggling against the full grown strength of an ancient and
powerful monarchy; having in vain attempted by the force of reason and entreaty
to obtain redress from their haughty tyrants, solemnly announcing to mankind,
their determination to be free or perish in the attempt. Uninfluenced by the
trifling considerations of private interest; unaffected by the singular peril
of their situation; surrounded by the fleets and armies of the foe, the
representatives of America, in the presence of Almighty GOD, declare that the
tyranny of the parent country had absolved them from all obligations of
allegiance. That henceforth they were and of right ought to be, a free,
sovereign and independent people. Thus having destroyed the possibility of
reconciliation, it remained for them, to support with every effort of
patriotism, a declaration announced, with such affecting solemnity.

HOWEVER unprepared for warfare with antagonists so far their superiors in the
deadly practice, still they shrunk not from the unequal contest. To the hardy
veterans of Europe they opposed the rude untrained levies of the moment, the
voluntary exertions of individuals and the sanctified justice of their cause.
The only object they contemplated, was their country's freedom, the only
efforts they employed, fair and honorable conflict in arms. No murderous
proscription, traced the steps of our revolution, in the blood of assassinated
brethren. No mockery of justice, made the difference of opinion a signal for
execution. The American cause needed not the aid of such auxiliaries. Founded
in justice, conducted with firmness and discretion, it ended in the most ample
and unbounded success. Search the varied history of nations: analise the
discordant principles of government, the records of mankind afford not an
instance of a revolution so important, effected with so few enormities. To the
wise provisions of our venerable forefathers are we indebted for such salutary
effects. Their early establishments for the education of youth rendered the
attainment of knowledge easy to the poorest member of the community. Hence
their rights were clearly understood, the blessings of genuine liberty ardently
pursued and the visionary wanderings of its phantom most judiciously avoided.

THAT our revolution was so little disgraced by cruelty and injustice much also
is due to the exertions of our clergy, and it is with pride I here offer my
humble tribute of applause to that devout and learned profession. The holy
precepts of our religion which they inculcated, and the bright examples of
virtue which they exhibited, gave them a great and merited influence with the
people. To their eternal honor be it recorded, that influence exerted on the
side of liberty and humanity, in a great measure restrained those wild excesses
which have too frequently blasted in the execution, a cause designed by the
noblest motives of the human mind.

HAVING obtained the glorious object of our contest, and wrung from the
government of Great Britain, a tardy and reluctant acknowledgment of our
Independence, the period which restored peace to our nation was replete also
with danger. The system of Federation which had answered every purpose while we
were under the impression of a foreign foe, was found totally inadequate to the
intention, when that powerful incentive to union, was removed. The united
wisdom of the continent was therefore summoned to devise a more eligible plan
of national government. The production of this assembly of sages was that happy
combination of liberty and law, the Federal Constitution, under which we now
exist; a work, which would have added reputation to the character of a Solon or
Licurgus. And under whose genial influence the United States have advanced
toward wealth and prosperity, with a rapidity unexampled in the annals of the
world.

BUT while we contemplate with unfeigned joy the auspicious effects of our
revolution, we cannot but observe with the most painful anxiety, that the mad
fury of Eurpoean politics threatens to cast a gloom over the bright prospects
of our political horizon, and to involve us in the calamitous consequences of a
war which has already deluged with blood the fairest quarters of the globe. --
The refusal of France to receive our minister, and her unprovoked depredations
on our commerce teach us the instructive lesson, that national friendships and
national partialities exist only in the distempered imagination of the
enthusiastic theorist. This conduct is not only a violation of the law of
nations, but an infraction of a treaty most solemnly ratified between us. The
reason assigned for such violent outrages is but an aggravation of the insult;
and must excite the indignation of every American who has the discernment to
perceive, or the sensibility that can feel, the wounded honor of his country.
-- Much has been said of the gratitude due to France for her assistance in the
glorious revolution which we celebrate. The motives of this assistance it is
unnecessary to develope. But the credit which she would derive from it, is
justly lost in a systematic and insidious attempt to create dissentions between
the people and constituted authorities of our country. -- To individuals of the
French nation we are indebted for great and important services. To the armies
which fought by our sides we feel sentiments of grateful acknowledgment; nor
shall the injustice of their country ever banish from our minds the sweet
remembrance of their gallant deeds. While Frenchmen were contending for that
liberty, which we so eminently enjoy, however we might disapprove the means,
still on the grand principle we wished them success; we were their friends in
reality not by profession, but their attempt to influence and distract our
councils, has made a ravage in our friendship that cannot easily be forgotten.
As an independent nation, the responsibility of our measures rests with us. "If
we have committed errors and those can be demonstrated we shall be willing to
correct them; if we have done injuries, we shall be willing, on conviction, to
redress them," -- but the guardians of our own honor we can not, will not,
tamely submit to the imperious dictates of a foreign power.

THOSE native principles of liberty, which established will protect our
independence and convince the intriguing politics of every nation, that between
the people and government of America, there is not the shadow of distinction.

WHATEVER may be the event of negotiation, however desirous to maintain peace
and amity with the French Republic, still it becomes us to be prepared for all
events, and if the sad alternative must be unqualified submission to their will
or opposition in arms, I will not insult the spirit and bravery of my
countrymen by a doubt upon their choice -- on a subject like this, we shall all
be united. Away then with the ridiculous distinctions of party, we are
Americans, and glorying in the character we swear to transmit it unsullied to
posterity.

FROM a view of our foreign relations we cheerfully recur to the prosperous
state of our domestic affairs, and permit me here, my fellow citizens, to
congratulate you upon the late election to the chief magistracy of this
Commonwealth. It is the singular felicity of governments constituted like ours,
that offices of honor and trust are confided to those only whose merit has
designated them the safe and dignified repository of the laws: at a period too
when the venerable ADAMS, o'erplied with public energies, demands of his
country a rest from his labors, it is with the highest satisfaction, that we
contemplate in the character of his successor, those virtues which will adorn,
those talents which will ably discharge, the important duties of his elevated
station.

SINCE our last annual celebration of this great and glorious day, an event has
occurred, which will give a striking example to mankind, of republican
moderation and political integrity. That illustrious man whose Herculean arm
strangled in the cradle of our liberties, the serpents of despotism and
oppression; having devoted to his country the most valuable moments of his
life, voluntarily descends from the high and lofty station, which the voice of
applauding millions had assigned him, and seeks in the bosom of retirement, to
close a life, marked with the splendid characters of virtue, magnanimity and
honor. Far is it above my feeble talent, to add a single sprig, to the wreaths
of laurel, which adorn his brow, but while gratitude shall warm our hearts,
while we feel the proud sentiment that we are the countrymen of WASHINGTON, let
us aspirate to heaven a prayer, that in his philosophic retirement, every joy
and blessing of life may be accorded him; that no dark cloud may obscure the
mild radiance of his setting sun

"And when old time shall lead him to his end,
Goodness and he fill up one monument."
THE successor of Washington, it must be acknowledged, has a great and arduous
task. Happy for our country her choice has fallen on a man whose long,
laborious services, in times when every step was marked with danger and dismay,
pronounce him fully adequate to the exigency of the case. If a profound
knowledge in the science of government, a decisive firmness and intrepidity of
conduct, a cool deliberating head and an honest feeling heart, are requisites
to constitute the enlightened statesman; the presidential chair of America will
continue to exhibit that luminous display of patriotic virtue and dignified
deportment which have rendered it the pride of our own country, the envied
admiration of others.

AMERICANS! we possess a country extensive and luxuriant. Nature has with a
lavish hand bestowed upon it her choicest gifts. The prolific bosom of the
earth cheerfully yields a rich and copious harvest to the industrious exertions
of her children. Our constitution, the result of our own deliberate choice,
secures to us every right consistent with good order and the general welfare.
What then, my friends, can disturb the full tide of our prosperity. Will
foreign foes invade our peaceful shores, destroy the palladium of our
liberties, and subject us to the insolent rapacity of a conqueror? We may defy
the combined despots of the earth. Do we fear, lest ambition and the lust of
power should establish on the ruin of our republic, a haughty dominion of
aristocracy? Dread it not, the American nation clearly understands and
vigilantly guards its right; the attempt would be ridiculous, the consequent
failure inevitable. But while we are secure from such attempts, let us beware
that our liberty degenerate not into licentiousness. Here is the destroying
angel of republics. Let us therefore cautiously avoid that spirit of jealousy
which leads to everlasting innovation; that spirit which disappointed
politicians and discontented demagogues will invariably convert to the purposes
of faction and disorder. A government like ours rests on the broad basis of
public opinion; give it then tho full energy of your influence, and suffer no
impediment to check the constitutional rotation of its wheels. The federal
constitution preserved on its grand principle, the strict union of the states;
a sedulous attention to the character of your public servants and a strict
regard to morality and the education of youth, will enable you to baffle the
intrigues of pretended friends, successfully to oppose the attacks of open
enemies and perpetuate to generations yet unborn, those blessings for which you
have toiled and bled.

THUS happy in the enjoyment of all those rights and privileges, which render
life desirable, we cannot but lament that a very large proportion of the
discovered world, still languishes under the lash of oppression. That in many
countries, where the richest luxuriancy of soil and most inviting salubrity of
climate prevail, the inhabitants, inveloped in more than monkish ignorance,
hold their lives and property subject to the wretched possessions of some human
monster. In others, a stupid veneration even for the follies and vices of
antiquity, have opposed an almost insurmountable barrier to the introduction of
learning or improvement. But in the eye of reason, it is clearly demonstrable,
that the divine influence of genuine liberty must ultimately prevail; and to
this period of darkness will succeed, a corruscation of light that will
penetrate the deepest recesses of bigotry and ignorance. Nothing will more tend
to produce this desired event than the liberal dissemination of those
principles upon which the rational system of our liberty is predicated. The
towering flight of the American eagle, has already described in the political
horizon, the glorious path to freedom and independence. May the nations of the
earth profit by the brilliancy of the example. We fondly cherish the hope that
the auspicious moment will arrive, when the great orb of day, shall not, with
his genial rays, illumine a single corner of this globe, which feels the hand
of Tyranny or acknowledges the power of a master. Then will the consequences
which have flowed and will continue to flow from our revolution, be duly
appreciated. Then will the applauding world, with joy record, the period which
gave it birth; and this day, so grateful to our feelings, so honorable to our
nation, shall universally be celebrated as the grand jubilee of LIBERTY.

FINIS.

