THE HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES FOR 1796; INCLUDING A VARIETY OF INTERESTING
PARTICULARS RELATIVE TO THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT PREVIOUS TO THAT PERIOD.

PHILADELPHIA: FROM THE PRESS OF SNOWDEN and M'CORKLE, NO. 47, NORTH
FOURTH-STREET. 1797.

Copy-Right secured according to Law.

CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I. First session of the fourth Congress. -- Resolution proposed by Mr.
S. Smith for checking the British treaty. -- Hints respecting that paper. --
Attempts to involve America in a French war. -- Sketch of the state of France,
by Edmund Burke. -- Contrast between her and the United States. -- Scanty pay
of the Federal army. -- Fatal effects of a rupture with France. -- Camillus. --
His mistakes as to the state of Europe. -- Mr. Pinckney. -- His opinion of the
advantage of delaying a British treaty. -- Attempts to irritate France. --
Extreme danger of doing so. -- Real authors of the misunderstanding. --
Montgaillard's prediction. -- Notice to the patrons of a certain gazette. --
Concluding remarks, 1 CHAPTER II. Character of Mr. Gallatin. -- Connecticut
poetry. -- Major Jackson. -- John Watts. -- The Boston Federal Orrery. --
Curtius. -- His exaggerated statement of British resources. -- Remarks on paper
money. -- Causes of the preference of Britain to France in the federal party.
-- Democratical conspiracy developed by Curtius. -- Defense of Jefferson,
Madison, Giles, Parker, Christie, etc. -- Fables from Pittsburgh. -- Curious
presentment by a grand jury in Georgia. -- Purity of Boston, 31 CHAPTER III.
Federal artifices to promote a French quarrel. -- Howe's landing at the head of
Elk. -- Jacobins not worse than other people. -- Burgoyne's picture of the
British East India Company. -- Recent stoppage of the bank of England. --
Robespierre eclipsed by Pit. -- Amount of the yearly rental of Britain. --
Note on the state-house of Hartford. -- Number of the public creditors of
England. -- The triumph of Camillus. -- Moral certainty of American
indemnification for British piracy. -- Mercantile apathy for the sufferings of
American seamen. -- Impressment at Jeremie. -- Pinckney. -- Jay. -- Neck or
nothing forgeries of Pit. -- Dependence of the British West Indies on the
United States. -- Fallacies of Camillus. -- What Jay should have said to
Grenville, 74 CHAPTER IV. British piracies on American shipping in 1796. --
Case of the schooner John. -- Of Capt. Samuel Green. -- British privateers
built in the United States. -- Skirmish in Port Jeremie between the Americans
and Capt. Reynolds. -- Impressments by the Severn, the Hermoine, and the
Regulus. -- Twelve Americans whipped. -- Case of the brig Fanny. -- Of the ship
Bacchus. -- The Swallow. -- The Paragon. -- The Voluptas. -- The Lydia. -- The
Hannah. -- Fray at Liverpool; and rout of a press-gang. -- The Friendship. --
The Ocean. -- Letter from Samuel Bayard. -- The brig Polly. -- Vigilance of the
American tories. -- The Hannah of Baltimore. -- The ship Dina, of New York. --
The ship Polly, Captain Mayo, 122 CHAPTER V. Federal plan for a French War. --
Specimen of French justice. -- The Sea Horse. -- The Musquito. -- Remarks on
the British treaty by Mr. Gallatin. -- Reply by Mr. Tracy. -- Hints on the
western insurrection. -- Case of the brig Maria Wilman, captain Oaks. -- The
schooner William, captain Scott. Despotic influence of the tories in American
seaports. -- Elegant style of some of their publications. The Polly, captain
Wade. -- The Edward and William, captain Jones. -- The Ariel. -- The brig
Sisters. -- Capture of the brig Jay, by the French, and barbarous treatment of
the captain. -- Mr. JAY'S INSTRUCTIONS. -- Extracts from them NEVER BEFORE
published. -- Proofs of his neglect of orders. -- Anecdotes relative to the
British treaty, 151 CHAPTER VI. British depredations continued. -- Mercantile
selfishness. -- The brig Fame. -- The schooner Andrew. -- Joshua Whiting. --
The brig Columbia. -- The sloop Dove. -- The May Flower. -- The Eliza. --
Murder of captain Bosson. -- Snuff Excise. -- Memoirs of ALEXANDER HAMILTON,
late Secretary of the Treasury. -- His singular mode of correspondence with
certain persons. -- Remarks on his connection with Reynolds, 189 CHAPTER VII.
Farther observations on the correspondence between Messrs. Hamilton and
Reynolds. -- Singular mode of secrecy in framing the federal constitution, and
of discussing Jay's treaty. -- Defense of General Mason. -- Report to President
Adams, by Mr. Pickering, on French captures. -- Singular style of that paper.
-- Defamatory charge by Judge Iredell to a grand jury in Virginia. -- Their
pitiful presentment. -- Defense of Mr. Cabell. -- Curious letter to Mr. John
Beckley. -- Observations on the PURITY of the federal government. -- Specimens
of the mode of traveling in America. -- A trip to New York, 228 CHAPTER VIII.
Proceedings of Congress. -- Affair of Randall and Whitney. -- Plan of
appointing a shorthand writer. -- Debates on the federal city. -- Act of
Appropriation. -- Debates on the call for Jay's instructions. -- Strange answer
of the President. -- Appropriations for the British treaty. -- Explanation of
the conduct of Mr. Muhlenberg. -- Singular multiplicity of petitions in favor
of appropriating for the British treaty. -- Rise of the session. -- Summary of
events till the end of the year 1796, 277
PREFACE.
IN January last, I published The American Annual Register for 1796. My
collection of materials required more room than had been expected, and it was
found necessary to close the volume without completing the plan.

Some gentlemen, who wished to see the publication proceed, offered to assist
by subscriptions for a second volume. But this was unsuitable, because persons
who had not seen the former one could not with propriety be asked to subscribe
for a continuation of it. I therefore began the same task over again under a
different title page. The subject was fertile, and repetitions of what had been
said already have been avoided with so much care that they do not, in whole,
extend to near half a page.

On the appearance of the former volume, certain critics complained of my
style. The roughness of their own, in the instant of condemnation, afforded the
best apology for the faults of mine. But moreover these refined literati were
the patrons and prompters of William Cobbet. He had spoke of me, with his
wonted politeness, in ten or twelve pamphlets. It was proper, as it seems, that
I should be silent, because the two chaplains of Congress, the secretaries of
state and of the treasury were in the number of his auxiliaries or admirers. I
would not injure Mr. Cobbet by comparing him with his employers. The bench and
jury who assassinated lord Stafford were still more execrable than Titus Oats.

In this catalogue of the patrons of genius we find Mr. Robert Liston. The
British ambassador, not contented with paying Mr. Cobbet for his labors,
receives a daily bundle of his gazettes. No person possessing the feelings of a
gentleman would suffer that commodity to come within his door. Such
intermeddling from a foreign envoy would not be endured by any independent
country in the world, unless in the United States of America. A French envoy at
London, or an English ambassador at Paris, never sets up a newspaper to
recommend his measures. Neither the old monarchy nor the present republic of
France, would, for a single day, have endured such a connection. In London,
where the spirit of national independence is understood and felt, the first
news of the Morning Chronicle being supported by a French pension, would level
the printer's office with the pavement. But Mr. Liston goes farther. He
corresponds with internal traitors. He is detected, and the most despicable, or
rather the most prostituted of all cabinets, has accepted of his refusal to
reveal their names. To trace the conspiracy, Congress appoints a committee of
five members. Of these, three are tories, and one of them is Robert Goodloe
Harper, the intimate friend of Liston, the adviser of a Spanish war, and of the
conquest of Mexico. This is a new way to discover plots.

When the fifth number of this book was published, Mr. Alexander Hamilton
printed, in Mr. Fenno's gazette, a denial of his connection with Reynolds. He
has now come from New York to complete a satisfactory statement. Like the pot
whitewashing the kettle, he has already received from Mr. Wolcot a certificate
of his virtue. He is, at present, also soliciting Mr. Monroe and Mr.
Muhlenberg, on both of whom he had heaped mountains of calumny. Mr. Hamilton
entreats them, to attest his innocence, that is to say, their belief of his
having debauched Mrs. Reynolds.

The variety of articles transmitted for revisal and publication was
unexpected, and many have been delayed for want of room. The denial of access
to subscribers appeared an ungracious task. A compliance with their wishes made
it necessary to shorten the latter part of the narrative, and to leave out some
entire chapters that were prepared for the press. This gives to the volume a
miscellaneous texture, which the rigid remarker is entitled to condemn. At
another time, I shall perhaps do better.

A report has been circulated, that Mr. John Beckley is the author of this
volume. He did not frame a single sentence of it. He is unacquainted with my
hand writing, and I could not be sure to distinguish his.

Philadelphia, July 19th, 1797.
History of the United States, etc.
CHAPTER I.
First session of the fourth Congress. -- Resolution proposed by Mr. S. Smith
for checking the British treaty. -- Hints respecting that paper. -- Attempts to
involve America in a French war. -- Sketch of the state of France, by Edmund
Burke. -- Contrast between her and the United States. -- Scanty pay of the
Federal army. -- Fatal effects of a rupture with France. -- Camillus. -- His
mis^akes as to the state of Europe. -- Mr. Pinckney. -- His opinion of the
advantage of delaying a British treaty. -- Attempts to irritate France. --
Extreme danger of doing so. -- Real authors of the misunderstanding. --
Montgaillard's prediction. -- Notice to the patrons of a certain gazette. --
Concluding remarks.

AT the beginning of the year 1796, the fourth Congress of the United States
were in their first session. On the 4th of January, Mr. Samuel Smith laid on
the table of the Representatives a resolution in these words: That from and
after the (...) day of (...) it shall not be lawful for any foreign ship or
vessel to land in the territories of the United States any goods, wares, or
merchandise other than the produce of that country to which the ship or vessel
belongs. This proposal was professedly pointed at the treaty of commerce with
Britain, which had been signed at London on the 19th of November, 1794, by Mr.
John Jay, as envoy on the part of America. Mr. S. Smith opposed that
instrument. He said in Congress, that, within two years, it might be expected
to destroy the shipping of this country. The fifteenth article of the treaty
has these words: Nor shall any prohibition be imposed on the exportation or the
importation of any articles to or from the territories of the two parties
respectively, which shall not equally extend to all other nations. Thus the
resolution was in strict harmony with the conditions of the treaty; yet, if the
United States shall ever carry it into execution, the treaty itself will, in
some measure, be at an end. Britain could find a thousand effective ways of
expressing her disgust at this regulation, which would incommode her much more
than the other maritime states of Europe. Still she would have less reason to
complain than any nation in the world, because the resolution is grounded on
the principle assumed in the English act of navigation On the 2d of September,
1793, the French Convention passed a similar act. Its operation is only
suspended on account of the war. By the first article, no foreign commodities
can be imported into France, but in French vessels, or in those of the country
which produces them, or of the country from which they are usually first
exported. By the second, no foreign vessel can convey from one port of France
or her colonies to another, any of their produce. Third, every French vessel
must have her officers and three-fourths of her crew Frenchmen. It is amazing
that the court of Versailles did not adopt this rule an hundred years ago. It
will, in a short time, double or quadruple the number of French seamen. Were
other omens averted, this law is an epitaph on the naval supremacy of Britain.
See an eloquent report by BARRERE.
.

The treaty in question has produced many volumes of elaborate investigation.
Since the new constitution, no other subject has excited so general an effort
of the ingenuity, the eloquence, and the passions of America. It was this
emergency which marked out the present year as more eminently deserving of
historical notice. The matter itself daily grows in importance, as this
transaction has brought the United States to the verge of a French war. Few
have leisure to read, and still fewer have information or even capacity
adequate to comprehend a great part of the complicated arguments employed for
or against it. To attempt a detail of the topics on each side would be a
voluminous, and by this time, almost an useless undertaking. The public has
already become satiated with essays, letters, memorials, replies, observations,
features, reports, addresses, views, vindications, defenses, paragraphs,
resolutions, petitions, explanations, proceedings of town meetings, motions,
and speeches. Within the short space of eighteen months, the argument has
entirely shifted its place. The stress of the debate can be no longer about
whether the British treaty is advantageous or prejudicial to American commerce;
but whether it is worth preserving at the risk of a French war. That the
Directory of Paris have this object somewhat in their eye is most likely. The
recall of their ambassador, citizen Adet, was a broad intimation of their
design. In Europe, such a step is the professed signal for hostilities. It is
as certain that a party in this country are solicitous of driving the United
States into that contest. If a crowd of other evidences could be forgotten,
their absence is supplied by the letter from secretary Pickering to Mr.
Pinckney our ambassador to the French republic. At the same time, attempts are
constantly made to decry the power of France. When a French general chances to
retreat, the newspapers of the party teem with exultation. The republic at
large is invariably represented as a rendezvous of ruffians, a nuisance to
civilized society. It is impossible that the French should fail of being
offended at such unprovoked insolence. They hire no gazettes in Paris to revile
America. They do not fill libraries in censuring our political characters. Yet
our federal prints attack, on every occasion, both the republic and all her
friends, in the most vulgar style of abuse. Even the ministerial prints of
London, the organs of Rose and Dundas, are, by many degrees, less insolent in
their invective, and less brutal in their reproach For instance, a late
correspondent in the Gazette of the United States writes thus: That
contemptible and drunken vagabond TOM PAIN, who is notoriously destitute of
every honest principle, religious, moral, or political, has crowned his career
of impudence and falsehood, etc. -- This creature of avaricious poverty and
deranged ambition, would set the world on fire, if he could find sixpence by
the fight, and advocate the climate and government of hell to be popular there.
-- He was, at the commencement of our troubles, a decided friend to the
measures of Great Britain. After the war, his first attack was upon the
tranquillity of Great Britain: but here he was disgracefully defeated. [It will
be time enough to speak of his defeat when the bank of England begins to pay
its notes in gold and silver. The present paper-money plan is like trying to
cross the Atlantic in a cork jacket.] I regret there was found any man in the
United States so base and hostile to the peace and honor of his country, as to
publish this letter of infamy; the letter from Pain to general Washington,
printed by Mr. Bache. The peace of the country runs no hazard, and as little
awaits the honor of the general. On the 14th of December, 1796, Dr. Ames
observed in Congress, that the character is fixed in history! Pain, therefore,
has come too late.
.

Before going farther, we shall glance at the character and actual state of the
French, whom Mr. Pickering and his friends are so anxious to degrade. In
preparing for a quarrel it is essential to be acquainted with the talents and
resources of your antagonist. The situation of our citizens, thinly dispersed
over an immense continent, affords a peculiar avenue to deception. It has been
employed with diligence against the republic. On a topic of such universal
Importance candid explanation can hardly be tedious. No better authority will
be required than that of Edmund Burke. Two letters from him on this head have
been recently printed. A few detached sentences, extracted from whole sheets to
the same purpose, will place the resources of France in a just light, and show
what the United States have to expect in a contest with her. Out of the tomb of
the murdered monarchy in France, has arisen a vast, tremendous, unformed
spectre, in a far more terrific guise than any which ever yet overpowered the
imagination and subdued the fortitude of man. -- The republic has actually
conquered the finest parts of Europe, has distressed, disunited, deranged, and
broke to pieces all the rest. -- We have not in the slightest degree, impaired
the strength of the common enemy, (France), in any one of those points in which
his particular force consists. -- The regicide has received our advances with
scorn The letters were published before Malmesbury went to Paris.
! -- If things should give us the comparative happiness of a struggle, I shall
be found dying by the side of Mr. Pit. -- Spain is a province of the jacobin
empire. -- Her crown is a fief of regicide. -- We have not considered, as we
ought, the dreadful energy of a state in which the property has nothing to do
with the government. -- The discovery is dreadful, the mine exhaustless. -- A
republic of a character the most restless, the most enterprising, the most
impious, the most fierce and bloody, the most hypocritical and perfidious, the
most bold and daring that has ever been seen, or indeed that can be conceived
to exist!

Mr. Burke is far from being singular in his panic. Major Cartwright, in his
work, entitled, The Commonwealth in Danger, shows the folly of England
depending for safety, solely on her fleet. The French may give battle by sea,
be defeated, and lose twenty ships of the line, without material injury. They
know that the English must be crippled and return to port. The road is then
open, and they disembark in Britain what troops they please. The major adds,
that, previous to the victory of the 1st of June, 1794, admiral How was
reviled for not beating the French fleet; but even then, he only did so because
the French came purposely in his way. They also, by sacrificing a few ships of
the line, gained their object. This was to secure the arrival of an American
convoy with provisions. Arthur Young, a third writer of eminence, has
demonstrated the depth of his despair by the following proposal; viz. that
England should raise an army of five hundred thousand men; and that they, as
well as their officers, must all be men of property. He says that nothing else
can save the country from a French conquest. This was above two years ago See
An Idea of the present State of France, printed sometime previous to March,
1795.
. These authorities confirm the lamentations of Mr. Burke. As to his picture of
what France can perform, we may judge by what she has suffered. In March,
1795, Dumourier printed at Hamburgh, a very interesting pamphlet on the state
of the war. He therein says, that, in December, 1794, a report was laid before
the Convention of the number of soldiers whom France had lost by her three
campaigns. They were stated at six hundred and fifty thousand. Dumourier adds,
that this computation was by one-third part less than the truth; and that,
including emigration, famine, and the scaffold, France had then lost twelve
hundred thousand men, in the flower of life, besides aged persons, women and
children. Compared with this havoc of the human species, the waste of any other
modern war is but trifling. The king of Prussia estimates that the war of 1756,
which lasted seven years, destroyed, in the whole, and in all parts of the
world, only about a million of soldiers. To the twelve hundred thousand
Frenchmen we may safely add eight hundred thousand from the allied armies;
since the latter were equally numerous with the republicans, and besides were
beaten. We have thus about two millions of deaths, in two years and four
months, or above eight hundred thousand per annum; so that the present war is
at least five times more destructive than that of 1756.

No other nation or government that the world ever saw, could have supported
such enormous losses as the French have endured; yet their strength appears
undiminished, and every campaign adds to the catalogue of their conquests. It
is not less than madness for a party in America to be hiring newspapers to
revile such a terrible people. They are not only most formidable from their
physical strength, but from the peculiar structure of their government. It is
systematic; says Mr. Burke, it is simple to its principle; it has unity and
consistency in perfection. [Congress have refused to impose a land tax. Nay
some of them, with surprising hardiness, declare such a measure impracticable,
though land taxes are at this moment paid in perhaps every state of the union.
Pennsylvania has three or four. Opposed to this frivolity, this puppet-shew of
legislation, observe what Burke tells of France:] In that country, entirely to
cut off a branch of commerce, to extinguish a manufacture, to destroy the
circulation of money, to violate credit, to suspend the course of agriculture,
even to burn a city or to lay waste a province of their own, does not cost them
a moment's anxiety. -- Going straight forward to its end, unappalled by peril,
unchecked by remorse, despising all common maxims and all common means, that
hideous phantom overpowered those who could not believe it possible she could
at all exist!

This is the sort of enemy whom we may chance to encounter, as the price of the
British treaty, and the epistle of Mr. Pickering. When in parliament, Mr. Burke
was considered as the best informed member of the House of Commons. He has long
been the oracle of English aristocracy. He is a pensioner to Pit, and would be
sorry to overcharge the picture of French power.

It is serving America, to make a short comparison between the relative force
of the two nations. The French, in only four years, have overcome the German
empire, Spain, Portugal, Italy, and the Netherlands, comprehending not less
than fifty millions of people. The United States, white, black and yellow, have
not five millions. The French have drubbed three British kingdoms, with their
population of fourteen millions, and crushed numerous conspiracies and
rebellions in the heart of their country. The revolt of La Vendee alone cost as
much fighting as passed in America during the revolution. Pichegru, in one
campaign, did what Marlborough, though constantly victorious, could not
accomplish in ten.

In 1794, France maintained nearly eleven hundred thousand fighting men, and
was, in 1795, to have sixty thousand cannoneers Carey's edition of Guthrie's
Geography, vol. ii. p. 699.
. In 1797, America, by the report of Oliver Wolcot P. 18.
, was to require an army of three thousand five hundred and twenty-four men,
including officers, cadets, artificers, and twenty-seven surgeons. Even this
handful cost infinite haggling in Congress The particulars will appear in the
next volume.
; and the greatest anxiety how they were to be paid. The French are the best
appointed troops, perhaps, in the world. From an immense distance, they have
been often transported in wagons to the field of battle. The pay of American
regulars is absolute beggary. The privates have a ration per day worth twenty
cents, or seventy two dollars and eighty cents a year. Their pay is four
dollars per month, or forty-eight dollars a year. An annual suit of clothes are
valued at twenty-five dollars, so that the accounts stands thus; Dolls. Cts.
Rations, 72 80 Pay, 48 Clothes, 25 Total, 145 80

Every man who can handle an axe may gain double the sum, and have his victuals
into the bargain. For such a pittance our soldiers, in war, penetrate the
wilderness to fight an enemy who give no quarter. In peace they are cooped up
in garrisons from whence they dare not stray above a gun shot, and where they
have been often in the utmost distress for necessaries. Thousands of horses, in
attempting to carry supplies through the desert, have consumed their loads, and
died of hunger Mr. S. Smith stated this, last winter, in Congress.
. General Wayne, it is said, lost his life at lake Erie, for want of two ounces
of castor oil.

Such is the present balance by land between the regular forces of France and
the United States. They are as one man to three or four hundred. Our expenses
equal or exceed our revenues. Congress have refused to attempt a land tax. All
other sources are about exhausted; and a war with France, by the ruin of our
commerce, would certainly cut off a great part of those arising from it. Nine
parts in ten of the public taxes proceed from the duties on impost and tonnage.
In the land tax debates of Congress, last winter, Mr. Harper strangely said,
that, if at war with France, our trade would not, in his opinion, suffer more
than it does already. He inferred that our revenues would not, by that event,
be materially reduced.

If we look at the sea there is no prospect of success in a contest with
France. We have on the stocks three frigates. Of their navy an exact account
cannot here be given, but it has, for a century, been the second in Europe. It
lately was said to contain three hundred and thirty-seven vessels. An hundred
and twenty one were ships of the line. Of these the least carry seventy four
guns Carey's edition of Guthrie's Geography, vol. ii. p. 696.
. They would, in a contest with America, be seconded by Spain, Portugal, and
Holland. Against this immensity of numbers, our Lilliput squadron would be like
three pismires in the gullet of a crocodile, or three grains of chaff in the
charge of a six pounder. But then our privateers can destroy their commerce!
Yes. And they shall destroy ours. Thus, as Henry Fielding says, we sell a blind
horse and receive a bad note in payment. Our seaport towns, from Portland to
Savannah, will be successively transformed into a range of bonfires. The
shutting up of the Mediterranean and the western waters would compose but an
atom in the Alps of our calamity. In a struggle with France alone, unsupported
by her allies, we could not muster a tenth part of her force either by land or
sea. Mr. Pit computed, in the House of Commons, that the campaign of 1794,
cost the republic an hundred and fifty millions sterling. Ours with the
Wyandots were estimated at a million of dollars yearly. The burden produced
infinite discontent, and an earnest desire of peace. France, at an annual
charge three or six hundred times greater, continues to fight and to conquer,
to trample every enemy, and to dictate the terms of every peace. To contend, if
we can help it, with this republican Typhoeus would, in rashness, resemble the
last struggles of Jerusalem and Palmira. On the altars of Titus and Aurelian we
might read with probability the prospect before us.

As a political writer, Alexander Hamilton holds the same rank in America that
Burke enjoys in England; and it would be injuring the logic of his party not to
give his opinion. Camillus, No. vii. was published in the summer of 1795, and
contains a survey of Europe extremely different from that of Mr. Burke. It
cannot be denied that she (Britain) is triumphant on the ocean; that the
acquisitions which she has made upon France are hitherto greater than those
which France has made upon her. The reduction of two or three islands in the
West Indies is not worth notice in this contest, where the independence of
Britain is in imminent danger. When No. vii. was written, the French had
conquered Holland, and the Austrian Netherlands. Holland, says Mr. Burke, is to
England a matter of value inestimable. Letter I.
By the conquest of the low countries, France forms a semicircle around the
British islands. Hence, while the fleet of England lies wind-bound at Spithead,
or is in any other given situation, the French, by taking an opposite point of
the compass, can, at their leisure, disembark an army on the coast of Britain
or Ireland. For excluding them, an hundred ships of the line and an hundred
canoes would be of equal importance. This, by the way, points out the folly of
a favorite British maxim, that he who is master by sea is master by land.
While the Netherlands, therefore, continue a part of the republic, it is
frivolous to speak of British conquests in the East or West Indies, or indeed
any where else. They signify no more "Than Caesar's arm, when Caesar's head is
off."

If, on the one hand, she (Britain) owes an immense debt, on the other she
possesses an immense credit, which there is no symptom of being impaired.
British credit has become, in a British mind, an article of faith, and is no
longer an object of reason. [Thus Camillus tells us that the creditors of
England are fools. The prospects of a merchant are not very hopeful, when no
man of prudence will trust him. Yet such is the condition of England as
described by its advocate.] Her government possesses, internally, as much
vigor, and has as much national support, as it perhaps ever had at any former
period of her history. Alarmed by the unfortunate excesses in France, most men
of property cling to the government, and carry with them the great bulk of the
nation, almost the whole of the farming interest, and much the greatest
proportion of other industrious classes.

Mr. Burke has the advantage of being on the spot; and he dissents entirely
from Mr. Hamilton. He estimates the number of British citizens who think for
themselves, at four hundred thousand. Of these he computes that eighty thousand
are pure jacobins, utterly incapable of amendment. -- On these, no reason, no
argument, no example, no venerable authority, can have the slightest influence.
They desire a change, and they will have it if they can. -- This minority is
great and formidable. I do not know whether, if I aimed at the total overthrow
of a kingdom, I should wish to be encumbered with a larger body of partisans
Letter I.
The London Courier, of the 26th of December, 1796, affirms, that these two
letters were published by the connivance of the minister. Burke has pensions to
the effective amount of about four thousand pounds sterling, so that this
supposition becomes highly probable. Thus the authority of Pit is superadded
to that of Burke, and they explode the opinion of Camillus. Each succeeding
campaign is an additional nail driven into the head of monarchy. Every new tax
makes a number of new enemies. Here we perceive three distinct causes for a
British revolution. These are, a superior and implacable enemy on the
continent, whose local position makes a British navy useless; a national debt,
which by this time approaches to four hundred millions sterling, and of which
the very interest can be paid only in paper; and a party within the country
whose enmity cannot be extinguished, and who, by the confession of their
enemies, are abundantly numerous for the destruction of any government in the
world. Among her allies, says Camillus, are the two greatest powers of Europe,
France excepted; namely, Russia and Austria. Spain and Sardinia make a common
cause with her. The two latter have been turned by France into mere stepping
stones in her path to the dominion of Europe. Russia never gave any help, more
or less, to the crowned coalition. Catharine is now dead; and her son has
declined any concern with it. But even if he did send an army to the Rhine,
Britain would be obliged to pay them. As for Austria, Jasper Wilson, in his
celebrated letter to Mr. Pit, says, that, before the present war began, the
Emperor was offering nine per cent for money, so that by this time he must be
as much entangled in debt as England herself. Nothing but arbitrary power could
enable him to pay even a single regiment. This will not hold out long. She
(France) cannot, without great difficulty, from their geographical position,
make any farther acquisitions upon the territories of Austria. Carnot is a
better geographer than Mr. Hamilton. Since this prediction, Moreau and Jourdan
have penetrated into the heart of Germany. They have subdued a multitude of its
princes, and were within a small matter of reaching Vienna. As to Italy,
Buonaparte has eclipsed every commander since Telesinus and Sylla engaged under
the walls of Rome. Hear what Burke says: The overrunning of Lombardy, the
subjugation of Piedmont, the possession of its impregnable fortresses, the
seizing on all the neutral states of Italy, our expulsion from Leghorn,
instances renewed for our expulsion from Genoa, Spain rendered subject to them
and hostile to us, Portugal bent under the yoke, half the empire overrun and
ravaged Letter I.
. This is the picture of 1796. Yet, in reliance on the political foresight of
Camillus, a numerous party in the United States have filled, and continue to
fill their newspapers with scurrilous calumnies against the French nation. They
insulted her ambassador, even after he had been recalled; and, as if this had
not been enough to ensure a rupture, Mr. Pickering sent a letter to Mr.
Pinckney in France which is more in the tone of a libel than a diplomatic
paper. When the blind lead the blind, we know the sequel. With regard to
Europe, Mr. Hamilton is, in all his views, mistaken. This lamp of political
wisdom, has conducted America to the edge of a precipice from which General
Washington saw fit to retire. It is of consequence to expose the sophistry of
Mr. Hamilton, that our enlightened citizens may see by what ignorance they have
been led into the present crisis. We shall, on this account, pick up two or
three others of his mistakes.

"Britain and her possessions are essentially safe," says Camillus, while she
maintains a decided maritime superiority. Burke, in one of his letters,
speaking of the war of 1689, says, that in two years three thousand vessels
were taken from the English trade. In every war, the commerce of Britain
suffers prodigiously. The present state of the West Indies shows that a
superior fleet cannot always preserve her islands. Witness the recapture of
Guadaloupe, the conflagration of St. Vincents, Grenada, and St. Lucia! But the
expedition of Hoche, to Ireland, is the best refutation of Mr. Hamilton. Some
people speak of the British navy as if it could be present every where at the
same time. If twenty-five thousand Frenchmen had disembarked at Bantry bay, a
march of two days would have brought them to Cork, a city as large as
Philadelphia, disaffected to government, and besides entirely defenseless.
Another week would be sufficient for reaching Dublin. The temper of its
citizens appears by a letter from the viceroy. He boasts of having a militia of
two thousand barristers, attorneys, merchants, and such people. But these men
would not mount guard, if they durst employ the poorer classes to do so for
them. Dublin has between two and three hundred thousand inhabitants, and if the
bulk of them had been well affected, the militia might have amounted to twenty
thousand. His lordship says that the whole militia of the island are about
twenty-five thousand. This is a pitiful portion in a population of four
millions His lordship tells us, that when the soldiers went off to Bantry Bay,
in quest of the French, he granted their wives four pence per day till they
returned. This was certainly a splendid allowance, and well worth fighting for.
In a pamphlet printed in 1794, sir Henry Clinton says, that the army is now
waiting to receive a very small share of plunder taken at the siege of
Charlestown!

The great take care of themselves at least. The history of The Crimes of the
Kings of England, relates that the family of Mr. Pit enjoy places and pensions
to the amount of eighty-one thousand pounds sterling a year.


. It is hard to say whether the catholics of Connaught or the protestants of
Ulster would feel the greatest impatience to join an invader. Thus the left arm
of England would be cut off without, perhaps, even the honor of a battle. This
is the essential safety that Mr. Hamilton speaks about.

In defiance of geography and history, Camillus next endeavors to undervalue
the conquest of the Netherlands. France must be still more fatigued and
exhausted even than her adversaries. Her acquisitions cannot materially vary
this conclusion; the Low Countries must have been pretty well emptied before
they fell into her hands. He has more to the same effect. They are inhabited by
about six millions of industrious people, among the richest in the world. The
acquisition was of immense importance. If Brussels and Amsterdam had been
reduced to ashes, and if a famine like those produced by British monopolies in
Bengal, had whitened the whole country with the bones of its inhabitants,
Camillus might have some reason for this insinuation. The French did not think
that Holland was emptied, as appears from their first requisition. Among other
articles, they demanded two hundred thousand quintals of wheat, seventy-five
millions of pounds weight of hay, fifty millions ditto of oats, and hundred and
fifty thousand pairs of shoes, two hundred thousand shirts, with straw,
breeches, coats, waistcoats, overalls, hats, and so forth, all in one month,
besides twelve thousand oxen to be furnished within two months. This
enumeration shows the inaccuracy of Camillus, and what may be expected if the
French disembark at Mud island.

The British government maintains a proud and distant reserve, repels every
idea of peace, and inflexibly pursues the path of war. Mr. Burke's two letters
are half filled with lamentations for the debasement of England. They hold out
a ludicrous refutation of Alexander Hamilton. The regicides were the first,
says St. Edmund, to declare war. We are the first to sue for peace. -- The
speech from the throne in the opening of the session of 1795, threw out oglings
and glances of tenderness. Lest this coquetting should seem too cold and
ambiguous, the violent passion for a relation to the regicides, produced, etc.
This is the proud and distant reserve described by Camillus. -- I do not know a
more mortifying spectacle than to see the assembled majesty of the crowned
heads of Europe waiting as patient suitors in the antichamber of Regicide.
They wait, it seems, until the sanguinary tyrant, Carnot, shall have snorted
away the indigested fumes of the blood of his sovereign. The remainder of this
scene is admirably painted; but our envoy, Mr. Pinckney, is not, it appears,
admitted even to the antichamber. He has been desired to quit the country. At
this second humiliation it might not have been amiss to pause and not to
squander away the fund of our submissions. A report from the Committee of
Agriculture at London affirms, that the lands lying waste in Britain, could be
increased in value by twenty millions sterling a year! They deferred this
acquisition to manufacture French kings. -- At Basle, it was thought proper
that Great Britain should appear at this market, and bid with the rest for the
mercy of the people-king. This is that republic which the American emissaries
of England are so busy in provoking.

Mr. Burke then relates two fruitless applications made by England, the one at
Berlin, by our friend Robert Hammond, and the other at Paris through the Danish
ambassador. Both were rejected. It might be thought that here, at length, we
had touched the bottom of humiliation; our lead was brought up covered with
mud. But in the lowest deep, a lower deep was to open for us still more
profound abysses of disgrace and shame. However, i^ we leaped!. -- The question
is not now how we are to be affected with it in regard to dignity. That is
gone. I shall say no more about it. Light lie the earth on the ashes of English
pride Britain has good reason to be tired of this war. A late London newspaper
says, that, from 1775 to 1782, inclusive, there were three thousand seven
hundred and forty-two bankruptcies; and from 1793 to 1796, inclusive, three
thousand six hundred and eight. Thus four years of the present quarrel have
done as much harm to the mercantile credit as eight years of the last.
!

We can now answer the query of Camillus. How happens it that France with all
her victories has not yet been able to extort peace! She never asked for it. It
is probable, says he, the negotiation (Jay's treaty) received its first
impression and even its general outline anterior to the principal part of the
disasters sustained by the coalesced powers in the course of the last campaign
(1794). If Jay had been warranted, as he was not, to make a treaty such as he
did, its first impression would have been sketched in America before he set
out. But, as lately observed American Annual Register, Chapter 8.
, the time chosen for making it was highly improper. Camillus, in ancient or
modern annals, will hardly find that, with views merely commerical, any nation
ever chose so hazardous a time for entering into a treaty. This consideration
alone should have laid the bargain on its back, at least till the conclusion of
a peace. It was just like building a house close to another which is on fire.
During the residence of Jay in England, every post brought him news of French
victories. Hence, even if the outline of his paper had been sketched before the
conquest of Flanders, that decisive event should have taught him to make a
pause. A suspension of signing the treaty for only three months could not have
ruined America. These things were as huge as high Olympus. They pierced the
deafest ear. They thrust themselves on the dullest understanding.

The letter of Mr. Pinckney above referred to clearly admits the advantages
that might have been gained by delay. The business, upon the whole, says he,
has been concluded more beneficially for us than I had any hope we could obtain
by negotiation six months ago, and, in my opinion, places us in a more
advantageous situation than we should have been in by becoming parties to the
war. If so much had been acquired by one delay of six months, reason pointed
out a second postponement. Britain has been ever since going down hill, and had
the affair been to begin at this time, we might have had any terms that could
be desired. The latter part of the above citation obliquely implies that
America had no choice between a treaty and a war. The supposition gives a poor
specimen of the writer's discernment. How gladly some people would be at
getting into war appears from the Aurora of the 5th of April 1797. -- A
correspondent in the Sentinel, says, that the people of this country are not
YET ripe for an alliance offensive and defensive with Great Britain, but
suggests that the event is probable. This passage points more clearly than
usual at the ultimate purpose of a certain party. If the alliance above
recommended were to take place, the best fortune that we could look for would
be that of Ulysses in the den of the Cyclops; we should be reserved as the last
morsel. If any motive can drive out of our fancy a British alliance, it is to
read the recent fate of the allies of England, as described by Mr. Burke. They
(the French) have hitherto constantly declined any other than a treaty with a
single power. -- In that light the regicide power finding each of them
insulated and unprotected, with great facility gives the law to them all. By
this system, for the present, an incurable distrust is sown amongst the
confederates; and in future all alliance is rendered impracticable. It is thus
they have treated with Prussia, with Spain, with Sardinia, with Bavaria, with
the ecclesiastical states, with Saxony; and here we see them refuse to treat
with Great Britain in any other mode. Suppose that we shall have entered into
the alliance recommended by the Sentinel, and that Britain, within six months,
patches up a separate peace, while Hoche's hussars are whetting their sabres in
the barracks of Dublin. America would then make but a sorry figure in a
solitary negotiation. Besides, we cannot trust our ally. This appears by an
extract from the journals of Congress, in the year 1779. "We are contending,
say they, against a kingdom crumbling to pieces How does this agree with
Camillus?
, a nation without public virtue, and a people sold and betrayed by their own
representatives; against a prince governed by his passions, and a ministry
without consistency or wisdom; against armies half paid, and generals half
trusted [these were two flagrant falsehoods], against a government equal only
(observe this only) to plans of plunder, conflagration, and murder, a
government noted for its violations of the rights of religion, justice,
humanity, and mankind, and revolting from the protection of Providence!" --
"Our armies in Flanders swore terribly," said uncle Toby, "but nothing like
this!" As for Providence, the people of England held frequent fast days for
military success. This delicate specimen of the mob-stile was part of a letter
from Congress to their constituents, and was draughted, at their desire, by Mr.
John Jay. They should have said nothing about half-paid armies, till they had
been half able to pay their own. Several continental officers, on casting up
the difference between dirty pasteboard and hard silver, found, during the war,
that they were fighting for about one cent per day This is affirmed by a
gentleman, in Philadelphia who was one of them.
. Yet they continued to support the cause, and to sink money in it. But the
object of the above quotation is to point out the consistency of our envoy, and
how notably the style of 1779 agrees with that of 1794. Only poor fifteen years
have converted a horde of demons, for that is the amount of his billingsgate
description, into the most upright people in the world.

We have remarked on the haste with which Mr. Jay closed his treaty, and how
much might have been won by deferring it. But the conduct of the negociator is
eclipsed by that of the great body of the people. It does not appear that the
possibility of a rupture with France ever once came into the conception of most
of our citizens. A majority in the House of Representatives of Congress did
indeed foresee or fear it. One of them was asked why they did not state it in
their speeches, instead of many trifles, which were advanced against the
treaty. He replied that they did not think it prudent. The Hamiltonians would
instantly have accused them of encouraging the French to begin a war with this
country.

This is the very design of some of that party themselves. When a man calls
hard names at his neighbor he is understood as desiring to quarrel. Mr.
Monroe, American ambassador to France, conducted himself with prudence and
popularity. In December 1796, he presented letters of recall, and bade farewell
to the Executive Directory, in the most amicable terms. His address was
received with respect and cordiality. He congratulated the nation on their
victories, and their new constitution, in terms not as strong, by twenty
degrees, as those of Mr. Washington on receiving the French flag. The Gazette
of the United States, for the 29th of March, 1797, scolds him for this act of
civility so contrasted to the insolence of Mr. Pickering. Though you could
crouch, and kneel, and lick, and fawn, on such an occasion, your fellow
citizens can feel nothing for you but contempt; and for the Directory, who
require of the United States an act that would prostrate them in the dust, the
utmost indignation. There is much more in this style. The alleged act referred
to, is, that the Directory refused to admit an American minister till the
United States had redressed their grievances.

As for the contempt and indignation so fiercely spoke about, a different tone
may soon be found necessary. Mantua is at length given up. Five Austrian armies
have been destroyed, and an hundred thousand prisoners taken, during a single
campaign in Italy. Compared to this work, the American revolution was mere
scratching. The Emperor cannot pay his troops with English bank notes. He must
either make an immediate peace, or be dethroned. It does not appear that the
United States could, in one summer, raise five, or indeed two such armies, in
defense of the frontier of Canada; and it is likely enough that the French may
reclaim that province from England, and require this country to restore its
ancient boundaries. They would enter upon such a scheme with every advantage.
They have already a numerous colony of their own people in Canada, who are
acquainted with it as well as the New Englanders. They have always exceeded the
British in the art of gaining the Indians. The war with the savages has been
computed to cost yearly a million of dollars; but with a French army to support
them, a campaign might devour fifty millions. The cession of Canada would be
one of the least wonderful events of the present war. A great part of the
people of New England have been uncomonly solicitious to exasperate the
republic, and, after the treatment which they have also diligently bestowed on
the southern states, and their numerous menaces of disjunction, the latter
might choose to give themselves but small concern in the dispute. On the
south-eastern frontier, the United States are still more vulnerable. Were
Victor Hughes, with three or four battalions of black troops, to land on the
coast of Virginia, the horrors of St. Domingo would immediately be renewed.
Georgia still continues to import negroes; a practice deserving the severest
reprobation.

When we consider the terror, which France has, for three years past, inspired
in Europe, the conquest of Canada, and the extension of its limits, will seem
but as dust in the balance. The brutal insolence with which the republicans are
treated in the Columbian Sentinel, can arise only from an unacquaintance with
the possible extent of danger to New England. Count Montgaillard is a French
royalist. His enmity to the revolution is as sincere as that of any printer or
preacher in the eastern states. In 1794, he published a pamphlet on The
Necessity of continuing the war. The generation, says he, which is to invade
and destroy Europe has now reached the twelfth year of its age. It was born in
the very midst of a revolution [that of America perhaps]; it has seen all the
epoch of this [the French] revolution; it has inhaled all its principles, and
it has sucked in every poison by which it was infected. -- Where is the treaty
of peace which can constrain this rising generation to renounce so horrible a
conquest. He insists, like Burke, that the war must be continued; he even
affirms, that the republic must be subdued. When this piece appeared, the
French had not conquered Lombardy. They had not plundered one-half of Germany;
and the bank of England had not stopped payment. Arthur Young, in the pamphlet
already cited, speaks in the same tone. Activity, vigor, and energy, such as
the world has not seen, are exerted to spread destruction. -- The late
manifestation of the French power is too tremendous to be considered but with
alarm and terror. The independence of Europe is at stake. He says that the war
had, at that time, cost France thirteen hundred thousand men. Every nation
fears her, except America, or rather the tories, and the monied interest of our
country. William Cobbet has set up a gazette in this city, for the express end
of reviling France. He does not conceal his design of bringing the nation into
a French war. Sincerity is always respectable, and he cannot, as an editor, be
charged with a want of that virtue. If we are plunged into such a situation,
his subscribers, and not Mr. Cobbet, must be held accountable for the mischief
that he has done. It will be nothing wonderful, if, before three years elapse,
a French fleet shall anchor in the Delaware, and compel Philadelphia to deliver
to the republic both him and them. Myriads of precedents of this kind are to be
found in history.

Dr. Ames once observed, in Congress, that "this country is rising into a
giant's strength." He was right. Ten years more of peace will double the
population of the whole range of western states from Vermont to Tennassee.
Above an hundred and fifty thousand people are annually added to our numbers,
and the ratio of increase is constantly augmenting. It will soon amount to two
hundred thousand yearly, or perhaps it has already reached that proportion.
This is an advantage enjoyed with equal happiness by no other nation. The
additional swarms will, for centuries to come, have no want of room.

"The world is all before them, where to choose
"Their place of rest."
They will not, for the sake of subsistence, be compelled to bury themselves
forever in mines, or unwholesome manufactories In England, excessive labor
kills perhaps as many people as her foreign wars. See Buchan's Domestic
Medicine.
, or to rush into mercenary regiments. Whatever profession they shall choose, a
moderate portion of industry can hardly fail to supply a plentiful competence.
But a foreign war, and most especially a French war, will assuredly retard, and
may finally blast this fairest harvest of felicity that the human race has
ever seen. Recurring to the metaphor of Dr. Ames, it would be madness to expose
the atlantean infant of America to the arm of a giant, whose limbs are
completely formed, whose joints are firmly knit in his tremendous maturity of
manhood. Let us forbear then to imitate, while we condemn the insolence of
Genet, or to propagate the exploded calumnies of Fauchet. Let us no longer whet
the edge and embitter the venom of our faith by reviling a distant nation for
having, like most of ourselves, granted an universal right of conscience. To
speak plainly, some of the holders of public stock, with Alexander Hamilton in
their van, have excited this clamor. Witness the letters of PHOCION Alias, Dr.
William Smith. The author of An Examination of the late Proceedings in
Congress, as to Mr. Hamilton's conduct, says that the doctor holds between
three and four hundred shares in the bank of the United States, and has
obtained discounts ad libitum. The bank was incorporated by an act dated the
25th of February, 1791. A share contains four hundred dollars. Three hundred
shares come thus to an hundred and twenty thousand dollars. In five years, from
the 1st of January, 1792, to the 1st of January, 1797. Dr. Smith would draw
nine thousand six hundred dollars per annum, at eight per cent.; in whole,
forty-eight thousand dollars of interest. Add this to the principal sum, and,
with the advantage of discounts, we may reckon safely, that he has netted in
whole at least two hundred thousand dollars.

The world says that these shares in the bank were formed by an accumulation of
Congress certificates, which the doctor bought from the continental army at
eighteen pence or two shillings per pound. They may have originally cost him
ten thousand dollars. As Hamilton was the progenitor of this masterpiece of
finance, the doctor has been active in displaying his gratitude.


! These people tremble for their paper, which no well informed citizen will
ever think of molesting; and, quite overshooting the mark, they wish to
preserve it by plunging the continent into a British alliance and a French war.
The latter is only another name for a second American revolution. Were Pichegru
at Elkton tomorrow, many citizens would feel more than a spirit of resistance.
The public can trace the contrivers of such a calamity; and, before opposing
the house-breaker from without, they would perhaps begin with punishing those
who had turned the key. It has already been proved in the Aurora, that the
flambeau dispatch of Mr. Pickering contains elaborate misquotation and direct
untruth. Our secretary takes the shortest way to provoke the rage of a
conqueror alike inflexible in defeat and success, intoxicated with the homage,
enriched with the spoils of Europe, and yet unexhausted by his thousand
victories.

In this chapter the narrative of the year 1796 has made small progress, but
something perhaps has been gained in point of information. The motion of
general Smith, with which it set out, regarding the British treaty, introduced
some reflections on the extreme hazard of a French war, and on the temerity or
perfidy of those who have led the United States into so critical a situation.
The authority of Edmund Burke, and other intelligent English writers, was next
appealed to with regard to the power of that republic, as a counterpoise to the
systematic and voluminous fallacies of Camillus. This induced naturally to a
comparative view of the respective force of the two nations by land and sea;
and the immeasurable inferiority of America was the result of examination. The
shameful attempts made to widen the breach between the two countries was
illustrated by additional remarks. We have closed with pointing out the
peculiar advantages that America may hope for, beyond any other nation, from
the continuance of peace; and we have seen some of the motives of that party,
who, under pretended zeal for her constitution, wish to disturb her
tranquillity. To elucidate the numberless advantages of a pacific system a great
deal yet remains to be said. So much untruth and deception have been studiously
heaped on the subject, that much previous labor is required to remove the
rubbish, before even the foundation of a narrative can be properly sketched
out. The most painful portion of the task is to bestow censure on persons or
parties, and sometimes to hold up even a large majority of the nation in a
light not extremely reputable. Flattery to the prejudices and vices of the
public has hitherto been the bane of almost every historian. This fault shall,
in the present work, be avoided as much as possible, though at the requisite
expense of displeasing the violent of every party. When we sometimes stop to
criticize the paragraph or essay in a newspaper, it should be remembered that
to these publications the people of the United States do most universally
resort for political knowledge. By seeing detected some dozens of notorious
fictions in that shape, persons at a great distance from sources of accurate
information may come to acquire the habit of thinking more boldly for
themselves, and of demanding evidence before they believe an assertion.

The ensuing chapter will partly consist of specimens of federal composition,
as a key to the projects and talents of that party. The next three chapters
proceed to some remarks on the mode of suppressing the western insurrection, of
repelling the savages on the south-western frontier, of compiling the present
national debt, and of negotiating Jay's treaty. The city of Washington, and the
treatment of the late continental army, will merit and receive some
investigation. These topics are intimately connected with the business of the
session of Congress about to be described. Without some prefatory explanations
of this kind, a reader might find himself in the same state of embarrassment,
as if he were to begin a perusal of Homer, at the thirteenth book of the Iliad.

The first five introductory chapters having been employed on political
subjects, we shall be prepared to go on with the journal of Congress. As
variety is the soul of enjoyment, and as this work is intended for the
entertainment of every class of people, an intermediate and miscellaneous
chapter will be given on the present internal state of America. A swarm of
books of travels, in this country will, among other articles of amusement, be
brought on the tapis, and some of their injurious or absurd observations with
respect to America will be heartily explained. To ourselves refutation may be
unnecessary, but several copies of the present work will be sent to Europe,
where it may chance to be reprinted. This part of the volume will there serve
as a vindication of America against the errors of those, who either did not
perceive truth, or did not choose to tell it.

A work of the present kind has been much wanted. We complain that newspaper
details are imperfect, prejudiced, and contradictory. These charges are true,
but the printer cannot avoid affording foundation for them. The narrative of
tomorrow is often at variance with that of today: and neither he nor his
readers can, sometimes, be certain which to prefer. Like Penelope, an editor
must frequently unravel at night the labor of the morning; while the public,
amidst the shreds and fragments of information, can hardly determine what to
believe or to reject.

The mere bulk of a daily newspaper makes its mode of information often
intricate, and sometimes inaccessible. A folio volume of twelve hundred and
forty-eight pages may damp the curiosity of the boldest reader. No one
newspaper can relate every thing. The proprietor generally wishes, as far as he
conveniently can, to decline publishing what his competitors have already given
to the world. Almost every sheet is, likewise, half filled with advertisements
which are entirely useless to most readers. These defects in newspapers cannot,
by diligence or candor, be entirely shunned. But they point out the expediency
of an annual compilation, where selection, brevity, and arrangement can more
easily find place. Many citizens of Philadelphia take in six daily newspapers
at an yearly expense of about fifty dollars. Three different prints are a
common supply. Not one-half or perhaps one-tenth part of their contents are
read; and they are sometimes cast into the fire without being opened. After
such a waste of money, a charge of one or two dollars for a yearly publication
cannot be held extravagant. The compiler of such a book has the greatest
advantage in coming at a distance behind the events which he is to relate. He
can expatiate on the ignorance of statesmen who, at easter, did not exactly
foresee what was to happen next christmas, and which, a twelve month after it
has past, he sees very distinctly. He is amazed at the dullness of
news-printers, who, with ten discordant accounts of a battle before them, did
not, for some hours, distinguish the right one. With judgment and industry, he
may write an useful performance; and, by some address, he can look extremely
wise at the expense of his predecessors.

CHAPTER II.
Character of Mr. Gallatin. -- Connecticut poetry. -- Major Jackson. -- John
Watts. -- The Boston Federal Orrery. -- Curtius. -- His exaggerated statement
of British resources. -- Remarks on paper money. -- Causes of the preference of
Britain to France in the federal party. -- Democratical conspiracy developed by
Curtius. -- Defense of Jefferson, Madison, Giles, Parker, Christie, etc. --
Fables from Pittsburgh. -- Curious presentment by a grand jury in Georgia. --
Purity of Boston.

AS to Gallatin, the seditious Gallatin! What shall I say? How shall I describe
that compound of vice and depravity, that disciple of meanness, corruption,
debauchery, and idleness. He is a foreigner by birth and education. [Of course,
he must be a rascal]. For some time after his arrival in this country, he
wandered about the district of Maine, like Cain, a fugitive and vagabond,
destitute of the means of honest subsistence. -- The writer of this felt the
effects of his own liberality for months afterward! -- Unable to pay for a
lodging, or to purchase the necessaries of life, it was his custom to sleep in
barns, and under the foliage of hedges, and not unusually in the arms of some
shameful strumpet. The fragments of the kitchen satisfied the cravings of
hunger. We find him next among the insurgents of the western counties in
Pennsylvania. The late whisky rebellion there is principally attributed to him.
There is ten times more of this trumpery. It is copied from the Kennebeck
Intelligencer; and was published about the beginning of the year 1797 to defeat
the re-election of Mr. Dearborne, a member of Congress for Massachusetts. This
is one sample of the federal eloquence of New England. If Mr. Gallatin had
wished for an opportunity of inflaming the public, he could not have chosen a
better topic than American finance. Yet his treatise on it is written in the
most harmless style, and seems to evince an unusual degree of good nature and
forbearance.

About the same time with this production, the Connecticut Courant contained
Guillotina, a series of rhimes, written by one Trumbull. They were republished
in a Providence newspaper. A few lines will show in what kind of kennel this
Connecticut muse dabbles; and how wretchedly a certain party labor under a
dearth of decent advocates.

"Once more my fond attentions turn,
"Where Pennsylvania's patriots burn.
"See Mifflin stretching out the laws,
"To aid the anti-federal cause."
This refers to the scandalous artifices employed in Pennsylvania to stop the
arrival of the post at this city with votes for electors at the late election
of President, and to the activity of governor Mifflin in detecting a variety of
frauds made use of by the federal party. If Trumbull had felt any sense of
common honesty, or common shame, he would not have stirred the ashes of a story
so dishonorable to his friends.

"See him with Barclay, John, and Dallas,
"(Poor Pennsylvania keeps no gallows)
"Play many a democratic prank,
"In fleecing Pennsylvania bank."
One may say, with parson Adams, I would rather be the subject of such verses,
than the author. Several months before this piece appeared, Mr. Dallas had
published a certificate that the bank of Pennsylvania was, at the time referred
to, in his debt. This fact could not be unknown to the libeller of Hartford.
But old brass will make a new pan, says the proverb. A fiction, though refuted
in prose, may have a joyful resurrection in verse. The polite introduction of
the gallows shows how strongly some of the federal party thirst for blood. They
have given more than one intimation to that purpose. The New York Gazette has
an essay by William Wilcocks, dated the 15th of November, 1796. Surely, says
he, the guillotine has not done all its duty! He rails at the machine in
France, yet recommends the setting up of another in America, for that is his
plain inference. Some people should not, in common prudence, be so forward to
speak of banks, till they give a satisfactory account of their connection with
Alexander Hamilton, and his bank of the United States. The books of transfer at
the treasury, and the books at the bank, are held secret under the obligation
of an oath, on all persons who use or inspect them, not to reveal the names or
amount of stock holders See An Examination of the late Proceedings in Congress,
respecting the official conduct of the Secretary of the Treasury, dated 8th of
March, 1793, p. 25.
. So much concealment can hardly be for an honorable purpose. The righteous
are bold as a lion. Trumbull proceeds thus: "When Fauchet kept an open mint,
"They doubtless had a finger in it.


This is another exploded untruth. The rhymer goes on at this rate through five
columns of ribbaldry. The lines now cited are sufficient to show the classical
discernment of his friends, and what sort of aid they will stoop to receive.
Swanwick, Giles, Gallatin, and a long list of that party are reviled sadly. Dr.
Franklin, his grandson, Mr. Bache, and Thomas Pain meet with the same usage.
General Washington, as usual, is thoroughly soaked in the treacle of panegyric.
But when the President notified his intention to resign, the party soon began
to change their tune. Wilcocks has said that the fulsome adulation of the
President on the reception of the French flag was the most derogatory part of
his administration Aurora, 31st December, 1796.
.

The charge of being a fulsome sycophant does not entirely agree with the
superb encomiums, which Wilcocks has so frequently plaistered upon General
Washington. This veering about lets us into the real character of some people,
and how little they care about the General, when his reputation ceases to
promote their private ends.

But this revolt was overbalanced by Major William Jackson, surveyor of the
port of Philadelphia. The speech of the President, on the 8th of December,
1796, was followed up, next day, by the Major, with a puff in one of our
newspapers. It begins thus. To attempt an illustration of a subject in itself
so illumined as the speech of our most excellent President were an arrogance
which we utterly disclaim. He goes on white-washing for a considerable length.
The distant settler on the Mississippi beholds with exultation that his
happiness forms a consideration in the mind of the government, coequal with
that of his fellow citizen on the Atlantic. He is equally entitled to
protection; for his welfare is essential to the union. Hence exultation would
be misplaced. A President and other officers of government are paid for doing
their duty; and, if they fail of performing it to public satisfaction, there
are, if we could only believe so, abundance of men as good as the best of them.
Major Jackson here points at the Spanish treaty; but he might have reflected
that the same administration, by the weakest and meanest species of trimming,
has induced the danger of a French war, and if that happens, the western waters
will be more completely blocked up than ever.

Is there a seaman belonging to the United States, or a connection of that
valuable class of citizens, whose vows are not offered for the good of him,
whose head and heart have been so much occupied with their concerns? This was
an unfortunate topic. But the Major, as a military man, knows that the weakest
part of a fortification has most need of defense. Where is the veteran whose
bosom does not beat in responsive applause to the eulogium of Washington on
military skill? If, at the creation of the public debt, he had taken a single
step to save them from indigence, if he had refused to sign the statute of
limitations, and some other laws not much better American Annual Register,
chap. v. and xi.
, their bosoms would have been more likely to beat. No peculiar share of blame
in this business lies on the President. The great body of the people have
betrayed entire indifference about the old soldiers, otherwise such acts never
could have past. At the same time money is unaccountably wasted on savages.
John Watts, a Creek warrior, boasts of having taken thirty-three scalps. In the
latter part of 1796, this fellow, and a number of others, came to Philadelphia,
where they feasted at an expense of four thousand dollars This is stated on the
authority of Mr. Christopher Greenup, a representative from Kentucky. The
writer has not yet seen the account.
. Thus much for Major Jackson.

Nothing is, in itself, more comtemptible, and nothing tends more certainly to
defeat its own purpose, than extravagant praise. Encomium never appeared in a
more farcical shape, than it has often assumed in poetry. Of this sort of
writing the Boston Federal Orrery afforded a miserable specimen, in the
Gratulatory Address on the birthday of the President, in February, 1796.

If a stranger knew nothing else of the history of the American war, than what
he could glean from this copy of verses, he would infer, that General
Washington had singly, and exclusively, exterminated the British armies in a
personal combat. In the last line of the first stanza, this rhymer of
Massachusetts calls him the "Godlike Washington." This is something worse than
mere nonsense. It approaches to indecency and profanation.

In the third stanza we meet with a parallel between General Washington and --:
let the reader, if he can, conjecture the counter part of this comparison!
Moses, the Jew, is introduced as not superior in legislative or military
merits, to the leader in our revolution. As if that were not enough, there
follows a parallel between the President and the Creator of the Universe; and
though this style may seem ridiculous, incredible, and mad, it has absolutely
been adopted by the bard of the Boston Federal Orrery. After alluding to the
miraculous passage of the Red sea, he adds, that "By night your pillar, and
your cloud by day,"
"He (the President) fought your battles."


Here is an attempt to blend the services and exertions of the American
colonies with the omniscient superintendancy of the Supreme Being. Effrontery
or impiety cannot proceed much farther. Of such panegyrists, Dr. Edward Young
has observed, that "Their praise degrades, as if a fool should mean,
"By spitting in your face, to make it clean!


For the sake of completeness, our author should have run a comparison of Mount
Vernon with Mount Sinai, the Delaware at Trenton and the Arabian Gulf. Between
such impious jargon and legitimate poetry, there is the same distinction as
between the trowel of a bricklayer, and the pencil of Titian.

About the same time, another piece of excellence, too singular to be
forgotten, appeared in a Philadelphia newspaper. Here it is: ADVICE TO COUNTRY
POLITICIANS.
Go weed your corn, and plow your land,
And by Columbia's interest stand,
Cast prejudice away;
To able heads leave state affairs,
Give railing over and say your prayers,
For stores of corn and bay.


This is the first stanza of that brilliant production. American farmers are
very obligingly advised to give over railing. The writer must by this word mean
remonstrating against the treaty of Mr. Jay. As to able heads, five-sixths of
the members of Congress are farmers, and hence this admonition applies to them.
They had better, as it seems, go home and mind their ploughs. The next and
concluding stanza runs, or hobbles, in the following words.

"With politics never break your sleep,
"But ring your hogs, and shear your sheep,
"And rear your lambs and calves;
"And Washington will take due care,
"That Britons never more shall dare
"Attempt to make you slaves."
The felicity of the rhyme in calves and slaves, proves that the auricular
accuracy of this laureate keeps pace with his other qualifications. It is a
very handsome compliment to the farmers of the United States to tell them that
their understandings are just equal to putting a ring into the snout of a hog.
The odes of Horace, and Martial's epigrams, were written in the sink of Roman
tyranny; yet, they contain nothing correspondent with the abject vulgarity of
this advice. The piece is, from first to last, a stupid insult on the feelings
of a free country. This Philadelphian bard seems a formidable rival to the
vilest sycophant that ever licked up the spittle of despotism.

The people of America boast loudly of their freedom, and of their superiority,
in this respect, to every other nation; yet the spirit of servility in writing
birthday verses, exceeds all bounds.

One of the gazettes of this city, after the birthday in February, 1795, had
another piece of the same shabby strain. It filled two entire columns; and,
which shows the wretchedness, or rather nonentity of literary taste, it was
printed, in at least one other newspaper.

Alluding to the friends of democratic societies, this poet calls them
sorcerers in their cells. After raving through this comparison for a few
impudent lines, worthy of Webster and his Minerva, we are told that "Already
Washington, like Atlas stands,
" Alone supporting empire with his hands;
" Alone, the prop of all this vast machine,
"The mortal hero of the immortal scene.


The genius of Columbia (this is the newfangled rhyming name for America),
then bounces into the following exclamation: "Chaos will come, when Washington
expires,
"Hide Freedom's sun, and quench her starry fires.
"A gift so fatal, why should I retain?
"Realms so accursed, why should my power sustain?
"No, let these regions to the deep be hurled.
"Take back, unfathomed ocean, take your world."


A charming proposal undoubtedly! that nature shall dissolve on the death of an
American p^^^^dent. There is reason to think that neither Geo^ge the third, nor
any of his predecessors, was ever soluted with such execrable buffoonery. If
the decalogue had said, Thou shall not write nonsense, this author must have
been a dismal sinner. It is the happy privilege of an American, that he may
prattle and print, in what way he pleases, and without any one to make him
afraid.

Augustus Caesar found it for his interest to be bountiful and grateful to
Virgil and Horace. Their verses, like stepping stones across the mire, partly
saved his name from that reproach, through which it has waded down to
posterity. The reputation of our President requires not the help of poetical
crutches. To him we may apply what the king of Prussia, in his memoirs, has
said of his brother Henry: The highest encomium which we can bestow, is an
impartial narrative of his actions.

As a sketch of the current style, we shall notice one other writer of the day.
Curtius published twelve letters in defense of Jay's treaty. The points now to
be investigated, refer to what he says about the relative force of France and
Britain, and the violent manner in which he speaks of those who differ from his
political opinions.

As an evidence of the greatness of Britain, Curtius, No. vii. says, that her
East India territories yield an annual revenue of more than eight millions
sterling. Camillus, also, No. vii. lays much weight upon the ships from India
to England in 1795, having cargoes computed to be worth between four and five
millions sterling. While an alliance with that country is recommended, and such
accounts given of its wealth and power, only a few words are needful to set the
matter right. Three-fourths of this revenue go to the expense of supporting the
government of the country; part is absorbed by investments and commercial
charges, and the remainder is consumed in paying the interest of the Indian
debts of the company. By the latest advices received, on the 16th of June,
1795, from India, they were owing, in that part of the world, seven millions
three hundred thousand pounds sterling. This was stated in the House of
Commons, on the above date, by Mr. Dundas. The company owe likewise another
enormous debt in England, a part of which, under the name of bonded, amounted
then to two millions sterling. Thus, when the company have paid the charges of
government, the interest of their debts, and mercantile expenses, they are, by
several millions sterling, worse than nothing. They have been often on the
brink of bankruptcy, and would have stopped payment many years ago, if Parliament
had not lent them, in advance, large sums of money See Smith's Wealth of
Nations.
. It is hard to think that such an establishment can add to the real strength
of a nation. Camillus and Curtius need not build much on that source of
opposition to France As the world in general appear to be mistaken on this
head, the following statements, laid before Parliament by Dundas, are inserted.
They are for two different years; and show how little England has, in reality,
gained by her catalogue of Oriental crimes.

General state of revenues and charges in India.
Total of the revenues of Bengal, Madras, and Bombay, 1793-4, as above stated,
L. 8,294,399 Charges of ditto, (including 66,358 l. supplies to Bencoolen,
etc.) 6,181,504 Revenues more than charges, 2,112,895 Interest on debts paid
from this sum, 458,043 Surplus revenues, 1,654,852 Add -- import, sales, and
certificates, 475,994 Sums applicable to investments, payment of commercial
charges, etc. (exclusive of 20,000 l. gained by issuing notes, 2,130,846
Estimates for 1794-5.
Total revenues of Bengal, Madras, and Bombay, estimated 1794-5, L. 7,790,807
Total charges, ditto, (including 104,632 l. supplies to Bencoolen, etc.)
5,923,063 1,867,744 Deduct interest on debts, per No. XVI. 437,047 Estimated
surplus revenue, 1,430,697 Add No. XV. Estimated sales of imports, and amount
of certificates, 380,669 Amount estimated to be applicable to investments,
payment of commercial charges, etc. etc. 1,811,366

On the 24th of May, 1791, Charles Fox said, in the House of Commons, that the
company's debts amounted to sixteen millions eight hundred thousand pounds
sterling. These details agree in substance with the summary in the text. Much
noise was made both for and against Jay's conduct on account of the
stipulations respecting the East India trade. When it is observed how little
even the East India company can make, who are masters of India itself, a
suspicion may be excited, that this branch of commerce was not worth much
contention. American ships can sail to China, without leave of England; and
that is the most important branch of the Oriental market.


.

When Curtius speaks of Europe, he stumbles in the same way as Camillus. Great
Britain, though her army was destroyed in the Netherlands, retains all her
activity and resources To fill up these armies, the country was, in some
places, half depopulated. On the 24th of March, 1795, Mr. Sheridan informed the
House of Commons, that one magistrate had attested twenty-one thousand
recruits. About the same time it was stated in the house, that Manchester,
since the war began, had lost twelve thousand people.
. Government has not been compelled to distress her trade to man her navy. She
never manned twenty sail of the line, at one time, without distressing trade. A
general press is the sure consequence of such an equipment. The scarcity of
seamen has been very great. Again. Her debt has indeed been augmented; but
still immense sums of money (of paper he should have said) are offered, and the
only question with government is, whose money shall be received on loan. That
is on account of the extravagant premiums. As for money, all the gold and
silver coin in England would not pay above one-nineteenth part of the debts
that she has contracted. If the island could be divided into three equal
shares, it would require one of them to satisfy the public creditors. Britain,
at this moment, maintains as commanding an attitude among the powers of the
earth, as at any former period. Only two pages before, Curtius had said, that
her land forces were defeated and cut to pieces, the last campaign (1794), is
undeniable; and there is no question that any combat by land would be decided
in favor of France. When England won the battles of Blenheim, Quebec, and
Minden, she was equally superior at sea. Curtius has no ground to compare the
present attitude to that of any former period.

With the same judgment this writer rejects all danger of a British revolution.
If England cannot be happy enough to make a peace, she will be excluded from
every port in Europe, as she is at present from two-thirds of them; and then
her commerce and her power must decline together. It is worth while to consider
the effects of this turn in her affairs on the situation of America. One of the
consequences must be the explosion of her paper money. The quantity in
circulation may be in England about three times, and in Scotland sixty times
greater than that of gold and silver. This is a rough guess. Every year of war
augments the quantity of paper. The first effects of a national bankruptcy
would be an utter destruction of credit. Currency would again be restricted to
the precious metals; and they would increase to three, four, or five times the
value that they now bear. The silver sixpence, which, in London, would not,
last winter, buy a pound of beef, will then purchase three, four, or five
pounds, as was the case fifty or an hundred years ago. Hence it follows, that
the manufactures of Britain will fall surprisingly in their prices, because the
same quantity of labor that formerly was worth half a guinea, will then
probably be offered for three or four shillings, or less. Another cause must
cheapen British exports. The country being rid of public debt, will, of course,
cast off a great proportion of her taxes; for, at this time, including the
expense of the collection of revenue to pay its interest, the debt requires
about sixteen millions sterling per annum. Even now the manufactures of the
United States cannot, in many cases, bear a competition in point of cheapness
with those of Britain. But a sudden fall of one-half of the former rate, or
perhaps a still greater reduction must put an end to them, unless their cost
can also be lessened. The price of so many commodities having sunk so fast,
they will, of course, drag all other kinds of property after them, till matters
shall be restored to their common level, because the situation would be too
forced and unnatural for any length of endurance. The price of flour, for
example, could not long continue at eight or ten dollars, in America, while
England raised it for two or three. The value of lands, houses, and personal
labor sinking with such rapidity would produce numerous failures, and the
quantity of money afloat being more than was wanted, the precious metals, as on
similar occasions, would drive paper out of the market. This must, in some
degree, give a check to banking: Another class of people would suffer
essentially, and that is the holders of public stock. From its nature the fall
would be more severely felt in this than most other property. Land, when
equally ploughed, will yield as large a crop as now, whatever might be the want
of money. The scarcity of houses in the sea port towns, would prevent them from
standing empty. Good tradesmen are always needful and must be paid a
subsistence. But stock being entirely unproductive of itself, unless as to the
interest paid by the public, its decline in price would operate as a real loss,
since it is only worth what it can bring in the market.

Thus the ruin of the British system of funds, and paper money, would run the
hazard of shaking the same systems in the United States. This appears to be the
reason why persons connected with them have such a violent prepossession for
British success, and so strong an aversion to the ascendancy of France. The
destruction of public credit in that country, soon after the revolution began,
and the mixture of despotism and anarchy which have since prevailed, inspired
every holder of stocks with horror. A considerable number of these public
creditors were from the eastern states, and but few from the southern. The
whole influence of the fiscal corpse, was directed against the French
revolution. As a requisite counterpoise, the party wished to cast America into
the arms of Britain. The bankers and stock-holders were joined by two other
classes. The one of these consisted of British tories, who had been permitted
to continue here in the war, or who had returned since the end of it. Another
order of men, in whom the motives of the former were often blended, had
frequent occasion for the discounting of bills, to support their credit. Within
a few years, since banks became numerous, there has arisen an extreme spirit of
mercantile speculation, which could only expand its flight on the wings of
paper-money. All these sorts of people, with a few exceptions, and all on whom
they had influence, joined in reprobating the French revolution. Alexander
Hamilton has always been considered as the leader of this party. His official
powers gave him a very considerable sway in the management of the public funds,
and the bank of the United States. Under him, the party have acted, or are
thought to have acted with system and spirit. But while they were thus loudly
declaiming, and often with justice, against the shocking barbarities
perpetrated in France, many of them have forfeited their pretensions to purity,
by promoting, to the utmost of their skill, a civil war among the United States
themselves, and likewise a quarrel with the republic. Their designs have been
gradually developed by the course of events; and it has at length been fairly
confessed, both by their words and actions, that they are willing to go to war
with France. They dread her example as contagious for the destruction of their
financial fabric, which they constantly mention not by its proper name, but as
the constitution.

Having premised these particulars, we shall now quote some of the expressions
that Curtius adopts in his twelfth letter. There is a confederation of
characters, from New Hampshire to Georgia, arrayed in opposition, either to the
constitution of the United States, to its administration, or to particular men
in office. The opposition of the principal men in this confederacy can be
traced to some known causes, originally of a personal nature. Disappointment in
application for some office, or the failure of some favorite scheme in their
political system, has converted many of the friends of the late revolution into
determined opposers of the general system of the present administration.

This charge is daily repeated in an infinity of different shapes. No facts are
specified by Curtius, except an indistinct reference to Genet. The conduct of
this ambassador is entirely unexampled in the history of civilized nations
Carey's edition of Guthrie's Geography, vol. ii. p. 294.
. He was received with tumultuous hospitality, and childish exultation. But
when it was discovered that he wanted to plunge the nation into a war with
Britain, this envoy instantly sunk into neglect. Curtius says, that his views
were counteracted by the President, seconded by the northern states. One would
imagine that the militia of New England had been ordered to march, that the
legislatures had taken some important step, or at least that their members in
Congress had introduced some motion to the house, which led the way for
recalling the French minister. Not one of these circumstances ever happened.
The impertinence and indiscretion of Genet were, in a few months, visible to
all men of sense. His importance shrunk immediately to nothing. As to
seconding, it was manifested in no way by New England, unless scurrilous
newspaper paragraphs deserve that name. Even this commodity was as plentifully
bestowed at New York and Philadelphia, as at Boston. The reign of Genet was
very short. He arrived in this city on the 17th of May, 1793, and his recall
was solicited by the American Secretary of State in a letter dated the 16th of
August following. This letter, though different indeed from the style of
Timothy Pickering's epistle to Pinckney, was as sharp as decorum would permit.
The one haggles like a rusty knife. The other cuts like a razor. The next news
from France was, that, if Genet had returned home, Robespierre would have made
him look out at the little national window. Even the letter desiring his recall
was not so much as wrote by a native of New England, though Henry Knox, as
Secretary at War, was then a member of the American cabinet. Neither did
Alexander Hamilton, though also in office, write any part of it; for the
dispatch has none of his entangled periods. It was drawn by Thomas Jefferson of
Virginia. The story of the President being seconded by the northern states is,
therefore, an entire falsehood.

The history of Genet has been thus examined, because it is the only fact to
which Curtius refers. We now go back to his quotation, and shall begin with
what he calls a confederation of characters arrayed against the constitution,
etc.

The most eminent personage of the party accused is Thomas Jefferson, the
single man who assisted the President in driving Genet out of office. But if
the democrats, as, for the sake of distinction, we must call them, were so
violently attached to Genet, they must have held his antagonist Jefferson in
the utmost abhorence. Yet this is so far from being the case, that, at the
distance of four years, their respect and friendship are unabated. Thus, as to
Genet, the charge against the great body of the democrats involves a gross
contradiction. Whether a few individuals do still admire what he did, cannot be
worth enquiring. If he was often in the wrong, he was sometimes in the right.
The wretched attack made upon him by John Jay and Rufus King was only fit for
two old women in a chimney corner. It disgraced the national character of
America, by showing what weak men had been elected as a chief justice and a
senator.

Curtius speaks of the principal men in this confederacy, and their
disappointment in application for some office. Neither can this apply to
Jefferson. He had been ambassador to France. He was then Secretary of State.
Little more was to be had. Sometime after he resigned his office. The
resignation was voluntary. This appears from the choice of a successor to him.
Randolph was of the same party and principles; which proves that the President
only chose him because Jefferson would no longer keep the office.

As to the failure of some favorite scheme in their political system, of this
also Mr. Jefferson stands clear. His retirement was heard of with general
regret. Nay, so much does he possess the confidence of every state in the
union, that Mr. Adams was perhaps the only man on the continent who could have
had a tolerable chance against him for the presidency. It is singular that the
principal person of a confederacy against government should possess the esteem
even of its friends.

We must enquire among the representatives in Congress for the second leader of
the confederation of characters. This is James Madison, esquire of Virginia. Mr.
Vans Murray said, some years ago, in Congress, that he might be called the
father of the present constitution. It would be strange if he was already
impatient to strangle his own offspring. Of the private character of the man it
is needless to speak, for the stock-holding newspapers confine themselves to an
incomprehensible jargon about conspiracies. He certainly had no hand in
promoting the popularity of citizen Genet. He was in Virginia during the period
of the citizen's importance. It is doubtful if they were ever in the same room
together. The classical elegance, and logical acuteness of Madison bear the
same resemblance to the scampering fustian of Genet which Madeira has to
ditch-water. It is impossible that two persons so contrasted in every thing
intellectual could have agreed, for a single day, in any confederation.
Besides, Mr. Madison is in close friendship with Mr. Jefferson, who put an end
to the citizen. Disappointment in application for some office cannot be imputed
to this gentleman, unless the office can be named which he was disappointed of
obtaining. Very few places in the gift of the President would have been a
temptation. Mr. Jefferson did not, as Secretary of State, save money. By
absence from his estate, he very likely lost as much as he received for
residing in Philadelphia. If Mr. Madison had undertaken an office in this city
worth two thousand dollars a year, it would have been of no pecuniary advantage
to him, while his plantation was lying half wasted for want of his presence.
But none of the federal hacks has ever pretended that Mr. Madison met with a
repulse in solicitation. They say that he has been in the pay of France. Yet he
just now despitefully gives up his seat in Congress, thus robbing the
accusation of the last rag which covered its nakedness. He never had a cent
from the government of this country, excepting his six dollars per day. As to
favorite schemes, Mr. Madison, at least for the last four years, has been as
often in a majority as out of it.

Thus we have got over the first and second heads of the confederation. The
third in order is William B. Giles, another Virginian. Almost all which has
been said of Mr. Madison suits him. He never applied for any office. Perhaps
the executive has not one to bestow, that, in a pecuniary light, would deserve
his acceptance. He has an independent fortune. He is a lawyer of eminence. He
could make a handsome income by his profession, if he chose to stay at home,
and mind that only. He could live on his own farm in Virginia for a tenth part
of the money which he must spend in attending Congress. To such a man six
dollars a day, or any place that the executive could give him, is not an
object; and nothing but sheer ignorance can excuse a party writer for holding
such language about him.

If we look over the other members who have often voted in opposition to
executive oracles, the same observations as to personal independence apply to
perhaps every one of them. For instance, Gabriel Christie is a merchant in
Havre de Grace, a village at the mouth of the Susquehannah. If he wants to
recommence planter, he has a large farm of his own a few miles up the river, in
one of the most healthy and desirable spots in Maryland. Such a man could gain
nothing by confusion, nor could the executive offer him almost any post
possessing a lucrative temptation. An office in Philadelphia, or any where out
of his own country, with a salary of fifteen hundred dollars a year would be as
a feather. The case is similar with Messrs. Baldwin, Blount, Heath, Page,
Parker, New, Nicholas, Macon, M'Dowell, Carnes, Venable, Preston, and others.
They have either independent property, or lucrative professions, or both. They
could gain nothing by disturbing government. They never made the smallest
attempt of the kind; nor has any of the scribblers, who abused them in
wholesale, ever pretended to specify a single fact, and much less to bring
evidence of a single fact, that looked like a confederacy against government.
Such malicious nonsense may do very well for a Connecticut tavern, a Kennebeck
Journal, or a town meeting of Stockbridge, when our patriotic citizens are
toasting John Jay and the papers! It may suit Samuel Dexter in a circle at the
dancing school, or Daniel Buck in an address to some mob, who are ringing the
town bells for joy at his return to Vermont.

After the words seconded by the northern states, Curtius proceeds thus. But
the party which originally rallied under that man, (Genet) still exists, and
forms a league co-extensive with the United States, connected in all its parts,
and acting by a single impulse. Dr. Swift, speaking of Gulliver's Travels,
says, that they contained a lie at every second word. If a single word could
convey an untruth, Curtius would be an unrivalled master in that sort of
brevity. The party, such as it is, existed in all its vigor, for several years
before Genet landed on this continent, a fact known to every person who has
crossed even the threshold of American history. As for the single impulse, if
the confederates were always to behave to each other with common civility,
there might be some possibility of the charge being true. But they are
constantly differing among themselves on serious topics. For example, Colonel
Parker, on the 10th of February, 1797, made an able and earnest speech in
defense of the three frigates. He was supported, manibus pedibusque, by John
Swanwick, who, if cartloads of slander can bestow distinction, shines like a
star of the first magnitude in the democratical zodiac. They were opposed by
three of their confederates, Messrs. Christie, Nicholas, and Giles. The poor
frigates were kicked about, as if they had been so many washing tubs. Nicholas
wished them to rot on the stocks, as an instructive monument of national folly.
Christie did not care if they were reduced to ashes. Giles declared that he
always had opposed, and always should oppose them, in every stage, and every
shape. This is only one instance out of fifty or an hundred, that occur in
every session, where the gentlemen stigmatized as acting by a single impulse,
do show very plainly that they value not one farthing the opinions of each
other; but speak immediately from their own caprice or conviction. We go back
to Curtius.

Thus, in the infancy of our empire, the bane of all republics, is already
diffused over our country, and poisons the whole body politic! [It is natural
that weak or ignorant people should find their heads half cracked, while they
hear of such terrible phantoms.] Faction is a disease, which has proved fatal
to all popular governments; but in America it has assumed an aspect more
formidable than in any other country. [He assigns some foolish reasons, and
then adds:] But in America, faction has assumed consistency and system. It is a
conspiracy perpetually existing, an opposition organized and disciplined, for
the purposes of defeating the regular exercise of the constitutional powers of
our government, whenever a measure does not please the secret leaders of the
confederacy.

Curtius ought to name those secret leaders, and to give some traits of the
progress of this conspiracy. In his labyrinthian style, it is impossible ever
to take a fast hold. He is one of the most decent writers of the federal party;
and this is the universal way in which they make an assault on private
characters. In the last four years of chiming, they have hardly advanced four
intelligible assertions. Their charges glide from the grasp of straight
inquiry, like the shade of Anchises from the embrace of his son. The Tom Thumb
tale about Fauchet bribing Randolph, has been safely conducted to its grave in
the American Annual Register. As for the western insurrection, Findley, in his
history of it, has showed that Gallatin was so far from being an insurgent,
that he had a principal share in preventing mischief. It is deplorable that a
party so pregnant with charges should be so unfortunate in their few attempts
at specification. Already, says Curtius, are the heads of our government
denounced as traitors; already is our country threatened with civil war. -- If
the opposers of the treaty can possibly embroil our country in civil war, it
will be effected.

There is a considerable sameness in the dialect of the Hamiltonians. Their
constant cry is the danger of a civil war; and the usual menace a disjunction
of the eastern from the southern states. This railing comes exclusively from
the eastern and some parts of the middle states. To the south of Pennsylvania
no newspaper embattles itself against the Yankees. Of the three daily prints in
Baltimore, not one is attached closely to either party. A majority of the
inhabitants voted for Jay's bantling. In the whole country, down to Georgia,
you meet with no gazette lying and raving in the style of Curtius and the
Columbian Sentinel. The Virginians encourage no newsprinter to balance accounts
in black ball with Webster; or to proclaim the people of New England bankrupts,
swindlers, conspirators, and traitors. They are not, with the monotony of a
magpie, eternally croaking about the danger of rebellion. Their souls do not
sit so much upon thorns as those of their eastern fellow citizens. There
appears to be less vinegar in their composition. At least, by judging from the
state of the press, in these opposite quarters of the union, a bystander would
make that inference. Envy may have some share in this barking. The population
of Massachusetts and Connecticut is stationary, and their territory is but
small. From New York, inclusive, all the states to the southward, excepting
three New Jersey, Delaware, and Maryland.
, have an immense extent of new land, which holds out the certain prospect of
augmented wealth, population, and importance.

The relative proportion of exports from the middle and southern states has
augmented greatly, and must continue to do so. Boston, formerly as populous as
Philadelphia, has still but about twenty thousand inhabitants, while those of
its late rival have augmented to sixty thousand. New York, which formerly was
much its inferior, has fifty thousand. But Baltimore is the most provoking
instance of recent ascendency. This town arose, but as yesterday, from a marsh;
and rivals or eclipses the wealth and population of the metropolis of
New England. Virginia is twelve times larger than Maschusetts; and has already
double her population. So great a difference of numbers did not exist in the
census, of 1775, and it is hourly augmenting. "Like ancient ladies when refused
a kiss," These two New England states are not perhaps pleased to foresee the
decline of their consequence. Whatever may be the cause, the rancour of many of
their citizens against the southern states appears to be of the bitterest kind.
Judging from the Columbian Sentinel, a foreigner might be led to believe that
the latter have subscribed a solemn league of revolution; that troops have been
raised, and magazines formed; that half our citizens are preparing to butcher
the rest; that Madison is a second Cataline, and Giles a Caesar Borgia. A
considerable minority in New England agree with the politics of Virginia. In
May, 1794, the inhabitants of Boston held a very numerous town-meeting, at
which, by a great majority, they agreed to recommend to Congress to prolong the
embargo. An additional sixty days of famine would have put an effectual end to
British piracies in the West Indies; and would likewise have been of more
service to France than an aid of ten thousand land forces, and ten ships of the
line. A copy of the Boston resolutions, signed by the town clerk, was
transmitted not only to their representative, Dr. Ames, but a second also,
superscribed to Mr. Madison, Colonel Parker, and Mr. Giles. This told pretty
plainly that they trusted the three latter gentlemen farther, in that instance,
than their own representative. Perhaps, however, this town-meeting consisted
likewise of conspirators. Aves unius generis facile congregantur. The foolish
word jacobin is rung in endless changes; while Curtius gravely declares that
private associations are formed and extending their influence over our country.
All this is the vilest trash imaginable.

The calumny of the federal patriots is not confined to the southern states.
The whisky riots in the western counties of Pennsylvania have supplied them
with a happy fund for declamation. Of their labors in this line, accept the
following specimen.

In a Philadelphia newspaper of the 8th of March, 1796, there is inserted an
extract of a letter, dated Pittsburgh, the 25th of February preceding, which
contains unexpected intelligence. The extract extends to one third of a column,
and represents the western counties, as having relapsed into a state of
anarchy. It is generally believed, says the writer, that near half the men in
this country have crossed the river to take possession of whatever land they
could get. This town is almost empty! Some large parties are gone with an
intent to clear all before them, where the land is good. Reports from the woods
say, that a strong party coming to a house, they turn out the weaker, and a
stronger coming on turn them out, so that some houses change their owners two
or three times a day. This makes about a fourth part of the extract, which is
all exactly in the same style, though some passages soar quite above
comprehension.

No farther intelligence about this tumult reached us, till the 28th of March
brought forth a second extract of an epistle from Pittsburgh, dated the 12th of
March. It corroborates the former news, affirming that the poor people are
passing the Alleghany in legions with their families to reside, and establish
actual settlements, etc. Both letters, but the second in particular, have a
multiplicity of ranting bombastical phrases, which would be apt to make their
veracity suspected. Both of them speak much about a Mr. --, who is doing some
inexplicable wonders. Both contain a profusion of such egregious nonsense, and
malicious falsehood, that they are in themselves, an hundred and fifty degrees
beneath animadversion.

No further notice was taken in any newspaper about this insurrection. Hence it
is natural to infer that both pieces came from the same pen, and that both were
written with one rascally view, that of spreading a false alarm among the
people in the Atlantic regions of the union. If such revolutionary wonders were
going forward, beyond the mountains, it was strange that nobody should hear
about them but one correspondent. It is the business of every good citizen, to
pluck up by the roots such incendiary slander. There seems a double barbarity
in ripping open the scar of a wound that is but just skinned over.

The bad effect of such reports was very well described in Congress by Mr.
Baldwin. On the 1st of December, 1794, this gentlemen observed that in a
country so extensive as America, and where the people are so widely scattered,
it was a work of immense difficulty to have a regular and accurate account of
the measures of government communicated through every part of the union. It can
scarcely be conceived, said he, by those who have no call to visit the interior
and more retired parts of the country, how much the peace of society is
disturbed by the malicious propagation of political falsehood. The most wicked
lies are kept in circulation, for months together, and before they can be
effectually contradicted, the people have become almost frantic. For example,
Mr. Baldwin mentioned, (and editors of newspapers in every part of the union,
ought to quote this part of his observations, as a caveat in future,) that it
had been asserted that a poll tax of forty shillings per head, has been laid on
all the inhabitants, that the excise has been extended to wheat, to looms, and
to instruments of husbandry, and that the late draughts of the eighty thousand
militia, are sold to France to carry on the war! It is probable, that riots and
insurrections are fomented by these rumors more than by all other causes. If a
constant and regular publication of all that is done could reach every part of
the United States, it would be an effectual, and, perhaps the only cure for
these mischiefs. The people of this extensive country have, for these ten
years, enjoyed all the essential benefits of society, on very easy terms. A man
with five or six hundred acres of land is scarcely called upon for a dollar of
taxes in a year. Perhaps no people on earth ever enjoyed so fully the
advantages of society with so few burdens. Is it not a distressing
consideration, that when we have so few real evils, we should create to
ourselves imaginary ones, that give us so much useless uneasiness? Some wrong
measures have taken place, and hereafter will take place, and nobody can expect
that any kind of conduct will give universal satisfaction In the course of the
discussion of this day, Mr. Hillhouse having spoke for some time, Mr. Dayton
rose next. He began by remarking, that it could not be expected that he was to
make any observations on what had been said by the member just sitten down, as
he did not hear ten words which the gentleman said. This was owing to noise
made by members in the house.
.

But a very small difference is perceivable in the scale of morality from one
end to another of America. Of this remark the Yazoo business afforded a notable
instance. By an act past in January, 1795, a junto in the assembly of Georgia
sold to four companies of land-jobbers some vacant lands of that state. On the
2d of March, 1795, Mr. Harper said in Congress that the sale covered thirty
millions of acres of the finest land in the world, and most admirably situated
for commerce and emigration. It might, every foot of it, be made worth half a
dollar per acre. Its settlement would tend to open the Mississippi navigation.
These thirty millions of acres had been sold, he said, for five hundred
thousand dollars! A more villainous transaction cannot be conceived. Yet,
strange to tell! many persons in the religious town of Boston were deeply
concerned in buying from these purchasers. The newspapers said ^at the
speculators of that place had agreed to give some millions of dollars for a
part of this booty. The reader knows that the bargain has since been set
aside, but that does not lessen the infamy of those connected with it. The
following extract from the presentment of the grand jury of Chatham county in
Georgia, at the October term of 1796, gives an entertaining picture of the
parties concerned.

We further and abominably present those abominable and iniquitous grants of
pine barren land, which have been palmed upon foreigners and northern citizens,
the plats of which have been decorated generally with timber not found on them;
and most of the pretended tracts sold are not in existence, to the injury of
the character of the state, and the honest citizens thereof; nine-tenths of
whom behold the speculation with the utmost abhorrence, considering the measure
calculated to injure their reputation and to cheat the unwary, to add to the
pelf of a few men, who are void of principle and honor, and who would
sacrifice their country and its rights to increase their own property. We are
sorry to say, that among those characters, are those high in office in the
United States; and two judges thereof, to wit, James Wilson of the Supreme
Court of the United States, and Nathaniel Pendleton, of the District Court of
this state, together with James Gunn, Senator from this s^^te to Congress, have
been foremost in influencing the legislature which passed the pretended Yazoo
law, bartering the rights of this state, and the most fertile tract in the
United States, for a mere song; and which, if it were to be deemed legal, those
concerned have sold for ten times as much, which the state, by proper
management, might have put into her treasury.

We congratulate our fellow citizens, however, on the virtue of the last
legislature, which declared the said pretended sale, constitutionally null and
void, as fraudulent and corrupt, and we hope our fellow citizens at large, will
now exhibit their virtue, by sending such men only to the next legislature, as
are known to be free from speculation, and will respect our rights by
continuing and confirming the annulling law. It is only by a firmness of
conduct in the citizens at large, on this important occasion, that our rights
can be respected in Congress, and at home; that this species of gambling can be
discountenanced, and speculating sharpers be defeated, which is as much to be
desired, on account of morality and our rising generation, as the future repose
of society, and the reputation of our growing community.

We further present on this head the attempt by Alexander Moultrie and others
to drag this state into the federal court, to answer a suit in equity, under a
former pretended Yazoo sale. We abhor both speculations alike, and we recommend
to the officers of the state, who may have been served with copies of the bill
filed in the said suit, to make no answer thereto until the next meeting of the
legislature, who we hope will remonstrate to Congress on this subject. We
cannot suppose the state liable to be sued, and in this case we hope she will
preserve her dignity, by refusing an answer, particularly in a court where the
judges have been guiding the last speculations, and where she can consequently
expect no justice. We hope that the amendment to the constitution, so
unanimously entered into by Congress, against the suability of a state, will
not be leaped over to answer the vile purposes of the most infamous speculation.

The above presentment gives no sublime notion of American jurisprudence, even
at its fountain head. What follows will show the pollution of some of its
inferior streams. In a work like this, the wrongs of the poor ought not to be
overlooked; and the story is inserted at this place lest, in the subsequent
press of matter, it might chance to be forgotten. The particulars are taken
from a letter addressed to the printer of the Georgia and Augusta Chronicle,
dated Hancock county, 30th of April, 1796, and signed Henry Boil. They serve
to show what outrages may be perpetrated, in this country, under the sanction
of public justice.

Sometime in last fall, Abner Pierce was committed to jail, and as it seems in
Hancock county, on suspicion of stealing a mare, the property of Ward Darnel.
He remained in irons till the sitting of the superior court, but could not have
his trial. The only evidence against him was the oath of Darnel, while two
other persons swore that they were witnesses to his having received the mare
from Darnel, in virtue of a mutual agreement. After being confined for a
considerable time, public justice had not leisure to do its duty, by giving him
a trial.

This poor man was on the point of lying in jail till the next superior court;
consequently, says the letter, as the imprisonment would have amounted to
nearly twelve months, lying summer and winter in the dungeon, chained in irons,
without one bit of fire to thaw the frost off his frozen limbs, and only one
oath against him, two in his favor, humanity shrinks at the idea What use
could there be for keeping the man in irons? A good stone wall would have
answered well enough. But perhaps the prison was made of boards. About forty
years ago, a wooden jail in Virginia, with a prisoner for debt confined in it,
took fire. The alarm spread. The jailor, in hastily turning the key, spoiled
the lock. The prisoner, seeing all efforts for his release to be in vain,
stripped off his clothes, thrust them through the bars of the door, which was of
iron, and bade the keeper carry them, as being all which he had, to his family.
He then retired to a corner of the prison, lay down, and perished in the flames,

If a man was to be kept a twelvemonth in-irons, and then to be hanged, for
stealing one horse, what shall we make of the old Congress, and their agents,
who forcibly pilfered so many that are yet unpaid for? Nay, what is to be said
of the third and fourth Congress, who have rejected many scores or hundreds of
such claims, after admitting them to be just? At the same time, we are giving
John Adams, FOURTEEN THOUSAND DOLLARS to buy furniture for his house. The
latter motion went through the Representatives by sixty-three votes against
twenty-seven. It was impossible to withstand the pathos of Mr. Samuel
Sitgreaves, when describing the crazy bedsteads, the broken chairs, the ragged
linen, the moth-eaten curtains, the rusty saucepans, and the fractured
waterpots, that General Washington was to leave behind him in Market-street.
But, had it been a soldier with a wooden leg, who, residing at the distance of
three hundred leagues, had only just heard of the statute of limitations; or
had it been a widow, like Ami Darden, whose only horse had been dragged from
her plough, while her children were starving, Mr. Sitgreaves might as well have
addressed the north-west wind.


. What makes the affair still worse, the prisoner had a wife and two small
children. They had neither cow nor horse, nor any visible means of subsistence,
except his labor. Four persons entered themselves as securities to the amount
of twelve hundred dollars, that this Abner Pierce should attend at the next
superior court. Mr. Boil, who subscribes this letter, was one of the justices
of peace who granted his liberation. For such an office of benevolence and of
equity, he has been abused in a newspaper, and published, in his own defense,
the letter above abridged.

The following is another anecdote of oppression, and of so singular a kind,
that it ought to be recorded for the honor of the eighteenth century. A negro
man from the coast of Guinea had been sold to a farmer on the southern line of
North Carolina. In the fall of 1793, he applied to a black boy and girl, the
property of an adjacent planter, to give him some victuals. In return he
assured them that he would perform a charm to soften the severity of their
master. He gave them a callibash full of the feathers and claws of birds, mixed
with negro men's nails. This was buried under the threshold of the planter's
door. He was, at that time sick, or fell ill soon after; and having ordered the
boy to be punished for some offense, the latter said that, if he was pardoned,
he would tell what had made his master ill. The concealment was immediately
discovered, along with some of the same materials which had been stuck about
the sick man's bed. The necromancer was consequently taken up. This was on a
Saturday. He was tried on the next Monday, by a jury of three freeholders,
convicted of witchcraft, and hanged on the Tuesday. The boy and girl were whipped
and branded in the forehead with a red hot iron. One of these children was
eleven, and the other thirteen years of age. The story has made noise, and an
indistinct account of it with some remarks, appeared in the newspapers, a
considerable time after the perpetration of the murder. The narrative is here
given on the authority of a gentleman of veracity in Pennsylvania, who was on
the spot soon after. A neighboring magistrate observed to him that he had no
doubt as to the guilt of the prisoner. He was sorry for being from home at the
time of the execution, as he should have made his own negroes attend it. He
added, by way of consolation, that the owner of the slave would not be any
great loser by the affair, because the state was to grant him seventy pounds of
damages In Jamaica, several black people have been executed for witchcraft.
.

We shall close this chapter with a few miscellaneous remarks. In the profound
debates of December, 1796, about whether Americans were the freest and most
enlightened people in the world, Dr. Ames said that, by all which he could
learn, the people in Europe who could read were but as numerous as those in
America who could not read. In plainer words, he meant to state that the people
in the new world had twenty times more commonly a decent education than those
in the old one. Mr. Giles agreed with him in thinking that Americans were wiser
than the rest of mankind, but he did not believe it modest or becoming to
divulge the secret; for a secret it hitherto has been, and, since the
resolution was negatived, it is likely to remain so. The very morning after the
doctor made the above remark, Mr. Bache printed a decisive specimen of the
superiority of the American intellect. A woman in New Hampshire was accused,
and persecuted for being a witch. A man who had beaten her, was, just before
this debate, brought to trial. The wicked bench laughed at the charge of
witchcraft. In revenge, a mob of the wisest men on earth were on the point of
pulling down the court house.

Connecticut is usually held up as the mirror of true republicanism, the
centrical point, the very focus of federal virtue. Take the following instance.
In spring, 1796, during the debates on the British treaty, a newspaper of that
state, which has been already cited American Annual Register, chap. ix.
, had the following most extraordinary paragraph.

We are informed, by a gentleman from the upper part of the county of
Hampshire, that a regimental review was held, if we are not mistaken, at
Conway. As the people were informed that some communications of a political
nature, were to be made to them, upon the parade, a very general attendance was
observed, of all ages, from sixteen years to sixty. The communications were
read to them while under arms, and they were then called upon to express their
sentiments, which was done without any hesitation. The unanimous voice of the
people present was, that, before they would submit to a prostration of the
constitution, by the present majority in the House of Representatives, they
would MARCH TO PHILADELPHIA; uphold the constitution and the President; and
cause the treaty with Great Britain to be carried into effect.

It would have been curious to see this army set out from Hartford with
Trumbull, as a second Alcaeus at their head, chanting the paean of battle.
Before they had got within an hundred miles of this city, Pennsylvania might
perhaps have furnished them with materials for a Connecticut Aeneid; and truly
the cause to be celebrated, and the bard who was to sing, were two objects so
worthy of each other, that the world has not seen a more suitable conjunction.

All the intemperate expressions of democratic societies, and Aqua vitae
reformers, do not come within sight of the effrontery and insolence of this
single paragraph. A body of men assemble in arms at a review. They declare that
they will march to Philadelphia. overbear the majority of the House of
Representatives, and uphold the constitution, and the President. By the way, it
was time that a public servant of such dangerous popularity should be removed
from his office. The resignation of General Washington merits the inexpressible
gratitude of his country. But what better was the Conway review than the
meeting at Braddock's field? Indeed it was much worse; for the whisky boys did
not, like this federal gang, make an explicit avowal of rebellion.

If the description drawn by Morse of New-Englanders be faithful, nothing but
such behavior is to be looked for. They are indeed, says he, often jealous to
excess; a circumstance which is a fruitful source of imaginary grievances, and
of innumerable suspicions, and unjust complaints against government. -- A very
considerable part of the people have either too little or too much learning to
make peaceable subjects. They know enough, however, to make them think that
they know a great deal, when in fact they know but little. -- Hence originates
that restless, litigious complaining spirit, which forms a dark shade in the
character of New England men The American Geography, London edition of 1792, p.
146.
. This is the account given by one of their own parsons.

Morse has obligingly announced his own principles. The clergy (of
Connecticut) who are numerous, and as a body very respectable, have hitherto
preserved a kind of aristocratical balance in the very democratical government
of this state; which has happily operated as a check upon the overbearing
spirit of republicanism The American Geography, London edition of 1792, p. 219.
. What a precious deliverance that must be! It is not surprising that this
state vomited up, during the revolution, such a multitude of the most
inveterate cutthroat tories.

In New England," says Morse, "learning is more generally diffused among all
ranks of people than in any other part of the globe Ibid. p. 145.
. His universal geography shows how little Morse himself knows about many parts
of the globe. He farther adds that another very valuable source of information
to the people is the newspapers, of which not less than thirty thousand are
printed every week in New England Ibid.
. Philadelphia has now, besides other prints, eight daily newspapers. They work
off about forty thousand sheets of paper in a week In the first session of the
fourth Congress, the House of Representatives cost the public for newspapers,
twelve hundred dollars!
; so that the people of this city must be still wiser if possible, than the
New-Englanders; who have only one daily newspaper in the whole country.

But newspapers, and especially some of those in New England, do not always
tend to illuminate; they often mislead. Thus, about the memorable month of
April, 1796, a number of the Columbian Sentinel had an article that begins thus.

MR. RUSSEL,
I send you another extract from Philadelphia, too important to be kept
private. You may therefore insert it, etc.


This important packet is by far too long, as well as too stupid, for
republication entire, but a few detached parts may serve as a specimen.

The writer sets out by alluding to the disgraced situation of Congress and our
country. A majority in the house are listed under Madison and Gallatin; or
rather Gallatin and Madison, for the latter has become so changed as to be only
a second to the former, a devoted tool to him in overturning the government. --
A majority of the house are arrayed, under such leaders, to oppose and pull
down the President. Their aim is to destroy the executive, to usurp to the
house all the power given by the constitution to them exclusively.

The House of Representatives, or a majority of them, have never been listed
under Mr. Madison or any body else; as little has Mr. Madison been listed under
Mr Gallatin, as a devoted tool to aid him in overturning the government. No
reason is assigned, and no proof is offered, that a majority in Congress had
any such design; and the result showed that a majority of the representatives
would submit to ratify the treaty. What then becomes of their pretended
enlistment?

As for pulling down of the President, the expression is highly impertinent,
and intended only to inflame the feelings of the public. Did a British House of
Commons ever scruple, or did they even forbear, to discuss the merits of a
foreign treaty? No! And yet it seems that to do so in America is to pull down
the President, and overturn the constitution. If the conduct of Congress in
making this enquiry was culpable, the constitution is de facto overturned
already. It is laid in ruins at the feet of the executive. The writer goes on
to tell us that, since 1781, Mr. Madison has been a devoted tool to the French
interest and government, the abject tool or the active hireling of the tyrant
of the day. He is charged with unwearied endeavors to plunge this country into
the present war in aid of France.

There is more ribbaldry to the same purpose, and all equally impudent and
nonsensical. What must be the state of mind among the readers of this honest
Sentinel, if they digest such a morsel? An hundred legislators never yet
assembled, without often differing in opinion from each other. The people
without doors are also much divided on almost every great topic, and we may as
well conceit them to be bribed as their representatives.

If the citizens of New England are so much wiser than their neighbors, it
must certainly appear in the choice of their representatives in Congress. The
superiority is not always conspicuous. In the debate on the snuff excise, in
spring 1794, some members from that part of the union, and especially Mr.
Sedgwick, affirmed, that a land tax was injust and impracticable, and that
Americans would never submit to it The words were taken down at the time, by
the author.
. It was impossible for any member to give a more consummate proof of ignorance
or stupidity. The constitution of Massachusetts itself, the very state that
sent Mr. Sedgwick to the house, authorizes the assembly to impose and levy
proportional and reasonable assessments, rates, and taxes, upon all the
inhabitants of, and persons resident, and estates lying within the said
commonwealth Part 2d. chap. i. sec. i. article 4.
. Such taxes are actually paid, yet Mr. Sedgwick has often declared that they
never could be raised, This conveyed a gross reflection upon the country. In
point of argument, the gentleman might as well have whistled yanky doodle to
the legislators of America. This remark has no reference to Messrs. Henderson,
Harper, and a certain venerable majority in the second session of the fourth
Congress.

While the people of Massachusetts have been so anxious about the preservation
of the federal constitution, they should revise their own. Morse says, that the
religion of Massachusetts is established, by their excellent constitution, on a
most liberal and tolerant plan. The present horrible oppression of baptists,
and other sectaries, contradicts this assertion See American Annual Register,
chap. ix.
.

When the Trojan fugitives, driven ashore on the coast of Africa, solicited aid
from the queen of Carthage, Dido, in her answer, tells them, that, acquainted
with misfortunes, she had learned to succor the miserable. A higher authority
than that of Virgil, has also declared, that, by the sadness of the countenance
the heart is made better. A shoal of metaphysicians, moral philosophers, and
divines, in volumes of five hundred or a thousand pages, have likewise told us,
that adversity softens and refines the heart.

By far the greater part of the world is full of misery; government, a few of
the republics excepted, is nothing but robbery reduced to a system. Life itself
has emphatically, and justly, been termed a vale of tears. These truths are not
only trite, but they have been stale, and even moldy, for twenty centuries.

Now, as adversity is so common every where, and so supreme an antidote for
thawing the ice of selfishness, as poets have loaded avarice with ridicule in
this world, and as divines have menaced it with perdition in the next, our
natural conclusion, from these powerful and coalescing causes, must be, that
this blessed planet is pregnant with sympathy, charity, liberality, and the
entire bead-roll of benevolent sensibilities. Amen.

These remarks have occurred on reading the account of a very melancholy affair
which took place in the latter end of February, 1796, at Hingham, in the state
of Massachusetts. The following particulars of it are abridged from a letter
written by one of the professors in the university at Cambridge, dated the 23d
of February, and printed in a late Boston newspaper.

About two months before the date of the letter, a young foreigner called on
this professor, and introduced himself by saying, that he wanted to become
acquainted with some scientific man. The subject which he brought on was
pneumatics and mechanics. He conversed with the professor fluently, in French,
Dutch, and Latin. After a conference, of which part is related, he took his
leave, and, by agreement, paid a second visit to the professor in three days.
We shall now quote verbatim a part of the account of him, as given by the
writer of the letter.

From his good figure, polite and easy manners, I concluded he was some
unfortunate emigrant from the continent of Europe, probably in the service of
the monarchy, who, destitute of money and friends, chose to apply some of the
principles he had learnt at college, to the purpose of procuring subsistence by
a novel exhibition. On this account, I never asked him his name or nation?

On what account? He was destitute of money and friends, and he wanted to
procure subsistence by the exhibition of a novel mechanical apparatus; and,
therefore, this American philosopher did not venture to ask him his name or
nation.

"'It Was pitiful! 'twas wondrous pitiful!" That the professor in a college
should be capable of mean ungentlemany conduct, we know by frequent personal
experience; but, that any man should wish to bring himself forward to the
public in so humiliating a point of view, is rather uncommon. Is it a crime to
be in want of money? Is it culpable to attempt earning subsistence by
exhibiting an apparatus of mechanism? Both these liberal and manly doctrines
are avowed by this Cambridge professor. Such treatment of a foreigner, a man of
learning, and, above all, a fellow creature in distress, is disgraceful not
only to the individual who acted so, but, from his alacrity in telling the
story, it reflects a sarcasm on the country to which he belongs. A reader in
Europe will be tempted to think very meanly of the general cast of our ideas.
Was the professor afraid that this foreigner would eclipse him in the eyes of
his pupils, by his intended show? How easy would it have been for the professor
to have found employment of some decent kind for a well educated man, who
understood four languages! It is trusted that every reader will heartily
despise such a frost-bitten pedagogue.

The chilling reception that he encountered, was undoubtedly the reason why
this ill-fated wanderer fell into despair, and shot himself. He left a letter
addressed to the professor, wherein he states, that his want of money, and the
failure of his plans for obtaining subsistence, had determined him to put an
end to his life.

The professor speaks of him thus:

The writings and drawings which he left directed to me, are so far from
evincing a deranged mind, that they intimate a cool and vigorous intellect;
being executed not merely with taste, but mathematical exactness. -- I have
never heard any thing against his character, but have seen some evidences of
his humanity, in giving freedom to his slave, after binding him to a trade by
which he could get his living. How much is it to be regretted that a man so
gifted, should have met with such beastly treatment!

The professor concludes by citing the exit of this gentleman as a proof, that
nature, without the commanding voice of religion, has left the noblest of her
works imperfect. What part of the christian religion taught this person to keep
a stranger at a distance, because he is in distress? To repel such sordid
ideas, and to extend the feelings of humanity, is the only intelligible or
rational purpose of religion.

The name of this victim to rashness was Iberkin. He was probably a German,
there is, at least, such a name in Prussia. The letter-writer is Dr. Benjamin
Waterhouse, Professor of Medicine at Cambridge. Leyden gave him education;
Rhode Island had the dishonor of his birth.

The people of New England boast much of their superior hospitality to
strangers; of which this anecdote holds up a shocking sample.

Before this sorry pedant speaks a second time of religion, let him read the
parable of the good Samaritan. In the Levite, who passed by on the other side,
he will trace the intellectual pedigree of his own mind. When such a character
presents itself to mankind, as a paragon of piety, it is both our right and
duty to wrench the vizor from the features of deformity, and to administer that
typographical drubbing, which has been so hardily courted, and so richly
deserved.

CHAPTER III.
Federal artifices to promote a French quarrel. -- Howe's landing at the head
of Elk. -- Jacobins not worse than other people. -- Burgoyne's picture of the
British East India Company. -- Recent stoppage of the bank of England. --
Robespierre eclipsed by Pit. -- Amount of the yearly rental of Britain. --
Note on the state-house of Hartford. -- Number of the public creditors of
England. -- The triumph of Camillus. -- Moral certainty of American
indemnification for British piracy. -- Mercantile apathy for the sufferings of
American seamen. -- Impressment at Jeremie. -- Pinckney. -- Jay. -- Neck or
nothing forgeries of Pit. -- Dependence of the British West Indies on the
United States. -- Fallacies of Camillus. -- What Jay should have said to
Grenville.

AMONG other artifices employed by the federal party to exasperate the people
of this country against the French republic, one is, their assertion that the
United States were indebted for the aid of France to the personal benevolence
of Louis. This is constantly held up as a reason for detesting the revolution;
and mountains of ribbaldry have, from that ground, been discharged on its
authors. Some notice has already been taken of this error British Honor and
Humanity, p. 14. American Annual Register, chap. viii.
. Mr. Burke, in the letters above quoted, goes fully through it. He says that
even when Louis came to the throne, the revolution strongly operated in all its
causes. The politicians of France had been compelled to despise their kings.
From quarrelling with the court, they began to complain of monarchy itself; as
a system of government too variable for any regular plan of national
aggrandizement. They observed, that, in that sort of regimen, too much depended
on the personal character of the prince. -- They compared with mortification
the systematic proceedings of a Roman Senate with the fluctuations of a
monarchy. -- What cure for the radical weakness of the French monarchy, but in
a republic? Out the word came; and it never went back. -- The different effects
of a great military and ambitious republic, and of a monarchy of the same
description were constantly in their mouths. After a long detail of
circumstances, Edmund goes on in these words: These sentiments were not
produced, as some think, by their American alliance. The American alliance was
produced by their republican principles and republican policy. Several pages
are spent on this subject, and every thing proves that the alliance of France
with America was the work of the republican party, not of the king. After this
explanation, no man who prefers truth to fiction will deafen the public about
their obligations to Louis, or the guilt of putting him to death. It was at
worst not more criminal than the unavenged murder so lately committed in the
jail of Philadelphia American Annual Register, chap. X.
. We print weekly whole columns of reproach against French armies; yet, when
five thousand of these troops marched down Front-street, in their way to the
capture of Cornwallis, it is still remembered with what prostration of
gratitude they were welcomed by the surrounding citizens. The French ambassador
was looked up to as a tutelar divinity. His landing from Europe was announced
by the discharge of cannon, by fireworks and illuminations. His presence was
essential at every public entertainment. He was the arbiter of politics, of
fashion, and of taste. But our turn has been served, and citizen Adet can
describe the reverse of the medal. Daniel Defoe, speaking of his country, says:
"Ingratitude, a devil of black renown,
"Possessed her very early as his own!"


Yet there is nothing quite so paltry as this conduct of ours, even in the
sable history of England. In a comparison with British armies, the French
cannot lose much. When How landed at the head of Elk, many persons in that
neighborhood had prepared the best entertainment which they could afford for
the reception of their deliverers. They brought the English soldiers to their
tables. The instant that dinner was over, the guests began to plunder. It was
affirmed, at the time, that in an extent of a few miles, they took away sixteen
hundred horses. It was a common practice, when one of the regulars met an
American, to ask him the time of day. When he pulled out his watch, it was
wrested from his fingers. The tories were so much ashamed of this treatment,
that they were never heard to complain, and at the distance of twenty years,
many of them are yet as firm in loyalty as ever.

Alexander Hamilton and Co. are in the habit of making comparisons between
France and England to the advantage of the latter. A celebrated writer of the
federal phalanx observes, that the French have ransacked the coffers of the
rich, stripped poverty of its very rags, robbed the infant of its birthright,
wrenched the crutch from tottering old age, and, joining sacrilege to burglary,
have plundered the altars of God A New Year's Gift for the Democrats, p. 1.
. All this, and much more is true; and declamations of that sort have been a
powerful means with the British interest for exasperating the people of
America. But, coming home for a comparison, the citizens of this state would
not think themselves fairly painted in a picture of the Paxton boys, butchering
innocent Indians in the prison of Lancaster. A few sentences will show that, in
general morality, the British are as bad as other people, and often much worse
than many.

Mr. Howard says, that the annual average of executions in London only, for
twenty-three years, was between twenty-nine and thirty. In all the seven
provinces, says he, there are seldom more executions than from four to six. The
United Provinces are, by common calculation, three times more populous than
London. They should, in proportion, have ninety executions per annum, instead
of which there are but five. Mr. Howard gives an hundred other facts of the
same nature. This may help in ascertaining the balance of domestic morality.

As for politics, no jacobin can less disguise his appetite for blood and
plunder than the common run of British historians. The late war against Tipoo
Saib is spoke of as follows: No period appeared more favorable to humble
Tipoo. The Nizam and the Mahrattas both declared themselves ready TO CRUSH THE
RISING POWER OF MYSORE Guthrie's Geographical Grammar, fourteenth London
edition* p. 686.
. The latter words are, as printed by the author, in capitals. He proceeds at
considerable length, in the most sordid and insolent tone of exultation. No
highwayman could speak in plainer language. To humble Tipoo! This creed
vindicates every thing that the French have done, or can do. Thus, after the
earthquake at Lisbon, Spain, might have sent an army to humble Portugal.
France, in the midst of peace, might as justly disembark an hundred thousand
men at Plymouth or Dover, to humble England. Thus, in all ages, has the most
detestable sophistry, been exerted to vindicate the commencement of unjust and
destructive wars. Guthrie says, that this war cost Tipoo forty-nine thousand
men. A famine destroyed perhaps ten times that number. Nothing but the wildest
ignorance of history could make our citizens believe that the French are worse
than their neighbors. It is of the highest importance to remove this mistake,
which has become such a favorite handle of party.

Of all writers, Burke is the fittest to be quoted on this head. I never, says
he, shall so far injure the janisarian republic of Algiers as to put it in
comparison, for every sort of crime, turpitude, and oppression, with the
jacobin republic of Paris. Yet, when speaking (...) England, this author has
afforded a still more complete idea of depravity. There has not been in this
century any foreign peace or war, in its origin, the fruit of popular desire,
except the war that was made with Spain in 1739. [This is the grand assertion
of Pain that government dragged England into such quarrels for the sake of
augmenting public debt, and pillaging the public purse. He adds.] I examined
the original documents. -- They perfectly satisfied me of the extreme injustice
of that war. [This shows the rooted corruption of the people.] Some years
after, it was my fortune to converse with many of the principal actors against
that minister (Walpole), and with those who principally excited that clamor.
None of them, no not one, did in the least defend the measure, or attempt to
justify their conduct. They condemned it as freely as they would have done in
commenting upon any proceeding in history Letter I.
. Every man must see that these authors of the war of 1739, were as execrable
as the French Directory possibly can be.

This is a sufficient reply to the endless barking of Webster and Camillus
about jacobin principles. Let us add one word more about this war of 1739.
Guthrie says, that the English took three thousand four hundred and thirty-four
prizes. They lost three thousand two hundred and thirty-eight. Thus we learn
that a navy cannot protect an extensive commerce. English trade has, in the
present struggle, suffered still more severely. A British navy of six hundred
sail cannot secure British shipping. Six frigates have an hundred times less
capability to protect the commerce of America.

In 1772, an enquiry took place before the House of Commons, as to the conduct
of the East India company. Burgoyne was chairman of the committee. He says,
that such a scene of iniquity, rapine, and injustice, such unheard of
cruelties, such open violations of every rule of morality, every tie of
religion, and every principle of good government was never before discovered;
and that, through the whole of the investigation, he could not find a single
spot whereon to lay his finger, it being all equally one mass of most unheard
of villainies, and the most notorious corruption Evidences of our transactions
in the East Indies, etc. by Mr. Parker. Printed at London in 1782.
. This passage occurs in the first of more than three hundred pages, all in the
same style. By accounts transmitted from Hastings, it was proved, that, in five
or six years, the servants of the company had destroyed, starved, or driven
away, a greater number of people, than were contained, collectively, in all the
British colonies. After such a review we need not be scared at the cruelty of
jacobins.

One incessant reproach to the French has been the breach of public credit. Our
ally is descending, with hasty leaps, to the same level. On the 27th of
February, 1797, the privy council of George the third, by an arbitrary order,
forbade the bank of England from issuing any cash in payment, until the sense
of parliament could be taken on that subject. The reason given is, an
apprehension of a want of sufficient cash to answer the exigencies of the
public service. If government had forbidden the bank to pay gold and silver as
the interest of the public debt, this would have been no worse than a simple
confession of bankruptcy. But they step in between the bank and its private
creditors, and say, You shall not pay your private debts. We must have the
money to pay our own salaries, and to support our standing armies; to defray
the charge of barracks built in defiance of law; and to clear off the bills of
a prince who has defrauded his mistresses, insulted his two wives, who are both
alive British Honor and Humanity, p. 44.
! hired newspapers to calumniate his mother, and attempted to keep his father
for life in a strait waistcoat.

Parliament have an equal right to interfere between any debtor and creditor in
the kingdom. Thus, all the requisitions of Robespierre are rivalled at a single
stroke. With equal justice they may say to every farmer, you shall pay no rent
to your landlord. Pit is in the highway to substantiate Mr. Sedgwick's
universal assessment See Appendix, No. II.
. No legislature on earth ever hazarded a more glaring act of iniquity. It is
as extensive in its operation, as detestable in its object. Every individual in
Britain will feel the effects of this stoppage. Associations of bankers and
manufacturers may, and will for a time, keep up the price of paper; but the
first loan wanted for 1798, will ring the knell to its interment.

The act of parliament that has followed this order of council, affects, in a
tender point, the mercantile interest of the United States; and, as shall be
presently explained, it strikes at one of the pillars of the British treaty.
Much pains are employed to represent it as of a temporary nature, and to
convince the public that credit will quickly come round to the former situation
The tories who say so do not believe it. The rate of exchange on England was
formerly above par, which is one hundred and sixty-six and two thirds per cent.
It has now (May 10th, 1797,) sunk to an hundred and twenty-five, and an hundred
and thirty. When a bill returns under protest from England, the indorsee is
entitled to twenty per cent. of damages. People now refuse to grant such bills,
unless with this proviso, that they shall not be liable to the usual penalty of
non-payment.
. On this account, it cannot be regarded as desultory to state, in this place,
some decisive facts, of which a few are not generally known in America.

The national bankruptcy of England is not a matter which has come suddenly to
a crisis. Its inevitable approach was distinctly foreseen and described. Mr.
William Morgan, an eminent writer on English finances, published, in the
beginning of 1796, Facts addressed to the people of Great Britain. From a long
series of arguments and calculations, the following particulars have been
abridged.

Mr. Pit estimates the yearly rents of all the landed estates in Britain, at
twenty-five millions sterling. But the land tax, at four shillings in the
pound, though comprehending houses, places, and pensions, gives only one
million nine hundred thousand pounds. Mr. Morgan believes that the yearly rents
do not exceed eighteen millions. The actual expenses wanted, in 1796, even for
a peace establishment, were twenty-two millions. Thus, even a year ago, the
public taxes were equal to the whole landed rents of Britain. It was, however,
found difficult or impossible to raise the twenty-two millions essential for
the national credit, even supposing that the war had ended in January, 1796. In
February, 1795, taxes were laid to the expected amount of sixteen hundred and
forty-five thousand pounds. In December following, others were also proposed to
the amount of eleven hundred and twenty-three thousand pounds. Yet the interest
of many millions of debt still remained to be provided for. From the first
establishment of the consolidated fund, in 1786, till the commencement of the
present war, the expenditure invariably exceeded the revenue. The deficiencies
in the six years preceding the war, amounted to nearly seven millions sterling.
The blank was supplied by loans, and extraordinary but casual receipts. In the
first three years of the war, new taxes were laid to the amount of about four
millions, and still the annual deficiencies increased. In 1795, they came
nearly to two millions. It is probable, therefore, says Mr. Morgan, that annual
loans will become necessary, in future, to provide for the ordinary expenses of
a peace establishment; and these loans, by requiring new taxes, will produce
further deficiencies; so that, by borrowing each year, not only to pay the
deficiencies of the preceding year, but also the interest on the deficiencies
in former years, the national debt will be increasing, at compound interest, in
the same manner as it is reduced; but with this alarming difference, that the
operations in the one case, are ten times more powerful than in the other. If
these are likely to be the effects of the public debt, with the expenditure
only of a peace establishment, or on the supposition that the war were
immediately closed, what must be the consequences of obstinately persisting in
a system of profusion, which, if long continued, would ruin any country,
however unimpaired its strength and resources?

Men who desire useful knowledge will not tire of this quotation. It is
certainly better entertainment than to ring invidious changes on the purity of
Connecticut The history of the new state-house at Hartford, exhibits a
delectable specimen of this commodity. The assembly possessed a claim on the
state of New York for almost fifteen hundred thousand acres of land, which are
worth three or four millions of dollars. In 1795, they sold this claim for a
few thousand pounds, to a private company. See American Annua^ Register, chap.
x. If they believed their title to be groundless, they were no better than a
gang of coiners, who sell b^d shillings at half price. If the lawsuit of this
company shall be successful, New York will hardly submit to the decision, but
on the point of the bayonet. Thus it follows, that for the dirty consideration
of a few thousand pounds, the legislature of Connecticut has put the union in
danger of a civil war. With these facts before their eyes, and with an
effrontery that transcends all description, many writers extol the superlative
federalism of Connecticut; and poor Samuel Dexter, as one of his reasons for
supporting the sugar and snuff excise, said in Congress, in 1794, that all the
members of that state voted for it.

If from the assembly themselves, we turn to their constituents, the prospect
does not improve. The sale of these fifteen hundred thousand acres, if the
state had a real right to them, was an act of outrageous robbery on their
fellow citizens; it was a second Yazoo business. When the people of Georgia
found their property invaded, they elected a new assembly, erased the swindling
law from the public records, proclaimed its infamous authors, and ordered their
attorney general to prosecute senator James Gunn, as one of the conspirators.
This was acting like men; but the citizens of Connecticut, when in a similar
situation, truckle under legislative treachery; while Pelham, and Trumbull, and
Webster, and a swarm of other scribblers from that quarter, rack their
ingenuity in reviling, as a race of inferior and degraded beings, the people of
the southern states.


, and the wickedness of Virginia. Since these remarks were published by Mr.
Morgan, a campaign has elapsed more disastrous, if possible, to England, than
any of the former. Her situation has, uniformly, sunk from bad to worse. What,
in the end of 1795, was but expectation, has, in 1797, been converted into
history. Many people in America seem to be intoxicated with the superior
information and abilities of Mr. Hamilton. The extravagant predictions and
assertions of himself, and his auxiliaries, about British pride, and power, and
opulence, have become too despicable for refutation. If Camillus really
believed what he wrote respecting them, he must have been very ignorant. If he
knew more than he chose to tell, his conduct demands a harsher name. Another
citation from Mr. Morgan will, perhaps, repay a perusal.

The competition of rapacious loan-mongers to share in the spoils of the
country, supported by the fictitious credit of paper-money, may perhaps enable
the minister to triumph in the facility with which the public debts are
accumulated, and the temporising expedient of ineffectual taxation may serve
him as a proof of our inexhaustible resources to provide for those taxes; but a
system founded upon delusion, must end in disappointment and ruin. It was the
boast of a French minister of finance, that the American war was carried on
during his administration, without imposing a new tax upon the French people;
and it was this very circumstance which produced the revolution. He borrowed
immense sums annually, and endeavored to provide for them by the ineffectual
means of economy; for, in that country, taxation had then arrived at its
limits. A system of economy, under a government which existed by corruption,
necessary failed. New loans became necessary to pay the interest of former
loans. The mass of debt continued to accumulate, till at length it overwhelmed
public credit, and buried the government in its ruins.

As the government and the bank of England cannot at present command specie,
the next question is, at what time, or from what source, have they a prospect
of getting it? The debts of the former are about three hundred and eighty
millions sterling. Pain guesses the paper of the bank of England at sixty
millions. Several other great banks had stopped before it, and the banks of
Scotland and that of Ireland, have stopped since. In an affair of uncertainty,
but of enormous magnitude, we may conjecture that eighty millions sterling, in
bank notes have been blocked up. This added to the debt will make four hundred
and sixty millions. Opposed to this world of paper, George Chalmers, an
authority to be trusted in this case, says, that the British dominions have a
circulation of twenty millions in gold and silver. Thus credit stands like an
inverted pyramid, of which paper is the base. But since that calculation, the
quantity of hard money has been reduced. Besides, every guinea, and every
sixpence, will now hide itself. Suppose that the bank has at present in its
coffers two millions sterling, and that this money is to be reserved for public
exigencies. Two months only of the approaching campaign will exhaust it. The
cash will dive into the pockets of those who furnish the supplies, and they
will hold it, with the gripe of death, till the alarm has become to an issue.
It is hard to see from whence money can be expected. The emperor will not
replace his wages. In the mean while, confidence must by degrees decline.
Tradesmen must be thrown idle, from the want of a proper medium to pay them;
and, after every expedient has been tried, an universal bankruptcy will ensue.
Unless France shall grant England a peace, the campaign of 1798 will require
another loan. Paper cannot be sent to the East and West Indies, even were its
character sound at home. The precious metals cannot be had, and public credit
will of necessity expire. We see that six years before the war, the minister
after every exertion, was annually borrowing great part of a million sterling
to pay the interest of old debts. This practice alone would, in time, have
produced insolvency; but, when there is superadded the history of the last four
years, probability rises to demonstration. In 1791, Mr. Raiment published a
statement of the number of the public creditors of England, taken from the
books. It amounted to an hundred and twenty-seven thousand three hundred and
one persons* About an hundred and twenty or thirty millions sterling have been
added to the debt, so that we may now compute the creditors as being at least
an hundred and sixty thousand. The bankruptcies of 1793 came perhaps to twenty
millions sterling. Those made by the stoppage of paper money will be at least
twenty times greater. Every man in Britain, who is worth five guineas, will be
affected more or less. The shock must convulse every nerve in the mass of
property. Thus much for British credit. We now come to apply these remarks with
respect to Jay's treaty. The Philadelphian address to the President, thanking
him for having signed it, speaks of indemnity (the subscribers meant to say
indemnification) therein stipulated for past losses. The New York chamber, in
their resolutions of the 21st of July, 1795, congratulate themselves on a fair
compensation for the spoliations upon our commerce, Curtius in his fourth
letter, trusts that just claims will be supported, and just damages paid! The
fifteenth number of Camillus is occupied on this subject. He quotes the seventh
article of the treaty, by which, referring to the piracies on American
commerce, his Britannic majesty undertakes to cause the same to be paid to such
claimant in specie, without any deduction, after the amount has been
ascertained. The plan, says Camillus, affords a moral certainty of substantial
justice. -- The indemnification which may be awarded, is to be paid fully,
immediately, and without de tour by the British government itself. Say ye
impartial and enlightened, if all this be not as it ought to have been!

In short, the hope of recovering payment for the ships and cargoes was the
greatest cause for the treaty becoming popular among American merchants. Its
advocates incessantly held out this article as an object of exultation. When
handling it Camillus rises above his wonted composure, and one apostrophe may
well enough answer another. Say ye impartial and enlightened, after the
preceding explanation of English finances, do ye expect one farthing from the
king of England? Do ye fancy that a monarch who is fifteen months in arrears to
the wench who scours his water closet On the 18th of April, 1796, Mr. Gray said
in parliament, that the civil list was FIVE QUARTERS in arrears. George the
Third has many millions sterling at command. His refusing to pay these arrears,
proves him to be one of the meanest beings that ever disgraced human nature.
, whose government is three hundred and eighty millions sterling in debt, and
who can pay its interest in nothing but paper, do ye fancy that such a person
will send over his money to indemnify American merchants.

Dr. Ames, in his renowned speech in Congress on the treaty, delivered himself
with more caution. Five millions of dollars, said he, and probably more, on the
score of spoliations committed on our commerce, depend upon the treaty. The
treaty offers the only prospect of indemnity This word means only pardon for a
crime. Thus, when Charles the Second signed the act of oblivion and indemnity,
the cavaliers called it an act of oblivion to his friends, and indemnity to his
enemies.
. Such redress is promised as the merchants place some confidence in. Will you
interpose and frustrate that hope! That hope, to borrow the style of Bunyan,
has since arrived in doubting castle, and will soon be in the grasp of giant
despair.

One feels less for the misfortunes of some of the merchants on account of
their ingratitude to their seamen. The neglect of Jay to secure an article in
favor of these people, even when it was offered by Grenville, has already been
stated to the public British honor and humanity, p. 41.
. It was disgraceful to have accepted of such a treaty at all, without an ample
compensation to every one of these men, who had been imprisoned, hand-cuffed,
starved and flogged, while acting in American service. The printed resolutions
of the chamber of commerce at New York and Boston approve the treaty in general
terms, without the smallest notice of this infamous omission. The indemnity
addressers of Philadelphia drop not one word of alarm or sympathy for the
dangers or sufferings of some thousands of mariners. On the 14th of April,
1797, also, when the merchants of Philadelphia presented an address to Congress
in favor of the treaty, that paper contains not one glimmering of compassion
or even of reference to the sufferings of their seamen. Five millions of
dollars, and the principal part of their remaining fortunes, form the exclusive
burden of the song. Never did the sordid spirit of mercantile adventure display
itself in more repulsive colors. Woe be to that country whose counsels are
governed by merchants, or by priests! When the Senate saw an article about the
West Indian trade which they did not like, they refused to accept it. But they
overlooked this hideous chasm about seamen, though in every view of justice,
honor, humanity, and even of commercial interest, it was by many degrees more
important than the other. This is precisely the way in which Congress and the
country have treated their old continental soldiers; so that no part of our
enlightened citizens has a title to condemn the rest.

It may be answered, but what could you do! The reply is ready. The immediate
restoration of every American seaman, or a serious and vigorous effort to that
end, should have been demanded and obtained, before making a single clause of
any treaty. Farther, every one of them should have received a liberal
compensation for the time during which they had been confined in British
vessels. We have not heard of such compensation being either given, or sought.
If any scruple was to be entertained on the part of Britain about making such
reparation, it contradicted common reason to believe that negotiation with such
people could end in satisfaction. Figure the case that a crimp kidnaps your son
on the streets of London, and sends him to the East Indies as a recruit. This
offender owns the fact, and without engaging to restore the young man, he asks
you to enter into an agreement for a freight of cotton or tobacco. You would
not listen to such a proposal till security was given for the redemption of
your son; or, if you did listen, the whole world would pronounce you an
unnatural barbarian. Of British impressments, the following instance is not,
perhaps, worse nor better than an hundred others. It is inserted merely as a
sample.

On the 29th of July, 1795, Cyprian Cook, master of the sloop Crisis, of
Norwich, in Connecticut, and Elijah Clarke, a passenger in the vessel, emitted
depositions at New London, of which here follows an abridgement. On the 4th of
July, preceding, the Crisis, and above twenty other American vessels were lying
at anchor in the port of Jeremie, in Hispaniola. The Hermione, an English
frigate, came into the port, anchored, and sent her boats to board the
Americans. Every man in the vessels, was taken away, excepting the captains and
mates. They were, to the number of sixty or seventy, kept on board and fasting,
during forty-eight hours. They were examined, one by one, and five only were
dismissed, because, as the English captain observed, they were unfit for
service. All these men were Americans born, excepting two Danes, who had been
naturalized here. This outrage happened seven months and an half after signing
of the treaty; and it shows how sincerely England despised our envoy and those
who sent him. Tame submission to such treatment was the very excess of national
disgrace. But, after Jay had declined to write an article in favor of our
sailors, they were sure of meeting with the worst usage. It is strange that Jay
did not burn the copy of his card, making a demand in their behalf, and of the
consenting reply of Grenville. The President had very good reason to be ashamed
of laying such a correspondence before the House of Representatives. It is
supposed that some thousands of American seamen have been treated like the
above at port Jeremie Some English newspapers of 1796, say, that the press
gangs employed in Britain, amount to nine thousand men. A great part of these
fellows are themselves sailors, and every one of them, from the nature of the
service, must be robust and able-bodied. Their situation requires better wages,
and better living, than that of a foot soldier. They can hardly cost the
country less, in one shape or other, than two shillings sterling per day. On
ship board, or in useful manufactures, they would be worth at least an equal
sum. Thus each of these kidnappers sinks daily four shillings sterling, which,
between positive and negative loss, they might expend or earn for society. Nine
thousand men, at a loss of four shillings per head, make a sinking fund of
eighteen hundred pounds sterling a day. This, multiplied by the number of days
in a year, gives six hundred and fifty-seven thousand pounds per annum, for the
charge of press gangs. It is an ordinary computation in Britain, that every
impressed man costs, upon a medium, an hundred pounds sterling, before he is
got into actual service.

Yet, in spite of this strange work, in order to man her navy, the queen of
isles labors under the greatest difficulty for hands, that she has perhaps
ever known. To press American seamen is very consistent with her Algerine code
of morality, but entirely repugnant to her common maxims of policy. The
exclusion of foreign mariner, from her ports and shipping, is the great object
of her act of navigation. Her breach of it arises from necessity more than
choice.


.

Camillus, in No. vi. points out many difficulties in the way of a complete
protection for our mariners. It is likely enough that the article, if inserted,
would have been broken; and real difficulties might have occurred in the
business. But even decorum required such a clause. Camillus has advanced some
assertions that are absolutely untrue. He says that Great Britain has
accordingly perseveringly declined any definitive arrangement on the subject;
notwithstanding earnest and reiterated efforts of our government. -- Our
minister plenipotentiary, Mr. Pinckney, it is well known, has long had this
matter in charge, and has strenuously exerted himself to have it placed upon
some acceptable footing; but his endeavors have been unsuccessful. By Thomas
Pinckney, and his efforts, we need not set much store. While France was in the
very act of driving the allies to perdition, Jay, by the most absurd, or
persidious misconduct, put his hand to the treaty, when, if he had only waited
six weeks, till the approaching conquest of Holland had been completed, he
might have had almost any terms worth asking. Pinckney was silly enough to
approve of his management in making so good a bargain. Neither of these
precious envoys would buy largely in the funds, when there was a certainty of
their tumbling. Yet they clapped up a treaty, when every moment of delay was
inestimable to America. This is the scandalous way in which our business has
been transacted. The affair had hung over ten years, and then was finished at a
moment of infinite impropriety. Such miserable botching the world has probably
never seen before.

Camillus foresaw the objection as to the very unseasonable period of signing
the treaty. In No. vii. he defends it thus. It will be useful to go back to the
periods when the negotiation began and ended. Our envoy arrived in England, and
entered upon the business of his mission, at the moment when there was a
general elation on account of the naval victory gained by Lord How, and
previous to those important successes, which have terminated in the conquest of
Holland; and the treaty was concluded by the 19th of November last, prior to
the last mentioned event, and the defection of the king of Prussia. The posture
of things at the time of the negotiation, and not at this time, is the standard
to try its merits.

It will indeed be useful to go back; for every line of this argument is
contradicted by undisputed facts. The President's message to Congress about his
having appointed Jay, was dated the 16th of April, 1794. The king of Prussia,
in the beginning of that month, had published a curious manifesto stating his
reasons for quitting his allies. Pit afterward gave him twelve hundred
thousand pounds to make him return to the combat. He took the money, but never
performed his promise. Instead of that, he went into Poland to besiege Warsaw.
He left indeed his quota as a prince of the German empire; but they also were
annihilated, along with an Austrian army, at Kaiserslautern, in a battle which
lasted inclusively night and day, from the 12th to the 15th of July, 1794; in
the end, the republicans plunged through the loaded Prussian batteries at the
point of the bayonet. Surely, Mr. Hamilton imagines that nobody reads
newspapers except himself. In November, 1794, when Jay signed this paper,
^ederic William had, for many months, been abused in the daily prints of
London, as a deserter from the cause of morality, and regular government. Thus
Camillus stands detected of an intentional and notorious falsehood.

As to the general elation about lord Howe's victory, the French were equally
satisfied, and with better reason. An American ambassador ought to have been
possessed of more penetration than the porters and chairmen whom Pit or his
run ^ired, upon that joyful occasion, to break the windows of John Wilkes and
lord Stanhope.

Again, Camillus says that Jay entered upon the business of his mission
previous to those important successes which terminated in the conquest of
Holland. This is another stupendous untruth, like that about the king of
Prussia. A few facts and dates will prove it to be so. On the 26th of April,
1794, Pichegru totally beat Clairfait at Moucron, and killed six thousand of
his troops. In the course of a few weeks, a number of other desperate battles
ensued. The allies did whatever brave men, and able officers could do; but the
French, by their numbers, their enthusiasm, and their talents, fairly drove
them out of the field. So early as the 19th of May, 1794, the emperor printed
an address to the inhabitants of Brussels, in a tone almost as dejected as the
king of Prussia's farewell manifesto. The armies continued almost constantly
fighting till the 26th of June, when the French gained the battle of Fleurus.
This completely turned the scale. The grand Austrian army immediately sent off
their baggage, and, in the course of a few days, thirty thousand people fled
from Brussels. From that day forward every man in England, excepting Jay, must
have foreseen the conquest of Holland. Though Jay had entered upon the business
of his mission before the fate of Flanders was decided, it was his duty to have
spun out the business and to have taken the utmost advantage of that invaluable
contingency. Camillus, by advancing, in Jay's defense, the above palpable
fictions, has exposed without reinforcing the weakness of the cause.

But Camillus should also have defended the Senate of Congress. They certainly
did not approve of the treaty till after the defection of the king of Prussia,
and the surrender of Amsterdam. They did not ratify till the 24th of June,
1795. In the above quotation, Camillus plainly implies, that, after the
defection and reduction, etc. better terms might have been had. The question
then comes to be why the Senate did not stand out to get them? They sent back
an article. They should have amended and sent back others. The true reason was,
first, that some of the Senators were seriously and substantially ignorant
about the real state of politics in Europe; for, after the reduction of the
seven United Provinces, a fear of England attacking America was but the eye of
childhood; that fears a painted devil. Secondly, the ratification was an object
of party. Jay had been sent over in despite of a majority in the House of
Representatives; and to have refused the ratification of a treaty planned under
the auspices of Mr. Hamilton, would have cast irrecoverable ridicule on their
whole connections. For this reason twenty senators, less pardonable, if such a
thing can be, than Jay himself, agreed to what he had done; and, as Junius
observes, though royal favor cannot remove mountains of infamy, it undoubtedly
lessens, for it divides the burden.

But, independent of French victories, Jay must have known that Pit, from his
dreadful want of money, could not hold out for any considerable time. Much has
been said as to the danger of England (forsooth!) declaring war against the
United States. To show the dreadful plight that she was in, the following
particulars are taken from a series of resolutions read in the house of commons
by Mr. Smith, on the 22d of February, 1796.

In September, 1795, Walter Boyd, junior, was requested by Pit to advance him
a million sterling. He did so, and by agreement, he was to draw bills on the
lords commissioners of the treasury, which they were to accept. Now comes the
astonishing part of the transaction. Bills for seven hundred thousand pounds
were drawn in London, bearing a false date at Hamburgh, several weeks preceding
the real time of framing them. Walter Boyd is not engaged in any house of
business at Hamburgh, so that he might as well have pretended to draw bills
from the moon. These forgeries, prosessing to be foreign bills, were written
upon unstamped paper. They were, says Mr. Smith, of such a nature and
description, as the bank of England would have refused to discount for any
commercial house whatever, and such as it would have been injurious to the
credit of any private house, to have negociated. These are civil words, but, in
plain English, any other parties of such a plot, but the minister and his
friends, would infallibly have been hanged.

It was plain that a government adopting such infamous expedients to raise
money, must have been upon its last legs. With such facts in view, it is
amazing how completely some of the ablest men in America were deceived about
it. Of all the arguments in favor of the British treaty, none was more loudly
repeated than the danger of a war with Britain. War, said Dr. Ames, might be
delayed, but could not be prevented. The causes of it would remain, would be
aggravated, would be multiplied, and soon become intolerable. More captures,
more impressments, would swell the list of our wrongs, and the current of our
rage. [If England had declared war against the United States, in consequence of
the representatives rejecting the treaty, she would have become bankrupt before
the next Christmas.] The progress of wealth and improvement is wonderful, and
some will think too rapid. Bache's debates, vol* ii. p. 332.
[Witness the enormous bankruptcies in October, 1796, and the intolerable
scarcity of money ever since. The country is thriving undoubtedly, but not the
more from the extravagant spirit of over-trading] The vast crop of our
neutrality is all seed-wheat, and is sown again to swell, almost beyond
calculation, the future harvest of prosperity. And in this progress what seems
to be fiction is found to fall short of experience. And, in this progress, the
bank of the United States, unless its discounts are extremely circumspect, will
go to the family-vault of those in London, Edinburgh, and Dublin. The reign of
paper is past in Europe, and, as a matter of course, its expiration in America
will happen sooner or latter. In case of any serious rupture with France, and
after the unparalelled ruin that is overspreading England, every man here will
directly insist on metal for his bank notes. A^ the vast crop of our
neutrality, the privateers of France and England have reaped a very great part
of it.

We shall now go back to Mr. Smith's resolutions, and cite another proof of the
utter incapacity of England, in June 1796, to have attacked America. The
profits of the contractors, says he, at the expense of the nation, have been so
exorbitantly swelled, as to have risen even before the deposit was made
thereon, to an amount greatly exceeding the deposit itself, viz. on a loan of
eighteen millions, to the enormous and incredible sum of, two millions, one
hundred and sixty thousand pounds sterling.

No man could imagine that such a system was to hold out, any more than the
gambling interest of five per cent. per month, so frequently paid of late in
the sea port towns of America. Both these ways of raising money resembled the
resource of the culprit, who said that he could escape the gallows by cutting
his throat in prison.

Another instance shall be given of the hurry in which Pit was to secure the
loan for 1796, and of the extreme impatience with which the people of England
saw the war prolonged.

When the bankers of London agreed to lend a sum of money to the minister, the
custom was to give them credit in the public funds to a certain amount. The
current price of stock, at the time of making the bargain, determined the
quantity of it to be given for the new advances of the creditors. Thus, if the
three per cents were at eighty, the same proportion of them would buy ten
thousand pounds, that would only buy seven thousand five hundred, if the stocks
were at sixty per cent. It was hence the great aim of every premier to raise
them as high as possible, before his loan, and it was usual to cast prospects
of peace, into some royal speech or message, by which they were sure of being
raised. But, on the 27th of November, 1795, Mr Pit, with a precipitancy that
wears the foulest aspect, closed a loan for eighteen millions with Mr. Boyd. A
message that he must have foreseen, came on the 8th of December, thereafter,
from George the Third to parliament, telling his earnest desire of peace. The
funds instantly got up so high that the quantity given for the loan, rose in
its value, nine hundred thousand pounds sterling. This was just so much money
lost to the public, and gained to the bankers, who probably run halves with
Pit himself. So rapid a rise in the funds, on the slender prospect of peace,
showed how very little the British were by this time disposed or indeed enabled
for a war with America. I consider all those war arguments that have been made
use of," said Mr. Christie, as nothing more than the old story of
raw-head-and-bloody-bones, much fitter to be used by an old woman to quiet a
cross child, than to convince any of the enlightened members of this house of
the propriety of this measure Bache's Debates, vol, ii. p. 351.
.

Events have since proved that the dread of war was a mere chimera, as the
public credit of England had become too feeble to support such a shock. But,
independent of that, and admitting our legislators to have been, as many of
them were, very shamefully ignorant of the state of English finance, still
America had another string to her bow that would have reduced Britain to any
reasonable terms. The West India Royal Gazette, of the 7th of October, 1794,
contains a memorial to Henry Dundas from the West-Indian planters and
merchants. They state, at much length, how impossible it is for them to subsist
unless by supplies of provisions from this country. Hence an embargo on
exportation would have reduce^ them directly to famine. There is not room here
to insert the whole memorial, though every line of it well deserves attention;
but the following passages will show how silly it was in members of Congress to
stand up and make speeches about the danger of an attack from England in the
shape of open war.

The British West India islands," says the memorial, "containing about five
hundred thousand black, and about fifty thousand white inhabitants, have been
for many years, greatly dependant for food upon a supply of flour, rice, Indian
corn, oatmeal, bread, and other articles of dry provisions, received by a
speedy channel, and in quantities proportionate to their want, from the
countries now under the sovereignty of the United States of America; by no
internal resource can they render themselves independent of such a supply,
excepting by a total change of their agricultural system, at the expense of
their commerce and revenue of the mother country; and experience dearly bought,
on such occasions, has now sufficiently evinced, that, by no other external
channel, can such a supply, adequate to their wants, and suited to the
emergency of circumstances, be obtained.

With such a document staring in his face, how could a representive pretend to
say that he was afraid of Britain declaring hostilities? Or how could two-third
of the people in this country fall into so foolish a tremor on that head? It
argues very little either for the sound information, or the good sense of our
citizens. The American alarm did not begin till eighteen months after the date
of this memorial, till the British minister had begun to forge bills, and till
the bank of England was within a year of its dissolution.

Besides the important articles of food, timber for the purp^ of building their
houses and manufactories, and staves and heading, of which to form packages for
their produce: horses and other cattle for agricultural uses (the indispensible
vehicles of those benefits which Great Britain derives from these islands)
cannot, in many cases, be obtained at all; and in no case, on reasonable and
advantageous terms, excepting by an intercourse with the United States of
America.

The whole paper goes on the same principles, that the British West Indies are
absolutely at the mercy of the United States.

The British colonies of Canada, Nova Scotia, and St. John, instead of
supplying the West India islands with timber and provisions, have, upon a fair
experience, been found, nearly at all times, to consume their own productions
of these articles; and, upon some occasions, even to need a supply from their
neighbors of the United States.

The contents of this memorial are so pleasing as well as important, that one
could wish to have it framed in glass, and hung up in every farmer's kitchen in
the country, as an invincible antidote against the return of the federal mania
of April and May, 1796. Every step of investigation discovers more clearly the
utter ignorance, negligence, or corruption of his excellency John Jay. This
envoy might have dictated his own terms about the West India trade, yet it was
in this very quarter that he consented to a stipulation which even the
capacious gulp of our Senate could not, or durst not, swallow. By the twelfth
article, we were not to keep the British islands from starving by freighting
any vessels larger than seventy tons!

Many obstacles stand in the way of the West India colonies, obtaining lumber
and provisions from Great Britain, or any other country in Europe; more
particularly the precarious circumstances of such a supply; its distance in
time of emergency, and the perishable nature of the articles of food, which
forbids a provision of large stores from a resource so remote; and even were it
practicable for the colonies to exist under a dependence of the necessaries of
life and cultivation, upon means so uncertain, yet the enormous expense of
those means, particularly in respect to lumber, must prevent their cultivating
their lands to any beneficial purpose either to themselves, in the first
instance, or finally to Great Britain.

The British colonies have found, in an intercourse with the United States, a
market for their superfluous produce beyond the European consumption, and
particularly for the article of rum; for which, at different times, the
European market would not afford the cost of package and transport.

Thus far we have about one-fourth part of the memorial. We now plainly see
that the more islands which England conquered in the West Indies, the more she
was dependant on this country, for their means of subsistence, for timber to
build houses, for staves and heading, as likewise for taking off a great part
of the West-Indian productions that would not bear the expense of being
conveyed to Europe. The planters and merchants proceed to complain heavily of
the mode of intercourse then permitted between the continent and the islands.
It is difficult to do justice to their ideas but in their own words. Here
follows part of what they say.

Since the separation of the United States from Great Britain, their
intercourse with our islands having been restricted to British vessels only,
the price of lumber and provisions at the West India markets, under the most
favorable circumstances of peace and regular supply, has arisen from fifty to
an hundred per cent.

This, by the way, shows the tyrannical spirit of the British government, and
how every other part of the empire is sacrificed to the plan of aggrandizing
the mother country. The memorial goes on in these words.

The intercourse, while confined to British vessels, has, for various reasons,
been principally carried on by a direct trade between the islands and the
United States, in vessels constructed and fitted for the purpose, which must
evidently have the advantage over vessels employed in the circuitous trade from
Great Britain; as the last could not be at once proper for the transport of
lumber from America to the islands, and for that of produce from the islands of
Great Britain; nor afford means of barter in rum and molasses, nor be navigated
on equally advantageous terms with those smaller vessels, nor equally suit
their expedition to the wants of the islands and to the state of markets.

Upon the breaking out of a war with France, these small and defenseless
vessels have either fallen a prey to the enemy, or been employed in other
trades; and this cannot be accounted a circumstance accidental, or that admits
of future remedy; since the nature of the intercourse in question forbids an
establishment of regular convoys to and from all the islands at such times as
may be suited to their wants; and the immense expense of outfit, seamen's
wages, and insurance, discourage adventure in a trade attended with such
imminent risk, and which, if a supply by such means were even possible, must
swell the expense beyond those bounds which the cultivators in those islands
can possibly support.

There is next stated the frequent and invincible necessity which the governors
of the West India islands find of opening their ports to American vessels to
prevent instant starvation; and yet provisions and other articles of immediate
necessity are sometimes sold at three hundred per cent. beyond the average
price. For this, and other reasons above stated, they solicit a more extended
intercourse with America. They represent the impossibility of providing food
from their lands, and the peculiar distress under which they labor during the
present war. Under such disadvantages a perseverance in the present system of
their intercourse with America must form an accumulation of burden, which will
entirely preclude a fair competition with their rivals in cultivation, will
stimulate and assist the progress of cultivation in the Dutch and Spanish
settlements, and immediately tend to the distress and ruin of the inhabitants
of the British West India colonies, and of the numerous classes of their fellow
subjects in Great Britain and Ireland connected with and dependant upon them.

The memorial also represents the good policy of encouraging America to
persevere in her agricultural system, and expresses fears that the depression
of her intercourse with the islands may have a tendency of driving her to
manufactures. They add, our system of exclusive possession of those benefits
has been found, in times of emergency, impracticable, and the participation
which, at such times, we have granted to America, has had neither the merit of
a concession with that country, nor the advantage of effectual relief to
ourselves.

It is needless to seek farther evidence of the British West Indies existing
wholely at our good will; and how highly England values that part of her
acquisitions appears from her solicitude to extend them.

In the debate, in parliament, about the beginning of 1796, on the bill for
abolishing the slave trade, in the House of Commons, Mr. Dundas stated the
imports from the British West Indies, in 1795, to be as follows: eight millions
eight hundred thousand pounds sterling; revenue arising on this amount, one
million six hundred and twenty-four thousand; shipping employed in that trade,
six hundred and sixty-four vessels; tonnage, one hundred and fifty-three
thousand; seamen eight thousand; exports from Great Britain, to the
West Indies, in 1794, three millions seven hundred and forty thousand pounds,
employing seven hundred vessels; tonnage, one hundred and seventy-seven
thousand; seamen, twelve thousand; produce of the islands imported to Britain
and re-exported, three millions seven hundred thousand pounds.

On the 10th of February, 1797, Mr. Parker, when defending the plan of building
American frigates, observed that, since the beginning of the war, not a single
British West India fleet had been homeward bound which these six frigates were
not strong enough to have taken. Such was the known track of the trade-winds
that they were obliged to come within seven days sailing of this coast. The
French were in the same condition, so that we might have been as formidable to
either of these powers as Algiers is.

The stopping of this enormous trade must have ruined the credit of Britain.
She would not, therefore, have been hasty in declaring war against the country,
after the dreadful campaign of 1794. On the 10th of February of that year,
Dorchester had, indeed, made an address to the Indians, wherein he stated the
possibility of a war, in the course of the year, between England and the United
States. But this was, most likely, a mere decoy for our executive. On the 26th
of May following, Grenville and Dundas denied, in Parliament, any knowledge of
this performance. They certainly lied, for they refused to produce a copy of
Dorchester's instructions; and, as Fox observed in reply, his lordship was not
a person who would hazard such a conduct without proper authority. This
disavowal by Dundas and Grenville shows that they were afraid to acknowledge
the speech; and that a rupture with the United States would have been regarded
in the old country with universal reprobation. Grenville even pretended to deny
the possibility of such a harangue having ever been delivered. What an
impostor! But this agrees very well with the forgery of Boyd's Hamburg bills
The satellites of the minister have about as much honor and honesty as
himself. The Telegraph of the 30th of March, 1795, relates, that, on a late
trial at Thetford, it came out that a member of Parliament pocke^ed three
hundred pounds sterling a year for franking letters to a banking-house.
.

Camillus, No. v. overlooks every circumstance of this kind that shows how much
Pit would have been afraid of an American war. He tries to play upon our
prudence and our fears. When speaking of the claim for negroes carried away by
the British from New York, at the end of the late war, he says no consideration
of honor forbid (forbade) the renunciation; every calculation of interest
invited to it. The evils of war for one month would outweigh the advantage, if,
at the end of it, there was a certainty of attainment. But was war the
alternative? Yes, war or disgrace. -- If nothing had resulted [from Jay's
voyage, he means,] was there any choice but reprisals? Should we not have
rendered ourselves ridiculous and contemptible in the eyes of the whole world
by forbearing them?

The necessity that Camillus describes did not exist; though we have lost less
by a shabby state of peace, than we must have done by a successful war. But
wisdom would have chosen a middle course. Jay might have addressed Grenville in
terms like these. You have wronged the United States in a variety of shapes.
Your offers of redress are evasive or insolent. We shall not declare war
against you. There is a shorter and a cheaper way. America has no treaty of
commerce with England. She cannot be accused of breaking any, by stopping the
exportation of provisions to your West India islands. We know that your fifty
thousand whites, and five hundred thousand blacks cannot find bread or pork for
their dinners, or timber to build their houses, or staves for their casks, or
even horses or cattle, but by sending for them to our continent. Besides large
quantities of their rum, we also take several productions that will not bear
the expense of a conveyance to Europe. This market they will forfeit, and
ninety days of an embargo in our ports will make them die of hunger as fast as
your victims on the glacis of Tanjore See Burke on the creditors of the nabob
of Arcot.
. We shall farther give notice to France that, for ready money, she may get
whatever supplies she can want, on exporting them in her own bottoms. If you
wantonly proclaim hostilities against us, we shall follow the maxim of the
Celtic chief, neither to seek the battle, nor slain it when it comes Fingal.
. Twenty thousand of our militia, would, in a few weeks, drive your handful of
regulars out of Canada, and you could not, at present, spare a fleet or an army
to recover it. We should thus put an end to Indian wars, by tearing up the root
from whence they spring. After driving Victor Hughes out of Guadaloupe, you
might burn some of our towns on the sea coast, as you did in the last war. But
then we shall infallibly destroy your nine millions sterling per annum of
imports from the West Indies, and the sixteen hundred thousand pounds of
revenue derived from them. This would be a mortal stroke to your finances, and
so take your choice.

In No xv. Camillus treats of the compensation afforded by the seventh article
of Jay's treaty for British piracies on American commerce. Since the apoplexy
of British paper the word compensation sounds like mockery. But Camillus would
have it believed that Pit never intended the confiscation of our vessels.
These terms, legal adjudication, were certainly not equivalent, upon any
rational construction, to condemnation. -- Yet the British West India courts of
admiralty appear to have generally acted upon the term as synonimous to
condemnation. -- The British cabinet have disavowed this construction of the
West India courts; and have, as we have seen, by a special act of interference,
opened a door, etc.

The style of Mr. Hamilton is so prolix, he has such skill at beating out his
guinea into an acre of gold leaf This can really be done.
, that it is inconvenient to quote him at full length. But he means to have it
understood, that the West India judges acted against the understanding and
wishes of P^t. The latter must have been a very great blockhead, if he could
not write a dozen intelligible lines, especially on a subject of such immense
importance. But every man, Camillus and the tories excepted, can see at once
the bottom of the story. The object was to seize American shipping for the
treble purpose of enriching the English, of humbling America, and distressing
France. Yet the orders were to be drawn in a shuffling form, that Pit, if he
should afterward find it advisable to disown them, as he did Dorchester's
instructions, might have a chink to creep through. We may be sure that judges,
and officers of the navy, acted from a perfect acquaintance with Pitt's real
intention* and, when colonel Hamilton tries to persuade us of the contrary, it
is only adding insult to robbery. When the object had been attained, it was
very easy for Pit to deny his orders. In a future chapter shall be inserted a
regular history of the whole of these instructions. A second set was published
by the cabinet of London on the 8th of January, 1794. They were very little
better than the first. A former edition, just about as bad, had been issued on
the 8th of June, 1793, under which also some bucaneering was committed. Thus
the court of London acted upon a system, and it was very wrong in Camillus to
cast the blame on the judges in the West Indies. As for the above door that has
been opened, it costs two hundred and fifty pounds sterling to get in. Divine
justice never displayed itself more splendidly than by the chastisement of
British pride. Since the storming of the Bastile, the most auspicious event in
the annals of Europe is the fall of the bank of England.

Among the inflammatory topics of the federal party, no one has had a more
powerful effect than the attempt of Genet to involve this country in
hostilities with England. The force of the objection shall be admitted; but any
other envoy, situated like Genet, would have rejoiced in securing the alliance
of America. This was the very part which Dr. Franklin acted at the court of
France; and the ultimate consequences of his mission overturned the French
monarchy. Nothing, therefore, can be more impenetrably stupid than to advance,
as Mr. Hamilton and his hacks constantly do, this design of involving us in an
English war, as a charge of peculiar atrocity against Genet and the republic.
This was the very path formerly pursued by the United States; and it would,
under similar circumstances, have been attempted by any nation or any
ambassador under heaven. This identical trap had been laid by the old Congress
and Franklin for the French cabinet, so that it was perfectly natural for
France to endeavor at obtaining a retaliation. While Genet must be condemned,
Mr. Hammond was equally culpable. His perfidious and insolent proposal to Mr.
Randolph, previous to the ratifition of Jay's treaty American Annual Register,
chap. viii.
, was more affronting to the executive feelings, if any such feelings existed,
than the most frantic menaces uttered by Genet. A compliance by General
Washington would have cast him completely into the lee-way of the British
ambassador. The possession of such a secret must have been of immense value to
the British cabinet. It would have been a rudder by which our executive must
have steered wherever Hammond chose to lead him; for it discovery was sure to
have interred even the popularity of Washington. If this disgraceful project
had come from Genet, the Gazette of the United States would have played a
weekly tune upon that fiddle to the end of this century. But, originating with
Pit, not a single word will be heard about it from the federal presses.

Mr. Washington has made an uncommon parade about the impartiality of his
conduct between France and England. As the former saved him from the chance of
ascending a gibbet, to which he had been destined by the Parliament of Britain,
he cannot derive much honor from an utter oblivion of his political
obligations. But the fact is, that he has preferred Britain to France. This
will appear from what follows.

In 1793, when Genet came here, he was directed, by his instructions, to open
negociations for a commercial treaty. They direct him to tell the American
government that the executive council are inclined to extend the latitude of
the proposed commercial treaty. Another idea was to break up the colonial and
monopolizing systems of all nations, and emancipate the new world. Camillus,
No. xxiv. calls the latter a mad scheme and a political chimera. These
expressions betray Mr. Hamilton's general cast of thinking. His feelings are so
perfectly British, and monarchical, that it seems inconceivable how he ever
came to sight, as he did, for the American revolution. Mexico and Brasil are
just as well entitled to freedom as New York and Pennsylvania. Their
emancipation would be an immense benefit both to the inhabitants of those
countries themselves, and to mankind at large. So far from being chimerical,
the event is probable The French had actually prepared a manifesto entitled,
Les Francaise Libres le leurs fr^res de la LOUISIANE. In one place they say, Le
despotisme Espagnol a surpass en atrocite, en stupidite tous les despotisms
connus. [Spanish despotism exceeds all others in atrocity and stupidity.] Ce
government qui a rendu le nom Espagnol execrable sur tout le continent de
l'Amerique. -- [This government, which has rendered the Spanish name execrable
over the whole continent of America, etc.] Such orators would soon have found
an audience.
; and it would thrill with joy the heart of every man who is not completely
petrified against the pleasure of seeing his fellow creatures happy. In the
last age, Camillus would have defended the divine right of kings. In England,
he would vindicate the Guinea trade, as in America he sighs over the memory of
the Bastile; while John Jay, and Rufus King, and Jedidiah Morse, and the whole
priesthood of Connecticut, heave responsive notes of sorrow The reverend doctor
has a pulpit at Charlestown, in Massachusetts. A mob in that place burnt the
British treaty. Their pastor, hearing what was going on, hasted into the street
to prevent them. He presently returned to his house with a black eye.
. Were these regions of the new world independent, a rapid influx of the
precious metals would pour into this country; and Mr. Hamilton's bank of the
United States might then be able, upon a month's warning, to give hard dollars
for one-fortieth part of the notes which it has in circulation. So far from
such an emancipation being chimerical, it is next to certain of taking place.
If the French do not atchieve this great event, the tide of federal population,
rolling westward, will begin it in less than a century.

Returning to President Washington and Genet, we observe that the former
refused to enter into any treaty, because the Senate were not sitting at the
time when the French envoy made the proposal. Yet, in the following spring,
while the Senate were in session, and without ever once consulting them, did
this identical George Washington take John Jay from the bench of the Supreme
Court of this country, and send him to England, where, as we all know, he made
a treaty. It was impossible for the French to avoid being affronted at such
duplicity. They could no longer put trust in a man capable of such naked
inconsistency. Here is inserted evidence of the fact.

The Senate being then in recess, and not to meet again till the fall, I
apprised Mr. Genet, that the participation, in matters of treaty, given by the
constitution to that branch of our government, would, of course, delay any
definitive answer to his friendly proposition. As he was sensible of this
circumstance, the matter has been understood to lie over, till the meeting of
the Senate. -- The President will meet them (the executive of France), as soon
as he can do it in the forms of the constitution See a letter from Mr.
Jefferson, then Secretary of State, to Mr. Morris, dated August 23, 1793, in
The President's Message, etc. Carey's edition, p. 88.
.

Gentlemen of the Senate. -- I HAVE THOUGHT PROPER TO NOMINATE JOHN JAY, as
envoy extraordinary from the United States to his Britannic majesty Journals of
Congress, April 16, 1794.
.

The President's message is of considerable length, but the few words above
quoted contain its essence. In the left hand column he says, that he cannot
enter into any negotiation for a treaty till the meeting of the Senate. No
words can be plainer or stronger than those which he employs. The opposite
column speaks an opposite language. It is ungenerous to triumph over the ruins
of declining fame. Upon this account, not a word more shall be said about the
matter. The bare circumstances supercede any attempt either to exaggerate or
demonstrate. Nothing but the necessity of explanation could have, at all,
brought the subject forward.

While this sheet was going to press, (16th May, 1797,) President Adams has
delivered a speech at the opening of the first session of the fifth Congress.
He says that the conduct of the government has been just and IMPARTIAL to
foreign nations. With respect to France, what has been above cited refutes the
assertion. The speech consists entirely of a complaint against the republic. It
forms a kind of postscript to Pickering's letter to Pinckney. Not a word
escapes the President about British piracy, which continues to expand in full
blossom. The very day before this speech was pronounced, the Philadelphia
Gazette contained a curious example of the relative amity of France and
England. The French had carried about sixteen American vessels into Jean Rabel.
The British cut out these vessels, and it was expected that they would be sent
to Jamaica for trial. There can be no doubt of their being tried somewhere; and
the chance is, that most, if not the whole* of them will be confiscated.

When Mr. Munroe, had his farewell audience of the executive directory, Barras
glanced with contempt at the British treaty, and the British interest by which
it had been brought about. Mr. Adams has mustered up this into an alarming
insult against our country, and an attempt to sow domestic dissension. He
reprobates such a style in the bitterest terms, as studiously marked with
indignities toward the government of the United States. It evinces a
disposition to separate the people of the United States from the government; to
persuade them that they have different affections, principles, and interests,
from those of their fellow-citizens, and thus to produce divisions fatal to our
peace.

This speech does not come within the period assigned to the present volume;
but it forms a branch of the plan already explained for provoking a French war.
A case exactly similar to this of Barras and Munroe happened, some years ago,
between lord Grenville and Thomas Pinckney. The former mentioned to the latter,
in the most overbearing manner, the influence of a jacobin faction in America.
Choiseul or Neckar would not have upbraided an English envoy with the riots
excited by John Wilkes or George Gordon. If the American executive of 1793, had
felt even the most glimmering spark of national dignity, the insult would have
been resented. If Pinckney himself had been penetrable by reproach, he would
have cut Grenville short. My lord, he might have said, England has many
jacobins. Scotland has perhaps a still larger proportion, and the number is
hourly augmenting. The Irish are a jacobin nation. They are as ripe for a
revolution, as a peach ever was for dropping. Confine your solicitude to them,
and leave us to get rid, as quietly as we can, of your correspondent, Alexander
Hamilton, and his funding cancer of six per cent.

Mr. Pinckney pocketed the stigma. He sent home the precious notice of a
jacobin faction in America. The executive, proud of such a corroboration to his
own doctrine, sent it to Congress; and the letter was read to the House of
Representatives without one murmur of disdain. That Pinckney should have
endured such mockery was bad. That General Washington should have transferred
the indignity to his own shoulders, without any muttering, was a great deal
worse. The abject silence of the representatives, when the paper was read,
betrayed an equal extinction of any formidable spirit.

Barras could not have wished for a better precedent in his speech to Munroe.
The etiquette of federal degradation had been established at London. It had
been approved by the President and Congress. Barras, with a thousand reasons
for resentment, while Grenville had not one, was highly excusable for giving us
a repetition of the dose.

The President affects to bristle up at the mention of American parties. He
knows that there are such, and an allusion to them was not separating the
people from the government. The British treaty was squeezed through the Senate
by a party of twenty against a party of ten; and two of the former, on account
of their personal characters, would hardly be admitted as evidences in a court
of justice Extract from the journals of the Kentucky legislature, November 21,
1795. On motion, resolved, that a committee ought to be appointed to draught a
memorial to Congress, setting forth that HUMPHREY MARSHALL, one of our Senators
from this state, has been publicly charged with being guilty of perjury, and
requesting that an investigation may be made on the subject, and that, if the
fact be sufficiently proved, he ought to be expelled from the Senate. And a
committee was appointed, etc.

Of Mr. Gunn, some notice has already been taken.


. In the House of Representatives the treaty escaped by a single vote. Every
second number of Camillus represents America as full of desperate incendiaries.
The Gazette of the United States is an egg hatched under the very wing of the
Senate. It produces a constant stream of invective against the republic, and
against every man in this country who has approved of the French revolution. On
the part of Barras the sarcasm was perfectly fair. We had no right or pretense
to complain about it.

The House of Representatives have set out with a direct breach of one of their
standing rules. This is that in ALL cases where others than members of the
house are eligible, there shall be a previous nomination.

The propriety of adopting this rule will be happily illustrated by a recent
circumstance, which occurred within the walls of that house. In the second
session of the third Congress, Mr. Sedgwick presented a petition from a person
who wanted to be appointed as their short hand writer. It was afterward known
that this man David Hogan, editor of the State-Trials of Pennsylvania.
had, sometime before, been publicly tried at Baltimore, and banished, as a
receiver of stolen goods. Had a stenographer been, at that time, chosen by
ballot, Mr. Sedgwick might have probably brought himself into the dilemma of
voting for this honest candidate. Such an instance has, to be sure, nothing to
do with the successful candidate in the election here referred to; but it shows
what may fall within the chapter of possibilities.

Mr. Giles urged the justice of naming the candidates beforehand, that
gentleman might have an opportunity of balancing, in their own minds, the merit
of each. This looked like fairness. The proposal was resisted by Dr. William
Smith of South Carolina. That state has, in the fifth Congress, sent two
members of the same name and surname. The one here meant is the writer of
PHOCION'S letters. This is the man who dispatched pilot boats, while Congress
met at New York, to Charleston. The object of this maritime embassy was to buy
up continental certificates. They were obtained at eighteen pence or half a
crown per pound. They were then funded by the doctor at twenty shillings. By a
special act of Congress, to which he gave his vote, an hundred and twenty or an
hundred and fifty thousand dollars of his precious commodity were transferred
from the public stocks into the stock of the bank of the United States. There
the Doctor draws eight per cent. of interest for the nominal amount of a sum of
which the principal originally cost him but ten per cent. In plainer words, he
advanced as it were ten dollars to serve his country, and, by various steps, he
now draws an yearly interest for them, at the moderate rate of eight dollars. A
nation cannot help flourishing, when under the auspices of such a disinterested
legislator.

The point in view, by the breach of the above standing rule, was, to remove
Mr. John Beckley from his office as Clerk of Congress, an office which he has
held ever since the operation of the new government. There was not a member in
the house, who could, even in the smallest degree, impeach his official
conduct. This made it necessary to exclude him by a silent vote. The motion was
carried by forty-one voices against forty. Mr. Beckley may now, like Sully,
find leisure to write an history of the abominations to which he has been a
witness. His talents are equal to the task, and he cannot render America a more
important service.

From what has been said about the sale of certificates, it is not inferred
that every purchaser of them, at an inferior price, acted dishonestly. No
certainty existed of their being funded by the new government, and much less of
their being funded at the full nominal value. It was a lottery whereof no one
could tell the proportion of prizes. The blame in speculating rested entirely
with those members of Congress who bought up the certificates at a cheap rate,
with the view of thereafter voting for their being funded at the full price; or
who gave such a vote with an eye to subsequent purchases. Among other defects
of the new government, one was that the House of Representatives consisted only
of sixty-five members. This number was too small, and twenty, joined together,
by the sacred bond of paper-jobbing, were next to certain of carrying any point
about which they were anxious.

On the 1st of January, 1790, this domestic debt amounted, in principal and
interest, to forty millions, two hundred and fifty-six thousand dollars
Gallati^, p. 96.
. A majority of each house voted for funding the whole mass at its nominal
value. How many millions belonged to themselves cannot be ascertained until the
arrival of that day, which is to disclose all human secrets. Thus did the
nation suffer a dozen or perhaps thirty speculators to sit as judges upon their
own job.

A member of Congress might, on this occasion, be very fitly compared to an
attorney whom you send into court to make the best composition that he can with
your just creditors. They had heard of your being partly insolvent, and offer
to transfer their claims for an eighth part of their nominal amount. It is the
business of your agent to take advantage of this juncture; instead of which he
clandestinely buys up all those debts against you, at the reduced price, for
which his funds afford him ability. To shelter himself in a crowd, he
encourages other adventurers to buy up all the remaing debts against you in the
same way. He then comes forward, in name of himself and his associates, and
compels you to give a mortgage for forty millions of dollars, when he could, in
reality, have rid you of the whole sum for five millions. You would not think
that such an attorney had discharged his trust with fidelity. You never would
employ him again. It is even possible that he might be turned out of his
profession. Within the last twenty years, Mr. Alexander M'Kenzie, an attorney
at Edinburgh, was employed to sell an estate. At the time and place publicly
appointed, no purchaser appeared, and Mr. M'Kenzie bought it up in his own
name. Several of his brethren, men above being suspected of collusion, attended
the whole transaction, and gave evidence that they had no jealousy of unfair
dealing. The price itself, though alleged to be somewhat low, was not much
under the mark. Yet the Court of Session declared that no factor could buy and
sell at the same time. They reversed the bargain, and the house of peers
confirmed their decree. But, if Mr. M'Kenzie had been directed to buy an estate
at its market price of two thousand five hundred pounds, and if he had first
procured it for himself, and thereafter forced his client to pay twenty
thousand pounds for it This proportion of one to eight is laid down by Mr.
Gallatia as the medium difference between the market price, and the full amount
at which the certificates were funded.
, his gown would have been torn from his shoulders. The first glance from the
bench would have announced the annihilation of his scheme.

Of the above forty millions of dollars, a small part was funded at only three
per cent. though with the prospect of certain advantages, needless here to be
explained, which were supposed to place it on a level in value with the
remainder of the debt. Another part, though but a small one, was funded in name
of original creditors, the men with palsies and rheumatisms caught on board of
the Old Jersey, with wooden legs and weather-beaten faces, whose very looks are
disgusting to a friend of order. These heroes promoted an American revolution,
when we were fifty times less heavily taxed than any other subjects of the
British crown. They began a rebellion when its expense, for a single week,
exceeded the value of all the taxes that England had either got or asked for
the preceding twenty years. HUNC tu Roman caveto. After such doings, they are
unfit to be trusted under any government.

For the sake of round numbers, and to be considerably under the fact, suppose
that only twenty four millions of dollars, out of the above forty, had been
funded in the name of purchasers at half a crown per pound. The interest, at
six per cent. comes to fourteen hundred and forty thousand dollars per annum.
If this sum had remained in the pockets of those who pay it, we should have
been saved from many of the burdensome taxes which are so heavy on the
inhabitants of the seaport towns; and more or less so upon every part of the
country. Again, those traders or manufacturers, who pay such taxes, must always
add more than the net addition, to indemnify themselves for the trouble which
attends it, as well as for the advance of money This circumstance has been
fully explained, and proved in The Political Progress of Britain.
. The enormous dearth of labor must partly be deduced from this cause, and it
produces, in an hundred different ways, inconvenience and backwardness to all
sorts of business. The expense of collecting or borrowing the money forms also
a serious item; and all these together, make a real loss to the public, by
these twenty-four millions of dollars, not merely of fourteen hundred and forty
thousand dollars, but of at least three millions. This equals the whole
principal sum that the buyers of the twenty-four millions advanced. Thus
nominally we pay about fifty per cent. but in reality, at the lowest, an
hundred per cent. of interest for the sum truly given before hand.

The common body of creditors must have been very glad to see six millions of
dollars. This would have doubled their principal and made a very snug
adventure. Judging by the statute of limitations, and other desperate leaps of
congressional economy, we may be perfectly sure that other creditors would not
have got one sixpenee more than they really advanced, if it had not been to
serve as a screen for the full gratification of Camillus and his myrmidons.
They have ever since been constantly haranguing the public about conspiracies.
The greatest rogue always turns king's witness, says the proverb. Nothing,
since the new constitution, has, within an hundred degrees, as much the
appearance of a conspiracy as this certificate business, unless, perhaps, the
uproar which forced Congress to ratify the British treaty.

This was the dawning scene of that government whose wisdom and virtue have
resounded through the four quarters of the globe. The annals of ancient or
modern finance record not a more deformed transaction. In the black luxuriance
of Roman rapine, a more pregnant field never exercised the ferocious contempt
of Claudian, or the majestic severity of Juvenal. If imperial Rome could boast
of her Sejanus, and Byzantium of her Rufinus, the the future historian of
federal glory, may brighten the tints of his canvas, and refresh the verdure of
his laurel, by the congenial names of Hamilton Excise has gone down in other
countries, and it SHALL go down in this. These were the words of Camillus, then
Secretary of the Treasury, to Mr. Isaac Jones, of Philadelphia, when consulted
about the snuff act.
and of Smith.

CHAPTER IV.
British piracies on American shipping in 1796. -- Case of the schooner John.
-- Of Capt. Samuel Green -- British privateers built in the United States. --
Skirmish in Port Jeremie between the Americans and Capt. Reynolds. --
Impressments by the Severn, the Hermoine, and the Reg^lus. -- Twelve Americans
whipped. -- Case of the brig Fanny. -- Of the ship Bacchus. -- The Swallow. --
The Paragon. -- The Voluptas. -- The Lydia. -- The Hannah. -- Fray at
Liverpool; and rout of a press-gang. -- The Friendship. -- The Ocean. -- Letter
from Samuel Bayard. -- The brig Polly. -- Vigilance of the American tories. --
The Hannah of Baltimore. -- The ship Diana, of New York. -- The ship Polly,
Captain Mayo.

MR. BACHE has compiled two volumes of speeches on Jay's treaty, which were
made in the House of Representatives of Congress, in spring, 1796. It would
have been a service of still more consequence to this country, if he had
reprinted a collection of the various narratives of British piracy on American
vessels in the West Indies. This monument of bucanneering might have served as
an useful curb to national vanity, and have taught us, if not quite incurable
on that side, to apprehend the meanness of our present maritime condition. The
devastation has been going on, with different degrees of violence, since the
summer of 1793. A complete account of these piracies would very far exceed our
present limits. A few examples are here selected from the mass; and beginning
with the early part of the year 1796; several miscellaneous anecdotes and
observations being occasionally interspersed.

A Salem newspaper, of March 8th, mentions the arrival of the schooner John,
captain Philip Saunders, from Jamaica. While he lay there, an English officer
and five men, from a sloop of war, came on board to impress his crew. Only one
of them happened to be on board, besides the mate and a boy. The rest were on
shore on business. The gang t^ the sailor. On being told that he was an Ameri^
^^^y replied that they knew this, but wanted (...) and would have them,
whatever might be the consequence. Captain Saunders went on board of the ^l^^p
of war, to reclaim his seaman. The commander told him to go back to his own
vessel, make out his account of the wages due to the hand, and send them and
his clothes to the sloop. In case of noncompliance, he was threatened with a
slogging. Whether he obeyed this order, we are not told. The rest of the crew
were secreted on shore by the captain, for ten days, till the sloop of war
sailed, as her declared design was to impress the whole. During this time, the
schooner lay exposed to the weather, as well as the insults of the sloop of
war, without any person to take care of her, except the captain, his mate, and
the boy. The sloop's crew consisted of eighty-seven men. Of these, thirty-five
were said to be Americans, who had been impressed in the West Indies. Such, at
the distance of twenty months, was the success of Jay's appeal to the
magnanimity of George Guelph, and of his kissing the hand of the meat, drink,
snuff, and diamond-loving dame. Captain Saunders further informed, that several
vessels belonging to the southern states, were lying at Jamaica, when he left
it, without seamen to navigate them home. The crews had been impressed.

The same post brought an article from the Minerva, which is in admirable
unison with the preceding narrative. An entertainment had been given, a few
months before, at Amsterdam, where, the portrait of our beloved Washington, was
exhited as the chief decoration of the room. Webster then gives a long
rhapsody, pronounced by some Dutchman, on the President, As a Cato in council;
a Caesar in the field; a Hercules in the political tempest; the scourge and
admiration of proud Albion; Columbia's bulwark, etc. etc. Mynheer should rather
have said the jossing-block of proud Albion, from which she vaulted into the
saddle of sea-robbery; for now, since the mountain of compensation has been
happily brought to bed of its mouse, all parties must, in their hearts, agree,
that, from the day when Jefferson left his office The 1st of January, 1794.
, our British concerns could not have been more wretchedly managed than they
actually have been. If Hercules had permitted Cacus to keep his stolen oxen,
the insertion of his name would have been more intelligible. As for Caesar and
Cato -- but it is needless to tread upon imbecility.

Early, as it seems, in the year 1796, captain Samuel Green made a voyage from
Norfolk, in Virginia, to Martinico. He had the command of a fast-sailing
schooner, of three bundred barrels burden, and carried a cargo for the British
at that island. On his arrival, the consignee showed him a bill of sale of the
vessel, and told him, that he was no longer master, because the schooner was
bought for the British government, and to be fitted out as a privateer. If
captain Green chose to remain on board, he was told that he might have
employment. This offer he refu^ed. Several of the sailors were impressed by the
British. Others were enticed to enter as volunteers in the different ships.
This was the treament which other American crews, in the same trade, met with
as well as his. These privateers, when thus fitted out, were to intercept our
shipping in their way to the West Indies. Thus the United States furnished
privateers and seamen for the destruction of their own commerce. This is one
proof, among many, of the indifference of some American owners to the personal
safety of their sailors. Captain Green arrived from Martinico at Baltimore,
about the 14th of March, 1796. He related the above particulars to Colonel
Lowry of that town, who gave them for publication to the author. Put the case,
that a merchant of Liverpool were to freight a vessel for Calais or Petersburg,
with the previous but concealed certainty before him, that the ship was to be
sold; the captain turned adrift without warning, and the crew to be seduced or
pressed into the Russian or the French service. The attested recital of such a
fact would make the owner completely odious to the public. But, in this
country, a series of such transactions does not excite the smallest emotion, or
even attention. About twenty-five years ago, an English sailor at Dantzie, was
entrapped by a recruiting party, belonging to the late king of Prussia. The man
got a letter conveyed to England, and though Frederic possessed, in all its
vigor, the faculty of retention, yet he found it necessary to give Jack his
freedom. The story was printed in the English newspapers, and became, for a
short time, a topic of conversation. Compare this sensibility to national
rights, with the selfish American apathy, and say which of the two countries
has the greatest appearance of being enlightened.

A newspaper of this city, of the 15th of March, 1796, contained a narrative
subscribed by Jacob Peterson, master of the sloop Polly, of Philadelphia. He
says that, on the 29th of January, 1796, he arrived at cape Nicola Mole, where
he had scarcely cast anchor, when the Siren, a British sixty-four, pressed one
of his best seamen. On the 31st, he sailed for Jeremie. While he remained in
that port, about nine o'clock in the evening, of the 9th of February, captain
Reynolds, of the Harriot, a British armed ship in government service, manned
his boat and pressed several American seamen from different ships in the
harbor. He began with the ship Carolina, of Baltimore, captain Lusher.

Next day, Reynolds, when on shore, swore that he would that night make a sweep
among the Americans. The latter, hearing of this threat, assembled themselves
into two vessels that lay in the harbor, one of them the brig Richard and
James of Philadelphia, and the other the schooner Eliza of Baltimore. About
nine o'clock in the evening, a boat full of armed men was observed coming from
the Harriot toward the Eliza. She was hailed and enjoined to keep her
distance. Reynolds caused his men to fire. This was returned; and, after
sometime, the boat went off. She came back with a fresh supply of men, and
again found it prudent to retire. The people in the Eliza then went on board of
the Richard and James. Reynolds went on shore, obtained a reinforcemt, and came
back to a third assault. Finding the Eliza deserted he gave up the attempt. In
this contest, the British said that they had seventeen men killed or wounded.
The Americans had one killed, and one wounded.

The above account, as to what happened at port Jeremie, was almost immediately
confirmed by the arrival of captain Webb, of the brig Nymph. Captain Webb
added, that the Americans had presented a petition to the commandant at
Jeremie, admiral Murray, for the recovery of their impressed men, and
satisfaction for the behavior of Reynolds. Murray answered, that he had given
no orders for the impress, and that he would use his influence to get the men
restored; but, when captain Webb left Jeremie, there was no appearance of that
taking place. The answer of Murray was mere mockery. Reynolds durst not have
fired a pistol against the real inclination of the admiral. A British officer,
in the river Thames, durst no more impress a seaman without orders, than he
durst set fire to the city. For the bare loss of so many men, independent of
other circumstances, he would have been called to a most severe account, even
at Jeremie, unless he had acted by express orders, or connivance.

On this affair, Webster has a curious paragraph Minerva, March 17, 1796.
. In spite of his British pension, it was necessary to save appearances, by
saying something about it. Accordingly he observes, that, heretofore, this
villainous business has been justified under the pretense, that the men were
British subjects, and indeed this has often been the fact; but these lawless
fellows now openly, and avowedly take Americans. The heretofore insinuates an
untruth; because, from the beginning, multitudes of Americans were taken
without any such pretense. As the admiral, says Webster, did not justify him
(Reynolds) it is possible the insulted Americans may obtain redress, and we
presume [and what is your reason for that presumption?], all impressments are
made without orders from the British government. [The best and only redress
will be, when the French shall burn Plymouth and Dover.] -- Their conduct is
now, if possible, aggravated, as it is a direct violation of the treaty; which,
to England, is of equal concern with the violation of a pancake. As for acting
without orders, that is the constant s^am. Dorchester was said to act without
orders, when, on the 10th of February, 1794, he made his famous or infamous
speech to the savages. Simcoe, undoubtedly, acted also without orders, when he
sent a body of British regulars and Detroit militia, to assist the Indians in
assaulting fort Recovery. The rank and file, with their faces blacked, and the
three British officers dressed in scarlet, who kept at a distance, in the rear,
and directed the motions of the Putawatimes, were certainly acting likewise
without orders. Nay farther, Henry Knox, late Secretary at War, did infallibly
act without orders, when he refused to give the newsprinters a copy of the long
and important letter from Wayne, giving evidence of these facts This is not a
hearsay. Not more than a sixth part of the letter could be obtained. The late
Mr. Andrew Brown, was in the War-Office, trying to get a full transcript for
the Philadelphia Gazette, and both he and others met with a refusal. They
received, besides a list of the killed and wounded, only some scraps which make
up a paragraph of about thirty lines. Nothing was suffered to transpire in the
public prints that could place the behavior of Simcoe in a proper light.

But, on the 21st of November, 1794, it was thought proper to read this
dispatch to Congress, with some depositions that had likewise been kept secret.
The latter showed, in the strongest light, the extreme aversion of the Indians
to fight Wayne, and the artifices of the British to make them do so. A person
who overheard the papers read obtained, a considerable time after, permission
to copy them from the repositories of Congress. So late as May, 1796, they were
successively printed in the Maryland Journal, the Aurora, and the Argus. Mr.
M'Henry, now Secretary at War, being greatly surprised at their appearance,
wrote a letter to one of these printers, entreating to know which of his clerks
in the war-office had betrayed official confidence; and assuring the printer,
that if he would give up the name of this correspondent, the mode of discovery
should be concealed. Such is the minute vigilance of the American cabinet! and
so culpable it is to let the people become acquainted with their own business!
In reply, the Secretary was assured of the entire innocence of all his clerks,
and advised to proceed with his inquiries.


.

On the 15th of March, 1796, Mr. Samuel Smith, presented to the House of
Representatives a protest taken by captain John Green, of a Baltimore brig,
trading to the West Indies. He deposed that, when he was at cape Nichola Mole,
he was on board a schooner from Virginia, where he saw two of the crew, native
Americans, impressed by the officers of the British ship Severn. One of the men
was afterward returned as unfit for duty. The commander of the Severn said,
that he was authorized, by the late treaty, to take all seamen who had not
protections from the United States. In saying this, he paid a compliment to
Jay's treaty which it does not merit. All seamen, whether with protections or
without them, are alike unnoticed by that paper. On presenting this protest, an
insignificant debate ensued in the house. The question was, whether it should
be referred to the select committee on American seamen, or to the Secretary at
War, that the President might make suitable representations to the British
government. It was remitted to the committee. Congress might as well have
deliberated, whether the protest should be cast under the table, or into the
fire.

The Philadelphia newspapers of the 18th of March, related that captain
M'Keever, of the brig Amiable Creole, sailed from Port-au-Prince, on the 25th
of February, preceding. The captain said that, while he lay there, the Hermione
frigate pressed, from time to time, a vast number of American seamen out of
different vessels. On a moderate calculation, two-thirds of his crew were
Americans.

The Regulus, another frigate, pressed all hands of all nations
indiscriminately, who could not produce protections. Those who refused to do
duty were whipped. Four days before capt. M'Keever left Port-au-Prince, twelve
American seamen were returned on shore from the Regulus, after receiving
several lashings for having utterly refused to do duty on board of her. The
rest of the impressed men, in these two frigates, had found it prudent to
comply with British orders. This was the treatment of our seamen fifteen months
after the signing of Jay's treaty, and before Congress began to debate on the
propriety of accepting it.

REMARKS from the brig Fanny's log-book, William Swinburn, master, from the
West Indies, arrived at New York, on the 21st of March, 1796.
On Thursday, January 28, 1796, at five P. M. was boarded off St. George's bay,
Grenada, by the Zebra's boat (a British sloop of war), who impressed one of the
people, John Burt, being born in the United States, and having a regular
protection. I accordingly made application to the commanding officer, in
expectation of getting him clear, but to none effect; their answer was, they
wanted men and must have them.

On Monday, February 8th, at two P. M. was boarded by the Mermaid's boat, a
British frigate, who impressed one of the men (he not being a British subject),
and overhauled us very strictly on suspicion of my having sailors stowed away.
That same night I went on board to solicit for my man. After communicating to
the captain my errand, he told me he was certain I had men stowed away, and he
would send his boat on board, and overhaul us from keel to gunnel; and, after
giving me much abusive language, said, he would flog me, and all I had on
board. Accordingly, the Mermaid's boat came on board with a great many hands,
hove the long boat out of the chocks, hoisted up twenty-two barrels of beef,
moved part of the ballast, and, as the saying is, turned every thing upside
down. They went on board, first being convinced I had no people stowed away. I
shortly after went on board the Mermaid to see if they would send the boat and
crew on board to stow the cargo in its proper place, as I had no people to do
it, and put the boat in the chocks, etc. and after distressing me all they
could, with respect to my people, I was told they had done with me, and bid me
go about my business, and get people where I could.

Shortly after I had got on board my vessel, the Charlotte, captain Williams, a
British sloop of ten guns, sent her boat on board, who overhauled us, etc. On
the 9th, at meridian, with much difficulty weighed anchor, and made sail, as I
could get no redress, and no probability of getting hands.

Shortly after was brought too by a shot from the above sloop, and after we
hove the sails to the masts, and brought too, she fired no less than half a
dozen musket shot, aimed right at us; but providentially we received no hurt
from them, though I heard the whistle of several of the ^alls.

After we had laid some time, they sent the boat on board, who rummaged and
overhauled; but seeing they could find nothing, they returned on board.

On Thursday, the 11th, at nine A. M. saw a sloop to the leeward, which shortly
knew to be the same sloop, that had boarded us two days before, in St. George's
bay.

When she came within a league of us she fired, and continued to do so, as long
as the guns would bear, she reaching one way and we the other. When she got
into our wake she tacked but did not come up with us until two P. M. when we
tacked, and she fetched us and brought us too with another shot. I received a
great deal of abusive language from the captain without giving any reasons.

He cursed and damned the Americans and said they were their greatest enemies.
He said he had fired twelve shot at us, that I should pay two dollars for the
first, and double for every one after: however, I not being willing to comply
with this unreasonable request, and seeing he had no business to have fired at
us, as he had boarded us the day before, and as he did not think fit to send
his boat on board, he suffered us to set sail.

This is a short specimen of the usage we meet with from the British cruizers
in the West Indies. All which I can attest to; and much more if required.

WILLIAM SWINBURN.


On the 28th of March, 1796, the ship Bacchus, captain George, arrived at
Philadelphia. On the 20th he was boarded by the Thetis, a British frigate. She
pressed his mate and cabin boy, on a suspicion of their being British subjects.
The boy was an indented apprentice.

As it is proper to do justice to all parties, it may here be noticed that, at
this time, captain Burnet, of the brig George, arrived in Philadelphia from
Kingston, and brought a complaint of the French privateers. He said that
several of them were cruising off Jamaica, when he left it. They were very
troublesome to American vessels, sometimes plundering them of their sea stores,
and otherwise behaving with the greatest insolence. No farther particulars are
specified; and this is the first complaint against France, or at most the
second, which has as yet occurred in collecting materials for the present
summary of piracies. At the same time, several articles of British rapine have
been omitted for want of room. So contrasted at that period, was the conduct of
these two nations to this country!

A gentleman at Kingston in Jamaica, in a letter to the printers of the
Maryland Journal, dated the 25th of February, 1796, gave the following
particulars. The Argonaut man of war of sixty-four guns, had, a few days
before, sent into Kingston, two American vessels. The one was the schooner
Swallow, captain Stubbs, from Cape Francois to Boston. Her cargo consisted of
cotton and coffee, with six thousand dollars in specie. The whole property
belonged to Mr. Trisdale of Boston. The other vessel was the schooner Paragon
of Norfolk, laden with coffee, and owned by Mr. Moses Myers of that town. In
June, 1794, coffee cost in retail, at Philadelphia, about a shilling per pound.
In June, 1795, it had got up to one shilling and four pence. By November, 1796,
if not sooner, it rose to two shillings and four pence. The piracies just now
stated, which are only part of hundreds of the same kind, explain, very fully,
the cause of this alteration. The writer of the above letter added that both
vessels were libelled, and that indeed none need expect to escape that fate,
whatever might be the final verdict about them. The very delay, disappointment,
and rise of insurance, in consequence of such alarms, impose a ruinous tax on
the owners, while, in the mean time, the sailors were frequently pressed.
Sometimes they were swept off by the yellow fever; and cargoes of a perishable
nature were often destroyed while the ship waited for a decision.

The same letter adds that the schooner Voluptas, Jonathan Hall, master, of
Baltimore, had been sent into Kingston, by the Severn of forty-four guns. She
had on board a valuable cargo of coffee and cotton, and part of an outward
bound freight of provisions, with a large sum of money. The supercargo, Mr.
Duncan, was going from Gonaives to the Platform, to purchase coffee to load the
sloop for Baltimore The pretense for sending in the Voluptas was, that she
carried provisions for an enemy's port. At this time, the captain of the Severn
had kept Mr. Duncan a prisoner for fifty-two days, and threatened to try him,
as a British subject, for high treason; although he had with him a certificate
of his being an American citizen.

Captain Hall, and Mr. Duncan had been sent prisoners from cape Nichola Mole to
Port Royal, on board of the Lark man of war. On their passage, they were put
upon two-thirds of the British seamen's allowance of salt beef and bread. One
of them, the letter does not say which, happening to sleep in the next birth to
the lieutenant, had his watch and money stolen out of his pocket. It was their
opinion that the Severn had designed to send the schooner to the bottom, for
she run so near as to carry away their bowsprit.

A few days before the writing of this letter, the ship Lydia, Robert Blount,
master, from Portsmouth in New Hampshire, had arrived at Kingston. About four
leagues to windward of Port Royal, he had been boarded by the Regulus. She took
away his mate, and four men. They were all natives of Portsmouth, married, and
had regular protections. Before taking them on board, the British captain sent
his surgeon into the Lydia, to examine the men, and see if they were in good
health. The Regulus had pressed above fifty seamen, went to Port-au-Prince, and
from thence to England; so that when the Portsmouth sailors were to see their
families, or whether they were ever to see them at all, was extremely doubtful.

The same correspondent gives an account of the conduct of a French privateer
to an American brig which, on the 14th of February, had come into Kingston.
This privateer had taken the British ship Barzillai, captain Blackburn, which
left Kingston on the 3d of February, and was taken on the 7th, in sight of Port
Royal But the misfortune is, that men will oppose imagination to fact. Though
we see Great Britain predominant on the ocean, though we observe her
pertinaciously resisting the idea of pacification with France, etc. Camillus,
No. v. A valuable predominancy, when her vessels were captured in sight of her
own ports, and almost in ^ight of her ships of war!
. The French put Blackburn, with his whole private property, on board of the
brig. In his trunk were two bags of money; the plate of the ship's cabin; and
two bills of exchange to the amount in whole of eight hundred pounds. The
Frenchman said that he disdained to take any thing from a prisoner, and wished
him a good voyage to Kingston. From the brig this jacobin took a barrel of
beef, and paid fifteen dollars for it. Thus far the letter to the printers of
the Maryland journal.

A Philadelphia print of the 26th of March, 1796, contained an extract of a
letter dated March 2d, from Bermuda. The writer mentions that the ship Hannah,
captain Hoare, from Philadelphia to France, was, on the 24th of February, taken
by the Lynx sloop of war. She stripped the Hannah of her whole crew, excepting
the mate, the cook, and the cabin boy, and sent her into Bermuda. Most of the
hands impressed had protections. The captain of the Lynx had spoke, on the day
before, with the Roebuck of Philadelphia, and said that he was prevented from
taking her by a violent gale of wind.

An article dated Salem, the 22d of March, gives what is called verbal
information by captain Blacker. Part of it is in substance as follows:

On the night of the 22d of January, 1796, the press gang at Liverpool crimped
an American seaman, having previously served several others in the same way.
Two hundred and fifty American sailors assembled, went to the house of
rendezvous of the gang, and rescued their companion. They placed the officers
of the impress in the center of the room, obliged them to uncover, and give
three cheers to the United States. On the 27th, another American was impressed.
His countrymen again assembled, rescued the man, killed one of the gang, threw
another into the dock, where he was drowned and severely beat the remainder,
who fled.

On the 2d of February, the American captains were called before the mayor and
magistrates of Liverpool. They were admonished to keep their crews in order.
They made an answer which must have occurred to any body excepting a member of
Congress vindicating appropriations for the British treaty. The account adds
that, from thence forward, the Americans were unmolested.

About the 29th of March, 1796, the ship Friendship, captain Atkins, arrived at
Norfolk. The captain said that, within the capes of Chesapeake, he was boarded
by a boat from the Thetis, captain Cochran, which pressed a man who had been
naturalized for ten years past. As the Chesapeake is within the territory of
the United States, the British might as decently have taken him from the
streets of Philadelphia. A letter from New York to a merchant in Philadelphia,
dated the 2d of April, informed that his ship, the Ocean, captain Vredenburgh,
had been taken on the 31st ult. and sent into Halifax by La Prevoyance, a
British frigate. The whole crew, at the time of writing the letter, were
detained on board of the frigate, except the master, the first mate and a boy.
The Ocean was from Havre-de-Grace, and the frigate took her, not far from the
Highlands, with a pilot on board. The Argus, of April 4th, says, that before
she was dismissed for Halifax, several passengers were most graciously
permitted to jump into the long boat, and come up to New York. When captain
Vredenburgh remonstrated, the British captain told him that this conduct was
justified by Jay's treaty. The Minerva says that the Ocean was taken three days
before she made land. But the Connecticut goddess of wisdom is distinguished
for want of veracity Webster is a native of that state.
. It is at least very uncommon to take in a pilot, at such a distance from
shore; and it is agreed that the Ocean had one. While the British were thus
plundering American shipping, Mr. Pickering received a letter from Mr. Samuel
Bayard, dated London, 29th of December, 1795. The following extract appeared,
on the 31st of March, 1796, in the Philadelphia Gazette.

In the course of this next month, the Judge of the Admiralty has authorized us
to expect an order for the restitution of the vessels and cargoes seized and
sold by sir J. Jarvis and sir Charles Gray, at Martinico, St. Lucia and
Guadaloupe.

In the Court of Appeals, also, two illegal sentences of the Vice-Admiralty
Courts, in the West Indies, have lately been annulled, and the conduct of the
judges severely censured by the Lords commissioners of appeals.

This intelligence, as if worth a perusal, was communicated by Mr. Pickering to
the Committee of Merchants in this city, appointed to superintend the business
of indemnification. Nothing but the blindness of interested hope, could have
drawn any comfort from such an account. The attainment of an object is at a
very indefinite distance, when the parties are only authorized to expect. The
annulling of two piracies, out of five or six hundred, was merely casting a tub
to the whale. As for the censure bestowed on the West-Indian judges, how much
it was in earnest, and how much it was respected, appears from their
persisting, at that very moment, to proceed in the same track. There could not
be a more palpable delusion, though indeed the thinness of the disguise almost
precludes it from that name. The British had been plundering American
merchantmen for almost three years. A treaty, which was to stop every
proceeding of the kind, had been ratified eight months before. Yet still piracy
and impressment went on at full vigor. But when we consider the uncommonly
petrified ideas of many merchants in the seaports of America, nothing but the
most snivelling timidity could be looked for. In summer, 1793, British
effrontery declared the French republic in a state of siege; and, under that
pretense, confiscated American vessels freighted for any French port with
provisions, as if France and her colonies had only been some fortified town
with an area of a square mile. At that crisis, merchants of eminence in this
city were to be found who vindicated that enormous robbery. If, in a similar
situation, any citizen of London had harbored such feelings, the certainty of
public abhorrence would at least have forced him to hold his tongue. When
captain Barney, about that time, made a voyage to the West Indies, and declared
his determination, if attacked, of giving battle to the successors of
Blackbeard, the tory party in Philadelphia were violent in his condemnation. A
report having reached the continent, that the English at Jamaica had resolved
to hang him, it was solemnly pronounced, in this city, to be perfectly right;
and that he was an incendiary who wanted to embroil the two countries. It was
to be expected that such people would abominate the American Annual Register as
the veriest catch-penny that ever was published, the mere tittle tattle of
jacobinism See Gazette of the United States.
. They are welcome to feel no excitement except that of disgust at any thing it
contains; for, if it had met with their approbation, it would have completely
disgusted its author, and that class of people whom he is chiefly desirous of
pleasing. It cannot escape observation that the above notice from Bayard
contains not one syllable about the impressment of sailors. This blank in Jay's
treaty, and Bayard's commission, may be compared to the capitulation of a
general, who, without a single stipulation about protecting the sick and
wounded men of his army, thinks of nothing but the security and free departure
of his baggage.

Captain Paulding, of the brig Polly, in a letter to his owners, at New York
from Curracoa, dated March 3d, says that he had been sent into Grenada, by the
Favorite sloop of war, after she had taken from him all his hands, with
sailing orders, letters, invoices, and bills of lading. He was detained for
some weeks. At length he had orders to depart, but could not recover his
papers. His cargo was, he says, considerably damaged by his detention. He does
not tell whether he got back any of his men, which is very unlikely, or by what
means he worked the vessel to Curracoa.

The Maryland Journal, of the 13th of April, 1797, has an extract of a letter
from an American seaman, dated Spithead, December ^6th, 1795, on board the ship
Assistance, in which she had been detained from the 20th of October preceding.
The man belonged to the Hannah of Baltimore, Captain Wescott. This vessel, with
four other Americans, had been carried into St. John's, Newfoundland. He
expressed a hope that the Hannah would be liberated. The printers added, that
the sticklers for British amity might, upon calling at their office, see the
original letter. This intimation was needful in the case where such an article
had not been copied from some other print; for in Baltimore, Philadelphia, and
perhaps in every seaport town in the union, a number of people are constantly
ready to browbeat and even ruin any printer who publishes articles unfavourable
to Britain. Thus, at the death of Dr. Franklin, a newspaper of this city
observed, that the flags of the ships in the Delaware were lowered. The printer
unthinkingly subjoined that even the British, A lady, who is very nearly
related to Dr. Franklin, had occasion, since his death, to make a voyage to
England. In several fashionable companies she met with the coldest treatment,
as being connected with the family of a rebel! If George the Third escapes the
dagger or the scaffold, his most faithful subjects in Philadelphia, and they
are not few in number, will have a notable opportunity for bowing and scraping,
on his alighting at Oeller's hotel.
did so. Next day, several of his subscribers came into his office, and, with
many reproaches threw up his paper. The author had the story from himself.
Indeed no better state of society can be expected in our seaports, where the
whole mass of British tories, who had been doing the utmost mischief in their
power to this country during the revolution, were permitted, almost
universally, without distinction, to return and mix upon a level with the
republican citizens. In private morals, they were just as good as other people.
But, in a political light, they were at best concealed, and often professed
enemies. In private life, no man would lodge under his roof an incendiary who,
for eight years, had been attempting to burn his house. At the last election
for Congress, in the county of Philadelphia, one of the most officious of the
federal managers had formerly acted as a British guide. He was, for this
offense, tried by the state, and very nearly hanged. A shoal of similar
examples might be traced.

The next article in the same Maryland Journal, shows in what subjugation the
tories hold the press. Captain Herring, from Jamacia, had informed the printers
that, when the British captured and sent into that island American vessels, the
sailors were either turned ashore to starve; or pressed into the British
service. He added that all of them received the most indignant treatment from
these tyrannical sea monsters. For inserting such harsh language, the printers
made a long and humble apology. This timidity betrays a feature of degradation
unknown in France or England. Was it ever heard of that a British mariner, on
returning home from a French jail, durst not publish his complaints in a
British newspaper; or that the editor would be forced to apologize for giving
him a corner Just below, in the same column, there follows a string of
resolutions from Cumberland county, in the state of Maryland, in favor of
Jay's treaty. They say that the esteem of his fellow-citizens is the only
reward, which he (the President) is willing to receive for his unexampled
services. It signifies nothing to chime over this impertinent fable of the
President serving his country for nothing. Yet though he has asked and received
the last cent of his two hundred thousand dollars, besides thirteen thousand
six hundred, to assist him in setting up a house, the friends of order will
never cease to prate that he would accept of no salary.
?

Captain Herring, abovementioned, furnished the printer of the Journal with the
following list of vessels left at Kingston, on the 8th of March last, which
were all prizes to the Argonaut, Schooners Voluptas, Hall, Baltimore; Active,
Compton, do.; Adelaine, Stanley, do.; Fortitude, Ross, do.; Swallow, Stubbs,
Boston; Paragon, --, Norfolk; and a number of other vessels, belonging to
several ports in the United States; in all FIFTY-FIVE.

The infatuation and stupidity of a certain set of people in this country
surpasses all description. They embrace every opportunity to revile and
exasperate the French, to whom we were at first indebted for independence, and
who, at this moment, are the shield which saves us from the implacable fury of
Britain.

On the other hand, though they cannot deny the scandalous conduct of our
blessed mother country, they do no not wish, if they can help it, to hear a
single word upon the subject. Language of this kind, can, they say, be
productive of no good; and it may irritate Britain, with whom, you know, we are
in amity.

A letter from Norfolk, dated 4th, and published in the Philadelphia Gazette on
the 11th of April, 1796, has these words.

A vessel, yesterday, returned from the Mole, which carried out some of the
horses, and lost about one half of them. Also a sloop from here, arrived there
with only four horses alive; and a brig from here lost about one half of the
cargo of horses which she carried out, the rest were all sickly.

The next paragraph shows the difference of behavior at this time, between the
French and English privateers. A French cruizer fell in with the schooner
Little John, sent her into the Havannah, and detained her five days. The French
took half a puncheon of rum, a barrel of bread, and a spyglass. The captain
gave an order for the amount upon his agent in Philadelphia.

NORFOLK, APRIL 4.
We stop the press to mention the arrival of captain Wanton Steer, of the brig
Charlotte, in twenty-four days from Port Royal, Martinique: from him we have
obtained the following:

That the ship Diana, of New York, David Chadeayne, master, on his passage from
the East Indies to New York, was boarded by his Britannic majesty's brig
Pelican, captain J. C. Searle, who sent an officer and crew on board, and took
out the mate, six people, and carried her into Port Royal, where on the 6th of
March, while in their possession, she caught fire and was burnt to the water's
edge, with all her cargo, of immense value!


The following article is here copied from a Boston newspaper, of the 7th of
April, 1796.

MORE BRITISH AMITY.
Captain Elkanah Mayo, who arrived in town this week from New York, has
favored us with the following account of the cruel treatment he and his men
received from the officers and men of the British frigate La Pique, at
Barbados, in December last, viz. Captain Mayo, in the ship Polly, of Cape Ann,
homeward bound, from a whaling voyage, was drove in by stress of weather to
Barbados, where he lay near three weeks for the arrival of some Americans to
freight his oil home; during which time, the British frigate La Pique arrived
there from a cruise, and in two days after, pressed two of his hands. Captain
Mayo applied to the governor for protection, who caused the men to be released;
three days after, captain Mayo's boat, being ashore with three men waiting for
him, the frigate's barge hauled in close to his boat, and boarded him with
^utlasses, to press the men by force. The men called on captain Mayo, from the
shore, who run to the boat for their relief, where he found the crew of the
British frigate with the tiller of their barge, beating his men over their
heads, with said tiller, till the blood gushed from their mouths and noses, and
otherwise mangling them in a barbarous and shocking manner. Captain Mayo sprung
into the boat and cleared it of the British crew. The commanding officer, who
was then on the wharf, said he would have every man aboard the ship. Mr.
Woodruff, with whom captain Mayo did business, being on the wharf, offered his
bonds to the captain of the frigate that he would bring his protections on
shore. Captain Mayo then went on board his ship to bring his protections. While
he was on board, the commanding officer of the frigate, and all the rest of the
officers, got into their barge, waiting for captain Mayo, who was returning
with all his protections; they boarded him; the commanding officer jumped into
captain Mayo's boat with his drawn cutlass, and dragged by force all his men
into their barge, and then presented his cutlass to capt. Mayo's breast, and
ordered him into the barge, which he refused; after which he pricked him
several times in the breast, and then towed him on board the frigate; he put
capt. Mayo's men into the hole among his men who were sick with the yellow
fever; he then ordered a pair of irons to be fixed on captain Mayo, which were
not, however, fixed; he kept him on the quarter deck until evening, then
ordered captain Mayo's boat to be hauled up, and ordered him on board alone.
Capt. Mayo requested him to let him have a man to go with him, which the
captain of the frigate refused; then said he would cast him off, and let him go
adrift, he told him he might perish at sea, to which he replied, he hoped he
would. Captain Mayo told him he would not go, unless he cast him off, he then
took his barge, and towed captain Mayo on board his own ship; the next morning
captain Mayo went to the governor, and complained of the officers' conduct; the
governor ordered his men to be immediately released, who were accordingly sent
on shore. Four days after, three of his men were taken with the yellow fever,
which they took while on board the frigate, and which spread through captain
Mayo's ship's company: four of his men died of the fever, the rest were obliged
to leave the ship, and he hired negroes to pump her. Captain Mayo then
chartered vessels as he could find them to take his men and cargo to the United
States. This base conduct of our new-treaty-allies occasioned the loss of eight
thousand dollars to his owners.

I, the subscriber, do testify to the above account, ELKANAH MAYO.

While the British were going on at this rate, a letter, dated January 17th,
was received in Philadelphia, from Samuel Bayard, agent for the United States,
at London, on the business of restitution. Mr. Bayard writes thus:

As soon as ministry learn the line of conduct, which the House of
Representatives mean to pursue, I am persuaded their conduct, as it regards us,
will be less fluctuating. Should the house coincide with the President and
Senate, every thing here will go well: should obstacles, on the other hand, be
thrown in the way by the popular branch of the government, I doubt whether the
western posts will be surrendered, or restitution made of our captured
property. However, I trust that every man who has any regard to the honor, the
faith, or interest of his country, will see the necessity of carrying the
treaty fully into effect, so far as regards the United States.

The scope of the letter is, that, if Congress appropriated for Mr. Jay's
treaty, compensation would be made for the piracies in the West Indies. If they
did not, the prizes would be kept. This plainly infers, that the British were
acting as consummate bucanneers. For, whether the treaty past or not, they had
no title to have taken these vessels. But the superior talents of Mr. Jay had
happily interwoven two matters totally distinct. If you sign this treaty of
commerce, you shall get compensation for the vessels. If not, we shall have
them to ourselves. Before entering upon the old story of debts due to Britain;
of the western posts, and of matters relative to the last war; before plunging
into treaties of amity, the recent seizure of the vessels should have been
fully and separately settled. If that could be done, it was time enough to get
into a treaty. If it could not be done, the way for America was to have stood
by in wait for contingencies, while an embargo on provisions would have laid
the British West Indies prostrate at her feet. Instead of this obvious policy,
matters the most distinct were all jumbled together; and the bait of
compensation made America snap at the gilded hook. In justice to Mr. Jay, it
must be believed that his conduct was affected by some reasons not yet
communicated to the public. The application of the following anecdote cannot be
mistaken. It shows the frequent appeals that Pit makes to Macedonian logic.

On the 9th of February, 1794, colonel Whitlock wrote a letter to general
Lavaux, who commanded at Port-au-Paix, in St. Domingo. He required Lavaux to
deliver up the town, the forts, and shipping. He then, in the name of the
British government, adds thus: The sum of FIVE THOUSAND CROWNS TOURNOIS shall
be paid to you in person, or deposited in the bank of England, payable to your
order.

In his answer, Lavaux says, permit me now to complain to yourself, of the
indignity you have offered me, in thinking me so vile, so flagitious, so base,
as not to resent, etc. He concludes with sending Whitlock a challenge
immediately to meet and fight him. See New Annual Register for 1794, History,
p. 338.

But if Port-au-Paix was worth five thousand crowns to England, Jay's treaty
was worth fifty millions. The Representatives were in the direct way to the
destruction of the British West Indies. A suspension of commercial intercourse,
and an embargo, would have reduced both England and those colonies to the
utmost difficulty. These two measures would have broke no treaty, nor afforded
any pretense for a quarrel, and they would have humbled England too much to
leave her any appetite for the wanton declaration of hostilities. All this was
so evident, the track pursued by the Representatives was marked with such
luminous circumstances of invitation, that nothing but ignorance, corruption,
or the most abject imbecility of understanding, could mistake it.

Like Sennacherib's angel, Camillus interfered to suggest an express libel on
Congress, to tarnish the character, to undermine the interest, and to hamstring
the vengeance of America. With a message so welcome, so necessary, to the very
being of the court of London, Jay must have been a favorite guest. And, after
the sacrifices which he made, if he did not pay due attention to the future
independence of his family, he is a greater simpleton than the world can
possibly think him to be.


Suppose that one of her neighbors has broke into a widow's wheatfield,
nightly, for months together, and carried off or destroyed her crops. An envoy
is sent to demand satisfaction. The robber answers that he has old accounts to
settle with the landlady, that he wants a wife, and that, if she will agree to
a settlement, and at the same time let him have her hand, he will enter into
one sweeping treaty for the whole. Any servant girl would see the absurdity of
this jumbling proposal. She would reply, that intermarriage might come time
enough, when former complaints were cleared up. But the object of Mr. Hamilton
and his friends was, right or wrong, to have a British treaty; and the present
one could not have been got through, but for entwisting it with the prospect of
compensation.

On the 8th of April, 1796, a Philadelphia print contained the following
extract of a letter from London, dated February 2d.

I this moment came from the court of admiralty, where the first case of the
captures at Martinique, by Gray and Jervis, was tried this morning: it was
reversed, which will be a precedent for all the others, and a point gained for
all of us that have cases in the courts here. And now they say, on Saturday
next, the lords will sit, and will go on to try the legality of the
condemnations in the West Indies.

As to the point gained for all of us, there is yet very little progress made,
nor is it of much concern to the claimants whether there is or not. The above,
and Mr. Bayard's letter, are quoted chiefly because they contain not even one
single, solitary, word, about the relief of the sailors, who had been torn from
their families, and their country, starved, hand-cuffed, and flogged, to make
them enrol in the British service of assassination. If this book falls into the
hands of any of that class of people, they are entreated to reflect for what
sort of owners, and what sort of a country, they are braving the hardships of a
mariner's life. We have seen how tranquilly Camillus gets over their enormous
wrongs. Yet, when a British creditor in the American funds was concerned, he
could speak about them like a man who was in earnest. No powers of language,
says he, at my command, can express the abhorrence I feel at the idea of
violating the property of individuals, which, in an authorized intercourse, in
time of peace, has been confided to the faith of our government. -- In my view,
every moral, and every political sentiment, unite to consign it to execration.
Camillus, No. 28.
Compare this glowing style with the frigid accents in which he observes, that
it was impossible to help the impressment of American seamen. They should be at
least as near our hearts, as the mere pecuniary interest of an English creditor
in the American funds. This will be granted by every friend to the country;
and, on this principle, every moral and political sentiment will consign to
execration, Jay and his treaty, wherein the safety of our mariners has been
totally neglected. As for the twenty treaty-making senators, they are neither
worse nor better than the numerous bodies of our citizens, who thanked the
President for signing this monument of American apathy -- an instrument by
which thousands and ten thousands of seamen were consigned to British mercy.
There is no desertion of fellow-countrymen so thoroughly disgraceful in the
annals of any independent people under heaven. A century of heroism could
hardly wipe out the stain. Fifty-five American ships are captured by a single
British corsair, The Argonaut. See above.
more than a twelvemonth after a treaty of amity had been signed, and above six
months after it had been fully ratified. With such intelligence staring in
their faces, while every newspaper, for eighteen months preceding, had been
suffocated with similar information, the FREEST and most enlightened nation in
the world, compelled their representatives, for fear of a British war! to
appropriate for the treaty.

As Mr. Hamilton has betrayed so much concern for British creditors, it may be
asked why he does not feel equal interest in the state of Maryland? Before the
war that province had vested considerable sums of money in the bank of England.
On the 17th of December, 1795, a select committee reported to the legislature
of that state, that they have no information as to the probability of their
recovering the stocks in the bank of England, to which they claim a title. When
Jay took so much care for the safety of British creditors in American funds, he
might likewise have paid some attention to the interest of Maryland in the
British funds.

The tenth article of the treaty contains a plain commentary on this stoppage
of Maryland property. It says that neither the debts due from individuals of
the one nation to individuals of the other, nor shares nor moneys which they
may have in the public funds, or in the public or private banks, shall ever, in
any event of war or national difference, be sequestered or confiscated, it
being unjust and impolitic, etc. Why then did England sequestrate, or with what
pretense of decency does she continue to keep the funds of Maryland? When the
Senate and Executive signed the treaty, they might surely have thought of this
important omission. But this article has even a worse fault The words unjust
and impolitic contain a direct libel on Mr. Dayton, and that party in the House
of Representatives, who, in March, 1794, had proposed to sequestrate British
debts, as a security for American compensation. The Senate and President
ratified this insult on the Representatives, though, as being a solemn act of
government, it contained an attack on the American legislature, a million of
times more flagrant than the transitory squib of Barras. Yet the latter is to
be made the handle for a French war, while the former, because it came from
Britain, was pocketed in silence. If an English minister had subscribed a
treaty conveying such a direct reference to, and such an abrupt censure of any
previous motion in parliament, the parties aggrieved would have taken the
matter up. But indeed no English minister dared to have made such a digression.
In discussing the treaty, none of the Representatives adverted to this tacit
reproach. The pulse of national dignity seems to beat higher in England than in
the United States.

Camillus clamours loudly about the iniquity of America in neglecting the
payment of debts due to Britain, before the last war. What here follows, on
that head, was related to the author, in January 1796, by Mr. James Madison.

Much noise has been made about the justice of America, in neglecting the
payment of debts due to Britain before the last war. In Virginia, it was
formerly usual for the planters, in that country, to consign their cargoes of
tobacco to a correspondent in Britain, who was vested with a discretionary
power of selling them as high as possible. It was often observed, that when two
planters had each of them, at the same time, sent cargoes of tobacco of equally
good quality to England, the one received perhaps twenty pounds the hogshead,
and his neighbor not more than four pounds. There was no regularity or
equality in the prices, and this gave rise to complaints and suspicions.

Sometime ago, a gentleman, in Virginia, brought a counter-action against his
British creditor, in one of the courts of that state. His plea was, that the
creditor and consignee had actually sold his tobacco in Europe at a much higher
price than he had stated in balancing their accounts. The facts alleged were
clearly proved, and the jury gave a verdict for damages to the amount of thirty
thousand dollars.

CHAPTER V.
Federal plan for a French War. -- Specimen of French justice. -- The Sea
Horse. -- The Musquito. -- Remarks on the British treaty by Mr. Gallatin. --
Reply by Mr. Tracy. -- Hints on the Western insurrection. -- Case of the brig
Maria, captain Wilmans. -- The schooner William, captain Scott. -- Despotic
influence of the tories in American seaports. -- Elegant style in some of their
publications. -- The Polly, captain Wade. -- The Edward and William, captain
Jones. -- The Ariel. -- The brig Sisters. -- Capture of the brig Jay, by the
French, and barbarous treatment of the captain. -- Mr. JAY'S INSTRUCTIONS. --
Extracts from them NEVER BEFORE PUBLISHED. -- Proofs of his NEGLECT OF ORDERS.
-- Anecdotes relative to the British treaty.

THIS chapter begins with a few instances of the maritime conduct of France and
England, that occurred about, or previous to, the commencement of the year
1796. They had been omitted for the sake of brevity. But while this work is
printing off, President Adams, and a formidable phalanx in the fifth Congress,
are driving the federal chariot, at full speed, to the brink of a French war.
One great pretense for this measure is the republican robberies on our shipping
in the West Indies. But if it can be proved that our commerce endured greater
injury, in 1796, from England, than it has since done from France, and that
the government of last year took very small concern about the outrages of the
former, while it has constantly exaggerated those of the latter, the reader
will gradually be convinced of a conspiracy perpetually existing Supra Chap. II.
to embroil this country with France, and to entangle her in an alliance with
the guinea-note monarchy of Britain Private letters from north Britain give
curious details about the decline of paper money. Take a guinea-note to the
butcher, and you must either lay ^ut the whole with him, or go without your
change. He parts with no silver. The only place where hard money has a chance
to be had is at the ale house, where, after you spend half a crown, the
landlord sometimes gives twenty shillings in cash for your guinea-note. These
traits come exactly to the point. They portend the future peace of Europe. A
gentleman who left Dublin on the 2d of March, says, that Cork
guinea-bank-notes were then at eighteen shillings hard money. Other bank paper
had also fallen.
.

A letter from Port-au-Paix, dated the 18th of December, 1795, to a merchant in
Philadelphia, Has the following particulars. Anthoine Chaplin, captain of the
Guillotine, a French privateer, had maltreated captain M'Keever of the American
ship James. For that and a similar offense against the ship Molleville, of St.
Thomas, Chaplin was fined in two hundred dollars, and all damages that might
accrue from the illegal capture of these vessels. His privateer was
confiscated; and the pirate himself was condemned to fifteen months of
imprisonment in irons. I this day saw him, says the letter-writer, chained with
a negro working in the street, in the same kind of dress in which he forced
captain M'Keever to leave the privateer and go on board an American vessel. So
much for our Laveaux's justice.

Anthoine Chaplin was less culpable than Reynolds, and other English
kidnappers. His punishment was immediate and complete; but we have never heard
a single instance of a British offender meeting with such a check. At the time
here spoke of, the American executive had signed Jay's treaty, to the extreme
joy of England, and the utmost provocation of France. Yet the former continued
to rob America, and the latter did not The most solid argument then urged
against the French in the West Indies was, that they had taken many American
cargoes upon credit, and either paid an inferior price, or exacted a delay that
became equivalent to no payment at all. But we have never been told of their
flogging American seamen, to make them enter into the republican service. The
convulsive state of the French West Indies was well known. Anarchy,
conflagration, and massacre, strode successively from one island to another. If
a merchant in Philadelphia, chose to send his cargo to such a market, he could
expect no better reception, nor did he, in all cases, merit much sympathy.
These speculators raised the price of flour from seven dollars per barrel, to
fifteen, to the utter oppression of the laboring poor in this and other
seaport towns. In Britain, neither the laws, nor even the people would have
endured such forestalling.
. For what reason was Laveaux able to execute justice, while admiral Murray
could only promise to use his influence? Thus Pichegru might have promised to
use his influence with one of his own corporals. The fact seems to have been
this. The Directory still valued federal friendship as something; while Pit
held it as nothing.

On the 4th of January, the schooner Hiram, captain Brooks, arrived at Hartford
in Connecticut. He related, that the Sea Horse, captain Smith, from Guadaloupe
for Boston, had all her crew, excepting the master and first mate, taken out by
an English ship. She was sent to Antigua, and released, but her crew were
detained on board of the ship that took them.

A more complete account of the sufferings of captain Smith and his people, was
given by himself, dated Baltimore, January 5th, 1796. On the 13th of November,
preceding, he was taken by the frigate Resource, captain Watkins. Five of his
men, two of whom had the fever, were impressed. A prize-master and four men
were put on board of the Seahorse. They confined captain Smith for three days
below, under the guard of two men with drawn cutlasses, and loaded pistols.
While captain Smith was on board of the Resource, he was ill treated by a
midshipman; and told him that he would not be insulted by a boy. Captain
Watkins said, that, if he had heard the expression, he would have tied up and
flogged Smith for daring to insult his majesty's officer. To the feelings of an
enlightened federalist, this language may be acceptable. Watkins offered him
two hundred pounds, and a share of the prize-money, to say that the ship was
French property. At Antigua, the first mate of the Sea Horse died, and the
president caused his body to be thrown into the sea. He also sent a pilot and
negroes on board to carry the vessel out to sea. Captain Smith offered to knock
them down. The president sent for him, and threatened to cause the fort to fire
into the vessel, if she did not go out to sea, either with men or without them.
On Smith's refusal, the president said that he would have him confined. What a
splendid blaze of British honor and hospitality! And how fondly would Noah
Webster have chuckled over it, if the scene had only past in a French port
instead of an English one! Watkins had brought three other American prizes into
Antigua. He cut them out of a port in Guadaloupe; and, their registers being in
the office on shore, he boasted of them as a sure prey. They were,
notwithstanding, discharged. How captain Smith got hands to work his vessel to
Baltimore does not appear. Two leagues from Cape Henry, he was boarded by
admiral Murray, who, as if the poor man had not already suffered enough, took
from him Wilkinson Gilt, a mate whom he had shipped at Antigua. Somebody called
citizen Hughes, is sincerely thanked for supplying him with part of a crew. But
whether this was Victor Hughes, or where the help was given, we are left in the
dark.

On the 8th of January, 1796, the brig Experience, captain Houston, arrived
from Port-au-Prince at Philadelphia. He informed, that three British ships of
war, at the former place, pressed every American who could not produce a
protection. They were chiefly manned with American seamen. A number of our
vessels, lying at Port-au-Prince, were in a most distressed situation for want
of hands.

A letter from St. Kitts, dated 4th January, 1796, and received by a merchant
of Philadelphia, says, that the brig Fame, captain Medlin, of this port, was
about to sail for it. The letter adds, that she had been plundered by a French
privateer, but gives no particulars.

On the 17th of January, the Musquito, captain Harshaw, arrived at Baltimore
from Bourdeaux. On the voyage, he was met by the Hussar, a British frigate. His
keys were taken, his chests broke up, and every thing stolen that the British
could lay their hands on. They also drank a case of his wine, and pressed the
Musquito's mate, and one of the hands, who was an American.

Thus far we have instances of British piracy, formerly overlooked or omitted,
as observed in the beginning of this chapter. The reader must have become tired
with this uniform and disgusting tale of our commercial degradation. As a
relief to the melancholy picture, let us turn, for a moment, to the debates on
the British treaty. The enthusiasm of attachment which it inspired, forms one
of the most singular phenomena in the history of the human mind. Many of its
sanguine advocates were men unsuspected of a sinister design.

On the 26th of April, 1796, Mr. Gallatin, in speaking of the British treaty,
had these words:

The fact was uncontroverted, that the British still continued to impress our
seamen and to capture our vessels. If they pretended to justify that conduct by
the treaty, it became necessary to obtain an explanation of the doubtful
articles; if there was nothing in the treaty to justify it, their acts were
acts of hostility; were an infraction of that treaty; and even, according to
the doctrine of those gentlemen who thought that, in common cases, the house
had no discretion, the treaty once broken by one party, was no longer binding
on the other; and it was the right as well as the duty of this house, not to
proceed to pass the laws necessary to carry it into effect, until satisfactory
assurances were obtained, that these acts should cease, and until Great Britain
had evinced a friendly disposition toward us Bache's Debates, vol. ii. p. 266.
.

It was impossible to conceive a plainer, or a more substantial argument. These
few lines contain just enough to have convinced an audience of accessible
understandings, of the propriety of suspending proceedings toward fulfilling
the British treaty, till an effectual check had been given to British piracy.
On the 27th of April, Mr. Tracy rose in answer to Mr. Gallatin. Two passages
shall be here given from his speech. The first is as follows:

It had been acknowledged, by Mr. Gallatin, that a new negotiation, at present,
cannot be expected. Great Britain possesses the posts, the confidence of the
Indians, the many millions of dollars despoiled from our commerce, the benefits
of our trade, and proceeds to make more invasions on our property and our
rights, and yet the gentleman says we will not go to war! What would be the
American conduct under such a state of things? Would they tamely see their
government strut, attempt to look big, call hard names; and the moment they
were faced, like an overgrown lubberly boy, shrink into a corner? Is this, he
asked, the American character? He thought himself acquainted with a part of the
United States, too well, to believe they merited such a character; the people
where he was most acquainted, whatever might be the character in other parts of
the union, were not of the stamp to cry Hosannah to day, and crucify tomorrow;
they will not dance round a whisky pole one day, and curse their government,
and, upon hearing of a military force, sneak into a swamp. No, said Mr. Tracy,
my immediate constituents, whom I very well know, understand their rights, and
will defend them, and if they find that the government either cannot, or will
not protect them, they will at least attempt to protect themselves. And he
could not feel thankful to Mr. Gallatin for coming all the way from Geneva, to
give Americans a character of pusillanimity Bache's Debates, vol. ii. p. 295.
.

This rhapsody makes up with ill nature what it wants in meaning. From the
first part of it, where the gentleman speaks of the injuries committed on this
country by England, one would suppose, that he was going to recommend an
immediate exertion of American vengeance. But, so far from that, he only
recommended that we should kiss the British rod by instantly appropriating for
Jay's treaty. The blustering sound of his words, and the abject prostration of
his ideas form a striking contrast. His comparison between Connecticut and the
western counties of Pennsylvania is a masterpiece of vulgar calumny. That the
people of the former state are as brave as any in the union has never been
denied; and the convention of Saratoga will, for ages to come, be remembered
and cited as a monument of their courage. But this ought not to be converted
into a handle for reproach, and much less for slander, against other states. As
to the western insurrection, it is time that we should begin to speak truth
about it. The way in which that affair was suppressed did, in itself, discredit
the government of the country. The late king of Prussia would not have thought
all the military conduct displayed about it, worth an ensign's commission. Here
are a few specimens of the federal army.

On Thursday the 13th of November, there were about forty persons brought to
Parkison's house, by order of general White; he directed to put the damned
rascals in the cellar, to tie them back to back, to make a fire for the guard,
but to put the prisoners back to the father end of the cellar, and to give them
neither victuals nor drink. The cellar was wet and muddy, and the night cold;
the cellar extended the whole length, under a log-house, which was neither
floored, nor the openings between the logs daubed. They were kept there until
Saturday morning, and then marched to the town of Washington. On the march, one
of the prisoners, who was subject to convulsions, fell into a fit: but when
some of the troop told general White of his situation, he ordered them to tie
the damned rascal to a horse's tail, and drag him along with them, for he had
only feigned having the fits. Some of his fellow prisoners, however, who had a
horse, dismounted, and let the poor man ride: he had another fit before he
reached Washington. This march was about twelve miles. The poor man, who had
the fits, had been in the American service, during almost the whole of the war
with Great Britain.

General White has not denied this accusation, nor prosecuted the historian who
records it. Hence we must admit the statement to be true; and New Jersey may
congratulate herself on the acquisition or production of a second DUKE OF
CUMBERLAND. Mr. Findley gives some farther traits of this federal hero.
Stockdale was forbid, on the peril of of his life, to administer any comfort to
his neighbors, though they were perishing with cold, and famishing with
hunger. The general treated the prisoners, as they arrived, with the most
insulting and abusive language, causing them all to be tied back to back,
except one man, who held a respectable rank, and who, however, was said to be
one of the most guilty in his custody. One of the nearest neighbors, who had a
child at the point of dying, and observing that they were bringing in the whole
neighborhood prisoners, without regard to guilt or innocence, went and gave
himself up to general White, expecting that, as he was conscious there was no
charge against him, he would be permitted to return to his family on giving
bail, but he also was inhumanly thrown into the cellar, tied with the rest, and
refused the privilege of seeing his dying child; nor was he permitted to attend
its funeral, until after many entreaties he obtained that liberty, accompanied
with the most horrid oaths and imprecations. Of the small honor acquired in
this expedition, a great part falls to the snare of captain John Dunlap, of
this city. Captain Dunlap and his party, while they behaved with the greatest
dexterity in taking the prisoners, treated them with as much politeness and
attention as their situation would admit of, and engaged their gratitude by
accompanying unavoidable severity with humanity Findley's History of the
Insurrection, p. 202.
. At Carlisle, a p^^t of our army, after a hearty dinner, were on the point of
setting fire to the town, and of charging each other with the bayonet. Mr.
Tracy is left to judge whether such conduct was not as bad as that of dancing
round a whisky pole. But when the member attempts to stigmatize the whole
constituents of Mr. Gallatin, as rebels and poltroons, it is hard to find,
within the compass of decency, a term suitable to his behavior.

Mr. Tracy farther complained of Mr. Gallatin for having said that the
negotiation with Great Britain was begun in fear, carried on through fear, and
the treaty made by the same motive; when it arrived in this country the Senate
sanctioned it, and the President placed his signature to it from fear* and now
there was an attempt to obtain the sanction of the House of Representatives
from fear. All these expressions, in an unqualified manner, the gentleman had
applied to this country, in its most important transactions, by its most
important characters, and to crown all, we were to defeat the treaty, and sit
down quietly under injuries the most irritating, and not attempt a redress, or
to do any thing like going to war. Under impressions made by such declarations,
he had said what he had, and he now said, he wished to look in the face of Mr.
Gallatin, or Mr. Heister, or any other, who dared say, the American character
was that of cowardice. He would say again and again, it was madness, or worse,
to suppose we could defeat this treaty and avoid a war.

What Mr. Gallatin says about fear is perfectly true. Mr. Tracy always takes it
for granted, that America had no medium between the acceptance of Mr. Jay's
treaty and a Btitish war. An embargo for four months would have reduced the
mother country to our terms, without occasion for the firing of a pistol.

Mr. Tracy next denies the reality of British impressments. He took this
opportunity to ask for the proofs of such transactions, as impressing our
seamen, by the British government. He declared he knew of none; and had never
heard one instance of the British government either avowing the right, or
practicing upon it, of impressment of an American into their sea service; many
instances had occurred of complaints to the government, and all were
immediately redressed; and, although it was become very fashionable to
calumniate the British government, he was impelled, from his own belief and
conviction on the subject, to say, that no such instance had ever taken place
or would ever, of the British government, justifying the impressment of natives
of the United States, or one who was an acknowledged citizen. Is it not unfair,
said Mr. Tracy, to attribute to the government unauthorized misconduct of
individuals, far removed from the seat and control of the government? It was
equally unreasonable to say, that we were not protected by the treaty, and
should not be, when the British government had promised to pay for all former
depredations made in that way upon our commerce, was it not reasonable to
suppose, they would prevent or pay for any such depredation now made? And they
certainly would prevent all such, which were not from the confusion of war
rendered inevitable.

As for the proofs of impressment, the gentleman is referred to the deposition
of Cyprian Cook, emitted at Norwich in Connecticut. As for his never hearing of
one instance, where the British government avowed the right of impressing, or
practiced upon it, the inference must be, that Mr. Tracy has ears of a
particular construction. Whether Mr. Pit himself asserted the right is of no
consequence. The British, in the West Indies, universally avowed and practiced
upon it. Mr. Tracy says that all complaints to government were immediately
redressed. He should have told us what redress was obtained in the case related
by captain Cook. He then mounts upon that favorite topic of the British
officers acting without orders. Compensation closes the chorus. We now proceed
with the list of British piracies, leaving Mr. Tracy to deny their existence,
as long as he shall think proper.

A Philadelphia newspaper, of the 8th of April, 1796, informs, that the brig
Maria Wilman, of Baltimore, captain Oaks, was taken in Tortola by the Bull Dog
sloop, and there sold at auction. She was from Demarara, bound to Baltimore,
with a cargo of sugar and coffee. It farther says, that, on Monday, the 11th of
April, 1796, the brig Charlotte, of Providence, arrived at Baltimore, in
thirteen days from Martinique. Captain Watts, of the schooner Alexandria, of
Alexandria, came passenger, along with a number of other Americans. Their
vessels had been contracted for, and they were obliged to leave them. This
corroborates the account already given by captain Samuel Green. In summer,
1793, Gideon Henfield and John Singletary had been arrested on board of the
Citizen Genet, a French privateer, lying in the Delaware, and Henfield was
tried in this city, soon after, for having enlisted in the French service. In
spite of a bustle made by government, he was acquitted. In the eye of reason,
it seems equally culpable to have sold privateers to Britain, yet no notice has
been taken of that practice.

A paragraph from Fredericsburg, dated April 1st, 1796, says, that, last week,
arrived in the river, the schooner William, captain John Scott, from
Bassaterre, St. Kitts. He said that on the 23d of February, between nine and
ten o'clock in the evening, in Bassaterre road, he was boarded by a boat with
five men with cutlasses. They belonged to a British armed sloop lying there.
They ordered William M'Coy, a native of Fredericsburg, into the boat; but,
being prevented from taking him, they went back to the sloop. Immediately
after, they returned with their commander, one Williams, and an additional
number of men, armed with pistols and cutlasses. They took away from the
schooner, John Mansfield, William M'Coy, and two blacks. Next morning, captain
Scott went on shore, and proved these people to be citizens of the United
States. He could recover only the two blacks. Every American at the port shared
a similar fate. A Baltimore schooner was stripped of all her hands, excepting the
mate and a boy.

A practice had for sometime prevailed at Norfolk, in Virginia, of sending
horses to the British West Indies to mount their cavalry. This, if not a breach
of neutrality, was at best a plain enough indication to France that we
preferred the most petty self-interest to any success on her side. A Kingston
newspapaper, of the 23d of February, 1796, has the following article. Captain
Huntington reports, that, when he left America, admiral Murray, with his
squadron, was lying in Hampton road, waiting to convoy the horses that were
purchased for the dragoons in St. Domingo. Two articles, dated Philadelphia,
April 12th, say, that three of these vessels, with their freights of horses,
were taken by the French, and sent into Cape Francois. This is the only capture
by the French of American shipping that has yet occurred in compiling the last
or the present chapter.

The Federal Gazette of Baltimore, of the 15th of April, 1796, contains a
letter from Tortola. The writer mentions the irregular proceedings of the
British court of admiralty in that island, respecting American captures. The
captains of the ships of war were permitted to detain the masters and
supercargoes of the prizes as prisoners on board of their vessels, till they
were deprived of opportunities for employing proper counsel. Enormous costs
were granted, of which the bench received a share. Some particular
circumstances of injustice are mentioned in the case of the Maria Wilman,
captain Oaks, who, in the same newspaper, is noticed as having, at this time,
arrived safe with his vessel at Baltimore. It is likely that he wrote this very
letter; but perhaps neither he nor his owners durst avow it, for fear of
offending the British party. In an independent country, this dread may seem
strange, yet nothing is more notoriously true, than that such influence is
extremely active and formidable. Every mercantile man, and every newsprinter,
who dares to speak, with energy, of the insolence and rapine of the Queen of
Isles, runs imminent hazard of persecution. The British tories, in our seaport
towns, seconded by the American interest, will spare no toil or expense to make
him insolvent and infamous. General description cannot convey a complete
picture of their proceedings. Their own pencil furnishes the best portrait.
Here follows an extract from a federal electioneering hand-bill. An hundred
years hence, it may be hoped, that Americans will turn over such outcasts of
typography, with the same contemptuous pity as an Englishman of the present age
looks back on the sallies of Settle and Tom Brown See Johnson's Life of Dryden.
.

To the Citizens of New York.
Jacobin men and jacobin measures are all hollow and rotten. An instructive
instance has just occurred. The bank of Pennsylvania was established in
opposition to the bank of the United States. A jacobin president, secretary,
and a majority of jacobin directors were appointed. The issue has disclosed a
scene of jacobin villainy. It turns out, that the president, secretary, and the
notable John Swanwick, have fraudently, and by collusion, drawn out of the bank
one hundred and seventy thousand dollars more than they had a right to. John
Swanwick, the famous French American democrat, whom the good democrats in
Philadelphia have lately made a member of Congress, in opposition to the
prudent and honest part of the city, now appears in his true color, an
unprincipled swindler. Such is the authentic intelligence just received from
Philadelphia. And yet a large body of citizens, many good but deluded ones, are
straining every nerve to place once more in Congress the aristocratic,
democratical, jacobinical, Edward Livingston. Pause, fellow-citizens; be
assured time will prove to his most infatuated followers, that he is as rotten
and hollow as his compeers.


Posterity, if this page chances to reach them, will naturally ask where lies
the propriety of reprinting such rubbish? The answer is, that such writings
were, in December, 1796, propagated at New York, with the approbation of a very
numerous party. The design was, to defeat the re-election of Mr. Livingston as
representative in Congress for that city; and while any remembrance of this
handbill shall remain, its authors and its abettors must be abhorred by every
honest man.

The bank of Pennsylvania was not established in opposition to the bank of the
United States. The field of competition was alike open to every person. It has
never been said that the Pennsylvania bank used an unfair means to rival or
injure the bank of the United States. The latter is here referred to, as if it
were something sacred; and yet the holders of its stock are ashamed or afraid
of telling their names Supra, chap. ii.
. Mr. Swanwick did not, in the close of 1796, nor for a long time before it,
owe the Pennsylvania bank a dollar. Here he is charged as an unprincipled
swindler, for having made fraudulent draughts out of it. Those who voted for
his election opposed the honest part of this city. But even if it had been all
as true as it was false, this had nothing to do with the election of
Livingston, any more than the idle story of Mr. Gallatin, sleeping under
hedges, afforded a reason for rejecting general Dearbourne Ibid.
. The same tissue of defamation, falsehood, and vulgarity, runs through a very
large proportion of the writings of the federal party. So many different
samples are here given to convince people, at a distance from the scene, that
these are not partial specimens. One would think that the friends of order have
imported a cargo of Cossacks or Hottentots to act as their penmen. Their
encomiums are, if possible, more loathsome than their invective. To censure
President Washington is ranked, by the Columbian Sentinel, with ridiculing
********, or black-guarding the Bible Aurora, January 4th, 1797.
.

Recurring again to the case of the Baltimore brig, it may well be supposed,
that captain Oaks was afraid of provoking such a swarm of scorpions. For the
same obvious and weighty reason many narratives of British piracy have been
secreted, by the sufferers, from the public prints. Of the fifty-five ships
taken by the Argonaut, perhaps no regular account of the capture of six has
appeared in any newspaper.

The Maryland Journal, of the 2d of May, 1796, gives the following account as
from captain Wade of the schooner Polly, from Jamacia. He says, that from the
20th of February to the 1st of April, thirteen American prizes had been sent
into Kingston. Three of these were schooners, belonging to Oliver and Thomson,
of Baltimore. Another was a new copper-bottomed ship from Baltimore to Calcutta.

On the 3d of May, the schooner Edward and William, captain Levin Jones,
arrived at Baltimore, in nineteen days from Port-au-Paix. In the passage, she
met with a brig from Port-au-Prince bound for New London. The people told
captain Jones, that five of them had been impressed by a British frigate. On
the 28th of April, they were chased by another, but night coming on they got
out of her way.

On the same day, the Ariel, captain Fisher, arrived at Baltimore from
Jacquemel. He had spoke to the schooner Elizabeth, of Philadelphia, from
Jamaica. The captain gave him an account of twenty-seven American vessels
carried into that island for trial, and of two carried into the Mole, which
were to be sent to Jamaica. He adds, that all vessels to or from French islands
were seized.

On the 17th of April, the brig Sisters, captain Brent, arrived in Hampton
roads from Guernsey. She had, on the 12th of March, been boarded by the Thetis,
a Bermudian corsair. These pirates took out the master and crew, rummaged the
vessel, broke up all the letters and papers, and, after three hours, permitted
her to proceed.

BOSTON, APRIL 16. By an arrival, on Saturday, of a vessel from Curracoa, we
received the following protest of Hugh Wilson, master of American brig called
the Jay, belonging to Baltimore; who being duly sworn before the notary royal
and public of St. Bartholomew, declares: --
That, having got his vessel captured and condemned, as hereafter will appear,
and having had his log-book and all the papers belonging to the vessel and to
himself taken from him, all to the shipping articles and a small memorandum
book of his private disbursements, he is obliged to give his declaration from
memory, and to the best of his recollection, viz. that, on the 10th of April
last, 1795, he sailed in said brig from St. Pierre, in the island of
Martinique, bound to Antigua: that, on the 12th of said month, in the morning,
he was boarded by the French armed schooner called, (as near as he could
recollect) the Alhenienne, commanded by one Pascal from Guadaulope, under the
lee of which island the brig then was, and in the evening was carried into
Bassaterre road, in said last island. That the same deponent and all his crew
were immediately put on board a French sloop of war, where they were detained
about eight or ten days, without knowing what was the intention of the French
to do with the said brig, and without ever having been heard or examined. That
the deponent and the supercargo, Mr. John Starck, were sent on shore and
conducted to the interpreter or linguister, who told them the brig Jay and her
remaining cargo, consisting in corn and staves, had already been condemned, and
who furnished Mr. Starck with a copy of the condemnation. That Mr. Starck was
put at liberty; but the deponent was, the next day, thrown into Bassaterre
goal, where he remained about ten days, after which he was drove out of the
said goal and put in chains, on board a small French schooner bound to
Point-a-Petre, the deponent lying all the passage (about sixty hours), with
eight prisoners more chained to the same bar, in the hold of said schooner,
upon the stone ballast, with a very scanty and indifferent food. That, having
arrived in such a situation at Point-a-Petre, the deponent was immediately put
on board one of the prisonships in the harbor, where he was detained for near
eight months, that is to say, until the 1st instant, (January 1796) when
captain Wheeler, of the brig Peggy, of New York, having obtained permission to
pick out American sailors, that might be found on board of the different prison
ships, came along side the ship, where the deponent was detained. That having
made his case known to him, he the said captain Wheeler took the deponent along
with him, and put him on board the said brig Peggy. That on the 11th inst. or
thereabout, the deponent went in said brig from Point-a-Petre, and arrived in
this harbor of Gustavia yesterday, the 13th inst. without yet knowing what has
become of his vessel, the brig Jay, her cargo, or any thing belonging to her,
and without ever having been heard, either in behalf of said property or of
himself, during all the time of near nine months, he was detained in
Guadaloupe, plundered of every thing belonging to him, and not left a second
shirt to put on; that, during his detention in Point-a-Petre, captain Lyle of
Baltimore, as he passed by the said prisonship, having seen and recollected the
deponent, had applied to the commissaire de guerre in his behalf, but in vain,
as said captain Lyle afterward told the deponent.

[Here follows the protest of the judge and notary public, declaring the
capture and condemnation to be contrary to the law of nations, and of humanity;
the whole is dated at Gustavia, (St. Bartholomew) the 14th January, 1796.]

The insertion of the preceding article, ought to vindicate this work from the
suspicion of a desire to conceal or palliate the injuries committed against
American commerce by the French republic. Nothing of that nature has been
intentionally overlooked; for the only object of the author is the discovery
and publication of truth, without the smallest concern what nation, or what
individual may chance to appear in an unfavourable light. From this instance of
French piracy, we return to British depredations.

A paragraph, dated Norfolk, April 26th, 1796, mentions the arrival of the
schooner Eleanor, captain Jackson. He gave an account of the Hussar, a British
frigate, having captured the ship Alexander of Yorktown, captain Orr, from
Lisbon to Norfolk. The crew were taken on board of the Hussar, and the ship
herself was sent to Halifax. The Maryland Journal, of the 2d of May, gives
account of the schooner Betsey of Boston, captain Philips. She was taken by the
British, but re-captured by the crew, who delivered up the British as prisoners
to the French, at Jacquemel. The same newspaper tells of the seizure of the
ship Alexander, of Baltimore, by the British. She was bound from Demarara for
Baltimore. The captors sent her into Grenada, where the cargo was libelled.
Here is also a statement from captain Wade of the schooner Polly, of thirteen
sail of Americans which had been sent into Kingston, Jamaica, between the 20th
of February, and the 1st of April, 1796. One of these vessels was bound from
Baltimore to Calcutta.

It seems amazing that, in the face of such injuries, any member of Congress
could recommend appropriations for the British treaty. Public curiosity has
been excited by the concealment of Mr. Jay's instructions. Access has been
obtained to this paper, and leave has been given to make an abstract of every
material part of it. This, though not in form, yet in substance, will answer
the end in view.

Some notice has already been taken of the singular conduct of the executive in
refusing to treat with Genet because the Senate were not then sitting, and
thereafter, while they actually were in session, of his resolving to enter into
a British negotiation, and nominating Mr. Jay as envoy, without giving the
Senate previous intimation of such a design. The message does not ask either
advice or consent, but abruptly declares that he has thought proper. This is
not the constitutional style of asking advice, or consent. The departure from
the spirit of the constitution is obvious.

The message was received by the Senate on the 16th of April, 1794. On the
17th, a motion was made in the following words: that previous to going into the
consideration of the nomination of a special envoy to the court of Great
Britain, the President of the United States be requsted to inform the Senate of
the whole business with which the proposed envoy is to be charged. This motion
was negatived. Thus the advice and consent of the Senate, as required by the
constitution, were overlooked. Without consulting them, the President resolved
to enter into a negotiation, and named an envoy. When he sent down the message
to the Senate as to his having done so, he did not let them know what the
negotiation was to be about. If the words advice and consent mean any thing, it
must surely be that the Senate are to be previously acquainted with and
consulted upon the business that an ambassador is going to undertake. There can
be no other rational explanation of the phrase. The Senate could not pretend to
give their advice about the expediency of commencing a treaty, when they did
not know the terms on which it was to begin. Yet such is the spirit in a
majority of that body that they refused, as appears above, to request a
communication from the President upon this pohnt. They had a title to have
demanded such an ecclaircisement. In private life, it would be mockery to ask a
man to consent to any business, without first telling him the scope of it.
Without such knowledge it is impossible that he can give any thing deserving
the name either of advice or consent.

On the 19th of April a motion was made in the Senate of which the following is
part. That to permit judges of the Supreme Court to hold, at the same time, any
other office or employment emanating from, and holden at the pleasure of the
Executive, is contrary to the spirit of the constitution, and, as tending to
expose them to the influence of the Executive, is mischievous and impolitic.
This motion passed in the negative, ten to seventeen. On the 27th of November,
1794, Dr. William Smith objected in Congress to the democratic society of this
city, the holding of such a doctrine. But its being supported by so large a
part of the Senate ought at least to have softened the severity of his censure.

We now come to the instructions of our envoy. Of these an entire copy cannot,
as above stated, be obtained; but permission has been procured to make a
copious abstract. They set out with directing Mr. Jay to obtain redress for the
piracies committed on our commerce by authority of instructions from the king
and council. He is next enjoined to draw to a conclusion all points of
difference concerning the peace of 1783. The Executive then expresses a wish,
that the debts, the interest claimed upon them, and all things relating to
them, be put outright in a diplomatic discussion, as being certainly of a
judicial nature to be decided by our courts. If this point could not be
obtained, he was to support the doctrines of government, with arguments proper
for the occasion, and with that attention to his former public opinions, which
self-respect will justify. This phrase, as to former public opinions, does not
seem very happy. Mr. Jay, as a judge, had declared, from the bench that the
English were justified in detaining the western posts, on account of the debts
due to Britain. Hence, attention to his former opinions, would lead him to
vindicate the latter, at the expense of America.

The instructions proceed to say, that, the British government, having denied
their abetting the Indians, we must, of course, acquit them. But we have
satisfactory proofs, some of which, however, cannot, as you will discover, be
well used in public, that British agents are guilty of stirring up, and
assisting, with arms, ammunition, and warlike implements, the different tribes
of Indians against us.

It is incumbent upon that government to restrain these agents, as a
forbearance to restrain them, cannot be interpreted otherwise than as a
determination to countenance them. Mr. Jay was farther directed to insist, that
the Indians dwelling in the territories of one, shall not be interfered with by
the other. He was likewise enjoined, to explain the pacific wishes of America,
in case that he should find the court of London equally disposed for amity. Mr.
Jay was, besides, instructed to mention the dangerous effect that might be
produced upon the minds of the citizens of America, by the continuation of
outrages in the West Indies, while, at the same time, our courts gave entire
authority to claims for British debts. Mr. Jay was, in particular, enjoined to
consider the inexecution and infraction of the treaty, as standing on distinct
grounds from the vexations and spoliations; so that no adjustment of the
former, is to be influenced by the latter. Mr. Jay was, in the next place,
instructed, if he should be able to obtain satisfaction, as to the trespasses
on the treaty of 1783, and as to the West-Indian piracies, to sound the British
ministry on the subject of a commercial treaty. If he found this subject
eligible, he was especially directed to insist upon the following points.

1. Reciprocity in navigation, and particularly to the West Indies, and even to
the East Indies.

The admission of wheat, fish, salt-meat, and other great staples, upon the
same footing with the admission of the great British staples in American ports.

3. FREE SHIPS TO MAKE FREE GOODS.

4. Proper security for the safety of neutral commerce in other respects; and
particularly, by declaring provisions never to be contraband, except in the
strongest possible case; as the blockade of a port; or, if attainable, by
abolishing contraband altogether. By defining a blockade, if contraband, must
continue, in some degree, as it is defined in the armed neutrality. By
restricting the opportunities of vexation, in visiting vessels, and bringing
under stricter management privateers, and expediting recoveries against them
for misconduct.

5. Exemption of emigrants, particularly manufacturers, from restraint Every
body knows how admirably this point has been attended to.
.

6. Free export of arms and military stores.

7. The exclusion of the term "the most favored nation," as being productive
of embarrassment.

8. The convoy of merchant ships, by the public ships of war, where it shall be
necessary, and they be holding the same course.

9. It is anxiously to be desired, that the fishing grounds now engrossed by
the British, should be opened to the citizens of the United States.

10. The intercourse with England makes it necessary that the disability
arising from alienage, in cases of inheritance should be put on a liberal
footing; or rather abolished.

11. You may discuss the sale of prizes in our ports, while we are neutral; and
this, perhaps, may be added to the considerations which we have to give,
besides those of reciprocity.

12. Proper shelter, defense, and succor, against pirates, shipwreck, etc.

13. Full security for the retiring of the citizens of the United States from
the British dominions in case a war should break out.

14. No privateering commissions to be taken out by the subjects of the one, or
the citizens of the other party, against each other It is hard to guess what
our Executive could mean by this injunction. In case of a rupture between this
country and England, the chief way in which we can affect her interest, must be
by attacking her commerce. Hence a stipulation for restricting our own efforts
in that quarter, has not an extreme appearance of perspicuity.
.

15. Consuls to be admitted in Europe, the West and East Indies.

16. In case of an Indian war, none but the usual supplies in peace shall be
furnished.

17. In peace, no troops to be kept within a limited distance from the lakes.

18. No stipulation whatever is to interfere with our obligations to France.

19. A treaty is not to be continued beyond fifteen years.

The above enumeration presented, in a general point of view, the objects which
our Executive considered as desirable to be comprehended in a commercial
treaty. But Mr. Jay was especially cautioned not to expect that a treaty could
be positively effected with so great a variety of advantages in favor of
America. Here it is difficult to suppress the feelings of surprise, at so very
injudicious a choice of the time for making a commercial treaty with Britain.
Something has been said upon that subject already, and to which the reader is
referred.

The sixth chapter of an act of Parliament, past in the 28th year of the reign
of George the third, mentions certain articles which may be carried from the
United States to the British West Indies, in British bottoms; and certain
others which may be conveyed from the British West Indies to the United States
in British bottoms. Mr. Jay was enjoined, if practicable, to obtain the same
privilege, in both cases, for American bottoms. But such treaty, instead of the
usual clause of ratification, was to contain the following. This treaty shall
be obligatory and conclusive, when the same shall be ratified by his Britannic
majesty of the one part, and by the President of the United States, by and with
the advice and consent of the Senate, of the other.

But if a treaty of commerce could not be formed upon a basis as advantageous
as that above stated, Mr. Jay was prohibited from concluding or signing any
such; it being conceived that it would not be expedient to do any thing more
than to digest with the British ministry, the articles of such a treaty, as
they appeared willing to accede to, referring them here for consideration and
further instruction, previous to a formal conclusion.

From this part of Mr. Jay's instructions, the plain inference seems to be,
that he was not at liberty to sign any treaty at all, till it had been
previously remitted to this country for examination. Indeed it was plainly
enough admitted, in the House of Representatives, that our envoy had exceeded
his powers.

After this injunction, the instructions to Mr. Jay proceed immediately in the
following words. Some of the other points which it would be interesting to
comprehend in a treaty, may not be attended with difficulty. Among these, is
the admission of our commodities and manufactures generally, in the British
European dominions, upon a footing equally good with those of other foreign
countries. At present, certain enumerated articles only are admitted, and
though the enumeration embraces all the articles which it is of present
consequence to us to be able to export to those dominions, yet, in process of
time, an extension of the objects may become of moment. The fixing of the
privileges which we now enjoy, in the British East Indies, by toleration of the
company's government, if any arrangement can be made with the consent of the
company for that purpose, would also be a valuable ingredient.

As Denmark and Sweden were upon very indifferent terms with the British
ministry, and as Russia, the nominal ally of England, had, in the American war,
appeared at the head of the famous armed neutrality, it was to be expected,
that some cooperation from that quarter would greatly tend to enforce the
success of Mr. Jay's errand. Accordingly, some ideas on this subject seem to
have occurred to our American cabinet. But the timid and indecisive style in
which the instructions, as to that point, are couched, shows how little could
be rested upon them. Our envoy was cautioned as to entering into such a
negotiation, if there was a danger of its being discovered by the British
court. Now this notion of our Executive runs expressly counter to the common
experience of mankind. For, the very dread of Jay maturing such a treaty, would
have been the most likely way to bring Grenville to favorable terms. Nothing
was to be depended upon from that quarter, but through the operation of
interest or fear; and the shortest way to make this impression, was, by
affecting a correspondence with the Danish and Swedish ministers, even though
America had previously determined to decline such a conjunction. The former
armed neutrality had struck England with unusual alarm, and the very dread of a
second combination of that sort would have chilled the warmest drop of blood in
the veins of the English nation. In private life, when you want to cheapen a
piece of goods, the first argument is, that you can go to the next store. But
Jay was expressly directed to conceal any design of such a nature. To give our
Executive full justice, the whole passage, as it immediately follows the last
quotation, is here inserted verbatim.

You will have no difficulty in gaining access to the Ministers of Russia,
Denmark, and Sweden, at the court of London. The principles of the armed
neutrality would abundantly cover our neutral rights. If, therefore, the
situation of things with respect to Great Britain should dictate the necessity
of taking the precaution of foreign cooperation on this head; if no prospect of
accommodation should be thwarted by the danger of such a measure being known to
the British court; and if an entire view of all our political relations, shall,
in your judgment, permit the step; you will sound those ministers upon the
probability of an alliance with their nations to support those principles.
However, there can be no risk in examining what can be concerted with Denmark
and Sweden, or any other power, against the Algerines. It may be represented to
the British ministry, how productive of perfect conciliation it might be to the
people of the United States, if Great Britain would use her influence with the
Dey of Algiers for the liberation of the American citizens in captivity, and
for a peace upon reasonable terms. It has been communicated from abroad, to be
the fixed policy of Great Britain to check our trade in grain to the
Mediterranean. This is too doubtful to be assumcd, but fit for enquiry.

As to the restriction in corresponding with the ministers of Sweden and
Denmark, with regard to an armed neutrality, the reader can compare the text
with the commentary, and decide whether a minister like Jay, who had justified
the British in detaining the western posts, was likely to negociate with the
northern powers, under such equivocal and tremulous injunctions.

Another part of the above paragraph, refers to getting the British ministry to
obtain the liberation of American prisoners in Algiers. Our minister was to
tell how productive this step would be of perfect conciliation. If the British
had desired the latter, American sailors would never have been carried as
slaves into Barbary. It was publicly understood in both countries, that the
court of London, by patching up the Portuguese truce, were the real authors of
the Algerine piracies. Nostro quoque seculo monstrum. To such atrocious, such
abandoned political bloodhounds, whose guilt rivals the darkest precedent in
the records of perdition, the application of this trimming, fawning style, was
perfectly useless. It was like telling a highwayman how greatly you would thank
him for returning your purse. Jay, if in earnest, ought to have assumed a
different tone. You are not only, he might have said, corsairs in person, but
corsairs by proxy. You have not only accumulated upon our commerce every wrong
that British bucanneers were capable of inflicting, but with a meanness and
baseness which no language can describe, you have summoned to your aid the
dregs of the human race. Till you make reparation, common sense loudly exclaims
that no treaty between us can repay the trouble of subscription.

The last sentence of the above extract from Jay's instructions, speaks of
something as a secret, which was in reality known to the whole world. England
adhered to the policy of checking, not merely American trade in grain to the
Mediterranean, but American trade in every commodity to every quarter of the
world. Lord Sheffield had even wrote a book, extremely popular in England,
wherein he recommended that protection from the powers of Barbary should not be
granted by England to American commerce. This was, in other words, recommending
that these robbers should be turned loose upon us, at the first opportunity.
When Jay went to England, Lord Sheffield, the apostle of this project, was high
in the confidence of Mr. Pit, so that the conduct of the latter was merely an
illustration of the principles of the former. Yet our Executive speaks, in the
instructions, as if this news had been conveyed by some secret channel, though
the doctrine and practice of the British ministry were alike notorious. Nay,
Mr. Tench Coxe had wrote an answer to Sheffield, and in particular to this
Algerine plan, several years before Mr. Jay went to England. Thus our Executive
might have found full evidence as to the fixed policy of Britain, in the store
of every bookseller in Philadelphia. The next part of the instructions is in
these words.

Such are the outlines of the conduct which the President wishes you to pursue.
He is aware that at this distance, and during the present instability of public
events, he cannot undertake to prescribe rules which shall be irrevocable; you
will, therefore, consider the ideas herein expressed, as amounting to
recommendations only, which, in your discretion you may modify, as seems most
beneficial to the United States, except in the following cases, which are
immutable.

1. That, as the British ministry will doubtless be solicitous to detach us
from France, and may, probably, make some overtures of this kind; you will
inform them that the government of the United States will not derogate from our
treaties and engagements with France, and that experience has shown that we can
be honest in our duties to the British nation, without laying ourselves under
any particular restraints as to other nations; and,

2. That no treaty of commerce be concluded, contrary to the foregoing
prohibition.

This extract concludes the instructions. A short analysis will evince that
they are not remarkable for perspicuity. We shall begin at their outset, and
attempt a short sketch of their merits.

The first object stated in the instructions is, to obtain redress for the
piracies, or, as the paper terms it, for the vexations and spoliations
committed on our commerce. The most atrocious of these vexations was the
impressment of American seamen; yet, in the whole text of the instructions, of
which about five-sixths have been exactly cited, nothing distinct or decisive
is said on that point. We have inserted above, an entire copy of the whole
nineteen articles upon which Mr. Jay was authorized to found a commercial
treaty. In these, nothing levels at the practice of impressment, unless it can
be implicated under the general phrase, "as to the safety of neutral commerce,"
and restricting the opportunities of vexations in visiting vessels. Restriction
is one thing, and prohibition is another; so that even if impressment had been
really implied, the language was too vague and equivocal for the object. The
treaty, as it now stands, contains not one single word about the protection of
American seamen. After Grenville and Jay had almost finished the articles of
this paper, Jay sent a note to the British minister, containing eighteen
corrections, or additions, that had occurred to him. Only one of them, viz. the
sixteenth, deserves publication here. It is in these words.

An article ought to be added, to prevent the impressment of each other's
people.

To this clause, the answer was thus.

Lord Grenville can see no reason whatever, why such an article should not be
added. No farther notice was taken by Mr. Jay of the business. As to the
authenticity of this singular correspondence, it has been first had from a
member of the House of Representatives of last Congress, who read it when lying
on the table of the Senate, and the substance of it was published, last fall,
in British Honor and Humanity. It was since repeated to the author by a member
of the Senate. As for the merit of our envoy, in this case, a thousand volumes
of diplomatic history would not furnish such another instance of negligence in
the duty of office.

The instructions next observe, that the debts due to England are to be put
outright In passing, one cannot fail to admire the classical style of our
cabinet.
in a diplomatic discussion, as being certainly of a judicial nature to be
decided by our courts. Instead of this Mr. Jay erected an arbitrary board of
five commissioners. Thus American debtors were, with one dash of his pen,
deprived of the right of a trial by jury. The President and Senate ratified
this breach of justice and of law.

The instructions likewise say, that the British government, having denied the
abetting of the Indians, we must, of course, acquit them. On the same
principle, an American debtor, denying his debt before the five commissioners,
they must, of course, acquit him.

Mr. Jay was also to consider, the inexecution and infraction of the treaty, as
standing on distinct grounds from the vexations and spoliations; so that no
adjustment of the former, is to be influenced by the latter. The general face
of the treaty plainly sets off the debts due to Britain, against the detention
of the western posts, and the piracies in the West Indies. The public have been
sufficiently tired with harping upon Jay's treaty; but the business of
compensation stands at present as follows. Providing that American merchants
recover their damages in a British court of admiralty, they are not to receive
immediate payment. The British claims on American debtors are to be held up as
a counter-poise; and, when the balance shall be struck between the two classes
of claims, the British expect and say, that several millions of dollars will be
found in their favor. This extraordinary mode of compensation for piracy, was
related by a person high in office in the British service, to a Senator of the
present Congress, from whom the account is here given.

We now come to the question, whether Mr. Jay broke his instructions? A few
literal citations from them will decide this point. On p. 176, there has
already been quoted a paragraph beginning thus: but if a treaty of commerce
cannot be formed upon a basis as advantageous as this, YOU ARE NOT TO CONCLUDE
OR SIGN ANY SUCH, it being conceived, etc. The whole paragraph is somewhat
confused, but it clearly enjoins a prohibition upon Mr. Jay of signing any
treaty, unless he could obtain an agreement to the whole of his own terms,
which the Executive, as above, says, could not be expected. Thus we have one
step.

A subsequent passage already quoted, has these words: you will therefore
consider the ideas herein expressed, as amounting to recommendations only,
which in your discretion you may modify, as seems most beneficial to the United
States, except in the two following cases, which are IMMUTABLE.

The two cases are above inserted. One of them is, that no treaty of commerce
be concluded or signed, contrary to the foregoing prohibition. These are the
closing words of the instructions; and hence they must be regarded as
explanatory of what goes before them. The preceding prohibition can only allude
to that passage where Mr. Jay is forbidden from signing a treaty, unless he
obtained every thing on his own conditions. The intermediate reference to his
discretion is instantly checked by the prohibition of signing. The case may
then be reduced to three points.

1. Mr. Jay was prohibited from signing a treaty unless on certain terms, that
were not within the compass of expectation.

2. Mr. Jay signed a treaty.

3. So far from obtaining the terms required, he agreed to a treaty almost
entirely the reverse of them. For instance, Free ships to make free goods is
inverted. The security of emigrant manufacturers is unnoticed. No admission is
obtained to British fishing grounds. In the case of an Indian war, we have no
restriction of military supplies from Britain to the savages. The free export
of arms and military stores is forbidden, in time of war, for the eighteenth
article of the treaty declares them contraband. Thus, out of the eighteen
injunctions above quoted, the third, fifth, sixth, ninth, and sixteenth, are
either neglected or contradicted; and other infractions, of an inferior nature,
may readily be found. But, passing by such trite materials, we proceed at once
to the two capital points of security to American commerce and of avoiding all
cause of offense to France. As to the first, the British continue at this day
(June 19th, 1797,) to plunder, though two years and seven months have past over
since Mr. Jay signed his treaty. With regard to the second, the French were,
from the first, highly and reasonably exasperated at the conditions of the
treaty, and a war with that republic is likely to be the consequence.

Thus, in all their material parts, Mr. Jay violated his powers. We asked for a
fish, and he gave us a serpent. It has been whispered that a second set of
instructions were transmitted to our envoy. They were never laid before the
Senate, and it follows, that, if they really existed, which is extremely
doubtful, the Senate knew nothing about them. They can form no part of our
envoy's vindication, unless he shall choose to produce them.

The tenth article, as to the injustice and impolicy of sequestrating British
debts, was written, as it now stands, by Mr. Jay. This evinces, if evidence
were wanting, that the whole affair was an instrument of party.

We have now ascertained that Mr. Jay trespassed his orders. The next question
is, by what motives he could be induced to do so? In this country it has been
the custom to hold up Americans as a race of superior beings, and from that
theory the result is, that, for Grenville to purchase our federal envoy, was
impracticable. But the tenth article of the treaty, by an express implication,
arraigns Mr. Dayton and a considerable party in Congress, as meditating an act
of injustice. Camillus, also Supra, chap. IV.
, in all the plenitude of his eloquence, can find no powers of language equal
to the baseness of the Daytonian project.

From these estimates of American purity, every man will make what inference he
thinks fit, as to the probable sale of our treaty. Speaking of this country,
Thomas Pain has indeed told us that the innocence of her character, that won
the hearts of all nations in her favor, may, a thousand years hence, sound
like a romance; her inimitable virtue, as if it had never been Pain to
Washington, p. 8.
. At the date of only ten years, from writing of the above sentence, the tale
sounds not like a romance, to be sure, but very like an untruth. It forms a
part of that empty blabbing of national vanity, which has been remarked among
every race of mankind, from Greenland to Cape Horn. Without launching into the
ocean of the revolutionary virtue of the United States, let us hear what the
Assembly of Georgia have to say about its situation, in 1796. The picture makes
an interesting part of the history of that year.

GEORGIA, BURKE COUNTY, 16th of January, 1796.
Clement Lanier, esquire one of the Representatives in the legislature of this
state, who, being duly sworn, on the Holy Evangelists of the Almighty God,
deposes and says, that, during the last session of the legislature of Augusta,
in the winter of the year 1795, he being a member of the House of
Representatives, and sitting on the same seat with Henry Grindat, another of
the members of that house, before the speaker took the chair, the said Grindat
recommended to him to be in favor of the sale of the western lands, for that
he the said Grindat, understood it was worthy our notice; for Mr. Thomas Wylly,
a Senator from Essingham county, had told the said Grindat, that he, the said
Wylly, could have eight or ten negroes for his part: and the deponent further
says, that, on the same day, in the afternoon, the said Thomas Wylly, came
into the lobby of the house, and beckoned to the deponent, who followed him
out, when the conversation commenced about the Yazoo act; that at the same
time, a Mr. Denison came by, and asked what we were upon. The said Wylly
answered, the land business; the said Denison then came up, and Wylly withdrew;
that Denison then told the deponent, that he did not pretend to advise any
member to be in favor of selling the land, but that those who were in favor
of selling it, were handsomely provided for, and that if the deponent thought
proper to be in favor of selling, that he should have part; and that the said
Denison said, that he was a purchaser of such of the member's parts, as had a
mind to sell, but understood that some of the members pretended to ask eight
and ten negroes for a share, or their shares; he said he could not give so
much, but the deponent might depend he would purchase: the deponent further
says, that, previous to any of the before recited circumstances, Mr. William
Longstreet, one of the members of the said legislature, frequently called on
the deponent, and asked why he was not in favor of selling the western lands,
who answered, he did not think it right to sell to companies of speculators.
The deponent at this time, wished to make further discovery of the conduct of
the members on that sale, and therefore affected to be inclined to come into
the measure, and, by that means, kept up a conversation about it occasionally;
that on the day the bill received its first reading, before the house convened,
said Longstreet spoke to the deponent to get his approbation to the sale. The
deponent asked him to show him what security the members had of the purchase,
when the said Longstreet presented a certificate, entitling the bearer to two
shares of twenty-five thousand acres each, signed by Nathaniel Pendleton,
chairman. The deponent then told the said Longstreet, that that was not what he
had formerly told him was a member's share; for the said Longstreet had before
said, a member's share was seventy-five thousand acres. That the said
Longstreet, then told the deponent if he would wait a few minutes, or an hour,
he would bring him another certificate from Gunn's company, for the same number
of acres. That the deponent in order to disengage himself from the
conversation, then said the security was not sufficient to entitle him to the
land. That the said Longstreet then told the deponent that if he was not
satisfied with the certificates, he would give him one thousand dollars for it,
or for them. The deponent then presented the certificates to the said
Longstreet, and went into the house, which was the last interview he had on the
subject. The deponent further says, that the shares offered him as aforesaid,
were expressly designed to induce him, the deponent, to vote for the bill for
disposing of the western territory.

(Signed,) CLEM. LANIER.
Sworn in presence of the committee of the House of Representatives, before me,
THOMAS LEWIS, J. P.

The above deposition is one of those published by the legislature of Georgia,
respecting the Yazoo business. It was happy for America, that, in June, 1795,
the terrestrial speculations of general Gunn did not prevent his attendance at
Philadelphia as a senator. An absence so fatal would have deprived this
continent of the British treaty, for which he voted, of that maritime security
which now constitutes the pride of the seaman, and of that compensation in
specie, which now cracks the coffers of the merchant Even if the British
government could preserve its existence, this boasted compensation would be a
very remote object. It is amusing to hear people yet say, that, after a peace
with the emperor, Britain will still maintain her supremacy at sea. France, in
the first place, can exclude her manufactures from every country in Europe,
Russia, perhaps, excepted. This cuts off three-fourths, at least, of British
commerce, and one-half of her revenue. Second, Other objects being out of the
way, France will turn her chief attention to her navy, which, in a short time,
may rival that of England, as it nearly did in the last war. Third, The
explosion of paper money, and the reduction of revenue, will soon disable
England from maintaining a navy, equal to what she supports at present. Fourth,
France has, in arms, ten or twelve hundred thousand men. A great number of them
are proprietors in the national domains. Many may be employed upon canals and
other public works. But, for the internal tranquillity of the republic, myriads
must be discharged upon some foreign enterprise. England will most likely be
the scene of action, and a lesser effort than that which conquered Flanders,
would convert her into a French province. Though the federal party in Congress
cannot see the danger of this event, yet Arthur Young, and Edmund Burke,
perceive it very distinctly.

As the friends of order are constantly talking of French ambition, and its
effects, let them read the following account of the emperor. It is here copied
from a London newspaper, of March 23d, 1796.

The Austrian share of the new partition of Poland includes four thousand four
hundred and fifteen square miles of territory, two hundred and seven towns,
four thousand six hundred and five villages, and one million one hundred and
six thousand one hundred and seventy-eight souls. The miles must be of some
German standard, otherwise this part of Poland would be twice as populous, to
its extent, as Yorkshire. What shall we think of this imperial usurper
enslaving, at one stroke, eleven hundred thousand defenseless people? With such
facts before us, it is foolery to speak of jacobin depredations. This is one of
those crowned robbers, into whose alliance the federal politicians wish to
precipitate America.


.

CHAPTER VI.
British depredations continued. -- Mercantile selfishness. -- The brig Fame.
-- The schooner Andrew. -- Joshua Whiting. -- The brig Columbia. -- The sloop
Dove. -- The May Flower. -- The Eliza. -- Murder of captain Bosson. -- Snuff
Excise. -- Memoirs of ALEXANDER HAMILTON, late Secretary of the Treasury. --
His singular mode of correspondence with certain persons. -- Remarks on his
connection with Reynolds.

TO commence this chapter, a few additional specimens of British amity are
inserted. A letter from captain Thorndike Deland, dated Kingston, 1st of April,
1796, to a merchant in Philadelphia, contains, for publication, a list of
twelve American vessels taken and carried into that port. Captain Deland
farther says, that he had heard of twenty-seven other ships at Tortola, which
were in jeopardy. He informs, that all Americans, when carried into Kingston,
were, after examination, turned ashore, without provision for their support.
Any one having concern in a house, or having even a factor at St. Domingo, or
any French port, was deemed a Frenchman, and his property was, on that account,
condemned. On the 21st of April, 1796, the schooner William and Mary, captain
Shaw, arrived at Portsmouth, New Hampshire, in thirty-eight days from Kingston.
When he left that place, the impressment of American seamen had not subsided.
On the 5th of May, the schooner Mermaid, captain Tabet, arrived from the Mole,
at New York. His mate, a native American, was pressed by the Regulus. Several
other Americans were, at the same time, pressed from different vessels. The
Mermaid had sailed from New York, with a load of timber, on account of the
British government.

The Minerva, of the 13th of April, expresses surprise, that, if all the
accounts of impressments were true, they had little or no effect in deterring
American seamen from entering into the service. In a full public meeting of
merchants, in this city, last week, says Webster, the question was asked,
whether the British impressments had operated to discourage seamen from
entering into service? The reply was, that no such effect had been perceived.
-- If seamen do not complain, how happens it [that] printers take up their
cause with so much zeal? Seamen do complain, of which the numerous details in
this volume, and which are not, perhaps, a twentieth part of the whole, compose
an ample attestation. But a common seaman has more difficulty in changing his
profession, than almost any other person. This explains the general adherence
to it, even in spite of British crimping. Webster is angry at printers for
taking up the cause of seamen with so much zeal. But, if they are not to be
defended with ardour, upon what point should zeal be excited? If circumstances
require it, the presses of America will continue to remonstrate against such
wrongs, when the bones of Webster shall be as rotten as his heart. As to the
query started in the mercantile meeting, the members would have gained more
credit by subscribing to form a fund for the relief of such seamen, or the
families of such seamen, as might be impressed while in their service. This
would have been acting like men. It would have been acting like ENGLISHMEN;
for, at London or Liverpool, a proposal of that kind would, under a similar
situation, have been adopted. But, in the United States, it seems that, if a
merchant can only save himself, he is perfectly indifferent, what becomes of
the people in his service.

A Charleston newspaper, of the 8th of April, 1796, contains the copy of a
sentence past by judge Green, of Bermuda. It is dated the 6th of January
preceding, and respected the brig Fame. In summer, 1795, the Fame sailed from
Charleston, for Bourdeaux. On her return she was captured, and taken into
Bermuda. The vessel and cargo were both American property. But one of the
owners, who went along with her, had staid behind, in France, to dispose of
some remaining part of her cargo. This accident, in the eyes of Green,
transformed him into a French citizen, and, on that pretense, both ship and
loading were confiscated. Thus the British went on in the West Indies, while
Mr. Bayard was transmitting to Philadelphia his important assurances about
indemnification, and the resentment of the London Court of Admiralty at the
decrees of Green.

Reader! unless you are a Britishtory, or the British editor of the Columbian
Sentinel, or Harrison Gray Otis, or Robert Goodloe Harper, or some other
curiosity of their cast, who is fitter for a workhouse than a state-house
During the present session, the speaker has signified in the house, that Harper
spoke like a MADMAN. This justifies the text. The following traits will help to
conjecture in what way congressional business has sometimes been conducted.

Previous to the election of a clerk for the Representatives, in the present
Congress, (Supra, chap. 3d,) Dr. Smith convened his party without doors, and
they agreed in the nomination of a candidate to oppose Mr. Beckley. Next
morning the votes were taken by ballot. The republican members had each to
write the name of their candidate; but the friends of order pulled theirs ready
written out of their pockets. As great part of them could know nothing of Mr.
Beckley but by name, this promptitude shows the exactness of their discipline,
and what praise is due to the diligence of our legislative Martinet.

In the Senate, matters proceed still more straightly. For instance, a few
weeks ago, five resolutions were moved in that body, and it was agreed to
ballot, next day, for committees upon each of them. The federal majority
consisted of seventeen; and so nicely had matters been ascertained without
doors, that the five committees, having each three members, were elected
exclusively out of the seventeen. The minority have no share of influence
whatever. They are debarred even from the appearance of it.

Compare this plain account with the plaster which Mr. Adams laid upon the
Senate in his late farewell address. It might be condensed into a few words.
Gentlemen, you are the greatest legislators in the world. -- No sir, YOU are
the greatest, and we are confident that you will make us all judges or
ambassadors, as early as possible.


, you must revere the magnanimity of President Washington, who, in his last
speech to Congress, disdained all notice of these British peccadiloes.

About the 23d of April, Captain Mercer, of the sloop Ambuscade, arrived in
this port from Bermuda. He brought a list of eight American vessels with their
cargoes which were condemned at that place; and of seven others which were
libelled. One of the latter was a brig from Boston. Captain Mercer had heard
that her captain had died of abuse which he received from the prize-master. A
paragraph of the same date says, that, at Nevis, the schooner Andrew, captain
Montayne, of Philadelphia, had her mate and seamen pressed by a British
schooner. They were all Americans; and had protections. The particulars are
related in the captain's protest, as transmitted to his owner.

These maritime anecdotes are valuable, as showing the character of that
people, who, in the midst of such injuries, could wish to appropriate for Jay's
treaty. It would be vain to look in the history of England, for any measure so
deplorably despicable. To proceed in a regular succession, to the end of the
year 1796, would occupy a large volume. At present, only three or four
incidents of this kind shall be added, as they come to hand in the order of
time.

Joshua Whiting was a seaman on board of the American brig Samuel. At
Port-au-Prince, he, and four others of the crew, were pressed by a British
frigate. Three of them, after eleven days, escaped by swimming, in the course
of which, one man had the calf of his leg bitten off by a shark. Another of
them was retaken, received four dozen of lashes, and was put in irons. Whiting,
and the cripple, escaped, after losing their whole adventure, besides being
cruelly treated. In the Boston Chronicle, of the 18th of April, Whiting
published a narrative, of which the above is the substance. Instead of voting
money for the treaty, Congress might as well have voted some relief of the poor
man who lost the calf of his leg, under that emblem of abasement, that contempt
of nations, that nautical DETERSORIUM, the American flag!

The brig Columbia, and the schooner Unity, both of Newburyport, sailed from
Port Lewis, on the 7th of March, 1796. Next day, they were brought to by the
Ganges, a British seventy-four; and a schooner, attendant to the ship. This
schooner, says the account, is one of the fifteen pilot boats built in
Virginia, not long since, which are all employed as attendants to the British
men of war. They were sent into Montserrat, examined, and on the 14th,
dismissed, upon paying forty-four pounds, four shillings, and ten pence, as the
expense of their examination.

The sloop Dove, of New Haven, in Connecticut, had gone on a voyage to the
West Indies. While lying at Antigua, she was boarded by a boat's crew from the
Narcissus, who took away Benjamin Eastman. He was a native American, and as
such, had a protection. On the 3d of April, 1796, the master and mate of the
Dove made oath to this fact, at New Haven. James Smith, master of the May
Flower, of Norfolk, published a declaration, dated the 3d of March, 1796. One
of his men, an American, was impressed at Port Jeremie, by the Regulus. Captain
Smith, himself, was kept, for three days, a prisoner, on board of the frigate,
and half starved. He left about thirty or forty American sailors in her. Almost
the whole of them had protections, and he saw some of them severely punished
for attempting to escape. The newspapers containing these miserable details,
are crammed with exulting encomiums on the number of petitioners to Congress,
in favor of the British treaty.

On Tuesday, the 31st of May, 1796, the Speaker of the House of
Representatives, laid before them, a letter from ten American captains, whose
vessels were then lying at Jamaica. Their seamen were on board of British ships
of war, where they were treated like slaves. They said that their brethren at
Algiers were not greater objects of sympathy. These ten captains might as well
have addressed a memorial, on the same subject, to any old woman, in any
chimney corner on the continent. Congress have no fleet, and they can hardly
raise money to pay the national debt. In this unparalleled state of prosperity,
what would you have us to do?

The Aurora of June 2d, 1796, contained a long account of the capture of the
Eliza, a vessel, American property, by the British. She sailed from New York,
for St. Thomas's, and had orders to touch at St. Bartholomew's. She was taken
by captain Cochran, of the Thetis frigate. The supercargo, a Danish subject,
was stripped to the skin. The ship was libelled before the Vice-Admiralty Court
at Bermuda, under pretense of being French property. The trunks of the
supercargo were sealed up, and he was himself thrown pennyless out of the ship,
without a second shirt to his back. The captain and crew were put on shore,
destitute of subsistence. Six or seven days after the ship and cargo had been
libelled, the cattle were sold at half their prime cost, bought in by the
agents who sold them, and sold a second time, next day, at a considerable
profit.

A Boston newspaper, of the 26th of May, contains a deposition, dated at St.
George's, the 27th of April, preceding. It was emitted by the second mate of
the brigantine Polly, John Bosson, late master. The vessel was on her way from
Demarara, to Boston, when the Cleopatra, a British privateer, took her. Soon
after, the prize-master quarrelled with captain Bosson, and wantonly beat him
in a most shocking manner. This is the substance of the deposition. Within six
days after, captain Bosson died of his bruises. He was only in the twenty-fifth
year of his age.

Such was the picture of national independence and dignity that America, during
1796, exhibited by sea. At some future opportunity the narrative will, perhaps,
be resumed and completed. In the mean time, these instances may be compared, by
an impartial citizen, with the censure bestowed by Barras, on the government of
the United States. He can then attempt to decide, whether Mr. Washington had,
last year, greater cause to complain of England, or Mr. Adams, in the present
year, of France. We shall now proceed to examine some federal transactions by
land. In a work embracing such various objects, many points of importance are
sure of being omitted. Still, however, even an imperfect history, if candid and
accurate, is better than none. The facility acquired by experience, and the
resources derived from public patronage may, hereafter, furnish means for
producing a more regular, and less defective, performance.

Among the memorials presented to Congress, in spring, 1796, perhaps none
deserved more attention, than that of the snuff-makers of this city, respecting
the excise on their manufacture. On the 5th of June, 1794, an act had past in
Congress, for levying a duty of six cents per pound, upon all snuff,
manufactured in the United States. As this law did not answer the end proposed,
it was repealed, and on the 3d of March, 1795, another was enacted in its room.
By the l4ter, two thousand two hundred and forty dollars were to be paid for
every snuff mill, with stampers and grinders, and sums proportionably less, for
those of inferior effect. As a relief to the snuff-maker, he received a
drawback of six cents upon every pound of snuff, exported out of the country.
The first of these two laws originated with Mr. Alexander Hamilton, then
Secretary of the Trersury. Both of them met with warm opposition in Congress.
Both were, in an eminent degree, absurd, oppressive, and impracticable. Both
deserve to be held in remembrance, as proofs of what shocking despotism the
legislature, even of a free country, may possibly commit. They were said to be
laws of experiment, by those who were least eager in their defense. But a
government has no right of making experiments in opposition to probability, on
the property of the public. The memorial was presented on the 9th of February,
1796, and is in these words.

To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States, in Congress
assembled: The memorial of the subscribers, manufacturers of snuff in the city
of Philadelphia, Respectfully represents,
THAT whilst the United States exhibit an universal appearance of public
prosperity, and of private happiness, the memorialists feel deep regret and
mortification upon their being once more compelled to address you in the
solitary language of dissatisfaction. They have sometime ago entered into a
struggle to support a second excise law upon their manufacture. Your
predecessors, the late Congress, gave a fair trial to the first act, which
attempted to levy a duty on snuff in proportion to the pound weight. This law,
as the honorable Congress well knows, operated at once like a stroke of
annihilation. No excise could be paid, at least in the state of Pennsylvania;
for, out of seven snuff-mills, six were instantly shut up, to the infinite
injury of the manufacturers. Their stock lay dead on their hands. Their
customers dispersed, and in many cases declined to pay the outstanding debts,
because the subscribers, having no power to manufacture snuff, were unable to
give them further credit. The buildings for carrying on their manufactories,
erected at an expense of many thousand dollars, were at once converted into
sepulchers of American industry; and, in the vain attempt to extract a revenue,
where every moral and physical circumstance rendered it impossible, six months
of business and of human life were lost. Even the seventh snuff-mill, which
actually was entered, never paid any duty.

Every feature in the history of this first excise upon snuff, justified the
energetic presage of a gentleman, who was a member of the last, and is one in
the present House of Representatives of Congress. He declared in his place that
the act would terminate not in revenue, but destruction. The accuracy of his
prediction has been verified by experience, and fully acknowledged and
attested on the floor of Congress. The effects of that memorable statute were
perhaps unrivalled, even in the tragical and exterminating annals of excise.
Like a pestilence, or a tempest, this law blasted and swept before it every
blossom of industry, and had your memorialists remained ever since entirely
unmolested by excise laws, yet some years of good fortune would have been
requisite for enabling them to recover the ground which they had lost.

That, with the deepest astonishment, the memorialists have, during the present
session, heard of several petitions presented to Congress, chiefly as they
believe from snuff-makers in the east^^^^ states, requesting the repeal of the
present excise, in order to replace it by the former law for levying the duty
by the pound weight. These petitioners have indeed honestly represented many
insurmountable objections to the present law, and which your memorialists
admit, as well as they do. But it does not follow, that the present extremely
oppressive excise on snuff ought to be superceded for the sake of adopting
another statute which is infinitely worse, and which has already been tried and
cast aside as impracticable. The ruinous effects of both these laws, have been
fully stated in a short history of excise laws, drawn up at the desire and
under the inspection of a number of manufacturers in Philadelphia, and of which
a printed copy has lately been transmitted to each of the members of the two
houses of Congress, and to the principal officers of the federal government.

In the last act for an excise upon snuff, a drawback of six cents per pound
has been allowed upon the exportation. This drawback was liable to various
abuses. If not granted at all, snuff could not be exported after paying an
excise, and this would tend to depress the American manufacturer. But, in order
to be entitled to the drawback, it was requisite to obtain a certificate of the
snuff having been duly landed at the destined port: the chief exportation was
to the British West Indies, where American snuff is contraband, and
consequently it was quite impossible to get the requisite certificates. But
farther, nothing could be more easy than to make a pretended exportation of
snuff to some island in the West Indies, where it was not prohibited, obtain a
regular certificate of its being landed, and then smuggle it back to this
country. Thus one barrel of snuff, might receive twenty drawbacks. Such frauds
are practiced every day in Britain. Many merchants on the river Thames support
their families in splendour by drawbacks, procured from their government for
imaginary exportations. Your memorialists have been assured, that one bale of
muslin, supposed to be worth five hundred guineas, received in this way a
drawback of twelve and an half per cent forty times over, so that this bale
earned two thousand five hundred guineas.

Trash of any kind, or even sand, might be exported from the United States,
under the name of snuff, and obtain the six cents per pound of drawback. Frauds
of this kind could not be prevented without a multiplicity of inspectors, whose
salaries would swallow up the revenue.

That the eighty-fourth and ninety-third sections of the British tobacco excise
act of 1789, fully show, to what length impostures of this sort have been
carried in that country. The former of these two clauses, inflicts a penalty of
two hundred pounds, for the mixture of cut walnut leaves, of hops, of sycamore,
or any other leaves or herbs, with the leaves of tobacco. The injunctions in
the ninety-third section, against mixing snuff with other materials, are still
more pointed. The penalty of two hundred pounds is levied for mixing with
snuff, any fustick, yellow honey, touch-wood, log-wood, red or guinea-wood,
braziletto or Jamaica-wood, Nicaragua-wood, Saunders-wood or any other sort of
wood, or any walnut tree leaves, hops, sycamore, or any other leaves or herbs.
This singular enumeration ascertains how far such practices have gone.

That there is another material objection to the present mode of granting a
drawback. The price of different kinds of snuff differs very considerably, and
yet the same drawback of six cents is granted, without distinction, upon all
kinds. Richard Gernon and Co. in their petition, state, that the snuff which
they have been exporting is worth ten cents per pound, besides the six cents of
drawback. Thus its value, after paying the duty, would be about one shilling
and three pence per pound. The memorialists are now selling snuff at two
shillings and six pence and three shillings per pound, and were they to export
it, a drawback of at least twelve cents per pound would be necessary to put
them on a level with Gernon and Co. who receive six cents per pound drawback on
an article not half so valuable.

The memorialists, in their publication already referred to, stated the
possibility that the drawbacks for a single manufacturer might amount to sixty
thousand dollars per annum, and if a dozen such manufacturers were to be found
in the United States, that they would drain the public treasury of seven
hundred and twenty thousand dollars a year, a sum which all the excises in the
country could not cover. To the great astonishment of the memorialists, this
prediction received a partial fulfillment almost at the instant when it was
made. The revenue derived from the mills, entered in the state of Pennsylvania,
comes only to eight thousand three hundred and eighty dollars. On the 26th
January last, the drawbacks, at the port of Philadelphia, since the new act
began to operate, amounted to eight thousand five hundred and twenty-three
dollars and thirty-nine cents, which is already one hundred and forty-three
dollars, and thirty-nine cents, more than the total revenue for this state.
Almost the whole of this drawback has been paid to Messrs. Richard Gernon and
Co. who have been only about four months in business, and within that period,
have got back above five thousand dollars additional, besides the two thousand
two hundred and forty dollars, which they paid, according to law, for entering
their mill. It is not the design of your memorialists to cast the slightest
reflection on the conduct of this manufacturing company. On the contrary, if
government has laid itself open by a law which defeats its own purposes, and
sinks a revenue where it expected to raise one, the manufacturers are in common
justice, entitled, to take every legal advantage of such an oversight. Nay,
they beg leave to state it as a matter of absolute certainty, that if this law
is not repeated, a number of snuff-makers will immediately enter into the
business of exportation. They only forbear altering their mi^^s, and adapting
them for the business, till they see whether Congress will adhere to the law or
not; for the example of Richard Gernon and Co. proves how easily a snuff-maker,
with the requisite degree of capital and enterprise, may take from the public
treasury in the shape of drawbacks ten times as much as he pays into it. Your
memorialists cannot believe that Congress, or indeed any legislative assembly
on earth, would suffer the longer existence of a law so pregnant with the most
preposterous and ruinous consequences. A few weeks ago, Messrs. Gernon and Co.
presented to Congress a memorial, representing the immense expense which they
have been at in preparing their mill to grind snuff for exportation. Among
other details, they state their having, in the first four months of their
copartnery, purchased four hundred and thirty hogsheads of tobacco, and that
they are continuing to make large purchases of this kind. At that rate, they
will, in the course of twelve months, purchase, altogether, twelve hundred and
ninety hogsheads. Your memorialists estimate, that, when grinded into snuff,
the drawback on this quantity will amount to about ninety thousand dollars. The
company will thus gain, by the public revenue, eighty-eight thousand dollars,
the drawback exceeding the revenue in the proportion of forty-five to one. This
is a circumstance perfectly novel in the history of taxation.

But further, if this affair is suffered to go on in its present way, Congress
may soon expect to see twenty other snuff-mills working on the same plan, and
to an equal extent, with that of Gernon and Co.

If the government of this country intend, seriously, and steadily, to give a
drawback of six cents per pound on the exportation of American snuff, it is the
most acceptable and joyful intelligence that your memorialists could ever hear
of. They will immediately repair their mills, extend their purchases, and they
have not a doubt of clearing, from the drawback, before the end of a year,
twenty or thirty times the sum which they are to pay into the treasury. Twenty
manufacturers, like Gernon and Co. would each of them thus cost government
ninety thousand dollars, or, collectively, one million eight hundred thousand
dollars per annum. The original object of the law was said to be a revenue of
forty thousand dollars; there is an equal chance, that, in search of it,
forty-five times that sum will be sunk. It has been abovementioned, that the
drawbacks, within this state, already exceed the revenue. The first year of
this law expires on the last day of March next, and, before that time, there
will most likely be a balance of several thousand dollars against the revenue,
at the port of Philadelphia. But if the law s^^nd^ unrepealed, it is probable
that two hundred thousand (...) will not make up the deficiencies in this state
alone, for the next succeeding year.

(...) their history of excise, the manufacturers stated the principle, that
all taxes ought to be levied in proportion to the ^^^^^um of personal property.
Since their publication took place, they have seen this doctrine justified by
an authority of the highest nature* The new constitution of France, in the
sixteenth article of the first section, lays it down as a fundamental maxim,
that, "as all taxes are established for the general good, they ought to be
apportioned among the taxed in the ratio of their means." Under the head of
finances, also, in the same work, it is declared, "that taxes of all kinds are
assessed among all those liable to contribution according to their means." --
Your memorialists cannot deny that the word excise is to be found in the letter
of the federal constitution; but they strongly contend, that it is entirely
hostile to the spirit of that instrument. One of the principle fabricators of
that production, was the present judge Wilson. When the subject was debated in
the convention of Pennsylvania, he argued that it was necessary to give all
power to government, but he was certain that an excise never would be imposed,
unless in the last extremity. From the opinion which the convention of
Pennsylvania expressed of excise, at that time, and which the assembly of this
state have expressed since, it is evident that they never would have consented
to ratify such a stipulation, if they had conceived that it was to become one
of the first, and favorite resources of government.

That your memorialists, cannot help considering this excise on snuff as
coming, exactly, under the description of an ex post facto law. They had no
contemplation of such a burden, when they built their mills, and gave credit,
to so great an extent, to their customers. Their mills would not, at present,
sell for one half of the money which they originally cost, and one half of them
are, at this hour, standing idle. This, of itself, would be sufficient to
destroy any set of manufacturers. Your memorialists likewise beg leave to
state, as their opinion, that if the merchants and manufacturers of Britain had
a liberty of petitioning Congress, they could not solicit a more favorable
mode of conduct for their own interest, than persuading you to trammel, and
distress, the manufacturers of America with excises, which do not pay the
expense of their collection, which in one state produce bankruptcy, and in a
second, rebellion. They humbly regard it as chimerical to term America
independent of Britain, while we are forced to send to England for a coat, and
to Ireland for a shirt. It is this commercial chain of dependence in which
Britain has entangled so many nations, that constitutes the essence and soul of
her strength, and that enables her to bully, to combat, and to rob her
neighbors. It is her superiority in manufactures, which has enabled this
kingdom to subsidize and embattle pirates and cutthroats, in every corner of
the world, while she herself may be termed a bucanneer of Atlantean magnitude,
whose grasp embraces the terraqueous globe, and whose stature reaches from
earth to heaven.

To conclude, your memorialists ardently flatter themselves with a hope, that
Congress will see the expediency, and even the positive and inevitable
necessity, for an immediate and complete abolition of the excise upon snuff
made in America. Though some ill-advised manufacturers to the eastward have
called for the restoration of the act of 1794, the principal snuff-makers, in
that part of the union, regard it with as much abhorrence, as the memorialists
themselves do. To continue the present excise, and withhold the drawback, would
be to prohibit, in a great measure, the manufacture of tobacco, the second
staple of the continent; and it has already been demonstrated, that, to
continue the law, and the drawback, in their present shape, is only to squander
forty-five dollars in a fruitless search after one.

Your memorialists, therefore, earnestly solicit an entire repeal of the excise
upon snuff, and they, as in duty bound, will ever pray, etc.

THOMAS LEIPER, and Co. HAMILTON and SON, ISAAC JONES, JACOB BENNINGHOVE, JACOB
BENNINGHOVE, jun. PHILIP STIMBLE,

Philadelphia, February 8th, 1796.

The statute has been since repeatedly suspended, and, it is supposed, will
never more be put into execution.

Some people may wonder what the House of Representatives were thinking of,
when they successively enacted such self-condemned laws. It is likely that,
during the discussion, ten or fifteen were employed in reading newspapers, or
in writing letters. About as many more might be in private conversation, at the
back of the Speaker's chair, or at the windows. General Samuel Smith, who has
saved the house from many woeful mistakes, is the gentleman alluded to, in the
second paragraph of the memorial.

We now come to a part of the work, more delicate, perhaps, than any other. The
freedoms which the federal party have taken with those who differ from their
opinions, are universally known. The most impartial scrutiny would determine,
that, in the arts of calumny and detraction, their publications exceed, beyond
all proportion, those of their adversaries. In the first session of the fifth
Congress, Mr. Harper has publicly declared to the Representatives, that Mr.
James Munroe, our late envoy to France, was guilty of corruption by foreign
influence. On being questioned by Mr. Giles, he has promised, in due time and
place, to bring evidence of his accusation. This example is only one out of
hundreds which might be adduced to show that the friends of order, for such
they call themselves, are resolved to set no limits to their rage and their
vengeance. Of course, they cannot expect to meet with that tenderness which
they refuse to grant.

Attacks on Mr. Munroe have been frequently repeated from the stock-holding
presses. They are cowardly, because he is absent. They are unjust, because his
conduct will bear the strictest enquiry. They are ungrateful, because he
displayed, on an occasion that will be mentioned immediately, the greatest
lenity to Mr. Alexander Hamilton, the prime mover of the federal party. When
some of the papers which are now to be laid before the world, were submitted to
the secretary; when he was informed that they were to be communicated to
President Washington, he entreated, in the most anxious tone of deprecation,
that this measure might be suspended. Mr. Munroe was one of the three gentlemen
who agreed to a delay. They gave their consent to it, on his express promise of
a guarded behavior in future, and because he attached to the suppression of
these papers, a mysterious degree of solicitude, which they, feeling no
personal resentment against the individual, were unwilling to augment.

The unfounded reproaches heaped on Mr. Munroe, form the immediate motive to
the publication of these papers. They are here printed from an attested copy,
exactly conformable to that, which, at his own desire, was delivered to Mr.
Hamilton himself. Not a word has been added or altered, and the period of four
years may, surely, have been enough to furnish the ex-secretary with materials
for his defense. In the letters of Camillus, the most sublime principles of
action are every where inculcated. But we shall presently see this great master
of morality, though himself the father of a family, confessing that he had an
illicit correspondence with another man's wife. If any thing can be yet less
reputable, it is, that the gentlemen to whom he made that acknowledgement held
it as an imposition, and found various reasons for believing that Mrs. Reynolds
was, in reality, guiltless. An attentive critic will be led to enquire what has
become of her husband, and why the indignant innocence of Mr. Hamilton, did not
promote the completion of public justice against a person, who had treated his
name with such gross disrespect? What a scandalous imputation was it for this
culprit to cast upon our secretary, that he had gained thirty thousand dollars
by the purchase of army certificates, that this fellow could bring him to
capital punishment, etc. etc.? It is to be wished that Reynolds may still be
found, and that, to borrow the words of his friend, Dr. William Smith, the
Secretary may come out of this matter, "as fair as the purest angel in heaven!"

Before committing the following papers to the world, their editor must again
beg leave to remark, that they are nothing more nor less than exact copies,
from attested originals, of which Mr. Hamilton, as hereafter specified, has
been, at his own desire, supplied with an accurate transcript. Some expressions
used by the culprit, Reynolds, are harsh, and convey disgust, without adding to
conviction. The editor, from aversion to invective, had, on this account,
resolved to leave them out, as well as several other passages, which are of
little importance to the main point. But on due reflection, it has been found
safer, and more advisable, to publish the whole, even at the hazard of being
tedious. This precludes all pretense of mutilation for unfair purposes.

As to the asperity of style in some parts of the precious confessions of
Reynolds, the painful reluctance of the editor, to the printing of them, has
been somewhat lessened, from the volunteer acknowledgment of seduction, emitted
by the ex-secretary himself. This appears to be about as bad, as any thing
which his wretched understrapper either said against him, or could imaginably
have to say. A procurer has always been regarded as in the lowest scale of
human character. Mutatis mutandis, the patron of such an agent can have no
scruple to become one.

Again, the intemperate style of the convivial and confidential communications
of our ex-secretary, prohibits him from being regarded as any peculiar object
of indulgence. For instance, he has often boasted of rceieving letters from
President Washington, with the word private wrote on the back of them, and a
cross drawn over the seal. After opening such a parcel, said Mr. Hamilton, what
do you think were the contents? DEAR HAMILTON, put this into style for me. Some
speech or letter has been enclosed, which I wrote over again, sent it back, and
then the OLD DAMNED FOOL gave it away as his own. Mr. Hamilton is not singular
in using this style to general Washington. After the squabble between citizen
Genet, John Jay, and Rufus King, the two latter sent a most insulting letter to
the President. Randolph advised him to resent it. He had once resolved to do
so; but altered his intention, from a jealousy that the writers were in concert
with Hamilton, from whom he could not determine to disjoin himself. Jay and
King wanted to obtain a certificate which Mr. Jefferson had drawn up, relating
to the behavior of citizen Genet. The President actually gave them the
certificate, but it is thought that they found it not to their purpose; for it
was suppressed, Jay and King also got back from the President their impertinent
letter; of which, after cooling, they began to be ashamed. But a copy of it is
in existence, and some hopes remain of its being obtained for publication.
These particulars are derived from undoubted authority. They prove what was so
fully stated in the American Annual Register, that the federal party despised
the late President; that they took frequent opportunities of insulting him; and
that they assumed the popularity of his name with no view but to serve their
own ends.

To be the prompter and primum mobile of the greatest man in the world, might
have flattered the vanity of a more discreet favorite than Mr. Hamilton. To
hear the Representatives, as in November, 1794, dispute for three weeks upon
the wording of an answer to a specch of his own composition, must have been
highly soothing to the self-importance of the ex-secretary. But, as general
Washington had been, in the highest sense of the word, his benefactor, he ought
to have concealed the imperfections of his friend. He has often compared his
influence over the President to that of the wind upon a weather cock, or of
that over an automaton, moved only by the hand which directs it. This style was
both imprudent and ungrateful. His power was very great, but not entirely
unbounded. He wanted to be sent to England as envoy to negociate the treaty.
The arguments of Randolph hindered the President from giving his consent. That
the pen of Mr. Hamilton has long assisted the President is a story current in
Europe as well as in America; and that the speeches and letters of geneneral
Washington are extremely different from his more early productions is very well
known.

We shall conclude these prefatory observations with an anecdote. During the
late canvass for the election of a President, Webster, in his Minerva, gave a
hint, that Mr. Hamilton would be an advisable candidate. A person in this city,
who chanced to see this newspaper, wrote immediately to a correspondent in
New York. The letter desired him to put himself in Mr. Hamilton's way, and
inform him that if Webster should, in future, print a single paragraph on that
head, the following papers were instantly to be laid before the world. It is
believed the message was delivered to Mr. Hamilton, for the Minerva became
silent.

(No. I.)
JACOB CLINGMAN, being a clerk in my employment, (F. A. Muhlenberg) and
becoming involved in a prosecution commenced against JAMES REYNOLDS, by the
Comptroller of the Treasury, on a charge or information exhibited before Hilary
Baker, esquire one of the aldermen of this city, for subornation of perjury,
whereby they had obtained money from the treasury of the United States, he
(Clingman) applied to me, for my aid and friendship, on behalf of himself and
Reynolds, to get them released or discharged from the p^^secution. I promised,
so far as respected Clingman; but, not being particularly acquainted with
Reynolds, in a great measure, declined so far as respected him. In company with
colonel Burr, I waited on colonel Hamilton for the purpose, and particularly
recommended Clingman, who had hitherto sustained a good character. Colonel
Hamilton signified a wish to do all that was consistent. Shortly after, I
waited on the Comptroller for the same purpose, who seemed to have difficulties
on the subject; and, from some information I had, in the mean time, received, I
could not undertake to recommend Reynolds, as I verily believed him to be a
rascal, which words I made use of to the Comptroller. On a second interview
with the Comptroller, on the same subject, the latter urged the propriety of
Clingman's delivering up a certain list of money due to individuals, which
Reynolds and Clingman were said to have in their possession, and of his
informing him, of whom, and through whom, the same was obtained from the public
offices; on doing which, Clingman's request might, perhaps, be granted with
greater propriety. This, Clingman, I am informed, complied with, and also
refunded the money or certificates, which they had improperly obtained from the
treasury. After which, I understand the action against both was withdrawn, and
Reynolds discharged from imprisonment, without any farther interference of mine
whatever.

During the time this business was thus depending, and which lasted upwards of
three weeks, Clingman, unasked, frequently dropped hints to me, that Reynolds
had it in his power, very materially to injure the Secretary of the Treasury;
and that Reynolds knew several very improper transactions of his. I paid little
or no attention to those hints; but, when they were frequently repeated, and it
was even added, that Reynolds said, he had it in his power to hang the
Secretary of the Treasury; that he was deeply concerned in speculation that he
had frequently advanced money to him, (Reynolds); and other insinuations of an
improper nature, it created considerable uneasiness in my mind, and I conceived
it my duty to consult with some friends on the subject. -- Mr. Monroe and Mr.
Venable were informed of it yesterday morning.

(Signed,) F. A. MUHLENBERG.

(No. II.)
BEING informed yesterday, in the morning, that a person of the name of
Reynolds, from Virginia, Richmond, was confined in the jail, upon some criminal
prosecution relative to certificates, and that he had intimated, he would give
some intelligence of speculations by Mr. Hamilton, which should be known, WE
immediately called on him, as well to be informed of the situation of the man,
as of those other matters, in which the public might be interested. We found it
was not the person, we had been taught to believe, but a man of that name from
New York, and who had, for some time past, resided in this city. Being there,
however, we questioned him respecting the other particular; he informed us,
that he could give information of the misconduct, in that respect, of a person
high in office, but must decline it, for the present, and until relieved, which
was promised him that evening: that at ten today, he would give us a detail of
whatever he knew on the subject. He affirmed, he had a person, high in office,
in his power, and had had, a long time past. That he had written to him, in
terms so abusive, that no person should have submitted to it, but that he dared
not to resent it. That Mr. Wolcot was in the same department, and, he supposed,
under his influence or control; and, in fact, expressed himself in such a
manner, as to leave no doubt, he meant Mr. Hamilton. That he expected to be
released by Mr. Wolcot, at the instance of that person, although he believed,
that Mr. Wolcot, in instituting the prosecution, had no improper design; that
he was satisfied, the prosecution was set on foot, only to keep him low, and
oppress him, and ultimately drive him away; that he had had, since his
residence here, for eighteen months, many private meetings with that person,
who had often promised to put him into employment, but had disappointed him;
that on hearing the prosecution was commenced against him, he applied to this
person for counsel, who advised him to keep out of the way, for a few days;
that a merchant came to him, and offered, as a volunteer, to be his bail, who,
he suspected, had been instigated by this person; and, after being decoyed to
the place, the merchant wished to carry him [to], he refused being his bail,
unless he would deposit a sum of money, to some considerable amount, which he
could not do, and was, in consequence, committed to prison. As well as we
remember, he gave, as a reason, why he could not communicate to us, what he
knew of the facts alluded to, that he was apprehensive, it might prevent his
discharge; but that he would certainly communicate the whole to us, at ten this
morning: at which time, we were informed, he had absconded, or concealed
himself.

(Signed,) JAMES MONROE, ABRAHAM VENABLE.


(No. III.)
BEING desirous, on account of their equivocal complexion, to examine into the
suggestions which had been made us, respecting the motive for the confinement
and proposed enlargement of James Reynolds, from the jail of this city, and
inclined to suspect, for the same reason, that, unless it were immediately
done, the opportunity would be lost, as we were taught to suspect he would
leave the place, immediately after his discharge, we called at his house, last
night, for that purpose; we found Mrs. Reynolds alone. It was, with difficulty,
we obtained from her, any information on the subject; but at length she
communicated to us the following particulars.

That since colonel Hamilton was Secretary of the Treasury, and at his request,
she had burned a considerable number of letters from him to her husband, and in
the absence of the latter, touching business between them, to prevent their
being made public. She also mentioned, that Mr. Clingman had several anonymous
notes addressed to her husband, which, she believed, were from Mr. Hamilton
(which we have) with an endorsement "from secretary Hamilton, esquire" in Mr.
Reynolds's hand writing; that Mr. Hamilton offered her his assistance to go to
her friends, which he advised; that he also advised, that her husband should
leave the parts, not to be seen here again; and in which case, he would give
something clever. That she was satisfied, this wish for his departure did not
proceed from friendship to him, but on account of his threat, that he could
tell something that would make some of the heads of departments tremble. That
Mr. Wadsworth had been active in her behalf; first at her request, but, in her
opinion, with the knowledge and communication of Mr. Hamilton, whose friend he
professed to be; that he had been at her house yesterday, and mentioned to her,
that two gentlemen of Congress had been at the jail, to confer with her
husband; enquired, if she knew what they went for; observed, he knew Mr.
Hamilton had enemies, who would try to prove some speculations on him, but when
enquired into, he would be found immaculate; to which she replied, she rather
doubted it.

We saw, in her possession, two notes; one in the name of Alexander Hamilton,
of the 6th of December, and the other, signed "J. W." purporting to have been
written yesterday; both expressing a desire to relieve her.

She denied any recent communication with Mr. Hamilton, or that she had
received any money from him today.

(Signed,) F. A. MUHLENBERG. JAMES MONROE. ABRAHAM VENABLE.


(No. IV.)
Philadelphia, 13th December, 1792.
JACOB CLINGMAN has been engaged in some negociations with Mr. James Reynolds,
the person, who has lately been discharged from a prosecution instituted
against him, by the Comptroller of the Treasury.

That his acquaintance commenced in September, 1791; that a mutual confidence
and intimacy existed between them; that in January or February last, he saw
colonel Hamilton at the house of Reynolds. Immediately on his going into the
house, colonel Hamilton retired. That in a few days after, he (Clingman) was at
Mr. Reynolds's house, with Mrs. Reynolds, her husband being then out; some
person knocked at the door; he arose and opened it, and saw that it was colonel
Hamilton. Mrs. Reynolds went to the door; he delivered a paper to her, and
said, he was ordered to give Mr. Reynolds that. He asked Mrs. Reynolds who
could order the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States to give that?
She replied, that she supposed, he did not want to be known. This happened in
the night. He asked her, how long Mr. Reynolds had been acquainted with colonel
Hamilton? She replied, some months; that colonel Hamilton had assisted her
husband; that sometime before that, he had received upwards of eleven hundred
dollars, of colonel Hamilton. Sometime after this, Clingman was at the house of
Reynolds, and saw colonel Hamilton; he retired and left him there.

A little after Duer's failure, Reynolds told Clingman, in confidence, that if
Duer had held up, three days longer, he should have made fifteen hundred
pounds, by the assistance of colonel Hamilton; that colonel Hamilton had
informed him, that he was connected with Duer. Mr. Reynolds also said, that
colonel Hamilton had made thirty thousand dollars by speculation; that colonel
Hamilton had supplied him with money to speculate. That, about June last,
Reynolds told Clingman, that he had applied to colonel Hamilton for money to
subscribe to the turnpike-road at Lancaster, and had received a note from him,
in these words, It is utterly out of my power, I assure you, upon my honor, to
comply with your request. Your note is returned; which original note,
accompanying this, has been in Clingman's possession ever since. Mr. Reynolds
has once or twice mentioned to Clingman, that he had it in his power to hang
colonel Hamilton; that if he wanted money, he was obliged to let him have it.
That he (Clingman) has occasionally lent money to Reynolds who always told him,
that he could always get it from colonel Hamilton, to repay it; that, on one
occasion, Clingman lent him two hundred dollars; that Reynolds promised to pay
him, through the means of colonel Hamilton; that he went with him, saw him go
into colonel Hamilton's; that, after he came out, he paid him one hundred
dollars, which, he said, was part of the sum, he had got; and paid the balance,
in a few days; the latter sum paid was said to have been received from colonel
Hamilton, after his return from Jersey, having made a visit to the
manufacturing society there.

After a warrant was issued against Reynolds, upon a late prosecution, which
was instituted against him, Clingman, seeing Reynolds, asked him, why he did
not apply to his friend colonel Hamilton? He said, he would go immediately, and
went accordingly. He said afterward, that colonel Hamilton advised him to keep
out of the way, a few days, and the matter would be settled. That after this
time, Henry Seckel, went to Reynolds, and offered to be his bail, if he would
go with him to Mr. Baker's office, where he had left the officer, who had the
warrant in writing; that he prevailed on Reynolds to go with him. That after
Reynolds was taken into custody; Seckel refused to become his bail, unless he
would deposit, in his possession, property to the value of four hundred pounds;
upon which, Reynolds wrote to colonel Hamilton, and Mr. Seckel carried the
note. After two or three times going, he saw colonel Hamilton. Colonel Hamilton
said, he knew Reynolds and his father; that his father was a good whig in the
late war; that was all he could say; that it was not in his power to assist
him; in consequence of which, Seckel refused to be his bail, and Reynolds was
imprisoned. Mr. Reynolds also applied to Mr. Francis, who is one of the clerks
in the treasury department; he said, he could not do any thing, without the
consent of colonel Hamilton; that he would apply to him. He applied to Mr.
Hamilton, who told him, that it would not be prudent; if he did, he must leave
the department.

After Reynolds was confined, Clingman asked Mrs. Reynolds, why she did not
apply to colonel Hamilton to dismiss him, as the money was ready to be
refunded, that was received. She replied, that she had applied to him, and he
had sent her to Mr. Wolcot; but directed her not to let Mr. Wolcot know, that
he had sent her there. Notwithstanding this injunction, she did let Mr. Wolcot
know, by whom she had been sent, who appeared to be surprised at the
information, but said, he would do what he could for her, and would Consult
colonel Hamilton on the occasion. Colonel Hamilton advised her, to get some
persons of respectability, to intercede for her husband, and mentioned Mr.
Muhlenberg.

Reynolds continued to be kept in custody, for some time, during which time,
Clingman had conversation with Mr. Wolcot, who said, if he would give up a list
of soldier's claims, which he had, he should be released. After this, Mrs.
Reynolds informed Clingman, that colonel Hamilton had told her, that Clingman
should write a letter to Mr. Wolcot, and a duplicate of the same to himself,
promising to give up the list, and refund the money which had been obtained on
a certificate, which had been said to have been improperly obtained. Clingman
asked Mrs. Reynolds, for the letters that her husband had received from colonel
Hamilton, from time to time, as he might probably use them to obtain her
husband's liberty. She replied, that colonel Hamilton had requested her to burn
all the letters, that were in his handwriting, or that had his name to them;
which she had done. He pressed her to examine again, as she might not have
destroyed the whole, and they would be useful. She examined, and found two or
three notes, without any name, which are herewith submitted, and which, she
said, were notes from colonel Hamilton.

Mrs. Reynolds told Clingman, that having heard, that her husband's father was,
in the late war, a commissary under the direction of colonel Wadsworth, she
waited on him, to get him to intercede for her husband's discharge. He told
her, he would give her his assistance, and said, now you have made me your
friend, you must apply to no person else. That on Sunday evening, Clingman went
to the house of Reynolds, and found colonel Wadsworth there. He was introduced
to colonel Wadsworth, by Mrs. Reynolds. Colonel Wadsworth told him, he had seen
Mr. Wolcot; that Mr. Wolcot would do any thing for him, (Clingman), and
Reynolds's family, that he could; that he had called on colonel Hamilton, but
had not seen him; that he might tell him, Mr. Muhlenberg, that a friend of his
(Clingman's) had told him, that colonel Wadsworth was a countryman and
schoolmate of Mr. Ingersoll, and that colonel Wadsworth was also intimate with
the governor, and that the governor would do almost any thing, to oblige him;
that his name must not be mentioned to Mr. Muhlenberg, as telling him this; but
that, if Mr. Muhlenberg could be brought to speak to him first, on the subject,
he would then do any thing in his power, for them; and told him not to speak to
him, if he should meet him in the street; and said, if his name was mentioned,
that he would do nothing. That on Wednesday, Clingman saw colonel Wadsworth, at
Reynolds's house; he did not find her at home, but left a note; but, on going
out, ^e met her, and said, he had seen every body, and done every thing.

Mrs. Reynolds told Clingman, that she had received money from colonel
Hamilton, since her husband's confinement, enclosed in a note, which note she
had burned.

After Reynolds was discharged, (which was eight or nine o'clock on Wednesday
evening); about twelve o'clock at night, Mr. Reynolds sent a letter to colonel
Hamilton by a girl; which letter, Clingman saw delivered to the girl. Reynolds
followed the girl, and Clingman followed him. He saw the girl go into colonel
Hamilton's house. Clingman then joined Reynolds, and they walked back and
forward in the street, until the girl returned, and informed Reynolds, that he
need not go out of town that night, but call on him early in the morning. In
the morning, between seven and eight o'clock, he saw Reynolds go to colonel
Hamilton's house, and go in. He has not seen him since, and supposes, he is
gone out of town.

Mr. Clingman further adds, that sometime ago he was informed by Mr. and Mrs.
Reynolds, that he had books containing the amount of the cash due to the
Virginia line at his own house at New York, with liberty to copy, and were
obtained through Mr. Duer.

The above contains the truth, to the best of my knowledge and recollect on,
and to which I am ready to make oath.

Given under my hand this 13th December, 1792. (Signed,) JACOB CLINGMAN.

(No. V.)
Philadelphia, 15th December, 1792.
Mr. Clingman informs us, that Mr. Reynolds returned to town, on Thursday
night, and told him, he had written him a letter which he then had; not having
had an opportunity to send it to him, and which he then tore; part of which was
thrown into the fire. Other parts he presented to us, and which we now have.

That Reynolds, at the same time, told him, he had been received by Mr.
Hamilton, the morning of that day, when they parted, about sunrise. That he was
extremely agitated, walking backward and forward the room, and striking,
alternately, his forehead and his thigh; observing to him, that he had enemies
at work, but was willing to meet them, on fair ground, and requested him not to
stay long, lest it might be noticed.

Mr. Clingman also informs us, that he received a note from Mr. Wolcot, to meet
him, on Friday morning, at half past nine (which note we have). That he
attended, and had an interview with him, in presence of Mr. Hamilton; when he
was strictly examined by both, respecting the persons, who were enquiring into
the matter, and their object; that he told Mr. Hamilton, he had been possessed
of his notes to Reynolds, and had given them up to these gentlemen: and to
which, he replied, he had done very wrong. That he also told Mr. Hamilton of
the letter he had received from Reynolds, since his enlargement, mentioning
that he (Mr. Hamilton) would make Francis swear back what he had said; and to
which Mr. Hamilton replied, he would make him unsay any falsity he had declared.

Mr. Hamilton said, Reynolds was a villain, a rascal, and he supposed, would
swear to any thing.

Mr. Wolcot said, that unless Clingman used the same candor to him, that he
had done to Clingman, he should not consider himself bound.

Mr. Hamilton wanted to know, what members of Congress were concerned in the
enquiry, and desired him to go into the gallery, where he would see them, and
enquire their names of the bystanders.

Mr. Hamilton observed, he had had some transaction with Reynolds, which he had
before mentioned, as well as Clingman remembers, to Mr. Wolcot, and need not go
into detail.

Clingman also informs us, that Reynolds told him, since his enlargement, that
when he was about to set out to Virginia, on his last trip to buy up
cash-claims of the Virginia line, he told Mr. Hamilton, that Hopkins would not
pay upon those powers of attorney; and to which he, (Mr. Hamilton) replied, he
would write to Hopkins, on the subject.

16th. Last night we waited on colonel Hamilton, when he informed us of a
particular connection with Mrs. Reynolds: the period of its commencement, and
circumstances attending it; his visiting her at Inskeep's; the frequent
supplies of money to her and her husband, on that account; his duress by them
from the fear of a disclosure, and his anxiety to be relieved from it and them.
To support this, he showed a great number of letters from Reynolds and herself,
commencing early in 1791. He acknowledged all the letters in a disguised hand,
in our possession, to be his. We left him under an impression, our suspicions
were removed. He acknowledged our conduct toward him had been fair and liberal:
he could not complain of it. We brought back all the papers, even his own
notes, nor did he ask their destruction.

He said, the dismission of the prosecution against the parties, Reynolds and
Clingman, had been in consideration of a surrender of a list of pay improperly
obtained from his office, and by means of a person, who had it not in his power
now to injure the department, intimating he meant Duer: that he obtained this
information from Reynolds; owned that he had received a note from Reynolds in
the night, at the time stated in Mr. Clingman's paper, and that he had likewise
seen him in the morning following: said, he never had seen Reynolds before he
came to this place; and that the statement in Mr. Clingman's paper, in that
respect, was correct.

(Signed,) JAMES MONROE. ABRAHAM VENABLE. F. A. MUHLENBERG.


January 2d, 1793. Mr. Clingman called on me, this evening, and mentioned, that
he had been apprised of Mr. Hamilton's vindication, by Mr. Wolcott, a day or
two after our interview with him. He farther observed to me, that he
communicated the same to Mrs. Reynolds, who appeared much shocked at it, and
wept immoderately. That she denied the imputation, and declared, that it had
been a fabrication of colonel Hamilton, and that her husband had joined in it,
who had told her so, and that he had given him receipts for money and written
letters, so as to give countenance to the pretense. That he was with colonel
Hamilton, the day after he left the jail, when we supposed he was in Jersey. He
was of opinion she was innocent, and that the defense was an imposition.

(Signed,) JAMES MONROE.

(No. VI.) LETTERS FROM COLONEL HAMILTON TO JAMES REYNOLDS, REFERRED TO IN No.
III.
Endorsement on the parcel, in the handwriting of Reynolds. "From Secortary
Hamilton, esquire The loose paper on which these words are written, is itself part
of some destroyed letter from Mr. Hamilton, for it has on the opposite side, in
his undisguised handwriting, this address, as the ba^^ of a letter: "Mr. James
Reynolds."
"

Tomorrow what is requested will be done. Twill hardly be possible to day.

[This card has neither date nor address. It is in a kind of character, half
print, half manuscript. It was admitted as his own by the secretary.]

It is utterly out of my power I assure you, PON my honor, to comply with your
request. Your note is returned.

[This is the card referred to in No. IV. being the answer to a request from
Reynolds, of money to subscribe for the Lancaster turnpike. It has neither date
nor address; but must have been written about the month of June, 1792. On what
ground could Reynolds pretend to make such applications to a person so far
above his rank? The gentle tone of the refusal, also, deserves notice. It
expressly implies a high degree of previous intimacy. The simple assurance of
inability was not enough. Mr. Hamilton declares PON HIS HONOR, that it is not
merely out of his power, but UTTERLY, etc. How generous! How magnanimous this
language of the ex-secretary! especially when he wrote to a being who was in
the habit of threatening to bring him to disgrace. If the statement of Mr.
Hamilton, as to Mrs. Reynolds, had been true, she must have cost him, in whole,
a smart sum. In No. IV. she says, that her husband had, sometime before,
received upwards of eleven hundred dollars of colonel Hamilton. A share in the
Lancaster turnpike cost three hundred dollars; and though, in this request,
Reynolds did not succeed, yet so extensive a scale of application shows, that
he had been in the habit of receiving, or at least of expecting, to a
considerable amount. In the same number it appears, that Clingman was almost an
eye witness to the receipt, by Reynolds, of a large sum from Mr. Hamilton. No.
IV. also, shows, that Mrs. Reynolds, during the confinement of her husband,
received money from our secretary; and in No. III. when Mr. Hamilton wanted to
get rid of these people, he offered, if they would leave these parts, not to be
seen here again, to give SOMETHING CLEVER. By the way, this was not the
language of a lover. If the colonel was tired he might have quitted the lady
with less ceremony. We proceed to the third card.]

Enclosed are FIFTY DOLLARS. They could not be sent sooner.

Addressed on the back, Mr. James Reynolds.

[This letter has neither date, nor subscription; and is in the feigned hand of
the two former. The address is in a counterfeit hand, of a different kind; but
resembling that of the secretary.]

My Dear Sir,
I expected to have heared the day after I had the pleasure of seeing you.

[This is in Mr. Hamilton's common hand. It has no date or signature. The
address, if it had any, has been torn away.]

The person Mr. Reynolds enquired for on Friday, WAITED FOR HIM ALL THE
EVENING, at his house, from a little after seven -- Mr. R. may see him at any
time today, or tomorrow, between the hours of two and three.

Mr. Reynolds.
Monday.
[The above, and its address, are in the feigned hand. So much correspondence
could not refer exclusively to wenching. No man of common sense will believe
that it did. Hence it must have implicated some connection still more
dishonorable, in Mr. Hamilton's eyes, than that of incontinency. Reynolds and
his wife affirm that it respected certificate speculations. The solicitude of
Mr. Hamilton to get these people out of the way, is quite contradictory to an
amorous attachment for Mrs. Reynolds, and bespeaks her innocence in the
clearest style. The following is the torn letter referred to, in the beginning
of No. V. It is in the same hand writing with the indorsement above quoted on
the parcel of letters, and merits particular attention.]

Thursday, one o'clock, 13th December, 1792 Reynolds got out of prison, on
Wednesday evening, the 12th of December. See No. iv.
. MY DEAR M. CLINGMAN,
I hope I have not forfeited your friendship, the last night's conversation,
don't think any thing of it, for I was not myself. I know I have treated
******** friend ill, and too well I am convinsed [Here about three lines are
torn out.] to have satisfaction from HIM at all events, and you only I trust
too. I will SEE YOU THIS EVENING. HE HAS OFFERED TO FURNISH ME AND MRS.
REYNOLDS WITH MONEY TO CARRY US OFF. If I will go, he will see that Mrs.
Reynolds has money to follow me, and as for Mr. Francis, he sas he will make
him swear back what he has said, and will turn him out of office The Secretary
kept his word. The person here meant was discharged from the treasury office.
. This is all I can say till I see you.

I am, dear Clingman, believe me, forever your sincere friend,

JAMES REYNOLDS.

Mr. Jacob Clingman.
Here the story comes to a crisis. Reynolds, a man of a bad character, and
dependent circumstances, had been cast into jail for an offense of a very deep
dye, and which, as it appears, could have been fixed upon him. Instead of
comporting himself with that humility suitable to a situation apparently so
desperate, he speaks of nothing else but ruining and hanging Mr. Hamilton, who,
the President excepted, was the most powerful and dangerous enemy that he could
have met with on the whole continent. This was not, certainly, an obvious way
to get out of prison. He had been prosecuted by the Comptroller, Mr. Wolcot,
with whom he found no blame; but he affirmed, that it was a scheme of the
secretary to keep him low, and drive him away. Even admitting that his wife was
the favorite of Mr. Hamilton, for which there appears no evidence but the word
of the secretary, this conduct would have been eminently foolish. Mr. Hamilton
had only to say, that he was sick of his amor, and the influence and hopes of
Reynolds at once vanished. Our secretary was far above the reach of his
revenge. The accusation of an illicit amor, though sounded in notes louder
than the last trumpet, could not have defamed the conjugal fidelity of Mr.
Hamilton. It would only have been holding a farthing candle to the sun. On that
point, the world had previously fixed its opinion. In the secretary's bucket of
chastity, a drop more or less was not to be perceived, If Reynolds had no claim
to regard but in one of the capacities of Mercury, his accusations and his
threats were more than folly. They were synonimous to lunacy.

Grounding merely on the procuring system, the forbearance of Mr. Hamilton is
equally inexplicable. The natural temper of our secretary, where he ventures to
exert it, is vindictive and furious See Findley and Brackenridge, passim.
, combining that unusual mixture of quick ferocity and unrelenting vengeance,
which Mr. Hume has marked out as a peculiarity in the character of Charles the
ninth The feelings of Mr. Hamilton may be estimated by the tone of the hireling
writers of his party; and show how little quarter he or they are entitled to.
William Cobbett, in his Censor for March 1797, describes Mr. Monroe as a
traitor, who has bartered the honor and interest of his country, to a
perfidious and savage enemy. Messrs. Muhlenberg, Jefferson, Swanwick, Giles,
Madison, Gallatin, Mr. Tench Coxe, and others, are all spoken of in the same
scurrilous way, without the least regard to truth or decency. What could ail
this writer at Dr. Rush? That gentleman has long since quitted politics, and
his philosophical works are better known and more highly respected in Europe,
than those of any writer whom the new world has produced, Franklin or
Jefferson's notes excepted.

This man does not write at random. His enemies laughed at him for boasting of
intimacy with some of the first characters in this country. He spoke only
truth. Not long since, Mr. Liston, the British ambassador, came down North
Second-street, past by the door of his store, looked carefully around him, as
if to see whether he was observed, then turned back and went in. Two days after
he was in the same store: and, no doubt his excellency derives much improvement
from this elegant and dignified connection.


. That such a man, or indeed that any man should tamely endure this treatment
is in itself highly incredible. No transient attachment, such as that which the
secretary alleged that he had, could have been put in the balance against his
official character; and from the time that Mr. Monroe and the other gentlemen
saw Reynolds, his reputation was evidently at stake.

In No. V. Clingman says, that he received a note from Mr. Wolcot to call on
him. It is in these words.

Mr. Wolcott will be glad to see Mr. Clingman tomorrow, at half after nine
o'clock. Thursday.


At this meeting, Clingman says that he was strictly examined by Messrs. Wolcot
and Hamilton, respecting the persons who were enquiring into the matter, and
their object. If everything was sound at bottom Mr. Hamilton, might have held
such persons and such enquiries in defiance. The following letter, the last in
the order of these pieces, is from Mr. Hamilton himself.

Philadelphia, December, 1792. Gentlemen,
ON reflection, I deem it advisable for me to have copies of the several
papers which you communicated to me in our interview on Saturday evening,
including the notes, and the fragment of Mr. Reynold's letter to Mr. Clingman.
I therefore request that you will either cause copies of these papers to be
furnished to me, taken by the person in whose hand writing the declarations
which you showed to me were, or will let me have the papers themselves to be
copied. It is also my wish, that all such papers as are original, may be
detained from the parties of whom they were had, to put it out of their power
to repeat the abuse of them in situations which may deprive me of the advantage
of explanation. Considering of how abominable an attempt they have been the
instruments, I trust you will feel no scruples about this detention.

With consideration, I have the honor to be, gentlemen, Your obedient servant,
ALEXANDER HAMILTON.

F. Augustus Mughlenbergh, James Monroe, and Abraham Venable, Esquires.

Addressed on the back thus. "Frederick A. Mughlenbergh, esquire."

The above letter, closes the collection of papers regarding this affair of
Reynolds. It only remains to make some observations; and these demand a
retrospect.

If we consider the magnitude of the object before them, it was highly
commendable in the gentlemen concerned in these enquiries to trace the matter
as closely as they did. The funding of certificates to the extent of perhaps
thirty, or thirty-five millions of dollars, at eight times the price which the
holders had actually paid for them, presents, in itself, one of the most
egregious, the most impudent, the most oppressive, and the most provoking
bubbles that ever burlesqued the legislative proceedings of any nation. The
debt that could have been discharged for ten or fifteen millions of dollars,
was funded at forty millions.

But as the universal suspicion and hatred which the formation of this mass had
excited, might, at some future period, endanger its existence, the assumption
act, was brought forward. This law incorporated into the former stock those
debts contracted by individual states during the war. Hence each of them
became, for its own sake, interested in the support of public credit which
implicated a riddance of the debt especially due by itself. Thus the
certificate funds were inseparably embodied with a powerful and popular ally,
under the shelter of whose reputation they might hope for some degree of
longevity. This artful measure was pushed through Congress by the same party,
who funded the half-crown certificates at twenty shillings. But, even in this
project, it is entertaining to notice the blindness and precipitation of
conscious guilt. The paper-jobbing junto were in such a hurry to shelter their
speculations under the wings of the above assumption law, that they acted the
measure in the most profligate or bungling manner which can be imagined. Take
notice! They pledged the public faith for twenty-two millions of dollars,
instead of eleven millions The accounts of the union with the individual states
might have been placed in the same relative situation in which they now stand,
by assuming eleven millions, instead of twenty-two. The additional and
unnecessary debt, created by that fatal measure, amounts, therefore, to ten
millions eight hundred and eighty-three thousand, six hundred and twenty-eight
dollars, and fifty-eight cents. Gallatin, p. 107.
; for, the latter sum would have settled the claims, if a reasonable degree of
time, of judgment, or of method had been employed upon it. This work was the
very pinnacle of stupidity, or knavery, or probably of both. Suppose that you
see a man go into a store, and buy ten shillings worth of linen. He receives
the cloth, flings down a guinea, and runs away without waiting for his change.
You will infer that he is either circulcating false money, or has deserted from
bedlam. Yet such is precisely the profile. view of this assumption act. It is
natural that Dr. Smith should be fond of calling Americans the most intelligent
of mankind, when his party have made them such egregious dupes. Thus, the
founder of some new sect in religion, while cramming the ears of his disciples
with visions and miracles, assures them that they are the chosen people. In
both instances the encomiast holds in his eye the very same object. As for the
state of public information, it is likely that not more than one-tenth part of
our citizens recollect or have heard any thing of the assumption act. Not one
out of five thousand people is acquainted with this blasting blunder, about the
eleven millions being funded at twenty-two.

This is a profile view of the assumption act. But when we look straight into
its face, fraud, anarchy, and rebellion, are seen indelibly engraved on its
forehead. Witness the debates of last winter in Congress, about the balance due
from New York to the union! A spark a thousand times smaller, has, before now,
involved half the world in conflagration. This act is like an ulcer in the
midriff of American tranquillity. To paint its possible effects would require
the eloquence of Milton describing the congress of Death and Sin.

The bank of the United States was another buttress raised to prop the rampart
of corruption. This institution, and the irresistible influence which it draws
after it, afford a striking evidence of the daring and profound genius of its
author. By what clause of the constitution Congress thought themselves
authorized to turn bankers, they have not yet informed the public. From any
thing which appears on the face of that instrument, they had no more warrant
for erecting banks than for erecting pyramids. Their plea, that the institution
was to be of national benefit, does not form a proper apology. It would have
been better to tell the real motive, which was, that the leaders of a majority
in Congress expected the scheme to issue in personal advantage to themselves.
The report of Mr. Hamilton to Congress, on this bank, promised mighty matters
which have never come to pass. But the grand point, the bracing of the funding
system, has been completely secured. The city of Washington shall be just
mentioned, as a quietus to the honest credulity of the President. Millions have
been worse than idly sunk upon that spot, which, if government removes to it,
may be safely predicted as the tomb of the federal constitution.

The result of all these measures has been a public debt of eighty millions,
instead of thirty; a republican government harnassed in a monarchical faction;
a continent overwhelmed with paper money, with jobs, and bankruptcies, of a
nature and species of infamy almost unknown in Europe See, for example, the
polite correspondence between Mr. James Greenleaf and Mr. John Nicholson, that
has so long blockaded the newspapers. Sometime ago, bills of a merchant in
this city were advertised for sale, by auction, to the amount of about four
hundred thousand dollars. These things make a person from the old world to
stare, but Americans, perhaps, know better.
; the price doubled on every article of living; a commerce insulted and within
sight of ruin; a public treasury without money, and without credit; and last
and worst, a squadron of legislative conspirators, in the fifth Congress, who,
by every insidious artifice, and every unblushing effort, pant and toil to bury
their country in a British alliance and a French war.

CHAPTER VII.
Farther observations on the correspondence between Messrs. Hamilton and
Reynolds. -- Singular mode of secrecy in framing the federal constitution, and
of discussing Jay's treaty. -- Defense of General Mason. -- Report to President
Adams, by Mr. Pickering, on French captures. -- Singular style of that paper.
-- Defamatory charge by Judge Iredell to a grand jury in Virginia. -- Their
pitiful presentment. -- Defense of Mr. Cabell. -- Curious letter to Mr. John
Beckley. -- Observations on the PURITY of the federal governmeat. -- Specimens
of the mode of traveling in America. -- A trip to New York.

IN his letter last copied, Mr. Hamilton speaks of an explanation. He gave
nothing meriting that name. The short way to exculpate himself was, by
confronting Reynolds and his wife, who accused him of fraud, with the gentlemen
who undertook the enquiry. Instead of that, he sent Reynolds and his wife out
of the way, to prevent any such personal exculpation. That he packed them off,
there can be little doubt, since the suddeness of the disappearance of Reynolds
can be accounted for upon no other ground. The letter from Reynolds to Clingman
mentions a promise of that kind, and Mrs. Reynolds had previously declared,
that this was a scheme in contemplation. Reynolds could not fly from fear. The
prosecution against him was closed, and his chief resource for subsistence had
been by applying to Mr. Hamilton. That he was removed, to keep him from a
meeting with Mr. Monroe and his friends, bears the strongest marks of
probability. It may be said, that the infamous character of Reynolds made him
unworthy of credit. Taken by itself, his testimony was, indeed, worth little;
but, when supported by various circumstances, it might merit more attention.
The profligate manners of the accuser afforded an additional reason why Mr.
Hamilton, if innocent, should have brought him forward, since it would have
been proportionably a more easy task to convince Mr. Monroe of his falsehood.
But the secretary sealed the importance of the accuser's testimony, by
forbearing to produce him to the gentlemen enquiring after him. When persons of
so much weight and respectability had entered upon this business, every
principle of common sense called for the clearest explanation. In place of that
the chief evidence was concealed, and sent off, while the mass of his
correspondence with Mr. Hamilton was, by desire of the latter, abruptly
committed to the flames. You will determine whether these fugitive measures
look most like innocence, or like something else.

Mr. Hamilton, referring to Reynolds and his wife, calls this an abominable
attempt. Granted. But, since the measures of himself and his party, on the
affair of certificates, had excited a very general and violent suspicion, and
since he well knew that the gentlemen who came forward, were supposed to be in
the number of those who entertained it, every motive of self-love, and of zeal
for the honor of his partisans, should have prompted Mr. Hamilton to tear up
the last twig of jealousy. In place of smothering testimony, he should have
courted it. In place of burning letters, he should have printed them. Publicity
was the only basis by which he could maintain the ground that he was in danger
of losing. Yet this was the very mode of defense which he chose to avoid. When
Randolph was arraigned of misconduct not more culpable than that imputed by
Reynolds to Hamilton, he pursued the accuser to Rhode Island, and obtained a
certificate of his innocence, couched in the strongest terms. Yet the federal
party, with their usual fortitude of assertion, and infelicity of
demonstration, have loaded him with reproaches, and the bare supposition of the
possibility of his innocence, has been scouted as the height of effrontery. Put
the case that Fauchet, when his apocrypha was intercepted, had been in jail,
that Randolph, instead of bringing him forward had paid his debts, burnt all
his remaining papers, and hurried him out of the country. Every friend to
order, would have been convinced that Randolph was guilty, and had removed
Fauchet, that the pool of corruption might putrify in peace Robert Hall, on the
liberty of the press.
. The force of moral or presumptive testimony does not augment or diminish,
because the party accused happens to be for or against the American funding
system.

Some years ago, the late President was attacked in the newspapers for
constantly uplifting his salary, before it became due. Mr. Hamilton immediately
printed a reply that filled nine columns of the Philadelphia Gazette. Even the
very worst which could be alleged of Mr. Washington amounted only to this
practice being irregular, improper, and super-eminently ridiculous from a man
who pretended to do the business of his country for his mere household expenses.
The charge of Reynolds wears a more serious aspect. If he was one agent for the
purchase of certificates, it may well be conceived, though it cannot yet be
proved, that our secretary had twenty others. Physician! heal thyself. Before
Mr. Hamilton prints any farther defenses of other people, before he again
arraigns one-half of his fellow citizens as cutthroats See American Annual
Register, chap. x.
, let him tell us what has become of Reynolds. Let him observe that this
narrative is explicit; and that, under all the circumstances of the affair,
silence will be more fatal to his character, than the most feeble vindication.

It is easy to see why Mr. Hamilton, and his party, have been permitted to
reduce America to its present disagreeable condition. When a merchant refuses
not only to balance his books, but vilifies those who advise him to do so, it
requires no ghost from the dead, to foretell for what port he is bound. In
private life, it is hardly possible to find such a fool; but nations are
sometimes actuated by a degree of madness to which, in their individual
concerns, it would be impracticable to drive them. Of this remark, America,
during the short period of her political career, has afforded various examples.
The people of other countries are ignorant against their will. The citizens of
the United States appear often averse, and even hostile to information. Thus,
the federal constition, highly respectable and valuable as truth must
acknowledge it to be, was yet an instrument framed in darkness. When the
convention who made it met at Philadelphia, they began by shutting their doors.
This clandestine appearance exhibited the worst auguries imaginable of what
they were going to do. Though they had to frame a constitution, yet, before it
could take effect it was to be submitted, seperately, to each of the thirteen
states. To assist the citizens at large in forming their opinions, the safest
and fairest method was to have debated with open galleries. If the arguments
that swayed the decision of the delegates were well-founded, they might have
had the same effect on their constituents We have not entirely forgot the mode
in which the federal constitution was crammed down the gullet of Pennsylvania.
When it first appeared, the assembly were in session. A minority declined
acceptance, because they had no special powers to that purpose from their
electors; and, to prevent its passing, they seceded from the house. The
remaining members did not form a quorum. Here they would have stuck, but the
friends of order, alias, a troop of ruffians, with the captain of a very modern
frigate at their head, broke into the lodgings of some seceding members, seized
them, dragged them through the streets, with one-half of Philadelphia at their
heels, and, by main force, projected them into the assembly. Thus a quorum was
formed, and the constitution accepted, in a way which would have disgraced a
gang of g^^es.
. But, to immure themselves in the way in which they did, looked more like a
Venetian senate, a gang of smugglers or coiners, than the Representatives of a
free people. The long parliament of England would never have obtained the
confidence of their party, they could never have overturned royal despotism, if
they had kept their proceedings and debates a secret from the world. In
England, a state-trial must be carried on in public. The spirit of the country
would not endure the concealment of such a transaction. In the course of
ordinary affairs, the present House of Commons do not shut their doors above
once in several years. But the framing of a constitution is of infinitely more
importance than the usual routine of business; the English people would not, on
such an emergency, submit to exclusion. The Scots union was previously known to
be detested by all ranks of people; and brought the country to the brink of a
revolution. Yet the Scots parliament debated with open doors. The acquiescence
of our citizens in the Tiberian privacy of their delegates, has marked a
peculiarity in the American character.

The arrival of Jay's treaty afforded another instance of the same kind. In
London, public impatience would, by such a circumstance, have been wounded up
to the highest degree; and the proudest minister must have found his popularity
interested in an early communication. But at Philadelphia, there was even a
parade of secrecy. The treaty reached the President on the 7th of March, 1795.
Instead of laying it before the public, who were ultimately to bear its
consequences, and who could have made light break in upon every quarter, he
suppressed its contents from mankind, till the meeting of the Senate. Thirty
gentlemen then shut themselves up, like the translators of the Septuagint, as
if they had been to act by inspiration. Without rashness it may be said, that
this superior branch of government, as Mr. Fenno calls it, did not collectively
know as much about commerce, and its foreign relations, as general Smith and
John Swanwick. The resolution of the Senate to ratify, transpired on the 24th
of June 1795, three months and an half after the President had got the treaty.
This long suppression did not excite an audible murmur. Nay, after the
ratification, the federal party displayed still more strongly their manly
notions of government. The Senate had just one member, general Mason, of
sufficient civility toward the public, to send a copy of the treaty to the
newspapers. This violated an injunction of secresy past by the Senate. The
federal cat calls began instantly to squeak; and, if the general had been
forging bank notes, they could hardly have made much more noise. Thus the
Plymouth resolutions of the 30th of October, 1795, charged him with "a
notorious breach of official confidence Carey's Remembrancer, vol. iii. p. 311.
." Instead of this language, they should have thanked him for his intelligence.
If it had been communicated three months more early, much of the subsequent bad
consequences might have been prevented. He should, also, have printed Jay's
instructions, with minutes of the notable harangues about the partition of the
United States American Annual Register, chap. v.
. With open doors, no senator durst have broached a doctrine of such enormous
attrocity. The master's eye makes a fat horse, says the proverb. In public
affairs, the same case holds good. The more that a nation knows about the mode
of conducting its business, the better chance has that business of being
properly conducted. This maxim appears very plain; and, in his domestic
concerns, every man approves of it. On a great national scale, we are the first
free people who have rejected it, and that is one of the principal reasons why
some parts of our federal administration have succeeded so very ill. Secrecy is
a favorite doctrine with our financial Mahomet; and its triumph has ensured
his own.

In the close of the last chapter, the word conspirator has been employed. It
sounds harshly, but it has been inserted on the clearest evidence, and after
the strictest consideration. To be convinced of an executive plot, for
involving America in a French war, we have only to look at a report from
secretary Pickering to President Adams, and which, on the 22d of June, 1797,
was sent by the latter to Congress. The title page professes to state the
depredations committed on the commerce of the United States since the 1st of
October, 1796. Consistency with this profession required, that, as much time
should have been bestowed on the recital of British captures, as on that of
French ones. Apparently grounding on this idea, Mr. Adams, in his message
accompanying the papers, has these words: I directed a collection to be made
of ALL such information as should be found in the possession of the government.

The report and documents fill about an hundred and sixty pages. The list of
French captures is taken from the Philadelphia and United States gazettes. Of
the British, Mr. Pickering writes thus:

Captures and losses by British cruisers, the secretary presumes, have not been
numerous; for, citizens of the United States having, these three years past,
been accustomed to look up to the government for aid in prosecuting their
claims, it is not to be doubted, that generally these cases have been reported
to the department of state. An abstract of such as have been communicated, is
annexed. Report, p. 5. This list amounts only to ten vessels. They are
dispatched in two pages. That of captures by the republic occupies about an
hundred and forty. As an apology for this disproportion of bulk, Mr. Pickering,
on p. 9, gives a most curious reason. This examination was chiefly made prior
to the call of the house of Representatives for a report on this subject, with
a view to ascertain the number of French captures, and the circumstances
attending them; and the result of the whole is annexed. It is regretted, that
the time did not permit a re-examination of those papers to ascertain likewise
the captures made by the British cruisers. The call of the house was dated the
10th of June. The papers were laid before the house on the 22d, being at an
interval of twelve days. As the French list had been made out beforehand, the
secretary had the more time to compile the British list. Six active clerks,
like those in his own office, could, with great ease, have completed the
business in forty-eight hours at farthest. Where was the mighty affair of
turning over two files of newspapers for the last eight months? With some
diligence, the whole might have been finished in a single afternoon. In a city
like Philadelphia, full of public offices, and able transcribers, the
secretary, if he had been in earnest, could have collected forty proper
assistants, on an hour's warning; and even admitting the British list to be as
bulky as the French one, each of these auxiliaries would hardly have found an
hour's employment. But the secretary himself says, that British captures were
not numerous. Be it so. Then it would have taken the less time to make them
out. Yet it seems that, with a space of ten or twelve days before him, the
secretary could not accomplish this Lilliputian task.

Thus does our secretary trifle with the orders of the legislature; and Mr.
Adams, by the acceptance of so absurd an excuse, exemplifies the proverb, like
master, like man. But, to be plain with Mr. Pickering, such palpable
sophistication will not go down. All people know very well why the British list
of captures was not made out. It would have counteract^d his plan of inflaming
us against the republic. He proceeds thus.

The editors of those two gazettes agree in saying, that no great attention was
paid to the subject, for the purpose of inserting accounts of all the captures
which were published in the various other newspapers; yet the number collected
exceeds three hundred, of which but few escape condemnation. The Gazette of the
United States is, and long has been, as much an engine of the American
executive, as that of London is to an English premier Instead of trying to turn
the speech of Barras into an instrument for a French war, Mr. Adams might have
bought a set of this executive newspaper, and sent it over as a present to the
Directory at Paris. For every syllable in the whole speech of Barras, they
would have found themselves paid beforehand with a column of invective.
. Mr. Fenno, beyond all question, inserted every French capture that he could
find. As to the Philadelphia Gazette, the present editor has only held it since
last February; and, previous to that time, he knows not how it was conducted.
When Congress wanted information, it was the duty of Mr. Pickering to have
looked at a wide variety of newspapers. But he was well aware, that Mr. Fenno
had collected about every thing of the kind. The object of Mr. Pickering is, to
insinuate that many French captures have escaped notice. Yet the number
collected exceeds THREE HUNDRED. So long ago as September, 1794, a list was
published, by authority, of British captures. They were about three hundred and
sixty.

The conduct of the public agents, says Mr. Pickering, and of the commissioned
cruisers there, has surpassed all former examples Pickering's report, p. 8.
. They cannot be worse than the confiscation of the Two Friends, and the murder
of captain Bosson. We might add an hundred British piracies recited in this
volume, all as atrocious as any possible case of French piracy.

The persons also of our citizens have been beaten, insulted, and cruelly
imprisoned; and, in the forms used toward prisoners of war, they have been
exchanged with the British for Frenchmen. This is very bad, but the French are
only following the example that England, for above two years, had set before
them, and at this moment continues to give them. When complaints of impressment
were made against England, the federal party did their utmost to quell the
story. In Congress, Mr. Tracy, and others, would gladly have denied that
British impressments had taken place, and Webster wondered why American
printers should trouble themselves about the matter Supra, chapters v. and vi.
. This was the uniform language of the whole party.

There have been frequent accounts of attempts to effect condemnations by
bribing the officers and seamen of our vessels to swear falsely; but it was
reserved to these times, when offered bribes were refused, and threats
despised, to endeavor to accomplish the object by torture. Report p. 10.
American seamen have been flogged by dozens at a British gangway. This also was
torture. Captain Reynolds, under the very nose of admiral Murray, attacked
American vessels. Several men were killed and wounded. This was torture. There
is not the smallest design to exten^ate French outrages, but merely to prove
the gross partiality of our executive in showing only the robberies perpetrated
upon one side.

Paulo majora canamus. If Mr. Pickering has displayed gross partiality,
President Adams has not acted, in the smallest degree, better. On the 23d of
June, 1797, general Smith was reciting in Congress the steps pursued by the
friends of order, for bringing about a French war. He said, that the executive
had called Congress, and had complained of the French; for the speech did not
contain a single word of reference to any other nation. He next recommended the
fitting out of frigates, with which he proposed to convoy American commerce.
Our merchant ships are to be armed, and, on arriving in a French port, the
question is put, against whom are you armed? The French would say, we have read
your President's speech. By these preparations, he can only mean to fight us.
Your envoys, arriving in France at the same time, are sure of being turned back
again. General Smith farther observed, that Dr. Smith and Mr. Harper had avowed
the design of employing the frigates to force a trade into ports of the
West Indies which the French have justly declared to be in a state of
rebellion. Such was port Jeremie. General Smith affirmed, that these measures
led directly to war. He believed that gentlemen wanted to lead us into war. The
member was right; there can be no doubt of it. This astonishing session of
Congress has afforded a whole dictionary of evidence. Sir John Brute says,
every thing I see, every thing I hear, every thing I feel, and every thing I
taste, methinks, has wife in it. So at present with the federal party, every
thing has war in it. A combination more culpable, more hateful, has not
occurred since the age of Cataline or Fiesco.

Mr. Pickering complains of the French maltreating American seamen. His party
have encouraged the British to impress them. In proof of this, attend to
general Smith, who is no violent democrat, for he professed in Congress great
concern, when Mr. Hamilton retired from office. On the 27th of May, 1797, this
gentleman said, in the house, that members had affected to treat the law for
the protection of our seamen with lightness. It conferred the highest honor on
Mr. Livingston, who introduced it. It was opposed in both houses by those who
are always combating for an increase of power and influence in the executive
government. The Senate mutilated that law, so as to deprive it of its most
salutary provisions. After all, the Senate refused their assent to a law for
protecting American seamen from impressment, and from being whipped on the bare
back at the gang-way of a British man of war. They refused to adopt it, until
it was so much mutilated, that the executive, to render it in any shape
effectual, was obliged to enforce it with a supplementary part. Thus far
general Smith.

If this majority in the Senate had been selected from the Divan of Algiers,
they could not have more completely disgraced their station. At the same time,
Messrs. Tracy and Harper, below stairs, were attempting to deny the reality of
British impressments; and Webster and Russel inveighed against every one who
mentioned their existence. These things are part of a system for degrading
America into a British footstool. What kind of an AMERICAN Senate is that which
refuses its consent to a law for the protection of AMERICAN seamen? The very
idea looks so monstrous that one is apt to think himself in a dream when he
endeavors to revolve it. The circumstances of their refusal to concur in the
bill, stand recorded on the journals of both houses. The full detail shall soon
be given to the world. The journals of the British house of peers afford no
precedent for such horrible depravity. England has hitherto stood upon her own
legs. Her representatives and legislators, though often extremely corrupted,
have never been suspected of servility to a foreign nation; and, a trivial
instance excepted In the reign of Charles the second. See Sir John Dalrymple's
Memoirs, and Hume's History of England, in the latest editions.
, they have not put themselves up to auction for foreign gold. Their opponents,
at least, have not alleged that they ever did so; and this forms a strong
presumption of their innocence.

In the mean time, Harrison Otis cants about French impressments, and Mr.
Harper on the corruption of Mr. Monroe, by French gold. For conceit and
ignorance, Otis may be looked upon as the lineal successor of Samuel Dexter. As
for Harper, he is said to be in embarrassed circumstances; and, while he
prattles about foreign gold, one might ask him, who pays for the printing of
his eternal pamphlets During the two last sessions, it is computed that this
gentleman cost the country at least ten thousand dollars worth of time, by
making superfluous motions, for the sake of making useless speeches about them.
In the session of December, 1796, he repeated one speech, about augmenting the
duties on imports, at four different times, in the course of little more than a
month.

He has a very pretty delivery, if any obliging friend would supply him with a
suitable stock of ideas. If he could be contented with repeating the same
thoughts not oftener than five times in the course of fifteen minutes, he would
not so barbarously drive the members from their seats, nor run himself into so
many scrapes with the speaker, as to wandering from the question. In an
antediluvian Congress, when people lived to the age of a thousand years, one
might have found leisure for hearing him to an end. Our span of threescore and
ten is too narrow for the torrent of his eloquence.


? By land, our interest has been as grossly betrayed as by sea. This appears
from the discouragement constantly given to the defense of the Indian frontier.
On that head, the following narrative will repay a perusal.

On the 19th of November, 1794, President Washington, in his speech to
Congress, has these words. Toward none of the Indian tribes have overtures of
friendship been spared. The Creeks, in particular, are covered from
encroachment by the interposition of the general government, and that of
Georgia. It would have been fortunate for the people of Tennessee, if the
general government had covered them from the encroachments of the Creeks.
Respecting the behavior of the Creeks, previous to the delivery of that
speech, information for the present work has been derived from two sources, the
public newspapers, and a private manuscript communicated by Mr. Andrew Jackson,
Representative from the state of Tennessee in the fourth Congress. An
examination of these details will assist in ascertaining what sort of
friendship the Creeks deserved, and to what side the balance of protection
ought to have leaned.

The account given in the newspapers amounts in substance to what follows.
Continual skirmishes had been taking place for a long time. In one of these, on
the 13th of August, 1794, lieutenant M'Clellan, with thirty-seven men, had been
attacked on the Cumberland path, eighteen miles from South-West-Point, by above
an hundred Creeks. He had four men killed, and four missing. He likewise lost
thirty-one horses, with several other articles. A multitude of murders by the
Indians are mentioned. Of these, it would be needless here to attempt a
catalogue. A letter from Knoxville, dated 22d of September, 1794, says, that
the general assembly of Tennessee had then been in session for several weeks.
They had prepared another memorial to Congress with a list of the citizens
killed, wounded, or taken prisoners by the Creeks and Cherokees, since the 1st
of March last, the date of a former statement to Congress. The number of
citizens was an hundred and twenty-seven, besides which the Indians had stolen
four hundred and seventy-four horses. These thefts and murders had been chiefly
committed while a party of the Lower Cherokees were at Philadelphia, giving the
strongest promises of peace, and while major Seagrove, an agent for Indian
affairs, was making assurances of the friendship of the Creeks. The letter
concludes with an account of some fresh murders which had, at that moment, been
received. They were said to have been committed on the 16th of September
current. Nickajack and Running Water were two of the most populous of the Lower
Cherokee towns. They were situated close on the south bank of the Tennessee,
below a place called the Suck. They were principal crossing-places for the
Creeks over the Tennessee, when they wanted to make war on Cumberland and
Kentucky. They had co-operated with the warriors of Look-out Mountain, and
Will's towns for several years past. They boasted of perfect security from
their situation. They were surrounded on three sides by mountains, and
protected on the north by the south branch of the Tennessee. They were also
formidable by their numbers.

On the 7th of September, major Ore marched from Nashville to attack the
savages. He had with him five hundred and fifty militia, of whom an hundred and
fifty were from Kentucky. They arrived on the bank of the Tennessee, opposite
to Nickajack, and undiscovered, in the dusk of the evening. About eleven
o'clock at night, a part of them crossed the river on rafts, and surrounded the
town, while another party lay in ambush on the opposite side of the river. The
attack began about day break. Many of the savages plunged, according to their
custom, into the water, and having got almost to the opposite shore, the
militia in reserve rose from their covert, and discharged a volley at the
fugitives in the river. The victory was complete. Nine squaws and children were
taken. About forty or forty-five warriors were killed. Accounts differ about
their exact numbers. As no particular detail is offered about Running Water,
but barely that it was destroyed at the same time with Nickajack, it seems
probable that they stood very near to each other. In these towns two fresh
scalps were found; and several others dry, that had been hung up as trophies.
Many articles of property were recovered which the militia knew to have been
taken from their owners when killed by the Indians, in the course of the
preceding twelve months. Among these were found a number of letters. They had
been carried off when the Kentucky mail was robbed and the post murdered. In
Nickajack was found a quantity of powder and lead, that had just been received
from the Spanish government, as also a commission to Braeth, chief of the town,
who was among the slain.

The prisoners confessed that sixty Creek and Cherokee warriors had passed
through Nickajack, only nine days before, on their way to make war against the
United States. Two nights previous to the destruction of Running Water, a scalp
dance was held in it. Among others, John Watts was present; and it was there
resolved to carry on the war with additional vigor. This the white people
learned from the prisoners. The towns were burnt, and every thing destroyed.
Such is the substance of the newspaper account. That received from Mr. Jackson
is to the following effect.

Major James Ore was, in the close of August, 1794, ordered by governor Blount
to march to the district of Mero, to defend its frontier; and, on the 6th of
September, was ordered, by general Robertson to march to the Lower Cherokee
towns, and destroy them.

It is proper for me here to observe, says Mr. Jackson, that the Indians
inhabiting those towns were daily killing our citizens, and our officers,
transmitting a Rostrum of the captured, killed, and wounded to the secretary at
war Mr. Henry Knox.
; and the answers returned were, not to pursue on any account across the Indian
boundary, or carry on any offensive measures against the Indians; construing
the word offensive to be an act of crossing the Indian boundary in the pursuit
of depredating parties.

Major Ore obeyed the orders of general Robertson. He marched to Nickajack and
Running Water, swept them with the besom of destruction, and killed about
thirty warriors. It is necessary here to state some facts. The night before
major Ore made the attack on Nickajack, the Indians held the scalp dance over
two fresh scalps, which they had taken on the frontier. Ore had pursued the
track of this party. On the very day that he made the attack twenty-two Indians
fell upon the station of the widow Hays, killed one man, and wounded three; and
the evening before, they had burnt captain John Donelson's station. At the time
that general Robertson issued the order to Ore, he had information of an
intended general attack, contemplated on that frontier. This was well
substantiated, and the expedition of Ore was the only circumstance which
prevented it, and established peace on the frontier.

The pay of these troops has been suspended, because they crossed the Indian
boundary, although they precisely pursued the orders given by general
Robertson. The muster and pay roll's were, in the latter end of the year 1794,
deposited with colonel David Henly, agent of the war department at Knoxville.
Governor Blount, in 1794, transmitted to Mr. Knox general Robertson's order,
authorizing and commanding the expedition, and on the 19th of December of that
year this communication was laid before Congress. Yet though frequent
applications have been made at the office of the secretary at war for payment,
they have constantly been refused. After a delay of more than two years, Mr.
Jackson, in the last session of the fourth Congress, has applied to Mr
Pickering to recover the necessary papers, that he might lay the subject before
the House of Representatives. I am informed by him, says Mr. Jackson, that he
knows nothing of the business. Here the matter stood, on the 22d of February,
1797.

Mr. Jackson further adds that this is not a single instance. In 1794, major
Thomas Johnston commanded a party of Tennessee militia who were ordered to
pursue a gang of Indians. The latter had murdered colonel John Montgomery, and
the Titsworth family. In the pursuit, they crossed into the Kentucky territory.
Colonel H^nly gave that reason for suspending their pay. These were the only
two parties of Tennessee militia, whose arrears have not been paid up,
excepting those comprehended in the appropriation act for 1797.

Many parts of the union lie beyond the reach of public information. The
country newspapers are commonly very barren. To remedy this inconvenience, some
members of Congress send printed circular letters to their constituents on the
existing condition of the political world. Mr. Samuel J. Cabell, of Virginia,
transmitted two of such letters. One of them was dated the 11th, and the other
the 23d of January, 1797. They contained nothing uncommon. They mentioned the
brilliant and irresistible progress of the French arms, the unfortunate chagrin
which had taken place between France and the United States, and the deplorable
consequences that would ensue to this country from an actual rupture. Mr.
Pickering's letter to Pinckney was referred to as more likely to promote than
prevent a French quarrel. Mr. Cabell expressed his regret at the election of
Mr. Adams as President, and added, as a consolation, that of Mr. Jefferson.

On the 22d of May, 1797, judge Iredell, of the federal court, delivered a
charge at Richmond to the grand jury, for the district of Virginia. It conveyed
encomiums on the government, and a strong recommendation of confidence in it.
The jury immediately gave in the following presentment.

We, of the grand jury of the United States for the district of Virginia,
present, as a real evil, the circular letters of several members of the late
Congress, and particularly letters with the signature of Samuel J. Cabell,
endeavoring, at a time of real public danger, to disseminate unfounded
calumnies against the happy government of the United States, and thereby to
separate the people therefrom; and to increase or produce a foreign influence,
ruinous to the peace, happiness, and independence of these United States.

The jurors themselves were evidently committing calumny. The phrase of several
members was casting their stink-pot in the dark. As to Mr. Cabell, they should
have specified the calumnies. When the grand jury of Chatham county, Georgia,
arraigned judge Wilson as a land-jobber, they condescended on matters
notoriously true It was upon the questionable evidence of this judge, that the
president declared the four western counties of Pennsylvania to be ^^ a state
of insurrection.
. When a citizen of Maryland censures judge Chase, he begins with a history of
the bankrupt law. If Mr. Cabell declared his dissatisfaction at the election of
Mr. Adams, one half of the American citizens were doing the same. This did not
produce the smallest confusion or embarrassment on the side of government. It
is unfortunate for the union, that Mr. Cabell had so much foundation for
regret. The out-set of the new President has been marked by an endeavor to
hurry his constituents into an unnecessary war, while secretary Pickering has
been writing, and secretary Wolcot has been encouraging others to write
invectives against the French nation British Honor and Humanity, p. 55.
. America needs not to hope for a sincere peace with France, while either Mr.
Adams or his present ministers remain in office. She cannot forget nor will she
forgive the many volumes of ribbaldry, which, under their countenance, have
been printed against her. Besides, upon a British spy, upon an associate with
the attorney general of England for the ruin of Thomas Pain Mr. Adams has
acted in both of these HONORABLE capacities. See American Annual Register,
chap. vi.
, every honest Frenchman, every true republican, of every country, must look
with horror.

"For never can true reconcilement grow,
"Where wounds of deadly hate have pierced so deep The following anecdote ought
to be known, and it is here given on the best evidence. A few weeks ago, the
first person in America gave a dinner to a party of the Senate. They were all
from the eastward excepting two southern members. The whole conversation turned
on ridiculing the southern states.
."
On the 31st of May, 1797, Mr. Cabell sent a third letter to his constituents.
It has, says he, been a regular practice of the federal judges, to make
political discourses to the grand jurors. -- They have become a band of
political preachers. This is true, and their sermons are often very dull. In
Britain, judges have generally been foremost to undermine the liberties of the
people, and encourage the encroachments of the crown. There is a country where
speculators occupy, in part, the supreme bench of justice. There, the assertion
of a public officer, whose want of probity is proverbial, has been taken as
complete evidence, that four counties were in a state of rebellion. It would
certainly be very wrong in a private citizen to contest the purity of such
legislators. In a subsequent letter of June 5th, Mr. Cabell says, upon an
assurance of the fact from general Smith, that the just claims of America, for
French depredations, do not exceed a million of dollars, and that the accuracy
of his statement is confirmed by the president of the American Insurance
Company. In the Congress debates on Jay's treaty, dr. Ames computed British
depredations at five millions, and the account has since been augmented.

The federal party naturally wish to drive out of their way every man who dares
to think for himself. Thus Monroe was recalled from France because, without
orders from Mr. Washington, he had obtained the releasement of Thomas Pain
from the Luxembourg; and because he had retained with the directory a degree of
that confidence which Mr. Washington had lost. Thus captain Montgomery, of one
of the revenue cutters of this port, has been dismissed from his office
because he voted for the Jefferson ticket. Mr. Beckley has not only been
discharged and attacked from the press, but even from the post office. An
elegant and polite letter came to him a few days after his dismission. It is
printed here for an odd enough reason. The character is feigned, but still, on
a careful comparison, it has a strong likeness to the hand writing of MR.
OLIVER WOLCOT, as the Saracen's head, in spite of disguise, resembled sir Roger
de Coverly See the Spectator.
.

DEAR SIR
You will now Experance the frut of your fooly in being so great a Demicrate
and bitter Enemay to that Government whose Bread you have Eaten which has now
cast you out of her service and is certainly nothing less than you could have
expede considering your conduct for a number of years past I can feal for your
situation as I Understood all your Land speculation has turned out but little
to suport a family in that Dignefied Way you have keept up However this I hope
will turn for your Good to make you Humble and know a little more of the
Deficulties attending those whose Cup has not ruin over with that fullness and
sweet you have long enjoyed [plase turn over] Let me give you an advise as a
friend Not to let your former station Hinder you from Acepteing of a less and
not so hounorable a place as that you have lost to enable you to suport your
family You now stand Yet a Respectable Character for if your Pride and
Haughteness keeps you out of Employ because you are not in so honorable a
station as before till your finances get lower and Lower you find that it will
be tenfold more dificult then to get into a place then at present and Endeavor
to lay aside your politicts leave that to those whose Country have called them
to the Important afairs of there Country by giveing them all the Aid and not
throwing Impedements in there way by such a prudent Conduct youll Only deserve
Well your Country and in time come forward again and get a good place take
these hints from a friend who Wishes the Happeiness your family Belive me to be
with much respect

Your Most Obt servant, JONATHAN WOTHERSPOON.


Nine years ago, the supposed writer of this piece was copying in the office of
the treasurer of Connecticut, at seventy-five cents per day. The grovelling
insolence which marks his elegant epistle has been too frequent with men
unexpectedly raised from mediocrity to something above it. The letter affords a
fine specimen of the spirit of the party. Your fooly in being so great a
demicrate; that is to say, in being so great a friend to the political rights
and importance of the people. Frederick of Prussia once wrote a letter to this
effect: If my subjects of Neufchatel choose to be eternally damned, I can say
nothing against it. In like manner, if the citizens of America choose to be
trod down by an aristocracy, no third party should interfere.

Your conduct for a number of years past. The official conduct of Mr. ^eckley
was unexceptionable. Indeed no audible complaint has been made about it. Dr.
William Smith, at the head of his regiment of forty, declined argument, and
obtained a silent vote. Where any thing can be said, the doctor is not a
niggard of accusation. That government whose bread you have eaten, which has
now cast you off. The bread was not eaten for nothing. The salary was moderate,
and the duties laborious. As to the casting off, it was by the odd vote of Dr.
Smith, who is, it seems, government. As for giving them all the aid, and not
throwing impediments in their way, they cannot surely have apprehensions from a
discarded clerk, who has to provide for his family by the toilsome profession
of the law? If government fear impediments from Mr. Beckley, their situation
must be very frail. That something is wrong will appear from what follows.

Alexander Hamilton calls it an abominable attempt in Reynolds to charge him
with dealing in the purchase of certificates. Thus, by his own admission, the
fact, if proved upon him, would be abominable. Colonel Wadsworth spoke of it,
as above quoted, exactly in the same way. But if this practice was indefensible
in a secretary of the treasury, it was just as criminal in a member of
Congress. There is no difference, or, if there be, the case of the member
differs for the worse. The secretary could only make a report in favor of
funding the half-crown certificates at twenty shillings. But the member voted
for it. The one drew the sword; the other drove it up to the hilt. Hence, by a
very short and plain process of reasoning, if one of our legislators was
concerned in these speculations, he committed an abominable crime. The heroes
of the piece are sensible of this fact. Their concealment of transfers at the
treasury, and the bank of the United States of the names and amount of
stockholders, proves an irresistible and disgraceful evidence of their internal
condemnation. What are you to think of a person who calls himself your
creditor, but refuses to tell his name, or the amount of his debt? Such was the
plan of the renowned leeches of the Nabob of Arcot. Bonds to an immense sum
were constantly produced, yet the catalogues of creditors constantly varied.
This rule at the treasury is like the crape over a highwayman's face, or the
dark lanthorn of a house-breaker. The public creditors of England wear no such
mask. Mr. Raiment printed their names to the number of an hundred and
twenty-seven thousand. When Americans begin to think upon this subject, they
will refuse to pay one cent more of interest upon the public funds, till they
shall have torn asunder the veil that shrouds the system. To the great mass of
the present holders the discovery would be indifferent or welcome. It is only
the patriarchal, the congressional sharks of stockholding, who can wish for
mountains to cover them, the men whose actions Messrs. Wadsworth and Hamilton,
have, by the clearest implication, declared to be abominable. Mr. Adams, by the
way, holds the funding system in abhorrence See particulars in the American
Annual Register, chap. 6.
, and he will put an end to it, if he can get into his French war. While
Americans entrust and admire such leaders, they display a temporal likeness to
the inhabitants of Neufchatel. These are the paper currency politicians, who
rail at jacobin rapacity, and at Jefferson for want of religion Phocion accuses
him, 1. Of trying to filch a little popularity from a few free negroes. An
important acquisition! The charge is eked through several pages. 2. With
impaling butterflies. 3. With disbelieving the story of Noah's flood. 4. With
the construction of sideboards and easy chairs. 5. Of resigning his office as
governor of Virginia, during a British invasion. Smith himself was in England
through the whole war. He chose to let his estate be double taxed rather than
return to defend his country 6. Whoever saw him (Jefferson) in a place of
worship? The doctor has been fully described in a line of Plautus: Impurus,
impudens, inverecundissimus.
.

In March, 1793, some debate ensued in Congress on the motion of Mr. Giles for
examining the conduct of Mr. Hamilton. The free latitude of discussion,
practiced upon other occasions, was refused; the smallest departure was
censured; and whenever, in particular, an approach was made toward the bank,
the whole party tumultuously crying to order, and with the directors at their
head, rose in arms to defend it. The character of the vote itself, which
constituted the majority is easily given. -- Of the thirty-five, twenty-one
were stockholders, or dealers in the funds, and three of these latter bank
directors An Examination of the late Proceedings in Congress, etc. p. 25. It
was in this struggle that dr. Smith pledged himself for the angelic purity of
Mr. Hamilton. Supra, chap. 6. Though the number of stockholding members is
specified in the text, it appears, afterward, to have been but a conjecture.
The writer gives a list of thirty-four members of the two houses, who were
believed to be stockholders; but their names are carefully blanked, as if he
had thought himself liable to prosecution. With such unexampled ostentation of
secrecy, there must be some dirty system that needs concealment.
.

The great cry of the party is about the sacred nature of public faith, which
they allege to have consummated by funding the domestic debt. This consisted
of arrears of pay due to the army, to contractors for supplies, of loans made
to government, and of the remnant of old paper money then in circulation. Now,
we must recollect, that, during the revolution, this country had been covered
with emissions of paper. When the old Congress borrowed money, they took part
of this paper back in loan, but not at the value for which they themselves had
issued it out. They allowed credit only for what was its current price in the
market. The difference was frequently as forty to one. Thus a farmer got four
thousand dollars worth of government paper for his wheat. After the value of
paper fell, he came to lend it to them, and they would only give him credit for
the fortieth part of its nominal value, being one hundred dollars. This
shocking fraud could be excused only by the omnipotence of necessity. But
farther, a part of the paper remained unredeemed at the close of the war, and
has been funded at the rate of one hundred for one under the present government
Gallatin, p. 89.
.

Thus taking America for a merchant who has three creditors, one of them is
paid with a fortieth, and a second with a hundredth part of the sum that he
lent. A third receives full payment. But a debt contracted ten years ago, and
still unpaid, is as fairly due as if it had been incurred but yesterday. The
creditor of 1776, who was paid with one-tenth, twentieth, fortieth, or
hundredth part of his just claim, was quite as meritorious as the other of
1781, whose debt has been bought up and funded, in the name of Theodore
Sedgwick, at twenty shillings in the pound. A brief consideration will convince
you, that this position agrees with the essence of justice.

If the continent had been sold by an hour glass, its utmost value would
perhaps have fallen short of satisfaction to the honest demands of public
creditors. The greater part of the United States had been swindled or plundered
to a degree that exceeds the descriptive talents of the most powerful mind.
Funds could not be had to satisfy all the creditors, or even a twentieth part
of them. It remains, therefore, to be proved what was the superior merit of
that class of creditors, whose claims were ultimately admitted, at their full
value, as a debt on the public. The common saying is, that they were old
soldiers. A great number of them were so, and possessed the highest merit. A
large portion of certificates was also held by contractors, and persons who had
furnished various kinds of supplies, but who were not in the army. The country
was full of widows and orphans, whose fathers and husbands had been killed in
the war, and who, to this day, have received no compensation. Multitudes of
soldiers had been also discharged from want of health, or from wounds, and who
in equity, though not perhaps in name, were creditors to the public. Hence, if
it had been possible to clear off all the last class of creditors, they were
not more deserving than a still greater proportion of military sufferers who
got nothing. The whole history of American public credit, during the war, holds
up a picture of inevitable but enormous iniquity. Three-fourths of the citizens
of the United States were, in real truth, creditors to government. The loss by
depreciated paper was prodigious and next to universal. If it could have been
possible to pick out all the soldiers or their families, and give them a higher
proportion of payment than others, it would have been well. But to give one
part of them their whole demand, and nothing to the rest, was not strict
justice. The widow and orphan of one old soldier were actually taxed to pay the
wages of another. When the federal party clamor so loudly on public faith, let
them revolve these particulars. Let them look at the annual bundles of
petitions referred to the committee of claims, and then they may blush at the
very mention of American public faith.

Some perhaps think that the friends of order have been treated with too little
ceremony in point of of style. Observe a few specimens of their own. Mr.
Fenno's gazette, of the 26th of April, 1796, contains a piece wherein the
members of Congress who opposed the treaty, are termed the war-whoop party. If
they carry their point, it will murder all your liberties, privileges and
properties. Again, referring to Mr. Albert Gallatin, Let the mighty Italian,
with his stilletto and bowl of poison come on. This piece concludes with saying
that the Americans despise all incendiaries; and it is subscribed ORDER.

An extract of a letter in the same newspaper has the following words. I want
to know how Madison has accounted for his inconsistency and duplicity of
conduct. How long will the people of America be duped by this man.

The first question to be here asked is, whether such inconsistency and
duplicity exist? No details are attempted, and no evidences are offered. There
never was an active and distinguished member in any legislative assembly,
farther above impeachment than Mr. Madison. The marked attention which this
gentleman obtained in Congress, is a tribute of esteem which all parties pay
not more to his abilities than his virtues, to the irreproachable tenor of a
life, that, since his first entrance on the political career, has remained
without a stain, and which is far above the ordure of Mr. Fenno's
correspondents.

As for the destruction of privileges and properties, no party ever displayed
greater tameness on that head than the Hamiltonians. After the British had,
for, many months, been capturing American vessels without provocation, and
almost without pretense, the Representatives, on the 21st of April, 1795, past
a resolution prohibiting, from and after the 1st of November then next, all
commercial intercourse between the United States and the subjects of Britain,
or the citizens or subjects of any other nation, so far as respects articles of
the growth or manufacture of Britain or Ireland. This would have been a most
effectual blow to British commerce; and, as six months were to intervene before
the commencement of its operation, full time would have been given for a mutual
explanation and compromise. The British majority in the Senate of Congress
rejected this proposal, so cheap, so simple, and so decisive. Jay, that
executioner of his country, was, at the same time, dispatched to Britain. He
there, by a clause of the treaty, tied up the hands of America, and destroyed
all chance of adopting such a resource in future. The fifteenth article has
these words. Nor shall any prohibition be imposed on the exportation or
importation of any articles to or from the territories of the two nations
respectively, which shall not equally extend to all other nations. Thus we
cannot prohibit the importation of English manufactures, without also
prohibiting those of all other nations; and that is impracticable.

This article has the appearance of reciprocity, but not the substance.
Supposing that England should entirely prohibit all intercourse with this
country, her loss would be an hundred times greater than ours. The desolation
of her West Indies would be the first consequence, and a general bankruptcy
among her West-Indian merchants, and her manufacturers for the American market,
would be the second. On the contrary, the inconvenience and loss to the United
States would be very supportable. We should begin to manufacture more among
ourselves. American produce would soon find other markets. Other nations would
learn to supply our wants, while the artists of England would crowd over to
this country in quest of employment. More commmanding ground could not be
desired. Yet Jay jumped from his eminence to waddle in the slough of pretended
reciprocity, to betray every principle of official trust, and to trample on
every atom of his instructions. The reader will infallibly abhor such ignorance
or treachery, unless he has been a British commissary during the last war, or a
certificat correspondent with James Reynolds since it, unless he has a suit of
compensation depending at London, unless he expects to be made an officer in
the customs, a director of the mint, a chaplain to Congress, a printer to the
Senate, or an ambassador to Berlin; or, unless he has twenty bills lying
protested at the bank of the United States, and his credit sticking together by
the nod of Mr. Thomas Willing.

While the resolution of the 21st of April, 1794, was under debate, and
frequently before that time, in the same session, the gentlemen on the opposite
side of the question, said that the British would not feel the want of our
commerce, because the three millions sterling of exports from Britain to
North America, formed only one-sixth part of her total exports. This reasoning
resembled that of supposing, that a person worth six thousand dollars, will not
regret the loss of one thousand, because he has five times that number behind;
or, if you will, that a man would not feel the amputation of one of his
fingers, if the other seven are safe and sound. Another circumstance must be
attended to. One-half of the commerce of Britain had been destroyed by the
ravages of the French war, so that the loss of American commerce would then
have been equal to the annihilation of one third or fourth part of her whole
foreign trade.

What effect these resolutions, if adopted, were likely to produce in Britain,
may be perfectly ascertained upon the authority of Dr. Adam Smith, who was, on
a point of this kind, a judge above exception. The passage now to be quoted, is
of considerable length, but it serves to illustrate the present subject so
completely, that an apology would be unnecessary for its insertion. After
describing some of the numerous inconveniences which Britain met with, in
attempting to monopolize the commerce of her North-American colonies, the
doctor proceeds thus:

Her commerce, instead of running in a great number of small channels, has been
taught to run principally in one great channel. But the whole system of her
industry and commerce has thereby been rendered less secure; the whole state of
her body politic less healthful, than it otherwise would have been. In her
present condition, Britain resembles one of those unwholesome bodies, in which
some of the vital parts are overgrown, and which, upon that account, are liable
to many dangerous disorders, scarce incident to those in which all the parts
are more properly proportioned. A small stop in that great blood-vessel which
has been artificially swelled beyond its natural dimensions, and through which
an unnatural proportion of the industry and commerce of the country has been
forced to circulate, is very likely to bring on the most dangerous disorders
upon the whole body politic. The expectation of a rupture with the colonies,
accordingly, has struck the people of Britain with more terror than they ever
felt for a Spanish armuda, or a French invasion. It was this terror, whether
well or ill-grounded, which rendered the repeal of the stamp act, among the
merchants, at least, a popular measure. In a total exclusion (...) the colony
market, was it to last only for a few years, (...) greater part of our
merchants used to fancy that they foresaw an entire stop to their trade; the
greater part of our master manufacturers, the entire ruin of their business;
and the greater part of our workmen, an end of their employment. A rupture with
any of our neighbors upon the continent, though likely too to occasion some
stop or interruption in the employment of some of all these different orders of
people, is foreseen, however, without any such general emotion. The blood, of
which the circulation is stopped in some of the smaller vessels, easily disgorges
itself into the greater, without occasioning any dangerous disorder; but, when
it is stopped in any of the greater vessels, convulsions, apoplexy, or death, are
the immediate and unavoidable consequences. If but one of these overgrown
manufactures, which by means either of bounties or of the monopoly of the home
and colony markets, have been artificially raised up to an unnatural height,
finds some small stop or interruption in its employment, it frequently
occasions a mutiny and disorder alarming to government, and embarrassing even
to the deliberations of the legislature. How great, therefore, would be the
disorder and confusion, it was thought, which must necessarily be occasioned by
a sudden and entire stop in the employment of so great a proportion of our
principal manufacturers!

In despite of this overwhelming narrative, members of Congress could stand up
and make speeches, by the hour, to prove, that an interruption of her commerce
with America would not be seriously regarded by Britain. If she was so deeply
afraid of America in 1766, when victorious, and at peace with all the world,
her alarm would, of course, be vastly greater in 1794, when her public debt had
doubled since the former time; when her armies on the continent were
extirpated; when her manufacturing classes were already starving by thousands A
letter from a merchant in Manchester to his friend in this city, written about
that time, observed, that, if it was not for America, they would have wanted
BREAD TO THEIR MOUTHS.
; and when her trade to the United States was computed to be at twice the
amount of what it had been twenty years before. This turn of circumstances went
directly in favor of America. In 1766, England was more deeply alarmed than
she ha^ ^een by the Spanish armada. In 1794, her tremor would have been ten
times greater, as a man dipped up to the chin, stands in more hazard of drowning,
than when the stream only wets his ancle.

The exports from Britain to America, were, in 1794, about three millions
sterling On the 18th of April, 1796, Pit said, in the House of Commons, that
the total exports of Britain, amounted to twenty-four millions sterling; and in
1795, to twenty-seven millions, two hundred and seventy thousand pounds
sterling.
; being, as above stated, equal to about a sixth part of her exported
manufactures. Let us suppose that every manufacturer in Britain requires
fifteen pounds sterling per annum to support him; and that one-half of the
price of the commodities exported from Britain to America consists in the wages
of their labor. Here then we have abstracted from the fund of subsistence for
the laboring part of the people of Britain, ONE MILLION AND FIVE HUNDRED
THOUSAND POUNDS STERLING. Of these manufacturers, a considerable number must be
married, and have families of children. It may seem strange in America, but it
is absolutely true, that in Britain, or at least in Scotland, a journeyman
manufacturer has raised his family on six shillings sterling a week, which is
only fifteen pounds twelve shillings per annum. Let us compute then that
one-fourth part of the hundred thousand manufacturers above stated, are
married, and that each has three children. This estimate gives us two hundred
thousand people reduced to beggary at a single stroke. We must likewise take
into the account, that many thousands of British tradesmen depend entirely for
their subsistence upon the custom of those two hundred thousand people; so that
the whole number deprived of employment may be conjectured at two hundred and
fifty thousand. To this we must add the destruction of revenue, the confusion,
alarm, and bankruptcy of merchants, and the fall of the stocks, which must be
the necessary consequence, and then let any body say, whether the loss of the
commerce of America must not be a very serious object to Britain.

This act, prohibiting the importation of British goods, was lost in the
Senate, by the casting vote of Mr. John Adams. All the advantages that it would
have produced, have been thrown away, and all the mischiefs attending Jay's
treaty have been originally caused by the fatal rejection of the
vice president. The advocates against the prohibition discovered a great want
of information, of integrity, or of judgment. There cannot be a plainer
position than that now before us. Adam Smith was, perhaps, the best informed
political writer that Britain ever had. He affirmed, that an exclusion from the
United States would affright her more effectually than a Spanish armada, or a
French invasion. The Adamites denied all this; and their ignorance, their
factious spirit, or their treachery, has cost American trade at least seven or
eight millions of dollars. The constant cry was, that the British would declare
war. Some weeks before that time, when Madison's resolutions were debated,
general Smith asked one of these bawlers, what made him apprehensive that
England would attack us? He replied, that he had no apprehensions of such a
thing, but some of his neighbors were afraid of it, and he wanted to please
them. General Smith told this in Congress, on the 27th of May, 1797. This would
be one of those impostors who went home and told their constituents, that
Madison wanted to destroy the government.

Among the ridiculous arguments advanced in Congress for accepting the British
treaty, one was, that it would prevent the renewal of an Indian war. On the
29th of April, 1796, Mr. Dayton said, that, by rejecting Jay's treaty, it might
be calculated upon as inevitable, and the consequent expenditure of fourteen
hundred thousand dollars annually; but in carrying the treaty into effect, and
possessing the (Western) posts with the troops, they should be free from any
danger of a serious rupture with the savages Bache's Debates, vol. ii. p. 347.
. That the Western posts would firmly bridle the Indians, was, at that time, a
received opinion.

Dr. Ames took up the subject in a higher strain. The tories were ready to spit
in any man's face who did not admire his speech on that occasion. On the Indian
war, he sets out as follows:

On this theme, my emotions are unutterable: if I could find words for them, if
my powers bore any proportion to my zeal, I would swell my voice to such a note
of remonstrance, it should reach every log-house beyond the mountains. I would
say to the inhabitants, wake you from your false security. Your cruel dangers,
your more cruel apprehensions are soon to be renewed: the wounds, yet unhealed,
are to be torn open again. In the day time, your path through the woods will be
ambushed. The darkness of midnight will glitter with the blaze of your
dwellings. -- You are a father -- the blood of your sons shall fatten your
cornfield. -- You are a mother -- the war-whoop shall wake the sleep of the
cradle. On this subject, you need not suspect any deception on your feelings.
It is a spectacle of horror which cannot be over drawn. If you have nature in
your hearts, it will speak a language compared with which all I have said or
can say, will be poor and frigid.

Will it be whispered that the treaty has made me a new champion for the
protection of the frontiers? It is known that my voice as well as vote have
been uniformly given in conformity with the ideas I have expressed. Protection
is the right of the frontiers; it is our duty to give it.

All this is very fine. The conclusion implies an internal doubt in the mind of
the orator that he was liable to the change of inconsistency. Indeed, on the
6th of June, 1794, Dr. Ames spoke thus, in Congress: I am not one of those who
think that there are too many Indians, any more than too many wild beasts. The
one may, by skilful management, be rendered as harmless as the other. In 1794,
when the doctor used this language, he thought only of injuries that Indians
have suffered from white people. In April, 1796, he thought only of injuries
that white people suffer from Indians. In the latter instance, Dr. Ames proved
more than he foresaw. A refusal to appropriate would not have justified England
in breaking the peace of 1783; and hence her stimulating the savages to murder,
would have been an act of the blackest perfidy. The doctor looked upon this
consequence as certain. Jacobinism can do nothing worse. This proves the folly
of thinking Frenchmen more barbarous than Britons. The doctor says, that his
voice as well as vote has been uniform. NO. He was an advocate for that system,
which ended with refusing payment to the militia of Tennessee, for having done
their duty. Yet the capture of Nickajack was nearly as important as Wayne's
victory on the banks of the Miamis. Of the former, nobody speaks. For the
latter, America has rung with exultation.

Again, if the Indians are ready to break a treaty, when a governor of Canada
shall bid them do so, we have certainly too many of such neighbors, and
systematic treachery makes it hardly worth while to negociate with them. This
picture of persidy does not agree with what Dr. Ames had said only a few
minutes before. I see no exception to the respect that is paid among nations to
the law of good faith. If there are cases in this enlightened period when it is
violated, there are none where it is decried. It is the philosophy of politics,
the religion of governments. It is observed by barbarians. A whiff of
tobacco-smoke, or a string of beads, gives not merely binding force, but
sanctity to treaties.

By the subsequent account of the gentleman himself, the beads and tobacco were
both to be forgotten at the nod of England. No exception to the respect to the
law of good faith! Modern history is as full as it can be of the violation of
good faith. The British orders of the 8th of June, and 6th of November, 1793,
and 8th of January, 1794, were all breaches of treaty. The extravagance of the
or^^r's style is too evident for detection. He then puts the supposition that
England refuses to execute the treaty, after we have done every thing to carry
it into effect. -- What would you say, or rather what would you not say? He
then, in a strain of lofty declamation, tells what might be said! The only
remark worth making would be that a blackamoor cannot easily wash himself
white; and that no man versant in history would feel surprise at such national
baseness. Dr. Ames makes repeated reference to the states of Barbary, as
unsuspected of breaking treaties. A short history of Algiers, printed some
years ago by Mr. Matthew Carey, will give him a precious catalogue of such
matters. Jay's treaty itself is regarded by the French as a violation of our
treaty with them. The remarks on this speech may be shortened, for the treaty
has de facto died. This can be proved in a few words.

There is no position better settled, than that the breach of any article of a
treaty by one party, gives the other an option to consider the whole treaty as
annulled Camillus, No. viii.
. Now, as England is on the verge of a general bankruptcy, our merchants have
no chance to recover their five millions of dollars. This was the temptation
for accepting the treaty; and, when that vision has vanished, Congress, by the
admission of Camillus himself, are at liberty to declare it void. They could do
nothing better.

His majesty's most faithful subjects in Philadelphia toil hard to prove that
England will recover her credit. The present distress has not come of a
sudden. In April, 1796, a committee of merchants waited on Mr. Pit. At this
interview it came out that the bank of England had advanced fourteen millions
sterling for government, Sixteen millions sterling of cash and bullion had,
within three years, been exported from the kingdom. Gambling in the funds had
been excited by Pitt's exorbitant premiums to such a pitch, that twenty,
thirty, and forty per cent were given for money to carry it on. Manufacturers
or merchants could no longer borrow money at five per cent, so that sober trade
was not to be supported. All these were the strongest causes and symptoms which
could be conceived of approaching ruin. France has only to rest on her arms,
to exclude, as she has done, English commerce from almost every port in
Europe, and then to permit England to proceed with an annual loan of twenty
millions sterling. Hence it is of little concern whether Britain professedly
stops payment in this year or the next. The event is certain. The delay is but
like a fortnight's respite from the gibbet. The predictions of Gerald and
Palmer have not been long unfulfilled; nor have their wrongs been long
unavenged.

Recurring to Dr. Ames, we can now answer one of his queries. The articles
stipulating the redress of our injuries by captures, are said to be delusive.
By whom is this said? By every body

Dr. Ames has been succeeded in the fifth Congress by a diligent imitator. Of
all that might have been spared in the representative of Boston we find a
faithful copy. But from his comprehensive knowledge, his pathetic vivacity, his
acuteness of remark, his chaste, yet luxuriant elegance of expression, the
honorable Harrison Gray Otis of Massachusetts keeps, and forever will keep, at
an immeasurable distance.

On the 1st of July, 1797, an amendment was proposed in Congress to the
stamp-duty bill. Twenty dollars were to be charged for a certificate of
citizenship to an emigrant. On this occasion, Mr. Otis made, as usual, a speech
of considerable length. Mr. Loyd took an extensive sketch of it. But as the
commodities of this orator are not much in demand, Mr. Loyd has not yet
presumed to incumber his newspaper with the copy. Mr. Bache gave a short
account of it, and as Mr. Otis has complained bitterly of the negligence of
reporters, the following extract of the most shining passages has been here
inserted, cum notis variorum.

Mr Otis defended the stamp duty. We did not want population now. [The United
states contain above a million of square miles, and about five millions of
people. Making large allowance for water, and for useless land, their territory
could with much ease accommodate twenty times their present number of people.
An immense wilderness beyond the Mississippi remains also to be filled up. We
need an increase of numbers more than any other nation. It is momentous to our
political safety. In the A. B. C. of American politics, Mr. Otis might have
learned this lesson.] He made some observations on the relative manners of
Europe and this country. He could not agree that there was this similarity Mr.
Gallatin had said that we were in fact an European nation, that the manners of
the people, on both sides of the water, were essentially the same.
, at least in the present distracted state of Europe; when morality and
religion, and every vestige of what was great and amiable, was endeavored to
be swept from the surface of the earth. [In some parts of Europe, in Portugal
and Russia, for example, the human character is degraded by despotism. But in
every country where any degree of freedom can be found, the people of Europe
will bear, in all respects, a comparison with those of America. How should it
be otherwise? The United States have become inhabited by a succession of chips
from the old block of European population. They have not been long enough in
the New world to attain any important distinction of character. During this
debate, an Irish representative remarked to a stranger in the lobby, that
nearly one fourth part of the members then present were natives of Europe. To
the south of New England, at least one half of the citizens are either
emigrants from thence, or the sons or grandsons of such emigrants. As for the
attempt to sweep morality and religion, every vestige of all that is great and
amiable from the surface of the earth, this is only a round-about way of
professing that Mr. Otis is an enemy to the French revolution. Had he been born
in due time, he would surely have resisted that of America; for the French had
received at least five millions of provocations, where the Americans could
produce one. It is to be inferred that Mr. Otis laments the destruction of the
Bastile, the abolition of the Gabelle, the rack, the wheel, monarchy, nobility,
and that utmost of abominations -- an episcopal establishment by law. He thinks
that to let every man believe what creed, and employ what priest he pleases, is
the way to sweep religion from the earth. To destroy aristocracy is to destroy
morality. This must be his meaning.] He wished to place a bar in the way of the
admission of those restless people who could not be tranquil and happy in their
own country; those who had unfurled the standard of rebellion at home. He
professed an esteem for some emigrants to this country; but he did not wish a
horde of wild Irishmen to be let loose upon us; who were now endeavoring to
effect a revolution in their own country. He did not wish the introduction here
of their revolutionary principles. He was willing to fraternize with those
emigrants who might be admitted among us now, but he wished a bar placed to
further migrations, and he did not think twenty dollars too much.

The term of wild, as here applied exclusively to Irishmen, is highly
impertinent. In those parts of Ireland where the peace and property of the
subjects have formerly been protected, the general cast of manners was fully as
good as that in New England. A great body of the people were however kept in a
state of incessant irritation by the pressure of their landed aristocracy, and
their blood-sucking church of England hierarchy. Of these unfortunate victims
it would be unfair to estimate the morals, till they shall enjoy a political
system, whereby industry is encouraged, and property secured. Fortune has never
sported more cruelly, than by subjecting that hospitable and generous nation to
the monopolizing jealousy, and the systematic barbarity of an English
parliament. An Irish revolution is now expected, and in its triumphant issue,
Ireland, spurning the yoke of hereditary tyrants, will assume her proper rank
and dignity among the powers of Europe.

Those, says Mr. Otis, who have unfurled the standard of rebellion AT HOME. A
gang of banditti from the town of Boston began the American revolution, by
unfurling the standard of villainy. They wantonly destroyed three hundred and
forty-two chests of tea, in presence, and with the approbation of an immense
crowd of spectators. The act of parliament for shutting up the port of Boston,
was the natural and suitable consequence of that shameful transaction. The
burning of the Gaspee schooner, at Providence, in Rhode Island, because it
obstructed smuggling, was another wanton outrage, that must be reprobated by
every man who is fit for living under a civilized government. The whole
continent was dragged prematurely into war, to save the factious townsmen of
Boston from a chastisement that some of them very highly deserved. The friends
of America in England, could no longer defend their proceedings. The cause of
liberty was disgraced and injured by the unbecoming insolence of its advocates.
The townsmen of Belfast have invaded no man's property. The burden of actual
oppression crushes them to the earth. The wrongs of America were chiefly in
imagination. She was more lightly taxed than any other country in the world. If
the people of New England had behaved with equal moderation and dignity as
those of Virginia, it is likely enough that we might still have been British
colonies, and in a happy situation, without any revolution at all. When once
the contest had begun, there could be no medium between independence and
slavery, but that does not lessen the extreme want of sense and honesty in
burning the tea. It very ill becomes such people to rail at reformers in
Europe. The whole speech proves that Mr. Otis is unworthy even to reside in a
free country, and infinitely more so to represent it. Nature intended him for a
keeper of the Conciergerie, or a led captain to some prince of Wales. After
all, Otis only betrayed the real sentiments of his whose party; and under such
leaders, we cannot wonder at the contemptible and pitiable figure which the
United States do at present make.

The unexpected length to which some articles in this volume are found to
extend, has of necessity prevented the publication of others. This deviation
from the first design is more fully explained in the preface. The following
miscellaneous remarks have, however, been inserted, as a relief to the reader
from the sameness of political details. They refer to subjects of universal
interest, and which, in the most expressive manner, demand reformation.

On Saturday, the 12th of March, 1796, two stage coaches, set out at six
o'clock in the morning, from Frenchtown for Newcastle. The distance is only
seventeen miles, and yet the drivers did not reach the latter place till twelve
o'clock. They took six hours to travel a space, which a healthy, active man
would have walked over with ease, in four and an half. The road through which
the coaches had to go, was very tolerable. One of the drivers, when near
Newcastle, attempted a kind of quicker pace than usual. The wretched harnessing
instantly gave way; the two foremost horses broke loose, and set off at full
gallop: one of them was near breaking his neck.

When the passengers arrived at Newcastle, the wind was fair, the tide was
making, and the boat for Philadelphia was ready and waiting; yet they were
detained an hour and an half. The only conceivable reason for this delay was,
that the innkeeper might scrub the passengers out of the price of a dinner.

At last the boat got off, and with a fair wind came up within less than two
miles of Gloucester point; but the wind and tide failing, the vessel was
obliged to come to anchor. If she had left Newcastle but an hour more early,
she might have come with ease to the wharf at Chesnut-street, by six o'clock in
the evening.

Seven or eight of the passengers, who were anxious to get forward, were
obliged to pay half-^-dollar each to the sailors to row them ashore. If the
owners of these boats are capable of shame, which is extremely doubtful, they
must blush at such multiplied instances of negligence, insolence and extortion.

Another tide was expected to begin about one o'clock in the morning. The
master, whose name is Mitchell, sat up, drinking grog, playing at cards with
some passengers, and making an intolerable noise, till the hour
abovementioned; he then went to bed. About four in the morning, some of his
men came down to tell him that the tide was ebbing, and that the boat was run
aground. It was a long time before they could make him understand them.

Finally, the boat came up to Arch-street wharf on Sunday evening, with the
tide, having performed a passage in twenty-eight hours, which, with the utmost
ease, might have been executed in six.

The above appeared in a Baltimore newspaper. Some of the parties felt
themselves angry, and said so; but they did not attempt to contradict the
statement, for it was only a specimen of their daily practice.

Extract of a letter from a gentleman in Philadelphia, to his friend in
Baltimore, dated 25th of April, 1796.
In the Maryland Journal of the 28th of March last, I observe an account of an
expedition from Frenchtown to Newcastle in the stage coach, and from the latter
place to Philadelphia by the stage boat. The writer complains that the coach
took six hours to drive seventeen miles over a tolerable road; that the boat
spent twenty-eight hours on a voyage up the Delaware, which might have been
ended in six hours; that Mitchell, the master of the boat, got drunk; that his
sailors fleeced some of the passengers, etc. etc.

This malcontent must undoubtedly be a foreigner, otherwise he never would have
attempted to grumble, for two solid reasons. First, because, with a few
exceptions, brutality, negligence and filching, are as naturally expected by
people accustomed to traveling in America, as a mouth, a nose, and two eyes,
are looked for in a man's face. Secondly, because legal redress, and individual
reformation, are equally hopeless. The former would require such a waste of
time and money, with so extreme an uncertainty of the issue, that no person of
common prudence ever thinks of it. As for the second, there are exceptions,
both as to landlords and drivers, between this place and Baltimore; and others
may be found in different parts of the country. But the blanks in this lottery
are more numerous than the prizes; and to hope reformation or amendment of
character, among the worthless, would be the most visionary of all visions.

Thus standing the case, this gentleman, instead of grumbling, should rather be
very thankful to have rode from Frenchtown to Newcastle, without getting his
limbs broke, and his trunk, if he had one with him, shattered to pieces, or
pitched a yard deep into the mire. Mitchell, the boatman from Newcastle to
Philadelphia, did not endanger the lives of his passengers. He only kept them
about five times longer than was necessary on the water. If his sailors took
half-a-dollar a piece for rowing some of the passengers on shore, they should
have been very grateful that the boat was not overset. Permit me to relate some
of my own trials and troubles of this nature.

In June 1794, I had occasion to go to New York. Two rival coaches came near
the town of Brunswick, at the same time. The one in which I was, got the start
of the other by a few yards; and entered the town at full gallop. I expected
every moment when the coach would break down, or some of the horses fall dead
under the fatigue. Most of our passengers were as fond of this triumph as the
driver himself, and did every thing in their power to encourage him to break
their necks. At Elizabeth-town, a young lady, well mounted, came up behind us,
and attempted to ride by. Six or eight of us instantly raised a halloo,
frightened her horse, and almost unseated her. On attempting to expostulate, I
soon found that I might presently be treated still worse than she was. The
whole cargo roared out, What? Suffer any body to take the road of us? They
reviled the lady in the most shameful style. One of them I learned to be a
merchant in New York, and a man not of an obscure situation. A second was a
quaker. I tried to argue with him on the principles of his society, on the
vileness and cowardice of hazarding the life or limbs of a fellow creature for
such a jockey piece of ettiquette. I had a surly answer, and was at the same
time, taken up short by a clergyman from the north of Ireland, who constantly
kept himself in a state of elevation during the last sixty miles of our journey.

At New York, I was lodged with two others, in a back room, on the ground
floor. This was a dirty hole about three yards and an half square. -- What can
be the reason for that vulgar hoggish custom, common in America, of squeezing
three, six, or eight beds into one room? No such thing is seen in the British
islands. Among genteel or decent people, every person has not only a bed, but
even a room to himself, and very frequently locks the door.

The back yard, into which the window of our cell opened, was about six yards
wide every way. Within this space, and just opposite to our window stood a
little brick kitchen, and cheek by jowl, an edifice of the most necessary
nature. They were separated by a brick partition about six or nine inches
thick. The delicacy of this arrangement must strike every person of superior
taste. Having occasion to visit the temple, I found that the roof had tumbled
in. It was about noon, and a very sultry day, and before I could get out again,
I had well nigh fainted with the most horrible stench that ever assailed my
nostrils.

If the continent of America were only ten miles broad, there might be some
excuse for jamming buildings together in such a disgusting, awkward and
dangerous way. I call it disgusting, as the scene just described might turn the
stomach of a Hottentot. It is awkward, for when these receptacles of filth come
to be emptied, matters are often so badly laid out, that the only passage to
get the nastiness away, is through the very middle of the house itself. Such is
not universally the mode of purgation, but it occurs, in too many instances.
Now it is surely awkward to be thus, almost in a literal sense, entrenched up
to the teeth in human excrement; and it is the more extraordinary, as the
Americans are highly and justly commended for the general cleanliness of their
domestic economy. Can any body wonder that a city, under the fortieth degree of
latitude, should be visited by the yellow fever, when a part of its inhabitants
are permitted to render it a center of putrefaction? The danger of squeezing
houses together like herrings in a barrel, is readily seen in cases of fire. A
house burnt down last winter in Philadelphia near the corner of Arch-street;
and such was its situation that it was either almost, or entirely inaccessible
to fire-engines. I know a city in Europe larger than Philadelphia, that did not
suffer so much by fire in fifteen years, as I have repeatedly seen the latter
do in a single evening. Excuse this disgression. I now return to my travels.

In coming back from New York to this city, I preferred going by water. -- The
master of a stage-boat, which took us over an arm of the sea to New Jersey,
gave an eminent proof of attention to his duty. He suffered our boat to be very
nearly run down on a smooth calm sea, in broad day light, by a vessel of much
larger bulk than ours, that was coming up in full sail. At last, when within
perhaps twenty yards of her, the shouting of her crew awaked him from his
torpor; but after all, we missed only by a few feet, a stroke that inevitably
would have sent us to the bottom. Thus were the lives of twenty or thirty
people brought into the most imminent risk, because the boat was entrusted with
a blockhead, who had not common sense enough to drive a dung cart.

At Amboy, part of our baggage was forgot, notwithstanding the injunctions
which we gave, and the assurances which we received, that the whole would be
carefully packed. So great was the politeness of the house, that though we had
paid for seats overnight, the coach was on the point of setting off without
giving notice to five or six of us, who were in considerable danger of being
left behind.

In our passage across Jersey, the drivers did every thing in their power to
kill the horses, by making them go at a hand gallop, for six or seven miles
together, without stopping, over a deep sandy road, and in a very hot day. If
the owners of these coaches had the least sense even of their own interest,
they would flog such barbarous villains, in place of paying them wages.

At Bordenton, we went into a second boat, where we met with very sorry
accommodation. This was about four o'clock in the afternoon. We had about
twenty miles down the Delaware to reach Philadelphia. The captain, who had a
most provoking tongue, was a boy about eighteen years of age. He, and a few
companions, dispatched a dozen or eighteen bottles of porter. We ran three
different times against other vessels that were coming up the stream. The women
and children lay all night on the bare boards of the cabin floor. A little boy,
one of the passengers from New York, lingered at the brink of the grave, during
several months, in consequence of this mode of traveling. We reached
Arch-street wharf, about eight o'clock on the Wednesday morning, having been
about sixteen hours on a voyage of twenty miles. Compared to such navigators as
those two, whom I have just given you an account of, even poor Mitchell was an
Anson or a Columbus.

Print the above. The press cannot do better than to describe scenes of
inhospitality and swindling that seem to have been reduced to a national
system, and that could hardly be expected in a Turkish caravansera.


The buildings of Baltimore, New York, and Philadelphia, contain in their
construction so great a proportion of wood, that if a flame has once fairly
caught, nothing but the most vigorous efforts can stop its progress.

If the ground story of one of our houses catches fire, a family residing in
the second floor, may run the utmost hazard of being either suffocated by the
smoke, or burnt alive in the flames. Their only snift is to jump out of the
windows, at the expense of breaking half their bones, unless, which does not
always happen, ladders are brought to their assistance. Even in that case, from
hurry and confusion, the risk is considerable. In many places, houses are
heaped together in such a manner, that in case of a fire, either exit or access
would be almost impracticable.

Every man who sees a conflagration in an American town, must remark the
facility with which it spreads from one roof to another. This is one of the
great and leading causes, which make our fires so generally destructive. The
first reason is, that our houses are roofed with wood; and secondly, a most
absurd and stupid practice among house-carpenters, has multiplied the hazard in
a ten-fold proportion.

When two houses of equal height are built close together, it is very common
for the planks of each roof to cross over and join with those of the other. By
this means, whenever one roof kindles, the flame, if it gets not opposition,
from a water engine, spreads immediately to the next. In Dublin, the houses are
roofed with s^ate or tile, and each roof is separated from others by a little
parapet of stone, which is raised about nine or twelve inches above the roof,
being in fact, the top of the partition wall between the two buildings. This
incombustible boundary, makes the conflagration spread far more tardily than it
otherwise would do.

When a traveller from Europe first lands in the United States, he is amazed at
the blindness and infatuation of persisting in this practice of running the
wooden roofs across each other, a practice so pregnant with danger and ruin. A
few years of habit reconcile him to it, and if he builds a house for himself,
he is not ambitious of looking wiser than other people.

We often hear of fires in London, and they are sometimes very terrible. But
London is about seven or eight times more populous than the five largest
seaport towns in America put together, so that if we compare the number of
buildings with the number of fires, in these different places, it will be found
that those of London are of much inferior frequency.

In Edinburgh, the houses are far more durably built than either in London or
Dublin. In the two latter, the walls are almost universally formed of brick,
and the stairs of wood. In Edinburgh the walls and stairs are of stone, and
every stair is arched quite round with stone, so firmly compacted, that the
wooden parts of the house might be consumed twenty times over, and the
staircase itself remain without damage. No wooden roof is to be seen; and the
s^ate roofs are invariably separated by a parapet wall. The result from this
style of architecture is, that a well built house can hardly burn to the
ground, on any account. A dirty chimney may kindle, cause occasional alarm, and
produce petty damage; but the burning out of a family is a very uncommon
accident.

CHAPTER VIII.
Proceedings of Congress. -- Affair of Randall and Whitney. -- Plan of
appointing a shorthand writer. -- Debates on the federal city. -- Act of
Appropriation. -- Debates on the call for Jay's instructions. -- Strange answer
of the President. -- Appropriations for the British treaty. -- Explanation of
the conduct of Mr. Muhlenberg. -- Singular multiplicity of petitions in favor
of appropriating for the British treaty. -- Rise of the session.

THE preliminary and miscellaneous materials of this volume have swelled to a
much greater bulk than had been foreseen or designed. After all, many articles
are left out, which were originally proposed for insertion. Though not always
in a regular series, yet a considerable part of the most important events of
the present year, have been related. Our maritime history, that is to say, an
account of the French and British depredations, for the first five months of
1796, have been compiled with tolerable completeness. The present chapter is to
give a sketch of the principal proceedings in Congress, during that part of
their session, which began with the 1st of January, 1796. Of many of the most
interesting speeches, there have already been inserted large specimens.

The affair of Randall and Whitney belongs, most properly, to the year 1795. A
full account of it has been recently given in the American Annual Register. It
is sufficient here to say, that Robert Randall and Charles Whitney, did, in
1795, conceive a project, in conjunction with some British settlers in Canada,
for purchasing from Congress that spacious peninsula, which lies between lakes
E^ie, Michigan, and Huron. It contains about twenty millions of acres. With
this view they came to Philadelphia. Randall made some improper advances to
certain members of the House of Representatives, in order to gain their
interest. Having, no doubt, heard of the pilot-boat history, he waited among
others, upon Dr. William Smith. He was apprehended, brought to the bar of the
house, and for a short time confined in prison. Whitney had done nothing wrong.
He was sent to jail, and then dismissed without examination. In this business,
the house acted without regularity, without judgment, and without justice.

On the 19th of January, they took up the bill of appropriations for the
current year. Mr. Williams moved to strike out of it all the sums allotted for
the mint. After a very hard struggle, the mint protracted its existence, under
the severest repobation of its management from every side of the house. The
plan of this establishment came from Mr. Hamilton. Large sums had been expended
to very little purpose. One design of it seems to have been the erection of a
board of sinecures for the sake of increasing the executive influence.

On the 29th of January, the house went into a committee of the whole, on a
report from a committee that had been appointed to find out a short hand writer
who was to take down their debates at full length, and print them. A person
had, for almost two preceding sessions, attended the house to take minutes of
its proceedings for the Philadelphia Gazette. In this wilderness of scribbling,
many particulars transpired, which members were ashamed to confess and afraid
to deny. Four gentlemen were especially irritated, viz. Theodore Sedgwick, Dr.
William Smith, Samuel Dexter, and Robert Goodloe Harper. Messrs. Dexter and
Sedgwick were not able to forgive the figure that they had made in the nobility
debates, as well as on some other occasions. Harper had disputed with col.
James White, delegate from Tennessee, on the defense of the South-Western
frontier; and the particulars, which were not to his advantage, had been
related with unfeeling accuracy. But Dr. Smith, was by far more rancorous than
the other gentlemen collectively. During the debate on Madison's resolutions,
Mr. Abraham Clarke of New Jersey said, turning round to his right hand, and
looking at Mr. William Smith, that a stranger in the gallery might suppose
there was a British agent in the house. The nickname of British agent became
general. Mr. Smith was burnt in effigy at Charleston. On the rising of the
session, he found it convenient to shun a meeting with his constituents by a
tour for the ensuing summer, into the eastern states. The blame of this whole
scandal was imputed to the pen of the guilty taker of minutes for the
Philadelphia Gazette. Influence was employed, but in vain, to procure his
dismission. This occurred in January, 1794.

But on the 2d and 3d of March, 1795, the Representatives met in the evening,
and some of them being in a state of unusual vivacity, Smith and Dexter arose
and complained bitterly of the minutes in the Philadelphia Gazette. Neither of
them said, because neither of them durst say, that any thing of their own had
been misrepresented. The late Mr. Andrew Brown, knowing that mistakes were
unavoidable, had uniformly advertised that he was ready to receive and print
corrections. The two members closed by proposing a resolution for appointing a
committee to examine a stenographer. It past by twenty-eight votes against
twenty-six.

All this was in March, 1795. On the 29th of January, 1796, Mr. Giles and Dr.
Smith, who had been appointed a committee, reported in favor of Mr. Robertson,
a Scotsman, from Petersburg, in Virginia. He demanded four thousand dollars.
Congress were to give him two thousand nine hundred, and Mr. Brown undertook
for the rest of the sum. The debates were to be printed first in his newspaper.
This would likewise answer the object of Mr. Smith in separating Mr. Brown and
his present reporter.

The plan was attacked from every part of the house, as impracticable, if
useful; and as useless if it could be practicable. Mr. Baldwin said that he had
seen many printed sketches of speeches made in that house, and which he would
not wish to see better done. Mr. Swanwick had often heard of miscellaneous
compositions, but the strangest of all miscellanies that he ever heard of, was
for the legislature of a country to run shares with a printer in the
publication of their proceedings. Even Mr. Sedgwick, also, opposed the plan. He
honestly said, that gentlemen were apt to get into a passion, and then they
were angry at seeing their expressions in print. Mr. Nicholas was for the
appointment. He complained that a person who came often to that house, and who
had a very good style of writing, once published a speech as his. The language
was much better than I could have made, said Mr. Nicholas, and here the member
was mistaken. The speech did not contain a single sentiment that I would have
disowned, but still the speech was not mine. Mr. Harper attacked the debates in
the Philadelphia Gazette, as disgraceful to the country, and full of
falsehoods. He prattled away at this rate, for a considerable time. He had
never complained of inaccuracy but once; and his correction was immediately
adopted. Mr. Harper possesses a readiness of invention, and a confidence of
affirmation, which the public estimate at their proper value.

Mr. Giles spoke in favor of the report; but he seemed to lose courage on
finding that a large majority in the house entirely disapproved of the plan. He
expressed regret at having been concerned in it. As an excuse, he complained,
for the first time, of the inaccuracy of the debates. He had never before dropped
a hint of that nature. The presumption is, that it was now brought forward to
help him out with a lame argument. He felt evident chagrin at finding himself
entangled in this prodigal and absurd project. The committee rose without a
division. On the 2d of February, 1796, the subject was discharged by a
resolution of the house. Mr. Robertson had come some hundreds of miles, from a
lucrative employment, at the particular desire of the special committee, and
had staid in Philadelphia waiting on this business, at a considerable expense.
He was dismissed without compensation. The house ought at least to have paid
the charges of his journey.

On the 8th of January, the President had sent a message to Congress. It
enclosed a memorial from the commissioners appointed for inspecting the
buildings at the federal city. The object was, to obtain a loan of money, under
the sanction of government, in order to complete the public buildings at that
place. The loan was to be secured on the public property in the city. The
United States were to pledge themselves that, in case of the property proving
inadequate for discharging the loan, government was to make good the deficiency.

A committee was appointed to report on this message. After several
discussions, a bill respecting it passed the House of Representatives, on the
31st of March, 1796. The President was thereby authorized to borrow three
hundred thousand dollars on the plan above stated. The bill went through, by
seventy-two votes against twenty-one. Thus a fresh blister is applied to the
back of our national debt.

Mr. Coit, Mr. Sitgreaves, Mr. Havens, and Mr. Swanwick, did themselves the
honor of opposing this annihilation of the public money; for, that these three
hundred thousand dollars will finally come out of the federal treasury, and
never more return to it, is tolerably certain.

Mr. Coit said, that, between three and four hundred thousand dollars have
already been expended; and, as he conceived, to what was worse than no purpose.
Ninety-seven thousand dollars had been laid out on the President's house, and
it was estimated that nearly as much more would be wanted to complete it. When
finished, he conceived that a house, which would cost only fifty thousand
dollars, would better answer the purpose. About eighty thousand dollars had
been expended on the capitol, and yet, progress was scarcely made beyond the
foundation. He expected many future and heavy applications to the public
treasury for those buildings, which he feared would be a lasting monument of
the pride and folly of this country. -- Ninety-seven thousand dollars for a
presidential palace, that is not yet more than half completed! Thus the whole
building will cost at least two hundred thousand dollars. If this is not
deplorable waste of money, we should be happy to learn what name it deserves?
Indeed, unless among the parties immediately interested in forwarding this
house, there can hardly be two opinions about it. The absurdity is too enormous
to be endured with tranquillity by any man, unless his ideas are adulterated by
self-interest, by prejudice, by the horror of being left in a minority, or by
some other petty motive unconnected with the common exercise of his
understanding. The capitol is another superfluous edifice, that, as came out in
the debates, has already sunk eighty thousand dollars, and is scarcely raised
beyond its foundation. Such things are encouraged to go on, while our most
excellent of all governments can hardly raise money to pay the very interest of
the debts which it is annually contracting. It is not a season to varnish the
poop, when the wind is rending the shrouds, when the sea is bursting the seams,
and driving in the cabin windows.

Mr. Sedgwick, in the debate on the 25th of February declared, with a
convenient rotundity of assertion, that accommodations are to be made for
government without any expense to the public treasury. It is certain that they
will be erected at a very enormous expense, which must come in some shape from
the purses of the people. Every newspaper is occasionally filled with
advertisements about the Washington lottery. This is a tax on the public. In
Europe it is universally agreed, that a lottery is the most ruinous of all
methods for raising money, and, at the same time, the most injurious to the
morals of the people. When we hear Mr. Sedgwick say, that these public
buildings are to be raised without expense to the public, one might guess that,
like the palace in an Arabian tale, they were to rise by enchantment.

It is amazing that any gentleman can stand up in Congress, and talk in such a
way. Nay, Mr. Sedgwick went further. He said that the more magnificent these
buildings were, so much the better. If they exceeded the splendor of the
palaces of Europe, Americans ought to be grateful. It is highly wrong for any
legislature to encourage, among its citizens, a taste for gambling. The lottery
for the federal city does this in a considerable degree; it explains, what Mr.
Coit justly said, that between three and four hundred thousand dollars have
been expended to what is worse than no purpose.

Mr. Sedgwick may rant as much as he pleases, about the gratification that
Americans must feel in contemplating the completion, and magnificence of these
buildings in the federal city. A man with chaste ideas of political economy,
and of national freedom, will consider them as an equal outrage on the one and
the other. The pyramids of Egypt, the amphitheatre of Titus, the pillar of
Trajan, and a thousand other edifices of a similar description, were durable
and insulting testimonials of the slavery of mankind, with an impression more
forcible than the pen or the pencil can convey. They attested, that the
property and industry of millions of people had been sacrificed to glut the
caprice and vanity of a single man. And who or what was this man? Some jockey
king, or cut throat emperor, who, if stripped of a little brief authority, would,
usually, have been one of the most insignificant of his species. But it is
needless to enter into general declarations, or appeal to the mournful evidence
of Rome and Egypt. The facts admitted in Congress speak with sufficient
distinctness.

If the money had been laid out on a canal between Newcastle and Frenchtown, or
on a high road between Philadelphia and Baltimore, or in pensions, to some of
the poor old soldiers, who sold their certificates for half a crown in the
pound, there might be some consolation. The cash had, to be sure, been raised
in a bad way, but its expenditure had answered some useful end; and, though no
man of sense would ever have been highly pleased by seeing the rapid sale of
lottery tickets, yet the laudable application of the money, must have served as
an emolient to the ulcer.

It is hard to say what was the original object of founding this federal city,
or what benefit it could be supposed to answer to the country in general. The
human faculties are as clear on the banks of the Delaware as on those of the
Potomac. The President had already a good house in Philadelphia, for which his
very large salary, of twenty-five thousand dollars, well enables him to pay a
suitable rent. The apartments wherein Congress at present assemble, in the same
city, are as roomy and elegant as can be desired. Philadelphia has a centrical
situation, and an atmosphere at least as healthy as the intended new
metropolis. We ask then, what could be the use or object of these buildings? Or
why did a government, encumbered with a debt of seventy millions of dollars,
plunge its citizens into this unfathomable pit of architecture and of
lotteries? An old London bookseller used to say, that the title page was half
of the battle. In like manner, the name of this city has produced more than
half the patience with which its expenditures have been endured.

Endured is the proper word, for this plan has never excited popular
enthusiasm. It hardly could. Is there not already in the union a city good
enough to accommodate Congress? No other city on the continent can expect the
smallest advantage from this removal, and every one of them feels a certain
loss. On the same principle, said Mr, Swanwick, the house might guarantee loans
for all the cities in the union? Why a loan for the city of Washington in
particular? Was there any reason why the different cities in the union should
be taxed for that city? He might have subjoined, is there any justice in such a
tax? If Washington becomes an eminent commercial place, Alexandria, or Norfolk,
or Baltimore, will not be one farthing the better for it, but they may chance
to be the worse.

It is highly expedient that the legislature of a nation should assemble to do
business in one of the largest of its cities. The reason is obvious. The eyes
of the people are thus more effectually opened to its proceedings; and a
legislature is much more safely to be entrusted when under such inspection.

The spirit of liberty, the penetration to discern and fortitude to resist
despotism, have often been found to beat higher in the metropolis of a limited
government than in any other place. Thus Charles the first was blamed for
calling the long parliament at London, where his tyranny was detested, and
consequently where parliament were sure of firm and effectual support. His
friends regretted that it had not met at Oxford; the mistake cost his majesty
the loss of his head.

The French revolution began at Paris. The true character of government was
much better understood there, by the common people, than by the same class in
most other quarters of the kingdom. At Amsterdam, also, opposition to the
corrupting influence of the stadtholder was always stronger than any where
else. A very large city is, in almost every respect, a great nuisance. Yet, as
it is a bad wind which blows good to nobody, a subordinate advantage may often
be traced in the midst of a political evil.

Such immense capitals as London, Paris, or even Amsterdam, cannot subsist in
America, for centuries to come, but if they did so, many reasons would
recommend that the seat of government should also reside in such a situation.
With so many observers to watch its motions, and whose very numbers inspire
them with peculiar confidence, the insolence or corruption of office is more
likely to be detected and exposed than on a more limited field of enquiry. The
present trifling opposition that the abandoned minister of England finds in the
House of Commons, would, by this time, have most likely dwindled altogether
away, if the spirit of Sheridan and others had not been supported by their
situation in the bosom of a numerous party of the citizens of London.

These hints tend to point out the propriety of retaining the residence of the
federal legislature in one of the larger cities of the union. On the streets of
New York or Philadelphia, every member of Congress meets with fellow citizens
as independent and well-informed as himself, and who, without ceremony, will
tell him what they think of his conduct. In such a place he has a thousand
opportunities of learning public feelings, which he never could acquire in a
sequestered desert, like the paper-built city of Washington, even supposing
that he were to read all the newspapers in the United States. We have at this
time about an hundred and twenty newspapers, if not more; and hence, that task
is, in itself, impossible. It is by mixing with mankind that you learn how to
legislate for them. In the multitude of counselors there is safety, said the
wise man; and in a limited sense, the maxim holds good. It is only by a
collision of various sentiments, opinions, habits of thinking and views of
life, the light of truth is finally to be struck out.

There is a large house in Philadelphia which the Assembly of Pennsylvania had
designed for the President. Mr. Swanwick, in a debate about this federal city
bill, noticed that twenty thousand dollars were granted to build it; but nearly
twice the sum had been asked for it since, and the house is not yet finished.

Veterans who fought battles for America, were glad to accept, as all the world
knows, of half-a-crown in the pound for the arrears of their dear-bought wages.
Hundreds of petitions are, in the course of every session, presented to
Congress from miserable objects of all sorts, who were reduced to decrepitude
and beggary in the continental service. Government cannot relieve all these
people, but still if they promoted lotteries for that end, the money would be
more honorably bestowed than on a capitol, which has already cost eighty
thousand dollars, though it is hardly visible above ground!

As for the palace of the President, the plan must have originated with
somebody, who wanted to set up a political idol. A President is the very last
man in the community for whom the public ought to build a house, because he has
a salary five times larger than that of any other public officer in the union;
and hence can afford better than other public officer to pay the rent of his
house.

The money expended on palaces at the federal city, is absolutely cast away.
The President and Congress are already as well accommodated with lodgings as
they need wish to be, or deserve to be. There is no use for such extravagant
buildings. The raising of money by lotteries is the most pernicious resource
within the range of political insanity. The erection of such fabrics tends to
excite a tone of aristocracy and of royalty, to which mankind are already but
too much addicted.

Dr. Samuel Johnson says, that to build is to be robbed. We cannot expect that
houses raised for a government will be carried on with more economy than those
of private persons. Mr. Coit See debate of the 31st of March, 1796.
says, that the buildings at Washington have been commenced on an extravagant
plan, and that he hopes the commissioners will be obliged to contract them. Mr.
Sitgreaves, in the same debate, also declares that the eventual expense of the
buildings is not within the reach of calculation, or even of conjecture. What a
miserable prospect is yawning before us!

Mr. Havens asked, what was meant when it was said that there existed an
obligation of going to this new city at the year 1800? If room was not to be
had in it, Congress might go to Georgetown. They may just as well stay where
they are. What would they be at? Poor Richard says, I never saw an often removed
tree,
Or yet an often removed family,
Which throve so well, as those that settled be.


Let us make a supposition that, before the end of the year 1800, only two
millions of dollars are expended on the federal city. The buildings, as has
been already explained, are on an extravagant scale. The United States could do
as well without them.

Put two millions of dollars into any rational scheme of domestic improvement
in the country, such as a well contrived canal. The money will yield a clear
profit of ten, twenty or thirty per cent. Take it at the lowest rate, and with
ten per cent. of compound interest, a sum doubles itself in seven years,
fifty-two days and an half. In fifty years, these two millions of dollars will
double themselves seven times. They will amount to two hundred and fifty-six
millions. In an hundred years, they will amount to thirty-two thousand seven
hundred and sixty-eight millions of dollars, which, at that era, will be the
real expense of the city, even if restricted only to the original two millions.
This computation shows the folly of sinking a capital on an object which is
both unproductive and superfluous.

At the end of the nineteenth century, the federal quarries above ground will
not be worth so great a sum; nor indeed worth what they originally cost. They
cannot, like a high road, or an improved farm, pay a large interest. They are
mere unproductive masses of brick and lime, and wood and stone, the spawn of
lotteries and land jobbing, for all which fine articles Mr. Theodore Sedgwick
imagines it our duty to be grateful.

This project of the federal city has been examined at some length, because the
subject is very imperfectly understood, and because the plan, if completed,
must end in destroying the American constitution. The monarchical party in the
convention of 1787, had the following clause thrust into that paper. The
Congress shall have power to exercise EXCLUSIVE legislation, in all cases
whatsoever, over such district, not exceeding ten miles square, as may, by
cession of particular states, and the acceptance of Congress, become the seat
of government of the United States. A like clause was never heard of before in
the constitution, or practical administration of any government in the world.

Suppose that, at the English revolution of 1688, the new parliament had
declared themselves exclusive legislators over a square of ten miles, and of
which St. Stephen's chapel was to be the center. Exclusive legislation is but
another term for arbitrary power, because it confounds the characters of judge
and legislator. In so small a space, where parliament were sure to see every
thing, magistrates would have been nothing but their tools; and jobs,
despotism, anarchy, and revolt must have ensued. The citizens of London and
Westminster would, in two or three years at the utmost, have laid the new
government on its back. But it would be wronging the character of the English
nation to put the supposition that a clause so absurd, so fantastical, so big
with mischief, and confusion could ever have past in that country. Such an
originality was reserved for the fertile brain of Alexander Hamilton. In the
convention of bolted doors, this bauble was part of the compromise and
sacrifice granted by Madison and his friends to the royal faction. Being
combined with better materials, it was without reflection accepted by the
citizens of America. As a parting appeal to their common sense, let us only
figure this case, that the state of Pennsylvania had ceded to Congress a
district of ten miles, including this city. There is not a man in Philadelphia
who wi^hes to see Congress erected into its exclusive legislators.

Their ignorance, their caprice, the natural insolence of unlimited authority,
would, in a few years, have thinned the streets of the city. If on the 4th of
July, 1795, Congress had held exclusive legislation in Philadelphia the evening
would not have closed with a shower of brick-bats. The dismounting and
disarming of captain John Morrell, of the china warehouse, in North
Front-street, and his being so basely pitched into Frog-pond at Kensington,
might have produced a general massacre of the citizens. The sale of his sword
for sixpence, on his declining to reclaim it, might have easily been turned
into a high crime and misdemeanour. This inference becomes very probable, when
we contemplate the bloody maxims of our American DUKE OF ALVA Alexander
Hamilton wished, that the people, assembled at Braddock's field, had burnt
Pittsburgh. Randolph's Vindication, p. 83. One motive assigned in argument, for
calling forth the militia, has been, that a government can never be said to be
established, until some SIGNAL DISPLAY has manifested its power of military
coer^ion. "This maxim," adds Randolph, "if indulged, would heap curses upon the
government. The str^^gth of a government is the affection of the people. Ibid
p. 102. The maxims and wishes of Mr. Hamilton exceed any sentiment recorded
from the hemp-crack-governor of the Netherlands. They rather approach to the
comprehensive sublimity of Caligula.

It is extremely worthy of notice, that although the Gazette of the United
States has been constantly ra^ling at Randolph, yet no denial has ever appeared
as to the accuracy of the passages above quoted. It is no wonder that, after
such discoveries, the party hate him. They sometimes harp upon his style. It is
at least far superior to that of Mr. ^e^no's auxillaries. If Randolph is not so
acute, so ^erse, so critical, and so brilliant, a^ Thomas Jefferson, yet, in
his printed correspondence with Hammond, he writes like a man who meant well,
and who felt for the wrongs of his country.


. Thus much for the federal city.

On the 5th of February, 1796, the bill of appropriation for the current year,
having gone through both houses, was approved by the president. This
approbation is an insignificant form. The worst laws, as well as the best ones,
have, for several years past, constantly received the president's; affirmative.
In all cases of importance, however, his will is previously understood and
strictly obeyed by a majority of the Senate. There may have been one or two
exceptions to this rule, but (...) for a considerable time. In the case of
Madison's first resolution, and of Mr. Clarke's ^ill for prohibiting commercial
intercourse with England, the Senate were, indeed, equally divided, and the
casting vote of Mr. Adams negatived both. But here it must be supposed, that
Mr. Washington had kept himself in suspense. He had only just parted with
Jefferson, and Hamilton was not yet completely fixed in the saddle. When the
latter fact came to be known, every federal measure was bolted through by a
large majority. After all, when two legislative bodies have agreed to a law* it
is below their dignity to enquire for the opinion of any single man. By the
constitution, a president who wishes to be troublesome, can raise considerable
confusion. If he refuses approbation, the law is sent back to Congress; and,
unless two-thirds of each house shall afterward agree to it, the law becomes
void. It is very seldom that so great a majority unites upon an important
measure. The Senate consists, at present, of thirty-two members; and, by this
clause of the constitution, Mr. Adams, supported by eleven senators, being more
than one-third of the whole number, could prevent the passing of any bill which
he did not like. Thus the veto of twelve persons, who are not wiser or better
than their neighbors, might in every instance overweigh the whole House of
Representatives, though supported by twenty-one senators. This is one of the
mistakes in our constitution. If the citizens of America could, like the bees,
create an animal of faculties superior to their own, this veto might be useful.
But in the late and present mediocrity of presidential talents, it is at best
an expensive exc^esence. This subscription of the laws, and a trifling or
inflammatory speeeh at the opening of each session of Congress, ^s almost the
only real duty that a president has to perform. The business of state is
divided among three secretaries, and we understand from Randolph that Mr.
Washington used to hold a meeting with them on interesting points, and decide
by the opinion of the majority. All this is no great matter. Jared Ingersol, or
the secretary of the state of Pennsylvania, or any counselor of equal talents,
would do the business fully as well, and think himself handsomely paid with an
annual fee of a thousand dollars The account might stand thus: The UNITED
STATES. DR.
To my trouble in writing and reading to the two houses of congress a speech
against democratic societies, or against the citizens of the south western
frontier, or against another speech made by a member of the French directory,
or concerning my friendship with John Watts and Doublehead, or in praise of the
gallant army who carried off one half of the pots and pans of the four western
counties of Pennsylvania, and who burnt every rail fence within their reach, 25
To my secretary for a clean copy of ditto speech, 5 To my trouble in approving
of sixty acts of congress, during last session, at five dollars each, 300 To my
secretary, for announcing the same to the two houses, at twenty-five cents
each, 15 For my attendance to count the votes of the triumvirate ministry, once
a week, during fifty-two weeks, at eight dollars per time, 416 To a complete
set of Cobbet's Gazette, of the Minerva, of the Columbian Sentinel, of the
Gazette of the United States, and of the works of Messrs. Harper and Cobbet, to
be resorted to for occasional information, 100 Carried over, 761 Brought over,
761 To my trouble in signing recalls, and appointments of foreign ambassadors,
e. g. the recall of my son from Holland, for which he had received an outfit of
nine thousand dollars, to my trouble, at the same time, in appointing him
ambassador to Portugal, with a second outfit of nine thousand dollars, of
recalling him within six weeks, and sending him to Berlin, with a third outfit
of nine thousand dollars, over and above his salaries, 120 To my loss of time
in bowing on the street to the additional acquaintances whom I have acquired
since my appointment, 19 Total dolls. 1000


.

On the 9th of February, was presented the memorial above inserted from the
snuff-makers of Philadelphia. The act of which they complained exemplifies the
remark of Montaigne, that there is nothing so commonly or so grossly faulty as
the laws. The first of the two statutes in question required the performance of
impossibilities. For instance, the snuff maker was to swear to a daily journal
of the snuff grinded. To be able to do so he must have taken down his mill at
the end of every day's work, and another entire day was requisite for putting
it again in order. Thus between taking down and setting up, the snuff-maker
would have spent four or five days in the week in hard work, without grinding
one ounce of snuff. Mr. Thomas Leiper, and his fellow sufferers, had not logic
enough to convince Mr. Hamilton, Mr. Sedgwick, and Dr. Smith, of this rule
producing a hardship. Other clauses were equally stupid, oppressive, and
impracticable. A ruinous excise on refined sugar manufactured in America had
been blended in the same law with snuff, and it still remains in force. In a
proof sheet of the short history of excise, it was stated that, after paying
the duty, there would not remain to the refiners of sugar more than a clear
profit of five per cent. upon the capital embarked in their business. This
circumstance was related on the authority of some of the principal
manufacturers in Philadelphia. But, on a revisal, they chose to strike it out
of the publication, lest a disclosure might alarm their correspondents, and
injure the general interest of the trade. This was in the fall of 1795. Matters
have certainly been improved, or else the manufacture must have stopped, as that
of snuff actually did. The sugar boilers could have got six per cent. for their
money in the common rate of interest, and ten times that sum from an exporting
flour merchant.

One would be apt to believe that the federal members of Congress wanted to
destroy altogether American manufactures. The paper money system is chiefly
theirs. Twenty millions of dollars, fabricated out of old rags, are now
circulating about the continent. Of these, ten millions belong to the bank of
the United States. The total dividend of all these banks, as stated in Congress
by Dr. Smith and Mr. Gallatin, comes to two millions of dollars per annum. The
expenses of management can hardly be less than five hundred thousand dollars
more. This enormous tax, for just nothing at all, and the scropholous abundance
of money produced by the bank capitals, have tended extremely to impede the
progress of American manufactures. Though not the sole cause, they have yet
been among the chief causes that raise the wages of labor in America so
extravagantly beyond its price in Europe. Some leaders of the federal party
possess extensive concerns in the bank of the United States. But the maturity
of American manufactures never can arrive, till wages fall, and that must be
preceded by a reduction of the mass of paper. Hence these leaders wish to
encourage the importation of British goods. The merchants who import them,
also, and who, in general, detest American rivalship, are in constant habits of
discounting at the banks, and it is of consequence to favor such valuable
customers. These obvious motives tend to make the federal commanders anxious
for the closest connection with England. The same scale of argument leads them
to abhor the French, among whom paper currency has always been despised. Hence,
among other reasons, we find their constant inclination to revile France
Camden, in his history of Elizabeth, book iv. p. 443, has these words. The
French lawyers say, that whatsoever is once annexed to the crown of France,
does inseparably adhere to it forever. This vindicates the republicans from a
suspicion of innovation, when they refuse to restore the Low Countries to the
emperor.

During the time of the French league, Elizabeth was advised to attempt the
conquest of Picardy and Normandy. She heard it, says Camden, with regret and
dislike, and rejected it with much indignation, saying, whenever the last day
of the kingdom of France comes, it will, undoubtedly, be the eve of the
destruction of England. Ibid. p. 444.


. Hence their enthusiastic zeal, for the completion of Jay's treaty to which
the journal of Congress has now brought us.

Nothing that excited general attention occurred in Congress from the trial of
Randall till the 1st of March. On that day, the President sent a message to
each house informing them that ratifications of the British treaty had been
exchanged at London, on the 28th of October, 1795. I have directed the same to
be promulgated, added the President, and herewith transmit a copy thereof for
the information of Congress. This was clearly the style of a public officer,
who considered his authority on this point, as independent and unquestionable.
He had complied with every formality required by the constitution. He had
selected an ambassador for England, and had given him instructions as a rule of
conduct. The constitution says he shall nominate, and by and with the advice
and consent of the Senate, shall appoint ambassadors. The president had
announced his nomination to that body. They were mean or stupid enough to
acquiesce in the appointment, without once asking for what purpose Jay was to
be sent to England, or demanding a copy of his instructions. This showed that
the message was but an empty form, and that, in the particular details of his
negotiation, the President scorned to hold any prefatory communications with
them. Here, by the way, comes out, as before observed, Supra chap. 3.
an evidence of hypocrisy toward Genet. Mr. Washington could not negociate
with the French envoy, because the Senate were not in session. Yet, over their
heads, he sent an envoy to England, without letting them understand one line of
his directions. This was frankly telling the republic that he rejected their
advances. He could not have taken a more ungracious, a more ungrateful or
infatuated step. After such coldness and contempt on our part, we should speak
with temper about the republic. Frenchmen have never been celebrated for
patience; and it can least of all be expected in the midst of a blaze of
victories, which reduce Belisarius and Hannibal to the rank and file of
conquerors.

From this digression we go back to Jay. Receiving orders from the President,
and a sanction from the Senate, he went to England and framed a treaty. On its
arrival here, the Senate, and President, gave in due time, a ratification. They
expressly took the whole burden upon themselves; and whether Jay obeyed his
instructions, or broke them, was a question entirely between himself and the
President, from whom exclusively he accepted of them. The Senate had,
beforehand, resigned all right of thinking upon the subject. They possessed no
future title to call for the instructions. The fit time for that demand had
passed away. If the treaty proved to be a good one, it was quite a frivolous
enquiry, whether the instructions were right or wrong. If it was bad, the
President stood in the gap, and they could disappoint all bad effects by a
rejection. They approved of the whole treaty, one article excepted. It was,
thereafter, ratified by the President. Here the character of these two
branches, or rather of these two sprigs from the trunk of representation, was
completely embarked.

There does not appear any solid reason why the President, in the sequel,
submitted Jay's instructions to the Senate, after the treaty had been ratified.
The only time for such a communication was before Jay sailed for England. The
instrument could only stand or fall, not by the tenor of the instructions, but
by its own intrinsic value. The tardy production of Jay's orders resembled a
Chinese marriage. The lover, it is said, does not see his mistress till after
the wedding, but has leave to send her home again, if he does not like her. The
President could only send this paper as a matter of civility. The Senate had
lost their right of calling for the instructions. They had not even a decent
pretense to have challenged Jay. He acted as private agent to Mr. Washington,
and the Senate had, in plain justice, no more to do with him, than the
President had with his secretary, Mr. Trumbal.

But farther, Jay was, upon a different ground, placed beyond the reach of
personal consequences* Admitting that he acted with the wildest deviation from
his orders, yet he neither did nor could do any thing final. If the President
disapproved of the treaty, still he had only to refuse it. He could have sent
Grenville a copy of his instructions to evince that Jay had entirely
contradicted them. This must have been a full apology for his negativing the
treaty.

There still remained one point of view in which Jay might be regarded as
responsible. Suppose that, while he carried on a negotiation contrary to the
spirit of his orders, the relative condition of the two parties had altered,
that Britain had become stronger, and America weaker, or that some change in
the condition of a third party had produced a similar effect. In that case, the
House of Representatives might have addressed the envoy in terms like these:

It is true that you acted as an immediate agent for the President, that he had
legal authority to employ you, and that he, along with the Senate, has taken
upon himself the total responsibility for your conduct. In common matters an
employer, by vindicating his agent, completely covers him from enquiry; but, in
your affair, there is something particular to be said. We believe that you
disobeyed your orders, that you treacherously entangled the President in a
bargain for which you had no powers, and that you thus forfeited that impunity
annexed to the character of HIS agent. He received your production with every
feeling of shame, of alarm, and indignation. Agreeable to law he assembled the
Senate; and they and he successively ratified the treaty, under the dread that
if they rejected it, their perfidious and formidable enemy would pervert their
refusal into a pretense for declaring war. So standing the case, we contend
that in substantial equity, you have not been the agent of Mr. Washington, but
of lord Grenville; and that the compulsive operation created by your perfidy on
the minds of the Senate and President, transferred the constitutional
responsibility from them to you. The charges here made against you are matters
of strong suspicion, but not of certainty. We are in want of evidence either to
support or to refute them. We can only get that evidence by resorting to your
instructions, for you can only be impeached on the head of having disobeyed
them, and of your disodienee having thereafter shackled the deliberations of
the President and Senate. For the purpose of ascertaining your guilt or
innocence, we are going to solicit the President. He has sent these papers to
the Senate. He cannot, therefore, in common civility, or even decency, deny our
request. Yet we have no constitutional right of demanding the paper. The power
of making treaties has been exclusively and jointly vested in the Senate and in
him. No part of the constitution requires that he should explain to our house
his motives, or divulge, unless by his own free will, your instructions and
subsequent correspondence. If he withholds these means of information and
impeachment, we can only grumble into silence, and blush at the contemptible
incense of adulation that, for seven years past, we have piled on the altar of
Mount Vernon.

The above is apprehended to contain a summary of the arguments that might have
been employed in favor of impeaching Jay. The stress lies on ascertaining that
the President disliked the treaty, and gave it a reluctant ratification. On
this point, Randolph affords a copious evidence. My opinion," says Mr.
Washington, "respecting the treaty, is the same now that it was, that is, not
favorable to it, but that it is better to ratify it in the manner the Senate
have advised, than to suffer matters to remain, as they are, unsettled. -- I
find endeavors are not wanting to place it in all the odious points of view of
which it is susceptible, and in some which it will not admit. [This is plain
enough.] I have never, since I have been in the administration of the
government, seen a crisis, which in my judgment has been so pregnant of
interesting events, nor one from which more is to be apprehended: whether
viewed on one side or the other. -- Scarcely a day passed, that he (the
President) did not enumerate many objections to it; objections going not only
to the commercial part, but also to the Canada article, -- to the omission of
compensation for the negroes and property plundered, and to some other parts of
less consequence. It would be useless to heap up farther testimony that the
President disapproved of Jay and his treaty, and that he agreed to it only to
prevent some worse consequences.

Having settled this point, we proceed with the journal of the Representatives.
On the 7th of March, 1796, the house took up a resolution moved by Mr.
Livingston. It was in these words:

Resolved, that the President of the United States be requested to lay before
this house, a copy of the instructions to the minister of the United States who
negociated the treaty with the king of Great Britain, communicated by his
message of the first of March, together with the correspondence and other
documents relative to the said treaty, excepting such of said papers as any
existing negotiation may render improper to be disclosed. As one Randolph, p.
35, 36, 38.
reason for this motion, Mr. Livingston said that the production of the papers
would determine the house whether an impeachment would be deemed advisable
Bache, vol. i. p. 4.
. But his chief reason was a firm conviction that the house were vested with a
discretionary power of carrying the treaty into effect, or refusing it their
sanction. To guide them in an enlightened determination as to that point, the
papers are necessary; they would certainly throw light upon the subject, and
enable the house to determine whether the treaty was such as that it ought to
be carried into effect Bache, vol. i. p. 4.
. Mr. Livingston calls the latter his principal reason. He did not speak
exactly what he thought. The papers called for could not be needful to guide
the determination of the house, as to whether they should sanction the treaty,
for nothing but its individual merits could decide for or against it. But,
second, if the papers were needful, the house, before this time, had virtually,
though not officially seen them. They had been lying for some time on the table
of the Senate. Many Representatives had gone up stairs and read them, and every
member was acquainted with the essence of their contents. Hence, they could not
be wanted for the purpose of determining an opinion about the treaty, even had
its fate rested on such a disclosure.

Mr. Livingston well knew that his former reason for wanting the papers was
almost equally hollow. He knew, or he well might have known, that an
impeachment was not advisable. The sequel of the debates discovered the real
sense of his party. The project of impeachment was but rarely and faintly dwelt
upon. But the democratical members had other and good reasons for desiring an
official Ibid. p. 5.
communication of the instructions. This would have fixed the perfidy of Jay in
departing from them. Popular resentment at his behavior would have risen to
the highest pitch. His alleged preceptor, Mr. Hamilton, would have been
involved in the clamor. The treaty must on fresh grounds, have become an
object of jealousy and disgust; and this addition to the force of its enemies
was to have ensured, in the House of Representatives, a refusal of money for
its fulfillment.

By an impeachment of Jay, nothing, in common sense, could be expected, but an
enormous waste of time and of congressional wages, a pernicious and endless
delay in the routine of private business, and finally, a triumphant acquital of
the envoy. In defiance of all imaginable testimony, the British treaty majority
in the Senate were sure to have pronounced him guiltless. Look at their
extrusion of Albert Gallatin, at their fraternal embrace of Mess. Gunn and
Marshal!

Thus it appears that Mr. Livingston could hope for nothing from an
impeachment, and he as little needed the instructions In the debate of the 21st
of March, Mr. Williams observed that for the space of ten weeks, any member of
that house might have seen them, Bache, vol i. p. 236. But the great loss was,
that no member could, from such inspection, venture to quote them in the House
of Representatives. He would have been called to order, and obliged to sit down.
to complete his opinion of the treaty. That opinion had been long since
matured. It is difficult to keep from smiling when we perceive an intelligent
legislator standing up, and giveing all reasons but the real one, in defense of
his resolution. The debate lasted, with some intervals, from the 7th of March
to the 7th of April, both inclusive; and the report occupies three hundred and
eighty-six close printed octavo pages. This is the American mode of managing
legislative debates. In a British House of Commons, the question could hardly
have been protracted beyond six o'clock on a second morning.

Mr. William Lyman rose next after Mr. Livingston. He defended the resolution.
One of his arguments was, that possibly the papers might throw such light as to
produce a very great degree of unanimity relative to that instrument (viz. the
treaty). Such circumstances might possibly be disclosed as to reconcile those
now opposed to it, and who might otherwise remain irreconcilable. If the
resolution tended only to this object it was effecting a valuable purpose. Mr.
Lyman held the treaty in notorious detestation, so that this argument was mere
hypocritical canting. The unanimity which he desired and expected from a
production of the papers was not for the treaty, but against it. As to
impeachment, Mr. Lyman spoke not one word. Mr. Giles on the same side,
followed. He did not contemplate impeachment as the probable issue, but the
information might tend, perhaps, to reconcile those now averse to the
instrument. This gentleman spoke with as little sincerity as the two former. We
may observe how very soon the Madisonians began to file away from their
impeachment.

Mr. Murray succeeded Mr. Giles. He opposed the resolution. He denied the right
of the house to intermeddle in treaties, unless these were alleged to be
unconstitutional. He objected the general impolicy of exposing secrets of
state. Mr. Murray is a moderate and sensible speaker; but, with all his
fondness for secrecy, he would certainly have voted (...) the resolution, if
its real object had been to promote the success of the treaty.

Mr. Buck, another friend to Jay, took the same side, but not from an
apprehension that the papers referred to will not bear the public scrutiny, or
from a belief that there would be the least reluctance on the part of the
executive to deliver them. Here the first sentence of Mr. Buck's harangue
contained two direct untruths. He knew that the papers would not bear scrutiny
Such as the two cards upon impressment. Supra chap. 5. Was it unknown, that
thousands of our sailors have been occasionally enslaved by the impress tyranny
of the British government? Or, that thousands have lost their lives in noxious
prisons, while their vessels were carried into British ports for legal
ajudication? Features of Jay's treaty, section 3d.

"In all my vast reading," as Dr. Wagtail says, this pamphlet, both as to style
and matter, is considerably the best which has appeared either for Jay or
against him. Candid, elegant, comprehensive, and concise, its accuracy
gratifies the most informed, while its perspicuity convinces the plainest
reader. Yet Mr. Dallas has a material defect. His extreme reserve and delicacy
are entirely cast away upon such enemies as Wilcocks, Webster, Curtius, and
Camillus, on the stupid malignity too frequent in Mr. Fenno's Gazette, and on
the illiterate brutality of the Columbian Sentinel.


. He knew, and and so did every person in the house, that Mr. Washington would
be ashamed and unwilling to give them up. It was for these very reasons, which
Mr. Buck set out with disowning, that he opposed the resolution.

Thus the combatants went on. They interpersed much extraneous matter, with
pretended arguments on each side, which, as in the five cases already cited,
the orator himself held in sovereign contempt, and which every man who heard
him knew that he despised. Some speeches deserved a better character, but the
limits of this volume do not permit farther criticism. At a future time it may
be convenient and instructive to trace the obliquities of congressional
discussion. The pompous petulance and Iscariot-like malignity of Buck A short
memoir of this gentleman, transmitted from Vermont, has, for the present
volume, been laid aside.
, the plausible stupidity and self-important ignorance of Sedgwick, the
pregnant vacuity, and elegant loquacity of Harper, often approaching to good
sense, yet almost never getting up to it, hold out prominent materials for
amusing illustration. But the number of respectable speakers was greatly
superior to that of such phantoms as these. In general, a member of Congress
has sufficient prudence either to hold his tongue, or to tell his sentiments
in a way which does not make him ridiculous.

On Thursday, the 24th of March, 1796, a division took place in a committee of
the whole house on this resolution to call for Jay's instructions and
correspondence. It passed by sixty-one votes against thirty-eight. This was a
majority unusual on great political questions. When some victim who has been
reduced to beggary by the late war, or some French officer who neglected to
call, in due time, for his arrears of pay, has the weakness to solicit
Congress, a negative passes with unanimity, or something like it. But in
matters of high political import, the majority runs, for the most part, very
close. The resolution past in the house by sixty-two votes against
thirty-seven. On the 25th of March, it was presented to the President. On the
30th, he sent a refusal of the papers. His message misquoted and perverted the
request of the house into a positive demand, and then pretended to refuse what
had not been asked See American Annual Register, chap. xi.
. Their behavior gave Mr. Washington reason to despise them. The debates that
lasted for eight, ten, or twenty days about an answer to his annual speech
dishonored the whole body. His refusal of the instructions was to conceal the
disobedience of Jay, and his own tameness in bearing it.

The majority of sixty two ought to have received the message with silent
disdain, and prohibited their clerk from inserting it on the journals. Without
ostensible interference they could have sent to press a copy of the
instructions. These would have darted through the newspapers with the velocity
of lightning. An abortive attempt to conceal this paper must have ensured its
universal perusal. A victory to the publishers was the natural consequence. The
people would have resented the disobedience of Jay, the pusillanimous
acquiescence of the President, and his ill-concerted scheme for suppressing
information. While they sympathized with the affronted representatives, a few
well written essays might have matured into effective service the germ of
indignation; and the treaty and its allies had sunk into the dust.

But the majority possessed not one man with the resources, firmness and
activity of colonel Hamilton. The party seemed studious to display more than
their usual inferiority of address and boldness. Never was a critical moment
more miserably cast away. Instead of a glowing declaration that they contemned
the refusal, instead of some spirited harangues to animate their partisans
without doors, their tremulous and trimming measures toward a faction whose
animosities are immortal, betrayed their total want of energy, depressed their
friends, encouraged their enemies, and paved the way for their own approaching
downfall. They did not perceive that the public had become tired of these
debates, that farther haggling and wrangling would only increase that disgust,
and raise the message to an unmerited importance, and that silent contempt was
the plainest way to render it despicable.

On the 6th of April two resolutions See them in Bache's Debates, vol. i. p.
374.
were brought forward. The meaning of the first was, that the majority, if they
could hold themselves together, would refuse money for fulfilling Jay's treaty.
The second implied, that when the house desired the executive to let them have
the instructions, they were not obliged to tell for what purpose the paper was
wanted. Madison explained and enforced the resolutions with that superior
knowledge, ingenuity, and eloquence, which have so often illustrated and
adorned the transactions of Congress. Next day, they were past, ayes
fifty-seven, noes thirty-five. They were not worth one half of the trouble
which they cost. To illuminate and brace the minds of the people it would have
been better to propose the striking twenty thousand dollars from the
president's salary. Mr. Adams, as a premium for his two British negatives,
might have been restricted to twelve dollars per day during the sitting of
Congress. This is the allowance to a speaker of the representatives, a
character of more real use, and who bears more actual drudgery than the Senate
and their vice president put together. Such resolutions could not have been
carried, but the bare proposal would have conveyed an important hint. A
contrast might have been run between an old soldier with the palsy and seven
dollars and an half per annum, or his widow with six ragged children, and Mrs.
Washington gossipping for a whole evening at the national expense, with fifty
or an hundred and fifty women, while snuff-mills and sugar-bakeries were cast
idle by the approbation of her husband.

Treaties had, within a short time, been entered into by the United States with
Britain, with Algiers, with Spain, and with those Indians whom Wayne defeated
at fort Miamis. On the 13th of April, 1796, Mr. Sedgwick moved a resolution
that provision should be made for carrying these treaties into effect. He meant
that the house ought to vote sums of money for that end, and his view in
bundling the whole four treaties into one resolution was that they might stand
or fall together. This resolution produced warm debates. Several amendments
were suggested and discussed. Of these a particular detail can hardly interest
an ordinary reader. The whole proceedings have been minutely compiled by Mr.
Bache, and deserve to be studied by every future candidate for a seat in
Congress. For this place, it is enough to set in one luminous point of view the
actual objects of the opposite parties. The news of the Spanish treaty had been
received in America with universal exultation. It was to open the navigation of
the western waters, of which the king of Spain had hitherto been the J^ilor.
The Indian and Algerine treaties were rather convenient than advantageous, but
as their terms gave general satisfaction, no doubt was entertained that money
would be voted to fulfill them. A refusal was, of necessity, to subject the
union to immediate piracy and warfare. But it was, in all respects, quite
otherwise with the British treaty. A general and violent opposition had
appeared against it. A complexity of principles was involved in its discussion.
Hitherto, most representatives had professed to dislike it, and a delay, or
even a rejection, could not reasonably be supposed to produce war, when, by the
conquest of Holland, the extirpation of her armies in Europe and the
West Indies, the scarcity of money, and the discontent of her people, England
was evidently staggering on the brink of ruin.

The scheme of the federal members was to blend these negociations in one mass.
Their arguments and motives, when stripped of the loquacious masquerade common to
both parties, might be expressed thus:

We have on the table before us four treaties. Of these, three are equally
acceptable to the whole house; but you want to fulfill them, and to reject the
fourth. We are as desirous as you can be for friendship with Spain, and for
peace with Algiers and the Indians. But our British treaty, that you propose to
destroy, is of infinitely greater importance in our eyes than all the others
collectively, and the interest and independence of our country into the
bargain. Grenville has adverted to you, as American jacobins, and has assured
the toad-eating Thomas Pinckney that a British army shall, if we request it, be
sent over to crush you. But if we reject this treaty, that aid cannot be
expected; and that twilight of our political millenium shall be forever
extinguished, while so signal a defeat on the floor of Congress will give a
mortal blow to the power which we at present possess. Mankind will begin to
think and act about us with common sense. They will demand a publication of the
books of the treasury. They will no longer pay interest for forty millions of
dollars of domestic debt to creditors, till they shall have learned who these
people are? And whether William Smith, or Izard, or Hillhouse, or Sedgwick, has
waded farthest into the funds? This prospect is terrible. To avert it we shall
fall or conquer by the side of the treaty. If that cannot be carried, we shall
rejoice in blocking up the Mississippi, in whetting the tomohawk, in glutting
the pirates of Barbary with the plunder of our commerce.

The resolution was negatived. The three treaties were agreed to. A second
series of debates occurred as to the granting of money for fulfilling Jay's
treaty. This ended on the first of May, 1796. The appropriations past, in
committee of the whole, by the casting vote of the chairman, Mr. Muhlenberg,
the votes of members being forty-eight on each side. In the house, this
appropriation past by fifty-one votes against forty-eight. Some even of this
narrow majority, declared their entire disapprobation of the treaty. The
general zeal excited in its favor, and the probability that the six per cent.
citadel of Connecticut would have burst into actual rebellion Supra, chap. 2d.
See also, the spirit of some people in that state, in the American Annual
Register, chap. 6th.
, were forcible reasons in favor of adoption. The multitude and style of the
addresses to Congress in its behalf were sufficient to make thoughtful members
doubtful as to rejecting it. Mr. Muhlenberg has been highly blamed for his vote
on this question. By an uniform tenor of conduct, since 1789, he had already
offended the opposite party beyond all hope of forgiveness. But on this
emergency, he preferred the security of internal peace, even to the approbation
of his constituents. He had heartily stated his ideas in several private
meetings of members previous to the final vote.

The session rose on the 1st of June, 1796. British depredations did not, as
had been fondly foretold, cease after the appropriations had past for the
treaty. As one of its consequences the French began soon after to disturb our
trade. The western posts were, however, delivered up. The general election for
Congress, and that for a President, the difference between the French minister
and the American executive, were among the chief events which occurred till the
next meeting of Congress, which was on the 5th of December 1796.

ERRATA.
On p. 164, third line from the bottom, read "the American monied interest." --
In the note on page 232, eleventh line from the bottom, read A minority
declined to pass an act for the calling of a convention, in order to its
acceptance, etc. -- On page 260, third line from the bottom, read "amounted, in
1794, to," etc.


