FEMALE FRIENDSHIP OR THE INNOCENT SUFFERER. A MORAL NOVEL. VOLUME THE FIRST.

Virtue alone is happiness below,
And our best knowledge is, ourselves to know.
HALLOWELL: Printed by HOWARD S. ROBINSON, For NATHANIEL COGSWELL. 1797.

INTRODUCTION.
Mr. Pope's maxim, that
BEING fully and generally admitted, it necessarily follows, that well drawn
characteristic pictures of life, though fabulous, are a commendable and
profitable branch of literary composition; as they prepare an attentive,
intelligent reader for scenes of real action; and if the superstructure be
raised from a moral foundation; without which, however beautiful the component
parts, it must fall before the breath of rational criticism; then, while it
delights the imagination, it improves both the head and heart; a large
majority, especially of the fair sex, have not time nor talents for the
investigation of abstract principles in moral and social life; wherefore a
lighter kind of study is essential; and even the greatest proselytes of
profound speculation, may unbend their minds, by perusal of a well penned novel,
both with pleasure and advantage; several of this tendency might be pointed
out, were they not already generally known and acknowledged. It is true the
Spanish novelists still remain unrivalled, for delicacy of sentiment, and
strength of character; but their pictures being, in general romantic
caricatures; our lighter and fainter drafts have more original reality to
recommend them; -- though it is to be feared, that many authors, through
necessity or avarice, exercise their pens for gain; and though we have too many
instances, of wretches ready to propagate vice, for pecuniary advantage; yet,
to the honor of the present age, it may be said, that no licentious piece,
beyond a half penny ballad meets encouragement: wherefore the worst charge that
can be brought against productions of this nature, at present being trifling;
so that there is little danger of prejudice, should there even be small hopes
of improvement to the mind.

Notwithstanding professed critics launch their mortal darts at every
production that issues from the press, and generally attack the most helpless
most unmercifully; the author of what follows, hopes, as he does not lay in any
peculiar claim to striking merit; as he professes himself a young inexperienced
adventurer, warmly attached to moral rectitude, and more disposed to be grave
in the cause of virtue, than ludicrous at her expense; he hopes to gain
protection from the ladies, and indulgence from those who examine the piece
with a more critical eye: possessed of this flattering idea, he submits himself
to public candor, without multiplying prefatory apologies, further than to
premise, that he has not adhered to a strict dramatic catastrophe, which, if a
deficiency, he hopes, among others, will be excused, as he previously
confesses, that some of his characters are introduced merely as foils to
others, without any design of disposing them according to the rules of poetical
justice.

FEMALE FRIENDSHIP: OR THE INNOCENT SUFFERER.
CHAP. I.
Know then this Truth, [enough for Man to know]
Virtue alone is Happiness below.
Pope's Essay on Man.
SIR HENRY SUMMERS was a man by nature formed sensible, open, and compassionate
to the distresses of his fellow creatures, which he never looked on without
pitying, nor was pity all he bestowed; he too well knew the pain which that
passion must give a feeling mind (when unaccompanied by assistance) ever to
refuse his, to merit in distress. By art his natural sense was refined into
wisdom, and his own generosity of sentiment gave him a humane politeness of
behavior, which gained him universal respect. By fortune he was blessed with
an ample sufficiency to indulge every benevolent wish of his expanded mind;
luxurious or whimsical superfluity never rendered him incapable of assisting
unhoused poverty. In short, he only regarded his riches as they gave him an
opportunity of contributing to the support of deserving or necessitous objects.

While his character was respected even by those who were not personally
acquainted with him, his behavior created admiration and affection in all who
were.

In friendship he was sincere, constant in danger, and patient in adversity,
which he more than once had felt. To these qualifications he had joined the
excellent address of living (which is most hard to do) without reproach. Yet,
notwithstanding he was thus endowed with every virtue that can truly form the
amiable, generous, honest man; he had, in common with all human kind, his
particularities; but they were such as rather to be the objects of applause
than censure: His praises were too constant in the mouth of every one not to
reach his own ear, and being well convinced of the solidity of his judgment, he
expected a due deference to be paid thereto by all who had the least dependence
on, or connection with him; he had a pleasing dignity of countenance, which
rendered him at once the object of esteem and reverence; there was a little
tincture of warmth and self-sufficiency in his disposition, which made him
rather impatient of control: yet, after what I have said of this gentleman,
there requires no great sagacity to discover, that what all allowed to be his
virtues, far outweighed what some chose to call his faults.

Sir Harry, so early as eighteen, had contracted an acquaintance with a young
lady of fortune, which, in a short time, grew into the most disinterested love;
and being a man of too much sensibility ever to think of her on any other than
honorable terms, he consulted her father, who cruelly rejected his proposals,
not from any dislike to his person, family, or fortune, which were all
unexceptionable, but on account of his youth; partially imagining, that he
could not be endowed with so much solidity, as to fix the volatile, wandering
affections at so early a period of life, upon one object, however valuable;
therefore considered his passion but as a flight of inconsiderate youth, which,
in a short time after the accomplishment of his wishes, would naturally wear
off: thus, through an over-refined degree of caution, the anxious father
opposed the only step which could insure his daughter's happiness. Thus it
often happens in life, that by earnestly endeavoring to avoid one error, we
inevitably fall into its opposite.

This refusal, of course, put a stop to the frequent interviews with which the
young couple had before found means to indulge themselves; yet, notwithstanding
it deprived them of the few sweet minutes personal conferences afforded, they,
lover like, industriously found means to hear constantly from each other; two
of which letters I here present to my readers. The first, which is from Sir
Harry, was wrote the day after he received the refusal from her father.

CHAP. II.
-- Thither write, my love,
And with my eyes I Will drink the words you send,
Though Ink be made of gall.
CYMBELINE.
Sir HARRY SUMMERS to Miss AMELIA.
WHAT words, most dear Amelia, can express my feelings at this juncture? Why
should I inform you of what (I fear) you must already have heard -- the
reception I yesterday met with from your father? He ordered me to forget you.
Oh! my AEmily, think what a person, who loves like me, must feel at such a
sentence: but, thank heaven I have still one gleam of comfort to support my
drooping spirits; I can not think you ever will be induced to join in such
cruelty. In that fond hope alone I live, after the repeated assurances of
regard I have received from my dearest AEmmy, I should be unworthy the smallest
glimmering of respect where I to suppose that a separation like this, can alter
her generous, tender way of thinking. Yet, though I am fully conscious of your
flattering sentiments, allow me to feel. -- Your own delicate mind will do me
the justice to suggest, how far a thought of losing you must affect me: let me
avoid it, lest I sink beneath a painful weight of apprehension. -- Yet, can I
be thus divided from you, and loose the thought of what I should feel from an
eternal separation? -- Forgive me, if I cannot force it from my mind: admit my
fears as a proof of my regard: but I wrong you to think you will look upon them
in any other light than as the unavoidable palpitation of a heart which loves
you to distraction. -- Alas! why did I ever experience the happy moments we have
spent together, since they now only serve to make my misery the more severe? --
May you not feel this parting as I do! -- Whatever is my lot, may you for ever
taste felicity; -- I once indeed flattered myself, that I should have been in
some measure conducive thereto; that by my attention to your wants, and
constant assiduity to please, I should have made myself worthy of the heart
which I hoped would have given me your hand, and thereby tendered your
happiness complete. -- Oh! what a delightful situation, when we have the
pleasing consideration, that every action of our lives adds to the felicity of
those we love! -- From this thought there arises an unwearied reciprocal desire
to please, which turns even the common occurrences of life, into proofs of a
sincere and permanent regard. How much more delight do we feel, than those
whose breasts are not susceptible of so delicate a refinement? This, my AEmily,
is a situation I once hoped to have reached; but alas! why do I think thereof,
since it can now afford but a momentary satisfaction, and only serve to make me
return to the prospect before me with more reluctant regret -- a prospect that
I cannot think or look on without shuddering? -- Forgive me for saving, that
under these circumstances; you will, by still assuring me of your regard, add
new life to

The afflicted, H. SUMMERS.

To Sir HARRY SUMMERS.
SIR,
ACCORDING to a maxim of the kindest mother, [for such I was once blessed with]
acknowledging a generous, disinterested passion for a deserving object, is most
minutely consistent with delicate modesty; where I shall make no scruple of
confessing, that your letter has raised very contrary feelings. Your
professions of love are flattering, but your doubts rather otherwise. The
concessions your tender solicitations drew from me before our present
disagreeable separation I shall ever adhere to, even though a father's
unreasonable displeasure should be the consequence. Let this undisguised
effusion of an artless heart quiet those uneasy sensations which too plainly
appear in your letter. Once more rest assured of sincerity on my side, as a
return for your obliging wishes and inclinations to promote and secure my
happiness. I could dwell much longer on the pleasing theme of mutual regard and
sincerity, but that a parent's harsh commands intrude, and hurry me to a
conclusion, with this assurance, that I am, with inviolable attachment, etc.
etc.

AEMLIA.

CHAP. III.
Soft Pity is the fairest flower
Heaven ever planted in the mind;
The queen of virtues, whose soft power
Can even to Godhead raise mankind,
OPERA of Tom Jones.
MANY more letters passed between Sir Harry and his AEmily; but as most of them
only contained the same assurances of regard in other words, and as love
letters, no more than love scenes, are amusing to any but the parties
concerned, I shall not trouble my readers with any more than these two, which
may serve as a specimen of the style and contents of all the others. Let it
suffice to say, that Sir Harry having made another application to her father,
and having received the same refusal, our lovers determined to make a stolen
match; which being effected, Sir Harry would have thrown himself at his wife's
father's feet, but the old gentleman absolutely refused to see either of them,
taking this imprudent step too nearly to heart, it in a short time finished his
days; nor could he ever be prevailed upon to see his daughter, but obstinately
carried his resentment to the grave, as a proof of which, he bequeathed all he
was worth to a distant relation of his wife's. This accident happening when
Lady Summers was pregnant, a miscarriage was the consequence, followed by a
violent fever, which in a few days put an end to her life: and thus was Sir
Harry left a widower at the age of twenty-two, as a mourning monument of the
fatal effects of filial disobedience.

So quick and so impressing a series of misfortunes cast a gloom upon his
countenance, which it was not in the power of time to remove, any more than the
settled resolution he made, on his wife's death, of never entering again into
that state, wherein he had been so unlucky in his first attempt. He therefore
lived, as I before said, the object of every one's admiration and esteem,
striving to do all the good in his power. He partook of all the pleasures of
life, without running into any of the absurdities; he was more delighted with
amusements he met with at his seat in Yorkshire, as being the more rational,
yet when in town, as he was half the year, he frequented every public place of
diversion, to avoid the character of a misanthrope, which, from his ^ettled
melancholy, some few officious people had chose to honor him with. He was
about the age of forty, when the following affair happened.

Early one morning in February, when on his return from Carlisle-House, he was
surprised by seeing a crowd of watchmen round his door, occasioned, as he
discovered on enquiry, by a basket just then picked up, which, to his great
astonishment, was found to contain a female child, of (seemingly) about a month
old. On his nearer approach, he observed a paper pinned to its breast, on which
were wrote, in a neat Italian hand, these words:

"Stranger, whosoe'er thou art, that find'st this luckless babe, shut not your
ears against the tender cries of youthful innocence, but pity, cherish, and
receive her; in return for which she will far o'erpay your generous care by her
endearing prattle."

This was so forcible an application to the humanity of Sir Harry (than whom no
man had a greater share) that he could not withstand the natural impulse of his
heart, but ordered the child to be conveyed into his house, and to have all
immediate care taken of it. -- Thus to a heart so susceptible of tenderness,
these few words pleaded the cause of this helpless infant, in full as effectual
a manner, and perhaps with more success, than whole volumes on the subject,
from the ablest hands, could have done.

So singular an adventure employed Sir Harry's thoughts great part of that time
which he would otherwise have appropriated to rest; but this circumstance, the
more he considered it, the more it bewildered his ideas; in short, it was an
endless maze of perplexities. He could not believe those lines to be the
produce of any common hand, either from the style or writing, nor did he know
any one on whom to fix his suspicions: however, after some hesitation he
yielded fully to the humane dictates of his heart, by resolving to furnish the
child with every necessary, and, as she turned out, to fix her in the world.
This resolution afforded him the tacit praise of what he had determined; nor
was he a little strengthened in his design by the affecting smiles which sat
upon the infant's countenance, when he went to inquire after it, and give
orders for her nursery. He was just sat down to breakfast, when Mr. Modish
entered the room, to inquire after the company he had seen at Carlisle-house
the preceding evening.

CHAP. IV.
MR. Modish was a gentleman of fortune, by nature endowed with a good
understanding, but unhappily much overrun with the weed of inattention. -- He
was a distant relation to Sir Harry's who having a real regard for him, with
pain observed the ridiculous circumstances of his behavior, which he always,
like a true friend, endeavored to amend by admonishment, wherever he saw
occasion. Sir Harry's mind was so full of the last night's adventure, that the
first compliments were scarce passed, when be told the whole affair to Modish,
who having heard him to the end with great attention, taking his hand with a
triumphant laugh. replied: -- "Sir Harry, I give you joy. 'Egad, I Am glad to
see any honest fellow, who has spirit enough to acknowledge his gallantry. I
really began to fear, we were all reverting to the antideluvian state, when an
amor was looked upon as a crime. You know, I in particular was never fond of
those primaeval notions, and always thought you rather too much addicted to
them. -- Well! and pray -- Now, what happy girl has had the honor of
converting you to my way of thinking? What -- it is a secret, I suppose. -- She
bid you not kiss and tell, ha! Sir Harry? -- 'G^d, I began to give you up for
an obstinate heretic, in whom it was impossible to work a reformation. Well --
I suppose it is to be sent to nurse in the country to a tenant's wife, who was
formerly your housekeeper; and when he is about twelve years old, brought to
^own as the son of a poor clergyman, for whom you have a great regard; then a
few years schooling, and a cornetcy in the guards, finishes the whole affair.
-- Well, upon my soul! you are a happy fellow, who have no check upon your
pleasures from a deficiency in your purse." -- This gentleman's volubility of
tongue was so great, that Sir Harry was obliged to let him run on thus far,
before he could convince him of his mistake with regard to the sex of the
child, and which he had before forgot to inform him of; -- but when he heard it
was a girl, after near a minute's pause, he cried, -- "A girl! that is unlucky;
however, we must make the best of a bad bargain. -- Why, she must of course, be
nursed in the country; and then bring her to London as your ward, the only
daughter of a particular friend who died in the West Indies: -- ay, ay, that
will do: -- and then a couple of thousand pounds, or so, may make her the wife
of some honest citizen, who has more money than wit." -- In vain did he protest
the child was not his own: Modish could not believe, that any man would thus
adopt a perfect stranger to him: however, on Sir Harry's firm protestations, he
began to have rather a different opinion: -- Well, (says he) if the child is
not yours, I think you did wrong to take any notice a^ her. -- For my own
part, it is a settled rule with me, to provide for no man's offspring but my
own, and not even them at all times." "For shame, for shame! (cried Sir Harry,
not a little nettled at his relation's dissolute sentiments) I am sorry to see
a man, to whom nature has been bountiful both in understanding and fortune,
make so bad an use of either, as to be directed, in the performance of the
moral duties of life, by that fashionable folly, that plea, for the commission
of every crime, Custom. Charles you know I Am your friend, and it is my
friendship tells you, that however you may have been taught to believe
otherwise by the company you kept, yet be assured, upon the word of a man who
has seen and knows the world, that chastity is as noble a qualification in our
sex as in the female, though, to our shame be it spoken, in the present age it
seems totally excluded from the catalogue of male virtues; nor indeed can I
hardly blame our youths for a breach thereof, not only because they have never
been taught to consider it in the light of a crime, but because they have no
incitement thereto from the only part of the creation, they naturally expect it
from, I mean, that class of females distinguished by the appellation of modest
women; a tender union with whom, in some part or other of our lives, we all
esteem as our ne plus ultra; and want of chastity being no impediment to such
an alliance, we consequently are not so solicitous about possessing this virtue
as we otherwise should be: for let a man commit every folly, every vice, which
youth, intemperance, or his impassioned inclinations prompt him to, and he will
never feel the consequences from those who, by the coolness of their behavior,
ought to express their dislike of such proceedings. On the contrary, amors
with a variety of women give a man an air of greater consequence, and more
probability of success with the rest of the sex. Can any thing be a stronger
proof of the truth of this assertion, than that proverbial expression which we
so constantly hear come from the mouths of females of every rank, and of the
truth of which they seem all to be so well convinced, viz, That a reformed rake
makes the best husband. In short, young gentlemen, whatever fashion or depraved
appetites may dictate, spirit with prudence, and love with virtuous constancy,
are the sh^at anchors of moral and social happiness." -- Bravo! (cried Modish,
after a short silence) pray, proceed: -- upon my word, Sir Harry, you have
harangued with the gravity of a bishop: so you mean, by this fine, grave,
sentimental oration, to make me believe, that this girl is not your own. But
pray, my dear Summers, joking apart, do you really look upon keeping a mistress
in the light of a crime?" -- "Sir (said Sir Harry, frowning, much amazed) I am
obliged to go out at present, on some particular business: if you will favor
me with your company to dinner, by four, at the Thatched House. I may perhaps
tell you some more of my thoughts on this subject." -- "Agreed, said he, though
upon my soul! I am engaged to meet Lord Squander, Billy Rattle, and some
others, to dinner, at the Shakespeare, from thence to proceed in battle array to
assist at the damnation of a new comedy; but you are such a holy witch, as the
poor poet says, that you enchant society to you, and I have really now kept
your company so long, that I begin to find more solid pleasure in hearing your
rational discourse, than in the noisy mirth of my bottle companions: I will
therefore wait upon you, though, by so doing, I shall disoblige some of the
honestest fellows, except yourself in the universe." -- "For which, replied Sir
Harry, I shall not be sorry. But pray, have you read this new play, which you
thus intended to have strangled in the birth?" -- "Not I, upon, my soul! said
he; I don't even know the author. -- "And how could you, rejoined his friend,
be cruel enough, for the sake of a few minutes diversion, perhaps to ruin a
man, whose only prospects may depend on the success of this night's piece; even
before you can know, whether it is deserving of your censure or applause?" --
"Nay, that replied Modish, is considering it in too serious a light. I never
troubled my head about its merit; but it would be making a riot, which is my
delight. But adieu till four." -- And thus they parted; Sir Harry, to go about
the business he had mentioned, and Modish, to take his usual turn in the Mall;
after which, he met his friend, according to appointment, and had the pleasure
of hearing his farther thoughts on the subject they had that morning started:
but as the particulars of their conversation never came to my knowledge, and
were, I presume, similar to those already mentioned, let it suffice to say,
that Sir Harry, in consequence of the conversation, was more confirmed in the
principles of humanity and protection to his ward, or rather adopted daughter.
He went home, his mind replete with those pleasing sensations, of which no one
can be a competent judge, whose soul is not equally expanded, equally
succeptible of delicate ideas.

CHAP. V.
-- She is young, wise, fair;
In these to Nature she is immediate heir;
And these breed honor. That is honor's scorn,
Which challenges itself, as honors born,
And is not like the Sire. Honors best thrive,
When rather from our acts we them derive,
Than our forefathers.
All Is WELL THAT ENDS WELL.
THE consequence of the conversation which Sir Harry had with Modish, as
related in the last chapter, was an immediate application of his time to the
preparation of every thing which might conduce to the ease and happiness of his
adopted child, whom he now determined to educate in London, that he might not
seem to pay any attention to the many ill-natured insinuations which he
constantly heard, and still expected to hear, about so extraordinary an affair,
from the major part of the world. However, equally regardless of their censure
or their praise, he still nobly persevered in the execution of his first
design, with regard to the education of that child, whom in memory of his once
dear partner, he had christened by the name of AEmily, and who^e benignant
smiles, whenever he approached, he considered as so many grateful returns for
his humanity, in the preservation of her life.

As soon as her tender mind was adjudged capable of retaining any impressions,
he prepared masters to instruct her in every thing suiting her age and sex,
which she took fast as 'twas minister'd; and he had soon the satisfaction of
hearing her, in unaffected strains, express her thanks for the many favors he
daily bestowed on her, and which never failed to put him in mind of those
remarkable words, which the reader may remember were found upon her breast. He
was in some doubt whether to acquaint her with this circumstance or not; but
judging that a discovery of that nature might, from the generosity and laudable
pride of her mind, when she considered herself as an object of charity,
occasion a reserve in her behavior, which would deprive him of the pleasure of
her open and ingenious conversation, he chose, rather than run this hazard, to
impose upon her by an information that she was his niece; and as he always made
a distinction between a falsity, contrived with a premeditated design to do an
injury, and one with an innocent intention, he had on this occasion no other
feelings, than those which conscious virtue always experiences on the
performance of any good action. However that she might not always remain a
stranger to what so nearly concerned her, he wrote an account thereof, which
with the paper abovementioned, being enclosed in his will, were committed into
the hands of his attorney.

AEmily was now endowed with a person far from contemptible; but having affairs
of much more consequence to take notice of, I shall not detain my readers with
a minute account of those qualifications which can reflect no honor on her
noble parts, being qualifications, if they deserve that name, which every woman
is equally liable to possess in as emminent a degree as herself; but to her
honor be it spoken, that, added to ageeable external endowments, she had a
mind replete with every amiable virtue.

Sir Harry now considering her in every respect as his niece, accompanied her
to all places of public entertainment; but she was far too sensible, to receive
any solid satisfaction from the enjoyment of any of the present modish
diversions, except the Theater, which she considered as not only proper for
refining our sentiments and ideas, but as the most luxurious treat the human
understanding is capable of enjoying. No wonder then, that she was an almost
constant attendant there, especially when performances of an edifying cast were
exhibited.

The residence of her uncle (that being the light in which she now considered
Sir Harry) in Yorkshire, during the summer season, to which place she always
accompanied him, gave her a full opportunity of pursuing her favorite
amusements, reading and walking; in the latter of which she found an additional
pleasure, being generally accompanied by a neighboring young lady, for whom
she had the sincerest affection that a similarity of sentiment could promote;
nor was her generous friendship placed on an undeserving object; she had the
happiness of having it returned with additional ardor. To this young lady, who
was the daughter of Sir Thomas Hartry, AEmily opened her whole heart, on every
occasion, with all the ingenuity of disinterested regard. She had just attained
her twentieth year, when an affair, which the reader will soon become
acquainted with gave rise to the following letters from AEmily to her friend.

CHAP. VI.
The supremest bliss in life,
Is the kind, the virtuous Wife:
Love's a spark of heavenly flame,
Lent to warm the human frame.
Air in the Opera of Tom Jones.
AEMILY to MARIA.
Albermarle-Street.
NOTHING but a thorough conviction of my dear friend's goodnature, and too
great knowledge of the mutability of our sex, to rally me upon my sudden
change, could have induced me to trouble her with this letter. -- Oh! my Maria!
must I confess to you, that with all my boasted indifference, I at length am
caught? at least I think so; and so will you, when I acknowledge, that I am
afraid to ask my heart the question. -- However secure of your friendly council
in this untried scene, I will venture to communicate the circumstances as they
happened.

The appearance of Garrick in tragedy, some time (...), induced my uncle, at my
request, to take places (...) that evening; and although he was indisposed all
(...) morning with a violent headache ^in spite of my ^^monstrances insisted
on performing his promise, by attending me to the play in the evening; so far
does (...) is good man, in every thing, prefer my happiness (...) his own ease.
As it was a crowded night, we (...) not to stay the farce, and ordered the
carriage accordingly. We had not been long seated in the ^ox, before Miss
Martin, with whom I have a slight acquaintance, seated herself behind us being
attended by her brother, (...) young gentleman of small private fortune, who
(...) his winter been called to the bar, where he promises fair to make a
figure: but although no one applies more closely to his profession, when out of
it, he is quite the gentleman, which character very few know, how so well to
unite with the man of business. Finding I was no stranger to his sister, from
his first entrance, he directed his conversation particularly to me; but being
the only woman in company, except her (and sisters, you know, are nobody) I
only thought it what every man would have done in the same case, and therefore,
at that time, considered it in no other light than as common civility. Our
discourse naturally turning upon the exhibition before us, the justice of his
remarks added to the apparent diffidence with which they were uttered, gave me
as high an opinion of his judgment as I had of his address and personal
behavior. Added to these, he is furnished with a mind susceptible of the most
delicate feelings; for, would you think it, my dear? he was even unfashionable
enough to weep at the imaginary representation of distress: as if ashamed of
his weakness, he for some time endeavored to conceal the emotions of his foul;
but in vain: nature got the better of art, and showed the unaffected goodness
of his heart in its true colors. I do not know whether it was from sympathy,
but I never was more affected at a tragedy in my life: he perceived it, and I
had the satisfaction of being complimented by him on the tenderness of my
passions. Surely this man knows my very thoughts, for he did not once seem to
pay the least attention to my person: if he has any design upon my affections,
this is his only way. Your Emmy would hold that man unworthy a place in her
heart, who could be captivated by her person only; such love can have no
stability; every day will show new beauties to his eyes, each of whom will blot
the remembrance of the former from his heart; and thus admiring all, he really
regards none. But a man, who prefers us for some superior excellence of mind,
will, when in possession of our persons, have daily opportunities of seeing the
improvement of the former: and thus with love and reason both combined, we
spread a toil too dear for him to break. How cautious, then, how very cautious
should we be, not to fix our affections on a man, who probably may abuse the
confidence we place in him. When the indissoluble knot is tied, we are no
longer preserved under the fostering wing of an indulgent parent, friends and
relations, all give up the joint care they have had of our happiness, and
center it alone in the will of a husband: to him we must on all occasions fly
for assistance, which if he refuses, we indeed are miserable.

And yet, my Maria, what hazard, what risque, do we not run, in ^he choice of
that man, who is to preside over every future action of our lives? for there
are a (...) of men, who think women made but for their pleasure, as a domestic
convenience, to rise at their smiles, or fink at their rebuke; and then, after
such behavior, are amazed to find the delights of matrimony do not answer the
expectations they have been taught to conceive thereof, and begin to treat
every idea of connubial love as merely chimerical, no where existing but in the
luxuriant fancy of (...) ingenuous to create imaginary pleasures: thus (...)
^^culing the height of human felicity, only because it is a refinement of which
their coarser ideas are not susceptible. From such, kind heaven defend my
friend and me!

Although I am not guided by a blind mistake^ partiality for my own sex, yet I
acknowledge myself to have so good an opinion of the generally thereof, as to
venture to say, that if their husband would treat them with a tenderness
becoming the ^^licacy of their connection, and not convert the ^^dulgence of an
obliging companion, into the (...) commands of an austere master, or the cold
conten^^ of negligent indifference, they would find in (...) wives all their
fond hearts could wish, obedi^^^ helpmates, faithful friends, and agreeable
comp^^ions.

Do not, from what I have above said, imagine (...) I am mad enough to think,
there is nothing requi^^^ of us in this arduous state; so far from it, I am
convinced that, were we to spend our whole lives in (...) consideration of what
is proper to be (...) there would still be something wanting in our conduct to
supply every duty incumbent on a good (...); and this very circumstance seems
designed by providence, to augment our felicity! for if there were faults, we
should loose all that heartfelt satisfaction arising from a reciprocal
forgivement thereof. (...) all let us remember, that we should retain (...)
after we become the wife, and not, when commence the one, entirely divest
ourselves of (...) other; for if we do, how wide will be the difference^? --
where that amiable, engaging compliance, we (...) use of to appear agreeable
before marriage? and we did it then only perhaps to satisfy a girlish-vani^^
how much more studiously ought we to use (...) most careful assiduity to
please, when all our domestic happiness depends on the firm possession of our
husband's affections. Let us therefore, by our wishes, strive to intercept his
will; and, according to the maxim in the song, While each with tender passion
burns,
Ascend the throne of rule by turns;
And place (to love, to virtue just)
Security in mutual trust.
The PADLOCK.

But my zeal for the happiness of the rest of my sex, has almost made me forget
to proceed in my story.

At the conclusion of the play, my uncle went out to enquire after the
carriage, promising to return immediately: but after having waited some time,
you may imagine how amazed I was to see nothing of him, nor could I help
expressing my astonishment thereat to Miss Martin, who as well as her brother,
strove with all the tender concern they could to quiet my fears; but in vain.
During the whole time of the entertainment, I was agitated with the most
dreadful apprehensions, insomuch that the (...) had dropped sometime before I
discovered it. -- In this dilemma, Mr. Martin insisted on setting me down,
which, in such a situation, I could not refuse; he therefore handed me into the
passage, where the crowd was too great for us to proceed, and his eagerness to
extricate us from this difficulty led him so far, that by some accident, a
chairman in shifting one of his poles let it fall upon his head, from whence
the blood immediately gushed in a great quantity. You may more easily imagine,
than I can describe, the consternation this threw both his sister and me into,
our fears interpreting the danger to be greater than it really was, which, he
assured us, was very trifling, and notwithstanding our most earnest entreaties,
could not be prevailed on to accept of any assistance till he got home: but
turning to his sister, desired she would lend him her handkerchief, somebody in
the crowd having been civil enough to borrow his; but I being the quicker of
the two (and, I am afraid, almost as much concerned for his safety) before she
could find here is, had offered him mine, which he politely accepted; and having
bound it round his head, with some difficulty seated us in the coach.

On our arrival at Albermarle-street, I enquired after my uncle, and had the
satisfaction of hearing that he had been taken ill, on the sudden change from
so intense heat to cold; but that, to my heartfelt ease, he was again
recovered, and had arrived just before me. On hearing this, Mr. Martin begged
leave to enquire after his health, the next day: which I could not refuse, but
desired that he would not, out of complaisance to enquire after the safety of
others endanger his own, by coming out too soon; (...) and entreated he would
let me know how he did in the morning; which having promised, they took their
leave, and left me at liberty to visit my uncle, who, I found had no remains of
his disorder but a violent headache.

Mercy on me! to what an unconscionable length have I extended this subject!
but we are apt to dwell on pleasing themes, without considering the leisure or
patience of a correspondent. However, I think it is now high time for me to
conclude, with an assurance of your soon hearing from me again; and that
however I may be employed in the delightful task of duty and of love, there
will always be room left for my Maria, in the heart of her sincerest friend,

AEMILY SUMMERS.

CHAP. VII.
To be obliged to compound with my duty? ashamed to look my uncle in the face!
to blush at his confidence, and be humbled by his kindness! to feel the
irksomeness of receiving praise, which I am conscious I do not merit! What a
state for an ingenuous mind! The SCHOOL for RAKES.
AEMILY to MARIA.
Albermarle-Street.
AGREEABLE to my promise, I again take up my pen, to proceed in what your
vivacity will call a romantic adventure. After parting with Mr. Martin, I went
to bed, but without inclination to sleep. The composure I had always hitherto
felt, on repairing to rest, was gone, and in its room had left ten thousand
doubts and fears. -- According to my custom, upon a strict examination into my
actions of the day, I found in my heart sensations which I dared not give way
to, nor could totally suppress: in short, I found my happiness depended on the
actions of a man who never (and what was worse) who perhaps never intended to
speak to me on any other footing than that of a common acquaintance. Shall I
confess to you, that this thought affected me so far as to hinder me from
taking my natural rest? I therefore rose i^ the morning, pale, and unrefreshed,
my usual sprightliness supplanted by a melancholy dejection, almost too much
for me to bear. My uncle perceived it, and with a paternal kindness, tenderly
enquired the cause. To acknowledge the real one was impossible the fictitious
confession of having been troubled with the toothach all night, delivered me
from that confusion which his question had thrown me into; but you may imagine
that I did not feel much easier, when after a moment's recollection, my
conscience dictated to me, to what the entertainment of an imprudent passion
had reduced your friend; the wilful deception of a man so kind, so generous,
that hitherto he had always strove to intercept my wishes, that I might never
know what it was to ask a favor. -- Oh! my Maria! -- to what does this love
subject us! how far does it debase the generosity of our minds beneath its
glorious sphere! -- At our births, by nature we are open, ingenuous, and
sincere; our youthful hearts can entertain no thought, no wish, which we desire
to exclude the breast of any one acquaintance.

I was meditating on the fallacious influence of unauthorized concealed love,
when, according to my expectation, the servant announced Mr. Martins approach.
This sound at once roused me from my reveries, and gave me spirits to receive
him in as disengaged a manner as the nature of our acquaintance would admit of.
I was sorry to observe, that his dress (considering the time of day) was
studiously elegant. I am afraid he has either too much of the coxcomb in him,
or a worse opinion of my understanding than I could wish; as his appearance
seemed to indicate, that he thinks me capable of receiving an impression from
his exterior parts. From your thorough knowledge of my heart, you best can tell
how much he is mistaken: and here, methinks you will call me a whimsical girl,
for troubling my head so much about a man, whom as yet I had never seen but
once. -- Why, that indeed is very true; but in that once, his eyes as plainly
spoke the language of his soul, as if he had told me that he loved; for, in his
whole behavior, there was a delicate attention to my every word, which was
more persuasive eloquence than any he could use.

Some few compliments had passed between us, when my uncle entered the room, to
whom I introduced Mr. Martin, as the gentleman to whom I was so much obliged
for his assistance the preceding evening. With his usual politeness, he made
him many acknowledgments for his behavior, and in a short time, insensibly
fell into a conversation, which seemed to promise an intimacy; nor was I
mistaken in my conjectures; a general invitation to Albermarle-street was the
consequence, at which I will confess, I was not a little pleased; and, in order
to strengthen this growing connection, I sent by him a message to his sister,
intimating that I should be proud of a stricter acquaintance with her: after
which he took his leave, not without first having made a very significant bow
to me; -- at least my vanity construed it as such.

You may imagine he did not neglect the invitation he had received: few days
passed in which we did not see him; and my uncle in a short time conceived so
cordial a fondness for him, that he scarcely ever seemed to have enough of his
company; he was one in all our parties at home, and a tended us to every public
place; and though he did not pay me the common compliments which most of his
sex use to our's, still there was a certain delicacy in every (...), which too
plainly assured me, that he regarded me with other eyes than those of a more
acquaintance: and I will acknowledge, that I daily expected a declaration of
his passion, nay, that I even wished it, though I was not without my fears,
lest my uncle, on account of the smallness of his fortune should oppose his
inclinations, and thereby deprive me of his company, which I now enjoyed with
unlimited pleasure. -- Oh! my Maria! -- what did I not suffer from this
apprehension! -- and as he grew every day more particular, every time I saw him
increased my uneasiness, till at length, what I so long expected, arrived: but
I am summoned to my toilet, and therefore must make this the subject of another
(...). Adieu I -- on whomever I may bestow my affections, you still shall have
your share in the heart of

Yours, most sincerely, AEMILY SUMMERS.

CHAP. VIII.
Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,
Brags of his substance, not of ornament;
They are but beggars that can count their worth;
I cannot sum up one half of my wealth,
ROMEO and JULIET.
AEMILY to MARIA.
Albermarle-Street.
WHEN once affection is rooted in the breast, hard is the task to conceal the
movements of our hearts from the dear object. I thus, my amiable friend, begin
with a sentiment, because I think the sequel of my story will pretty clearly
exemplify it: I will therefore now resume the thread of my discourse, and
endeavor to be a little more consistent than in my last; but as I was at that
time in an unusual flutter of spirits, I am sure you will pardon me.

The morning preceding to my writing it, I was lolling negligently on a settee,
perusing your letter, when Mr. Martin, entering the room suddenly, unheard and
unexpected, threw me into some little confusion, and in my hurry I dropped your
epistle on the (...) which if you remember, was directed by your father: he
immediately picked it up, and perceived the superscription to be a man's hand:
after a short silence, during which various passions by turns appeared in his
face. "How happy, Madam, said he, must that gentleman be, who can so far have
acquired your esteem, as to be permitted to correspond with you!" -- Having so
said, he held it in his hand, as if waiting for an answer; but as I perceived a
taint of jealousy in his words and mode of expression, I endeavored to evade
the circumstance, by enquiring when I might hope to congratulate him upon a
perfect recovery of the accident he met at the Theater, which still clouded his
countenance with a patch? Seeing through my artifice, he answered as follows;
"You seem, Miss Summers, to be extremely cautious of saying any thing further
on the letter:" -- and, with a kind of forced irony, added, "I am sure Miss
Summer's principles would never suffer her to hold a correspondence with any
one of whom she need be ashamed." -- Notwithstanding the satisfaction I at that
moment felt for having awakened the resentment of that love I wished to
cultivate, to support the farce, I could not avoid replying, with an air of
negligence, "I do not think myself obliged to consult all my acquaintance on
the choice of my correspondents; and provided I have none with whom my uncle is
displeased, I do not see that any other person has any concern in the affair."
-- Poor soul! how engagingly simple he looked! -- he hung his head, and with a
timid hesitating inferiority, said, "To be sure, Madam -- as you say -- I have
no right -- I once, indeed, added he with a sigh, flattered myself -- but fool
that I was -- what reason had I to expect" -- then with a low bow continued,
"as I acknowledge my transgression, and sincerely beg your pardon, I hope Miss
Summers will for once excuse so impertinent a curiosity; -- especially as in
palliation thereof, I can with truth assure her, that I had some reason for my
seeming enquiry." -- Well, said I, since you confess your fault, I will now
convince you, that your suspicions were groundless; -- but observe -- I do this
to justify myself, not to satisfy you." -- So saying, I produced the letter,
and relating to him the real truth, showed him your name, at the sight of
which, his countenance immediately brightened up; and I will own to you that I
felt an unspeakable pleasure, when I saw him under a pretense of a closer
examination of the direction, press my name to his lips with the greatest
eagerness; after which he returned me the letter, with as much composure as if
he was convinced I had not taken notice of his last action.

The conversation now dropped; but this being far from my intention [I am
afraid out of the secret desire of urging him to a declaration] immediately
took an opportunity of saying, "I think Sir you told me, that you had a reason
for your seeming enquiry concerning the letter; shall I not come under the
predicament of unreasonable curiosity by desiring to know what it was?" -- "By
no means, replied he, as you are the only person interested in it, you have an
undoubted right to be acquainted therewith; -- pardon me then; dear Miss
Summers, but my own happiness was at stake." -- "Nay, now said I, I don't
understand you." -- "Say rather, replied he, with some emotion, you will not
understand me, and indeed I do not know whether I should wish you to, nor would
I ever have informed you of it, but that I find, notwithstanding all my
endeavours' it will be impossible long to conceal it from you; in justification
therefore of my own behavior (which I am sensible must have appeared very
extraordi^ry) am under an absolute necessity of declaring, that from the first
moment which I saw I loved you." -- Oh, my Maria! -- what contradictory
creatures are we women? -- although this declaration was my ultimate wish, and
though it was what I had so long expected, would you believe, that when the
wished, for moment was arrived, I could scarce support myself from fainting.
Perceiving therefore that I hesitated for an answer (for indeed I knew not what
to say, he took one of my hands and with some warmth cried, "May I not dearest
Miss Summers, hope that by my earnest endeavors to please, I may at length
render myself not totally disagreeable to you." -- And much more he then said
than I can now remember: it is impossible to describe the dilemma I was in; and
to confess the truth, the moment was not a little critical. -- A fine young
fellow at my feet, using all the rhetoric he was master of, to persuade me to
what before I had no small inclination (I mean the avowal of my passion) was a
dangerous situation: -- Tell me, my Maria, was this a time for hesitation? --
Trust me -- No -- And I really think that I had great prudence in avoiding a
present return of his professions; which I did by saying, "It has always been
my constant rule, and always shall be, Sir, never to listen to any one on this
subject, till I have my uncle's sanction for so doing; it is to him therefore
you must apply." -- "By your referring me to Sir Harry, madam (replied he) I
flatter myself that if I have his permission for the attempt, I may one day
inspire you with sentiments of tenderness." -- Was not that pretty forward my
dear? -- However I was determined to punish him for his presumption; therefore
with all the consequence I could then assume, I replied, "You have drawn, Sir,
a conclusion in your own favor which might as easily be turned to your
disadvantage; I mean, that you might take my reference of you to my uncle for
an absolute denial; as I think, you may be pretty well convinced, that he will
never be induced to give you his consent." -- "I understand you, Madam, said
he, the difference of our fortunes and expectations; but I have too good an
opinion of your generosity to think that alone could influence you, whatever it
might Sir Harry; for which reason I rather chose to apply to you first, being
convinced that were I to meet with encouragement from you, he would never
withhold his, in a point where your happiness was so nearly concerned." My
answer to this came of course, "Your only way, Sir, to gain mine is, to say no
more on this subject, till after your application to him; however of this you
may be assured, that as I am almost convinced he will never interpose in an
affair of this kind, so have I too much honor to give any person a double
trouble where one will suffice." Was this saying too much? -- However, whether
it was or not, be understood my meaning well; for kissing my hand with the
greatest tenderness, "My kindest AEmily," burst spontaneously from his lips;
and so he left me to follow my instructions with regard to my uncle. -- And now
my friend, I ask your advice how to act, in case he should oppose my wishes: as
be that as it may, I am sure it will be impossible to hide the movements of my
heart from him, who has gained so entire possession of it; but in your council,
talk not of impossibilities; and if you have never felt the influence of a
tender partiality, considering the difficulty of erasing one when it is firmly
rooted in the heart. -- Adieu, strain every power to assist with your advice,

Your dearest friend, AE. SUMMERS.

AEMILY to MARIA.
Albermarle-Street.
OH! my Maria give me joy; I am happy, happy beyond expression; he is mine,
fast as the powers of love and promise can ensure him; -- oh, the extatic
minute when, after long restraint the hearts of lovers congenial spring to meet
each other! -- Sir Harry yesterday informed me, that he had received proposals
from Mr. Martin, "of what nature (added he with a smile) I believe you are not
ignorant; I therefore desire to know of you what answer I am to give him:" --
"Your prudence, Sir, (said I) will always direct you to what is best." --
"That Is not the case (replied he) put prudence out of the question, then tell
me, could you love him as a wife? -- if you can, he is yours; and though your
fortunes will not be large enough to supply the luxurious superfluities of
life, it shall be made sufficient to render two worthy people happy; and you
still may have something to spare for the necessities of a deserving friend, or
a pitiable object; and in this life what more can be desired?" In short, in the
afternoon I received a visit from Mr. Martin, and my uncle joining our hands,
expressed his approbation of the union; at the same time, with a benignant
smile, imploring Heaven to shower down prosperity upon our heads. I was thus,
you see, obliged to promise, that in due time I would, by completing Martin's
^appiness, render my own so too. -- Would you were here to share in my felicity
(...) -- for at present my joy is almost too great to bear with moderation.
Adieu; a tumultuous heart, ill can furnish matter for a long epistle; excuse
therefore any more from

Your overjoyed, AE. SUMMERS.

Though these letters are thus placed in immediate succession, that the thread
of the narrative might not be interrupted, the reader will no doubt observe,
that some time intervened between the writing of each.

CHAP. IX.
Mighty Pan! with tender care
View this swain and virgin fair;
May they ever thus impart
Just return of heart for heart!
May the pledges of their bliss
Climb their knees to share the kiss!
May their steady blooming youth,
While they tread the paths of truth,
Virtues catch from either side,
From the bridegroom and the bride!
Lloyd's ARCADIA, a Dramatic Pastoral.
MARIA to AEMILY.
INDEED, indeed, my dearest AEmily, there is no bearing this: you are positively
a horrid provoking girl: one minute you ask my advice, and the next comes a
letter, informing me that you have followed your own inclination, without
waiting for my counsel: thus are all the fine things, which I had treasured up
to persuade you to conquer your passion, thrown away, and rendered useless, by
your precipitate conduct. Being determined to give you some assistance, as I
cannot address myself to you after the manner I at first intended, I will
endeavor to lay you down some rules for the married state, which I hope will
not be totally useless.

Seriously then, as my AEmily has always hitherto dignified me with the name of
Friend, I should ill deserve that title, were I to be silent at a time when all
her acquaintances will soon be pouring in their congratulations, on what may
justly be called, the most important event of our life. At a time like this,
when your heart is replete with joy, I am afraid you will scarce have leisure
to attend a tedious homily of grave sentiments. Sincerity is the truest test of
friendship, and, though uncourtly, when well meant claims a favorable
reception: the physician who administers medicines which may be disagreeable,
and the surgeon who probes a wound, as they act upon salutary principles, ought
rather to be thanked than blamed, for the essential pains their endeavors
occasion.

First then let me entreat you to consider seriously the solemn nature of the
engagement into which you are going to enter; and as you have often, to feed a
foolish vanity, spent whole days in choice of a new gown, or a set of ^ibbands;
how much more attentively should you consider that general conduct, which is to
ensure your happiness, or misery!

But as a preacher in petticoats is intolerable, though my pappa says there are
many old women mount pulpits, I shall not endeavor to prejudice you against
the matrimonial voyage you are about to take, by picturing the many hazards and
perils which often attend it. -- Be neat in apparel, cordial in behavior, slow
to find, and ready to forgive, faults; -- cautious of hearing that dangerous
flattery beauty like yours may produce; follow fashion, without worshipping so
vain an idol; indulge agreeable, harmless society; preserve natural charms, by
a regular life, without paltry aids of art; support spirit according to your
income, with that commendable economy which casts at distance parsimonious
penury; -- in short, my dear AEmily, strive to make home agreeable, and with
the accomplishments you are mistress of, if your husband wanders, he must be
the most ungrateful, insensible, or vicious wretch living.

That I may not interrupt that pleasing flow of ideas, and that lovely prospect
of expectation, may they prove real and permanent, which now brighten your
mind! Allow me to hasten a conclusion, and to wish that some remembrance of me
may ever find some corner in my dear Emmy's delicate affection.

Yours, in all degrees of sincere cordiality, MARIA HARTRY.

MARIA to AEMILY
Oak-Hall.
YOU cannot imagine, my dearest AEmily, how much your last letter This letter
does not appear.
has surprised me; nor are you so explicit as I could wish: you only tell me,
that an unexpected business requires your uncle's immediate attendance in
Ireland, and that he has desired you to postpone your marriage till after his
return; thus leaving me to guess at all the other circumstances: however, I
hope that his business, whatever it be, will not detain him long; and if so, I
will fairly confess, that I am not sorry for it, for, two reasons; because to
learn how to set a just value on prosperity, we should feel the frowns of
disappointment; so this slight misfortune will inure you to the patient
toleration of greater, should they ever arrive: the other cause of my joy at
this event is, that it will give me the pleasure of your company, as I must
insist on having you at Oak Hall during your uncle's absence: bring Mr. Martin
with you, and let us make a p^rtie (...); who the fourth person is to be, I
will inform you when I can do it in person. -- Oh! my AEmily, I have much to
say to you, more than I can possibly crowd into the limits of this letter: I
will therefore make no other apolgy for leaving you in some doubt, than my
eager desire of seeing you with all convenient speed, Come soon, I request, and
glad the heart of

Yours, most affectionately, MARIA HARTRY.

CHAP. X.
IN consequence of the foregoing Letter, AEmily ^^on set out for Oak-Hall;
though not without some small regret, as Mr. Martin's attendance at Westminster
necessarily prevented him from accompanying her; but as Maria will now begin to
make ^o small figure in this history, it might he right to give my readers some
further account of this young lady, as well as of her parents: in order to do
which properly, I must begin at an earlier period than that to which I have
reduced my story.

Sir Thomas Hartry was a baronnet possessed of a large estate in the country
where he resided; which he inherited from a long train of ancestors, who were
all rendered remarkable by their extreme avarice: and though he did not possess
this shocking contraction of heart in so great a degree, still he did not
totally degenerate from the maxim of his illustrious forefathers. "Get money,"
was his favorite principle; and indeed this seemed to be the aim of all his
actions; notwithstanding which, he was by no means totally callous to the
feelings of humanity; -- for, what was most extraordinary, he could feel for
the distresses of others; though he seemed deaf to almost the common calls of
necessity for himself. Ever constant to his favorite notions, he married lady
Hartry for two reasons; the one, because she had ten thousand pounds; the
other, in hopes of having an heir to his estate: and as this was almost his
ultimate wish, one would imagine he must be completely happy, to find himself
indulged with such a blessing, about a year after his marriage; and such a one
who as he grew up, became the admiration of the whole country, for his sense
and good nature; in short he seemed entirely clear from his father's faults,
and to inherit the virtues only of both his parents; yet such is the
unaccountable caprice of human nature, that though he was so deserving a son,
as almost to exceed description, he never was a favorite with his father; who,
notwithstanding, could assign no reason for his dislike. Charles (that was his
name) beheld it with concern, and endeavored to gain his affections by his
assiduity; but this, instead of being taken in the favorable light, served
only to heighten his father's disgust: in short, nothing could please him, and
he at last drove him, by a course of ill usage, at the age of eighteen, to seek
that happiness among his nearest relations. But behold the amazing caprice of
mankind! who never knew how to set a just value on a jewel till it is gone; that
we cannot know how much we love, or what it is to want a friend till we have
lost him was never more strongly verified that in this instance of Sir Thomas
Hartry; who till this moment, never was aware of the real affection which he
had for his son; his virtues now appeared with double force to the afflicted
father, who in vain used all possible means to recover him; and when be found
that he was gone for even, all the tender parent rising into his eyes, quite
absorbed the man; and he for some time gave way to that soft sorrow which
overpowered his breast, and which he could not suppress.

So severe a blow had nearly been too much for Lady Hartry, who almost doated
on her son, regarding him with those innate feelings which mothers only can be
truly judges of. Time, however that great restorer of all things, in some
measure alleviated the grief of both Sir Thomas and his lady; the former of
whom, with the loss of his son, seemed totally to have abandoned his passion
for money, and determined to make up in kindness what the son had wanted, to
his daughter Maria, who being ten years old when the above affair happened,
could not, of course be supposed to feel much affliction for the loss of her
brother: -- all that she could, she did. -- As she might now be reckoned an
only child, no trouble, no expense, was spared in the education of this darling
of the family; and her fond parents were overjoyed to find their trouble and
attention so well repaid, as to behold her, at the age of eighteen, possessed
of every natural as well as acquired perfection, necessary to complete the
accomplished lady: her person was handsome to excess, rather short than
otherwise; her carriage was genteel and easy without affectation; Her breath
disclosed the sweets of spring
And if for summer you would seek,
'Twas painted in her eye, her cheek.
The goodness of her understanding has been made sufficiently apparent to the
reader by her letter, before inserted, to AEmily on the subject of her
marriage. So happy in natural and acquired perfections, no wonder she was the
delight of her parents, and the admiration of all who knew her.

CHAP. XI.
-- But come what sorrow can,
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
That one short minute gives me, in her sight.
ROMEO and JULIET.
MARIA Hartry was proposed as a just pattern for all the young ladies in the
country. No young man could see her without loving; nor was there any father
but what courted, and would have been proud of her alliance. Yet, amidst the
many admirers that she gained, the many compliments which were paid her, and
though surrounded by the whole artillery of love; no gallant could yet boast of
having received more encouragement from her than was becoming an acquaintance,
for as such only did she regard all who had offered her their services:
notwithstanding which, as I profess myself to be a faithful historian, I must
confess, that she could not call her heart her own, it having long since, in
her private determination, been bestowed on a neighboring gentleman, whose
name was Melvill; though he was ignorant of his good fortune in the possession
of so inestimable a treasure; not that he was blind to the united charms of
person and understanding, which so apparently shone forth in Maria, but because
his diffidence prevented him from assuring himself of that success, which only
depended on his asking her the question.

I will not pay so bad a compliment to that young gentleman's understanding as
to say, he was the handsomest man nature ever formed; let it suffice to assure
my readers, that she had been far from deficient in adorning him with personal
qualifications, to which his politeness gave an additional lus^re; his father
dying whilst he was yet young, left him heir to a very large estate; on this
proviso, that he should not come into the possession thereof, till he attained
the age of twenty-five years: a right which though not allowed of, either by
nature or justice, many parents thus assume, by prolonging the minority of
their children. As he lived with his guardian, in the neighborhood of Sir
Thomas Hartry, he of course was intimate with that gentleman, and from his
frequent visits at Oak-hall, had drank deep of the delicious poison of love,
before he knew by what name of style his regard; recollection of the pleasure
which he had always found in Maria's company, too soon, alas! convinced him of
the true reason, and he several times determined to inform her thereof; but
such is the modesty attendant on unfeigned love, that notwithstanding the
various opportunities he had, his fear overcame his regard, and prevented his
beginning the only subject on which he wished to talk; but it is not the tongue
alone, that can declare our passion; no, our eyes pronounce it, and every
action speaks; what though he never told her that he loved, his whole behavior
showed it; it was apparent to every eye; nor could Maria any longer be blind,
to what she so earnestly wished to be true.

She saw it with pleasure; and thus Melvill had a more powerful advocate in her
breast, than he even dared to hope: thus situated, she daily expected a
declaration, and as often was disappointed; for though her behavior gave him
every encouragement the nature of their connection would admit of, he could not
so far overcome the natural timid respect of his soul. Under these almost
insupportable torments, his health, from inward grief, sensibly declined; his
life became burdensome and tedious; he never was easy one minute when out of
her presence, and at the same time, was racked with the most tormenting fears
of loosing her forever: In this unhappy state did he for some time live, till
no longer able to endure it, he determined to acquaint her with his inviolable
attachment, and hope the best. When we have formed any favorite scheme, it is
an easy matter of putting it into execution; thus as Melvill had formed a
design on the success of which, all the happiness of his future life depended,
he burnt with the most eager impatience to be delivered from so painful an
uncertainty; and as very few days passed in which he was not at Oak-hall, he
soon found the so much wished for opportunity.

One very warm day, after having dined there, Maria proposed a walk in the
grove, which her parents immediately assented to, saying that they would follow
her; thus luckily leaving our young couple together at which Maria was not a
little pleased. Melvill having previously informed her, that when a proper time
offered, he could wish to have some conversation with her; therefore joyfully
leaving her parents to follow them, she set out with Melvill, almost dying with
curiosity to know what he had to communicate.

She wished it might be what she suspected; though at the same time she was not
totally devoid of fear, lest it should, not being provided with a suitable
answer thereto: from these considerations therefore, her mind was far from
being the most tranquil. Conscious of his intentions, Melvill was not in a very
enviable situation, and trembled so violently, that had she not been as much
agitated, it could never have escaped her notice: however, by both being
equally concerned, they neither of them perceived it in the other, and thus
walked without uttering a syllable, till they arrived at a bench in the grove,
where they sat down, both still preserving the exactest silence: many attempts,
indeed, to speak, were made on both sides, but nothing more than -- Sir -- and
Madam -- I beg your pardon -- I thought you spoke -- and such incoherent
sentences passed, till alter some hesitation, Maria took courage enough to ask,
what business Mr. Melvill could have with her? to which he returned no answer,
and put her to the painful necessity of repeating the question; when no longer
able to restrain his passion, he dropped on one knee, and seizing her hand cried,
"Can you lovely Maria, even appear to be ignorant of what I have to say? -- Who
can be permitted to converse with you, without involuntary loving you? -- Can
you be mistress of those charms and wonder at my passion? -- Yes, ^earest
angel, I love you with the most ardent affection; but could I have divined,
that a declaration thereof would have so far offended you (as by your
countenance I see you now are) my lips for ever should have been closed, and I
would have carried the secret to my early grave. What vanity could induce me to
hope your kind notice, with so small a share of attraction and merit to
recommend me? -- But do not, dear Maria, do not hate me; though you cannot
love, do not despise me." -- "Despise you! -- no, Mr. Melvill, heaven forbid I
should despise any one! -- But pray, Sir, rise: -- you distress me -- indeed
you do." -- "I did not mean it, replied he, I would sooner die, than give you
one moment's uneasiness: -- but will you then thus reject me for ever? -- Oh!
do not look with such chilling indifference: allow me to hope, without
trespassing the bounds of delicacy, one favorable expression." -- "What would
you have me say?" -- "Only that I am not quite indifferent to you, not*
hateful"! -- "You are, indeed, Sir, replied she, sighing) far from it." -- "And
is it possible, returned Melvill that Maria can think tenderly of me.?" --
"Soft, no more: here are my father and mother." -- "But may I then be
permitted, says the impatient lover, to impart my further sentiments by letter?
-- "Any thing, if you will now be silent: another time I Will hear you or from
you."

The arrival of Sir Thomas and Lady Hartry put an end to the conversation for
this time. The discourse turned on different topics, and our young couple
parted much better pleased with each other than when they met; Maria, to find
that she had no placed her affections on a senseless and unworthy object; and
Melvill, that he had gained a kind of permission to write to her, which he
determined to do immediately on his return home.

CHAP. XII.
To mourn a mischief that is past and gone,
Is the next way to draw new mischief on;
The robbed that smiles, steals something from the thief,
He robs himself, that spends a bootless grief.
OTHELLO
BEFORE I proceed any farther, I must beg leave to introduce to my readers,
some new acquaintances I mean the family of Mr. Howard, Melvill's guardian;
which indeed was not large, as it consisted only of himself, his daughter
Charlotte, and his ward. -- This gentleman had formerly been in a capital
business in London; during which time, he had contracted an intimacy with
Melvill's father; who, from his candor and just dealing, conceived so good an
opinion of him, as at his death to appoint him sole guardian of his son.

On the loss of his wife, he retired with his daughter, who was then an infant,
to the small estate where he now resided to enjoy the down hill of his life,
far from the noisy bustling of that world, the major part of which he was
convinced, made fraud their only study, and money their almost sole pursuit:
although his rank in life was not equal to Sir Thomas Hartry, nevertheless a
great intimacy subsisted between the two families; and Charles Hartry and
Charlotte being play fellows when young, conceived for each other a cordial and
unfeigned friendship, which as they grew up, ripening into mutual love, in
their inadvertent youth they readily gave way to it; but when the pleasing
fondness in some measure was subsided in a settled passion, and reason had
recovered her lost sway, Charles began seriously to consider, that on account
of their inequality of (...) it would be impossible ever to make his father
agree to the match: and as he had too much real love for poor Charlotte, to
think of involving her in certain distress, by a clandestine marriage, he had
no other resource left, than the aforementioned manner of leaving Oak-Hall;
flattering himself, that absence would efface the remembrance of what he dared
not cherish in his breast; nor would he venture to take leave of the darling of
his heart, lest her presence and arguments should shake the firm resolve which
he had made. After his departure, and not till then, would he inform her of his
reasons for this step, which he ^id by letter; and although she law the
justness and propriety thereof, in their full force, his absence could not fail
of being a heavy cause of grief to her; however as resignation was the only
medicine which could restore her peace, she patiently submitted to her
misfortunes; though being destitute of a friend, to whom she might relate the
story of her woe, she could not forbear sometimes in private, paying to his
memory the tribute of a tear; till as Maria grew up, they formed an intimacy,
which from a similarity of sentiments, was soon converted into friendship; and
Charlotte had the satisfaction of (...) her heart of the load under which it
labored, to that person from whom she was sure to meet the generous return of
compassion: nor was her confidence misplaced; Maria saw, and pitied her
misfortunes; and by being frequently with her, kindly endeavored to dispel
that gloom which hung over (...) countenance, while alone. Melvill therefore
knowing the friendly connection which subsisted between them, determined through
Charlotte's mean's, to get a letter conveyed to Maria; and accordingly, on his
return to Mr. Howard's, informed her of what, from his behavior, she must have
been blind not to have perceived before; at the same time desiring her
assistance therein, knowing what it was to love, and pitying the pangs of
ba^r'd affections, she promised him all the help in her power; and as an
earnest of future services, to convey a letter the next morning to Oak-Hall,
upon which he immediately wrote as follows:

To Miss HARTRY.
Dear Madam,
IN what words shall I express my sorrow, for the pain that my yesterday's
behavior gave you? If I then said any thing to incur your displeasure, or
really offend you, I hope you will have goodness enough to attribute it to the
violence of a passion, which no time can alter or abate: and consider, that I
declared it to you, before I could have an opportunity to ^eigh the
consequences of such behavior, that my mind was so replete with the idea of
your perfections, I was not master of myself; that the time, the opportunity,
all conspired to hurry me on to that act, by which I have incurred your
displeasure. If you will generously recollect all these, I flatter myself your
goodness of heart is such, that you will readily forgive me: for be assured,
that could I have foreseen any displeasure, or painful anxiety, on your side,
nothing should have forced the painful secret from me. However, since I have
once had the presumption to entertain a thought of you, give me leave again to
throw myself at your feet, and declare what I hope you will believe me sincere
in, that I love you almost to distraction. -- Oh! dearest Maria, if you cannot
regard me with a favorable eye, at least pity the sufferings of

Your devoted admirer, HENRY MELVILL.


The above letter Charlotte dispatched under a cover to her friend, and Melvill
waited the return of the messenger with the greatest anxiety; however, thinking
him unusually tedious (for lovers ever run before the clock) in order to amuse
himself, he took up his favorite author The GUARDIAN
, when the following lines immediately caught his eye, which he thought, so
applicable to himself, that he could not bear repeating them two or three times
aloud: Blessed be the man, his memory at least,
Who found the art thus to unfold his breast;
And taught succeeding times an easy way,
Their secret thoughts by letters to convey:
To baff^le absence, and secure delight,
Which, till that time was limited to sight:
The parting farewell spoke the last adieu;
The lessening distance past, then loss of view;
The friend was gone, which some kind moments gave,
And absence separated like the grave.


CHAP. XIII.
-- If I were now to die,
'Twere now to be most happy; for I fear,
My soul has her content so absolute,
That not another comfort, like to this,
Succeeds in unknown fate.
OTHELLO.
MELVILL was amusing himself after the manner mentioned at the conclusion of my
last chapter, when Charlotte entered the room with a letter, which having given
him, she smiling, retired; but the joy that he had conceived, at the receipt of
an epistle from Maria, was quickly converted into the most poignant grief,
when, on opening it, he read only the following words:

"Sir,
"Since I last saw you, an affair has happened, of which I cannot conveniently
inform you by letter. If you have the regard which you profess for me, you will
find some immediate opportunity of seeing

The afflicted MARIA HARTRY."


On reading this extraordinary note, our hero was little better than one mad:
his mind was agitated with the most perplexing doubts and fears; and in this
agony did he set out for Oak-hall, without giving any answer to the repeated
questions of Miss Howard, who had no small reason to be surprised at his
behavior; nor indeed could she form any conjecture of the cause, 'till, just
as he was sitting out, throwing her Maria's note, he cried, "Madam, read that;
-- then wonder, if you can, that I am distracted."

On his arrival at Sir Thomas Hartry's, he found that both he and his lady were
out, but that Maria had walked into the grove; thither he hastened with all the
impetuosity of a lover, and found her on the same bench, where but the
preceding day he had disclosed his love; he found her, it is true; -- but, oh
heart piercing sight! with one hand she was supporting her head, and with the
other, she wiped away the tears, which fell in torrents from her lovely eyes.
She was so lost in thought, that he got pretty near before she perceived him;
but when the rustling of the leaves drew her attention that way, starting up,
with eager transports, she cried, "Oh! Mr. Melvill, is it you? I am glad you
are come." -- Then smiling through her tears, she added, "Have I not
overstepp'd the bounds of modesty, in thus desiring to see you?" -- "Tell me,
my dear Maria (said he) tell me, what is it that affects you, inform me, I
beseech you, what can be the cause of that uneasiness which I see so strongly
printed on your countenance?" -- "You were no sooner (answered she) departed
yesterday, than my father informed me, that he was just come from Sir Toby
Clunch, who had been to make a proposal for an alliance of the two families, by
his son's marriage with me; and ^o my sorrow, he was so thoroughly resolved
upon it, that it was in vain that I pleaded my dislike to Mr. Clunch; he who
has hitherto been so indulgent a parent, nor ever offered to force my
inclinations in an affair of this nature, has insisted on my receiving this
gentleman as one who is to be my husband; and I am ordered this afternoon to
prepare for an interview." -- "And can you! can my Maria (said Melvill) thus
cruelly resolve to abandon me forever, just when I have had resolution enough
to declare my love?" -- "You know (said she) it is my father's order; and you
must likewise know the inevitable consequence of disobedience from a man of his
violent temper." -- "And was this your business with me, Madam? -- but I will
not complain; for since I am indifferent to Miss Hartry, it matters not what
becomes of me: -- that you may forever be happy," was all that he could answer;
and was just going to quit the place, when Maria recalled him, by saying with a
tone of voice, that astonished him, "although Mr. Melvil may hereafter despise
me, for my ingenuity, in so readily acknowledging my passion; nevertheless I
can on no consideration, be hypocrite enough to disguise the real sentiments of
my heart; what that dictates my mouth must utter, nor can I to gain the world,
be guilty of the least deceit; no, Sir be assured that I will never give my
hand to any one but you, even at the altar, should they drag me there; -- I
will there assert my right of nature as a freeborn Christian, nor give my hand
to any one when my heart is already disposed of to another." -- On hearing
this, Melvill stood like one thunderstruck or petrified; at last taking her
hand, with an inexpressible tenderness, he said, "Despise you! -- no my dear
Maria; I honor, I revere you for your ingenuous generosity of sentiment: --
amiable girl! -- that could at once throw aside ^he veil of dissimulation, her
sex so often affect, and thus openly confess her regard; -- oh, my dear angel
you are too good, I can never deserve i^." -- "Indeed you do (interrupted she)
and much more; but at present let us consider of the most probable means to
extricate ourselves from this dilemma; which the precipitate unkindness of a
positive parent, has thrown us into." --

After some conversation on the subject, it was agreed, that she should inform
Mr. Clunch of her dislike to him; and if that would not do, even of her
preposession in favor of another; to persuade him to discontinue his visits;
and, having exchanged vows of mutual (...) they parted; she, to prepare for the
reception of a man whom she detested, and he to relate all that had passed to
Charlotte, which he did immediately on his return home. But before I proceed,
it may not be improper to give my readers (...) me sketch of Mr. Clunch's
family and character.

CHAP. XIV.
-- I am much sorry, Sir,
You put me to forget a lady's manners
By being so verbal: and learn now for all
That I who know my heart, do here pronounce
By the very truth of it, I care not for you:
And am so near the lack of charity
T'accuse myself I hate you: which I had rather
You felt, than make my boast.
CYMBELINE.
MR. Clunch was the sole heir of Sir Toby Clunch, who having lost his wife in
childbed of this son, grew so immoderately fond of him as never to suffer him
out of his sight; so that we may reasonably suppose the education that he gave
him was not the most refined; indeed his only concern was, to make him master
of hunting, shooting, and other such rustic qualifications; in which he
succeeded so happily, as to have him reckoned at the age of twenty-five, the
time of this proposal, the completest sportsman in the country; that is, he
would fight a main of cocks, drive a set of horses, ride a fox chase, drink his
bottle, or shoot flying, with any man ^n the three kingdoms for five hundred
guineas, play or pay; and in these five things consisted all his excellence;
sweet recommendations! to a girl of Maria's delicate feelings: his father had
likewise not forgot to instill some of his favorite principles into him; such
as, "Children have not, or ought not to have, any will of their own; -- that
all their actions tend to one great end, -- obedience," and many others equally
arbitrary and ridiculous. -- When Sir Toby therefore mentioned this match to
him, all the answer he made to it was, -- "Why, ay, I Will marry her, if you
think it proper; otherwise, I am very well as I am, -- howsomever, I Am glad
you have appointed this afternoon for the meeting, because I am engaged to hunt
tomorrow with neighbor Trottall." --

Such was the gentleman who arrived at Oak-Hall to pay his addresses to the
loveliest of her sex; and to whose beauty her anxiety and concern gave an
additional luster: After a little general conversation, the young couple were
left alone, and some time elapsed before one word was spoke on either side, Mr.
Clunch being very busy in tying some kno^s in ^he lash of his whip; however
recollecting himself, he approached nearer to Maria, and made the following
elegant speech.

"I suppose Miss, you know my business here; -- my father has ordered me to
wait on you; for as he says, we are to be married, he thinks it proper we
should be a little acquainted beforehand; though for my own part, I don't see
the necessity for it; but it seems it is the way of your great folks; and since
I am here, I Will tell you a piece of my mind -- look ye, Miss, I am a man of few
words. -- I don't love your high-flown speeches, because I don't understand
them, if you can like me for a husband -- I Am your man: but what do I say --
if? for your father says you must, and that is enough." -- A great deal more of
the same sort did Maria suffer him to run on, before she interrupted him; which
she at length did, though in the gentelest terms possible, left he should fly
into a passion, and thereby rouse her father, whom she knew to be not far off;
-- with the most persuasive eloquence "she begged him not to importane her any
longer on the subject, for that she could never think of him for an husband,
that she should always be proud to respect him as an acquaintance; but found
herself unequal to the task of loving him with the tenderness of a wife."

Rough as the surrounding woods, all the answer this unfeeling brute returned
to her remonstrances, was, "why, for the matter of that, I cannot help it -- I
believe there will be but little love lost between us; nor should I ever have
troubled my head about loving you, but that my father has expressly said, I
shall marry you; and yours says the same." -- "I am sure he could not so far
have forgot himself," replied Maria. -- "Nay, but he did, answered the squire,
and marry me you must; unless you have a mind to be a disobedient girl: -- but
as I am obliged to ^e out early tomorrow, I will take my leave of you; so
Miss, I wish you a good night: -- I shall acquaint Sir Thomas of your
behavior, I assure you; -- your servant. -- So saying, he fallied out in quest
of her father, to whom he related all that had passed, not without some
favorable additions on his own side.

When Maria found herself alone, bursting into tears, with uplifted hands, she
exclaimed, -- "And is it possible, my father can seriously think of marrying me
to such a wretch? -- a brute, devoid of every sense of feeling! -- " Your
father says you SHALL marry me, those were his words: -- Sure no such unjust
resolve ever could escape his lips. -- Would he, who hitherto has let my
inclinations be as free as air, for the sake of a little pelf, tie me to a
wretch whom my soul detests, on whom I can never look but with abhorrence? --
SHALL marry me! -- Surely, if the sin of disobedience admits of palliation, it
is where parents cruelly usurp an authority, by endeavoring to force the
hearts of their children; and which no situation in life, however elevated or
debased, can give them a just right to. -- Oh! Melvill, you have my heart, and
on you alone will I bestow my hand."

Thus was the lovely Maria bewailing her misfortunes, when the door opened, and
presented her father, with a much more angry look than she had ever seen him
wear before: -- "Little did I think Maria, said he, on entering, that I should
ever have so much occasion to be dissatisfied with you, what is the reason that
you do not behave even with common civility to the man whom I have fixed upon
for your husband?" -- "I did indeed Sir, said she behave respectfully to him;
Oh Sir! -- on my knees, let me entreat you by all the tender ties of nature, to
remember, that equality and sympathy of feelings in marriage, is the only
probable method to ensure felicity; do not make your only child unhappy, by
dooming her to receive the churlish addresses of that odious man. -- Man, do I
call him? he is not worthy the name; a brute, that," -- "This to my face,
interrupted Sir Thomas, take care, take care what you say; I have always been a
kind, indulgent father to you, can forgive any thing but obstinate
disobedience. -- Make you unhappy! -- why, have not I provided an husband for
you? a rich man! -- don't I do all in my power to make you happy? -- and now
fore^ooth, you say you don't like him; what, I suppose you want a frenchified
beau, full of flattery and fashion, a thing made by tailors and barbers; go,
go, you're a silly girl, and don't know what you like; -- besides, what right
have you to like? -- it is I must like. Look ye, Maria, if you don't alter your
behavior to Mr. Clunch, I Will I Will -- but I Am in a passion, and will not make any
resolution; however, don't provoke me, beware of the consequences, that is all,
beware of the consequences." -- So saying he flung her from him, with all the
heat of passion, on the ground, where she lay hardly sensible, and presented a
spectacle sufficient to have touched the most obdurate heart: Sir Thomas was
leaving her in this condition, when lady Hartry entered the room, brought
thither by the elevation of her husband's voice; as soon as Maria saw her
mother, immediately rising up, she desired her to intercede for her with Sir,
Thomas, whom she said, she had very unwillingly disobliged, by expressing her
reluctance at receiving the visits of Mr. Clunch, as of one who was to be her
husband and earnestly begged her to dissuade him from ^he odious match on which
he had set his heart. -- As nothing out of the common course of nature can be
of any long continuance, so Sir Thomas's passion soon began to subside, and
give way to the powerful conductress of all our actions, reason; nor was he
long able to withstand the well timed arguments of a sensible wife, joined to
the more powerful solicitations of an amiable daughter, but kissing Maria, told
her he had been too hasty, and saw his error, bid her be a good girl, and
endeavor to like Mr. Clunch; and concluded with an assurance of doing every
thing in his power to make her happy. -- Thus this quarrel ended, and in an
hour not only seemed but really was forgot, by all the parties, except the
heroine of the piece, whose rest that night was not a little disturbed, by the
concern she felt for her father's obstinacy, in thus persisting in a match,
which she never could or would agree to.

CHAP. XV.
What torments exceeding, what joys are above,
The pains and the pleasures that wait upon love?

AS none of the family at Oak-Hall were acquainted with Melvill's passion, he
continued his visits there as usual, and in a few days had the happiness of
being an hour with his Maria, who informed him o^ all the particulars of the
scene related in the last chapter. The result of their conference was, that
Maria should discover the history of their passion to her mother, and beg her
kind assistance, in endeavoring to persuade Sir Thomas to agree to their
marriage; accordingly she soon found an opportunity of relating the affair to
Lady Hartry, which she did with the most candid ingenuity, without concealing a
single circumstance; at the same time entreating her, as she valued her
happiness and peace of mind, to persuade Sir Thomas not to attempt to force her
inclinations, and ^ay her under the severe task of disobedience to a parent's
command. This good woman was so well pleased at her daughter's sincerity, that
she wanted but little persuasion to do what she was desired, and promised, that
the first opportunity she had, she would use all the rhetoric she was mistress
of, to persude her husband to relinquish all thoughts of Mr. Clunch.

The next time they were alone, he luckily opened the subject, by saying," I
cannot imagine what reason that girl can have, for so strongly objecting to
marrying the person whom my prudence has selected, as one fit to be her
husband; a young man of person, family and fortune, who demands no money till
after my death too; a plaguing, provoking little jade; when I have found a
suitable match for her, in all respects, she forsooth, must object to it, by
saying, She cannot love him, but she shall have him I Am determined, or I Will
never give her a farthing." -- As lady Hartry had resolved not to mention a
word of Melvill, lest he should imagine, as ^e sometimes would, that she was
joined in a plot against him; -- she only interrupted him, by gently saying,
"Nay* "now my dear, you are indeed too violent; consider that we can never
account for natural antipathies of our own, to particular people, (...) less
for these of others; she is young and may hereafter know better; but let me
entreat you, as she is so strongly resolved against the match, to think no more
of it. Don't Sir Thomas, make your girl unhappy." -- But all this signified
nothing; he had formed a resolution, and it was not in the power of words to
make him alter it; he was resolutely determined not to give up the point,
thorefore ending were he began, "that if she would not marry Clunch, he would
disinherit her, he left the room.

Maria had been waiting to be informed of her doom from her mother, and though
when she saw Sir Thomas, she thought she could too plainly read it in his
countenance; still as uncertainty, even in misery, is painful, she was willing
to be convinced of her wretchedness; and accordingly hastened to lady Hartry,
whom she found in tears, and who, after having endeavored in some measure to
comfort her, informed her circumstantially of all that had passed; she for some
time, heard her with great seeming patience, and finding she had done speaking,
clasping her hand, immediately exclaimed with great energy, -- "and does he
still thus cruelly persist in his resolve? then am I doomed for ever to be
miserable, as no power on earth shall ever force me to agree to it." -- Lady
Hartry endeavored all in her power to argue Maria into temperature; and, as
eloquence is to reason down the fever of the blood, and sooth with words the
tumult of the soul, so it never was better applied than at present; for she in
a short time cooly listened to her mother's advice, which was to inform Melvill
of what had passed, and give him leave to make open proposals to her father,
who, added she, when he finds your affection fixed on another object, may
perhaps give his consent to that, which it will not be in his power to
prevent." -- Maria accordingly, the next morning, wrote a letter to Melvill,
informing him of what the reader has before heard, and concluded it in these
words, "Since my father has thought proper to throw off the indulgence which
ought to accompany that name, you have my free consent, to make whatever
proposals to him your love dictates." -- His regard for her, must indeed have
been very trifling, not to have understood her meaning, which he did in its
full force, and accordingly waited on Sir Thomas that very day; and after the
first civilities were over, opened to him the occasion of his visit; who, as it
was quite unexpected, did not attempt to interrupt him in his discourse; but
when he had finished, made the following r^^ly. -- "I shall always esteem Mr.
Melvill, as a friend and neighbor; but can never think of him for a son
in-law; -- I have passed my word to another gentleman; had I not I could never
listen to your proposals. -- Consider, Sir, that by your late father's will,
you are not of age, nor will be these three years; you can therefore make no
settlement on Maria, except her own fortune, which a beggar can equally do; and
would you have me give my only daughter to a beggar? for such in fact it would
be: and as for trusting to your love for three years hence would be nothing at
all, possession soon cloys; for what man rises from a feast with that keen
appetite with which he first (...) down?" -- "I am sorry, very sorry, Sir, said
Melvill, to find you have so bad an opinion of me; but even allowing my love
for your daughter should abate, I say, Sir, allowing your cruel, unjust
suspicion to prove true, love for myself would engage me to fulfill my
promises, -- my honor, Sir." -- Honor, cried Sir Thomas, is not what it was;
I remember when, as it ought, it was as sacred as a man's bond, and I should
have thought myself as secure from the one as the other; but that time is past,
and I very much fear, never to be recalled. -- Honor is the offspring of ^air
truth and honesty, yet to what base, what scandalous uses do we see it
perverted? -- Does a man want to seduce an innocent girl, honor's his cry,
honor will oblige him to marry her; -- and thus, while he professes a most
noble, glorious virtue, does he no^ commit the most abandoned acts of
wickedness! -- It is now so shamefully corrupted, that it saves but for a
gilded bait ^o catch unwary fools; I am sorry to say it, but who trusts to the
bare prospect of a man's honor, trusts too often to a broken staff: (...) be
it from me to arraign yours. -- No Sir, I believe you may have a strict sense
(...), I hope you have; if so, I am glad of it; but still I cannot think of you
for my daughter, don't let me hear any more of it; I beg you will not rob me of
an agreeable acquaintance, by laying me under the necessity of forbidding you
my house." -- Melvill found the truth of all he said so strong, that he could
make no answer to i^; and Sir Thomas was leaving the room, when he caught him
by the hand, crying, in the most supplicating tone, "Do not, dear Sir, make
your amiable daughter unhappy by a refusal," -- "Unhappy! re-echoed Sir Thomas,
why you have not sure? -- You cannot so far have prevailed upon her, that she
has agreed to this proposal; but I Will hear it from her own mouth." So saying he
fallied out in quest of the unfortunate Maria, who luckily was not to be found,
and he returned rather cooler than he went, to tell Melvill, that after what
had passed, he must desire him to discontinue his visits. -- This was a painful
sentence to our almost distracted lover; who, however, bore his misfortune with
firmn^^^ and departed from Oakhall, without gaining one sight of his amiable
afflicted.

CHAP. XVI.
I Am giddy, expectation whirls me (...),
The imaginary relish is so (...)
That it inchants my sense (...) will it be:
When that the watery palate (...) indeed
Love's thrice reputed nectar?
TRO^^^ and CRESSIDA.
SIR Thomas began now seriously (...) consider, that gentle means would be the
most probable, to make his daughter conquer her dislike to one lover and
obliterate her regard for the other: in the (...), therefore, he gently taxed
her with her (...) for Melvill, and as she had heard of his visit of which too
well guessing the cause, she knew it would be to no purpose to deny it; and
therefore acknowledged his suspicions to be just; at the same time, begging his
pardon, promising never to make him unhappy by a clandestine marriage: -- in
answer to which, he informed her; that, if she should ever be guilty of such an
imprudent step, from that day she must forfeit all pretentions to his favor;
which to ensure, he still insisted on her receiving Clunch's visits, whom he
informed her was the next day to be at Oak-hall: -- she begged, she entreated,
she would promise any thing, provided ^e would give up that point. -- But her
prayers and tears, alas, were all too ineffectual; his whole heart was set upon
it nor could any argument, however strong and forcible, change the settled
purpose of his soul.

Her time, therefore, now passed wretchedly, being bound to (...) some company
of a man, whom (...) detested; (...) the terrifying threats of her father:
sometime indeed she gained a short resspite, by being left alone with her
mother, who pitied her situation, (...) tenderly endeavored to alleviate the
torments (...) her breast, with all the soft fellings of an (...) parent; and
when Sir Thomas was from ^ome, as she knew that all her felicity was centered
in Melvill's company, sent for him to Oak-(...) who, with j^y obeyed the glad
summens, so (...) his moments would have passed far from disagreeable, had it
not been for the melancholy reflection of what his dear Maria must suffer at
other times; but as he saw there was no likelihood of his ever gaining her
father's consent to their union, after some struggles of reflection, he
ventured to mention a secret marriage to her; but she would not listen to it,
and silenced him by saying, -- that though her father had thus thrown off the
kindness of a parent, still she would support the duty of an obedient daughter,
as she did not think any unkindness on his side, could authorize such an act of
indiscretion in her. Happy would it be, were every young lady of this way of
thinking; how many miserable hours would it then save themselves, and others.
--

Various and many were the schemes which Melvill thought of, whereby to gain
Sir Thomas's consent; but still they could afford him but the momentary
pleasure of imagination, as he for some time could hit on none likely to effect
it; however, after along patience and perseverance his invention framed one,
which appeared to him so likely to succeed, that he determined to mention it
the next time he went to Oak-Hall. The wished for moment soon arrived, and the
above thought gave him so unusual a flow of spirits, that Maria could not avoid
asking him the reason: taking her hand with inexpressible tenderness, he
replied, -- "I have, my dearest life, at last, thought of something which may
make us both happy; but as some deceit is necessary on your side, I did not
chose to mention it, being well convinced, that your sense of truth is so
strict, you would scruple a falsehood, even in thought." -- Having thanked him
in a genteel manner for his compliment, she desired to know what it was,
saying, -- that if she thought there was any probability of its success, she
would venture a great deal, to be freed from the misery in which she then
lived; but, added she, here comes my mother, let her hear it; and if she
approves thereof, that alone will be reason sufficient for me to put it into
execution.

Lady Hartry having joined the company, Melvill told them the scheme from which
he entertained such flattering hopes, in the following words; "It is, said he,
that Maria shall feign an implicit obedience to her father's commands, in
receiving the addresses of Mr. Clunch* that she shall even carry her seeming
duty so far, as to go to church with him, and then publicly refuse him at the
altar: this of course will convince Sir Thomas of her firm resolve, never to
marry the man whom he has fixed upon; which will also be so public an affront
to my rival, as to shake off his disagreeable solicitations: I will take care
to be present, and make use of all my rhetoric, to persuade him to consent to
our union: if he is cruel enough to entertain a doubt of my making a settlement
on Maria, when I come of age, I will even agree to have our marriage postponed
to that period, and at the same time, to put a private one out of our power,
will consent to reside abroad, during all the intervening time; and
notwithstanding his late behavior, I am so well convinced of his natural
goodness of heart, that, added thereto my persuasion, the solemnity of the
place, and his surprise at so sudden and unexpected an affair, will altogether,
^e too much for him to resist; and then my dearest girl, we shall with pleasure
look back on all those obstacles as stronger incitements to us, love each other
hereafter with increasing ardor; for, as the poet says; Love in security but
faintly burns,
But after doubts and fears more bright returns.


Although this was certainly the most unaccountable thought that ever entered
into a mad man's head; still as a lover, we must not wonder at his adopting it;
and Maria coming under the same predicament, we must not be surprised, at his
finding so little difficulty in persuading her to agree to any thing which
carried with it the least probability of ensuring her happiness; though she often
repeated, that the hypocrisy would be very painful; but what shall we say to
lady Hartry? in whom, to use Hamlet's words, "The heigh-day in her blood was
tame, was humble, and waited on the judgment;" yet such is the frailty of human
nature, that though she made the most scruples, Melvill's persuasions, joined
to her wishes for Maria's happiness, soon overcame her scruples of deceit; and
it was therefore agreed, that this scheme should be immediately carried into
execution; and as Maria was the principal actress, we may by sure she
determined to hasten it as much as possible.

CHAP. XVII.
And yet methinks duty cannot demand the sacrifice of my own happiness! surely
neither heaven or nature require me, in obedience to a parent, to marry a man
with whom I must be forever miserable. The Opera of Tom Jones.
OUR lovers, thus happy in the anticipation of future joys, had been sometime
alone; when they were suddenly surprised by the unexpected return of Sir
Thomas, who immediately burst into the room where they were sitting; happy was
it for lady Hartry that she had left them, being thereby rendered unsuspected
of having had a hand in this meeting; although the bare finding the young
couple together, would have been sufficient grounds for Sir Thomas to have
reprimanded Melvill; yet to add to the misfortune he had interrupted them in a
minute, sacred alone to love and privacy; in short he had found his daughter
clasped in the arms of him she fondly loved: to describe the surprise painted
on each of their countenances at this minute, would require the pen of a
Fielding, or the pencil of a Hogarth; there was but one part for Maria to take;
and therefore with an assumed anger, pushing Melvill from her, she uttered some
few inarticulate words in a kind of reproof. -- Sir Thomas now began, by
telling him, that after what had passed, he was much surprised at seeing him
there, and insisted he would not for the future trouble Oak-Hall with his
company, for if he did, as a gentleman, he should be obliged to call him to an
account for his behavior. Melvill, willing to improve on the hint he had
received from Maria, begged his pardon in the most humble manner: (...) that ^e
need no longer be under any apprehensions concerning his visits at Oak-Hall, as
he had been sufficiently tutored on that subject by his daughter, whose anger
he had already incurred, by his unpardonable presumption; so saying, he took
his leave, inwardly pleased at having left Maria so fair an opening toward the
prosecution of their scheme; nor was she at all behind-hand with him in
contrivance: for when her father began to reprimand her for seeing Melvill,
contrary to his express commands, she interrupted him by saying, that according
to his orders, she had endeavored all in her power to forget him, in which she
was so happy as to have succeeded, but that, if she had any little esteem for
him lef^, he had now forfeited it, by this last act of imprudence: as a proof
of which, she was willing to receive favorably Mr. Clunch's visits, and ready
to enter into an alliance with that family, as soon as was agreeable to her
father.

Sir Thomas kis'd her, called her his good, his dutiful child; and in (...)
fondness, was as ridiculously foolish, as in his anger, he had formerly been
imprudently passionate, and though Maria, out of a pretended coyness, objected
to so early a time, he insisted on that day sev'night being fixed for the
wedding, and that all necessary preparations should be immediately begun; to
which our heroine, with great seeming reluctance, at length consented,
promising to obey her father in every thing, who instantly ran to communicate
this good news to his wife.

It was on the evening of this happy day, before Sir Thomas had scarce
recovered from the transports which the first knowledge of his daughter's
obedience had thrown him into, when the happiness of this family was not a
little increased, by the arrival of AEmily Summers, though the felicity of most
of them sprung from (...) causes: as this young lady was to (...) ^t Oak-hall,
her presence did not in the least restrain the lively sallies of the Baronet's
joy; nor had she been long arrived, before she was given to understand the
reason. -- Nothing could equal her astonishment at this news, as she thought,
from their long and sincere friendship, Maria had not behaved with her (...)
generosity, in concealing it from her, which she had (...) ^one, except giving
her the hint, which (...) reader may remember, in her last letter, and which
could refer to nothing else; nor was this thought confined to her own breast,
she soon found an opportunity of taxing her friend with unkindness, who
immediately related to her, all that the reader has before heard; as likewise
her intended scheme. -- AEmily knew it would be to no purpose to dissuade her
from it; and as Maria had put so much confidence in her, by trusting her with a
^ecret of this nature, she could not in honor, divulge it to Sir Thomas, of
which at first, she had some design; she therefore, though without the least
hopes of its success, seemed to acquiesce therein, and promised to do all in
her power toward the execution of it. Charlotte Howard was the next day made
acquainted with the arrival of their friend AEmily, and at the earnest request
of both, added one more to this happy circle, for though Sir Thomas had dropped
all acquaintance with Melvill, still this did not alter his behavior to, or
diminish his regard for the rest of Mr. Howard's family.

CHAP. XVIII.
-- Understand more clear
What Is past and what is to come, is strewn with (...)
And formless ruin of oblivion.
TROILUS and CRESSIDA^.
THE necessary preparations for Maria's wedding were immediately begun, and
Clunch spent as much of his time as he could spare from his rustic amusements,
at Oak-Hall with his intended bride, who received his visits with great seeming
complacense, conscious that they could be of no long continuance. When she was
not thus employed, she had the felicity of enjoying the company of her two
friends, without control; and indeed the affection which these young ladies
had mutually for each other, made their time to pass with the greatest social
harmony; every day brought with it some new pleasure; and as the surest means
of augmenting their festivity, each of them seemed more assiduous to promote
the bliss of the other two than her own. A sigh, indeed, would sometimes
unwarily escape from poor Maria; who as the destined day drew nigh, seemed
every moment to loose some of her resolution: to add to which, her friend
Charlotte, on the day before the intended marriage, for reasons very apparent,
made an excuse to return home; by that means avoiding being present at the
proposed nuptials.

During this young lady's stay at Oak-Hall, poor Melvill's time had passed but
heavily; however, to compensate for all his torments, she brought him a letter
from Maria, containing fresh assurances of regard; which when he received, in
an involuntary ecstasy, he exclaimed; Sweet love! sweet lines! sweet life!
Here is her hand, the agent of her heart,
Here is her oath for love, her honor's pawn,
Oh, that her father would approve our loves,
To seal our happiness with his consent!
(...), heavenly Maria!


As it was agreed on that Melvill should leave England, as soon as he had
gained a promise from Sir Thomas to consent to their marriage when he came of
age; he had taken care to prepare everything necessary for his voyage: nor
indeed was he displeased at thus having a plea to satisfy his eager curiosity,
by visiting foreign countries, though at the price of being separated from
Maria. And when the destined morn arrived, he hastened to the church, were the
other company were already assembled; consisting of the intended bride and
bridegroom, AEmily Summers, Sir Thomas, and Lady Hartry, and Sir Toby Clunch:
Maria trembled with apprehension; but that only served to cast an unusual glow
upon her countenance, and made her look uncommonly beautiful; nor was her
concern on such an occasion taken notice of, as a modest diffidence is usual.

Although Melvill stood a great way behind the rest of the company, he could
not avoid the eyes of Sir Thomas, who thought it not a little extraordinary for
him to be there; however, still keeping his post, he stood agitated by violent
hopes and fears. -- Maria went through the former part of the ceremony
tolerably well, till the critical moment arrived; and here I fain would conceal
the weakness of my heroine: but truth obliges me to maintain my character, and
inform my readers of every particular, without suppressing any. Judge then, if
you possibly can, kind reader, what were poor Melvill's sensations, when on her
being asked the important question, after near a minute's silence, he heard her
feebly pronounce, I WILL: his astonishment and rage for some time, were both so
great, that he stood motionless; at last, casting at her a look of distraction,
he hurried out of the church, and throwing himself into a post chaise, which
had been ordered to wait for him, proceeded to Mr. Howard's, to whom in a few
minutes he related what had happened and set out the next day for Dover, but
with a far different opinion of the female sex, than what he flattered himself
he should have begun his travels with: thoughts of himself alone had for some
time occupied his mind; but anger against Maria now took its place, which he
vented as follows, "Yes, I have long been blinded by passion, but that at last
is over, my natural reason has regained her power; and I can now see, nay feel
what an abject wretch he must be, who trusts his happiness in a woman's power;
smiling mischiefs all, that crocodile like, flattery but to betray: thus then I
disclaim all thoughts of a serious connection with any of the sex; but why do I
still talk, of, or trouble myself about her, she is not worth a thought; and I
hope I shall get quite clear of her idea before I reach Dover;" -- on the road
to which place we must leave him and return to see what happened at the church
after his departure.

CHAP. XIX.
Why tell you me of moderation?
The grief is fine, full, perfect that I taste,
And in its sense is no less strong, than that
Which causes it. How can I moderate it?
TROILUS and CRESSIDA.
I DON'T doubt but my young female readers, if any such I am honored with,
will be apt to condemn and despise poor Maria for want of fidelity, or rather
of resolution; but let them consider, and make her case their own, and I am
sure their contempt will be converted into generosity. A young lady educated
with so strict a sense of honor and truth as she was, could not be guilty of
such premeditated deceit; the solemnity of the place, the awful grandeur of the
ceremony, all forbade it; passion had before obscured her reason, but it now
justly appeared to her, like going to church with a design to utter a
premeditated falsehood in the sight of God: yet notwithstanding all this, she
suffered the most painful conflict, before she could so far let her virtue
overcome her love; but when she had thus nobly gained an ascendancy over her
passions, she left that innate satisfaction which conscious virtue always does,
on the performance of any good action; but that satisfaction was but of a very
short duration, and instantly vanished, when on turning her head round, she
observed in Melvill's face the distraction of his heart and immediately after
saw him leave the church; it was then the thoughts of having deceived him, and
lost him for ever, rushed upon her mind in their full force; nay, even with
aggravated circumstances: this was far too much for her tender nature to
support; she immediately fainted away, before the material part of the ceremony
were performed, and threw the whole church into confusion: she was carried home
senseless: but by being put to bed, and by the application of proper remedies
soon came to herself.

Almost every one then present, put different constructions on this accident:
No one except lady Hartry and AEmily were acquainted with the true cause; they
had as well as Maria observed Melvill, and on his leaving the church in so
extraordinary a manner, had too well guessed what where his intentions: to
these, when alone, our afflicted heroine unburthened her full heart; and having
made all the excuses she could think of to palliate her infidel^ty, conjured
her mother as a proof of her sympathetic feelings, to send to know what was
become of Melvill: lady Hartry, with true maternal fondness, was ready to admit
of any plea that her da^ghter could make, and joined with AEmily in assuring
her, that she thought her more worthy of pity than censure; after which she
mentioned her suspicions of Melvill's being gone abroad, the better to prepare
her for such a stroke, in case it should prove true, and promised to satisfy
her curiosity, by sending to Mr. Howard's immediately, which she accordingly
did; and in return to her message, had the mortification of hearing from
Charlotte, that Melvill was by that time at Calais, having previous to his
departure, informed Mr. Howard of that part of the affair, which was left
untold by her, only because she was not acquainted with the issue of their
scheme; that his intention was to endeavor, by a variety of objects, to drive
from his mind a woman, whom he no longer held worthy of a place in it; and
lastly, that he had promised to write, when he arrived at Paris. -- It was on
this promise only, that Lady Hartry ventured to inform her daughter of what she
had heard, which she at length did, though with the greatest caution and
tenderness; gently breaking it to her, by almost imperceptible degrees, till
she had made her acquainted with the whole.

Although poor Maria was very well prepared for this blow, and though it was no
more than what she might reasonably expect, still she had flattered herself
with the old proverb, That while there is life, there is hope: she had flattered
herself, that when Melvill's anger began to subside, he would stay and see the
end of so extraordinary an affair; that he would defer his journey, till he was
thoroughly convinced of her infidelity: -- he thought very justly, that nothing
could be a stronger proof thereof than thus giving herself to another before
his face; his passion obscured those reasons which arose so powerfully in her
mind to countenance the act; those reasons lasted but so long, as while she
remained in that uncertainty of doubt and fear, but when the answer to her
mother's note arrived, she insisted on seeing it, which lady Hartry at first
refused, as thinking one part thereof, not so proper for her perusal; but as it
is impossible long to maintain a denial of any thing (...) we love, Maria soon
got the better, and by (...) victory was made completely miserable: for though
her mother had before informed her of every part thereof, still she had done it
in a manner which gave her some small gleam of hopes, and which, by the sight
of it, she was convinced she had no reason to indulge; for a long time after
reading it, her mind was torn by the contrary passions of contempt, love and
pity; sometimes she would rail at him for not waiting to see the event of an
affair, which it so nearly concerned him to be acquainted with; at others, she
would express her commendations of him for thus behaving to a person who had
used him so scandalously, and then would vent the most bitter inve^ives against
herself; but as according to the natural order of things, the human
constitution cannot long thus exist upon the stretch, in a short time the agony
of her mind affected the body, and threw her into a violent fever, in which she
quickly became delirious, and was continually calling on Melvill; sometimes she
would talk to him as if he were present, at others, she would fall into the
most violent fits of passionate rage, and in this manner rave, till nature
being almost exhausted, a flood of tears came seasonably to her relief.

Conscious, that from her so often mentioning Melvill's name, Sir Thomas must
imagine there was something more at the bottom of this affair than he was
acquainted with, lady Hartry, by the advice of AEmily, who behaved with more
than common prudence, in such a scene of complicated distress, related to him
all she knew of the affair, kindly endeavoring to exempt poor Maria from as
much blame as she possibly could: -- To her great joy, this news was received
in a far different manner from what she expected; for as soon as Sir Thomas
knew the cause of his daughter's illness, he used every means in his power to
hasten her recovery; at her first interval of reason, with the most assiduous
tenderness, he desired her to compose her spirits, acknowledging, that he was
convinced of the folly of his conduct, and determined no longer to oppose her
happiness; she thanked him for the kindness of his intention, adding -- "how
happy would this goodness once have made me! now it is an aggravation of my
sorrow, and ^omes, like a reprieve when execution's past."

With all the affection of friendship, and at the same time, with the the
unlimited extent of a parental love, he used every argument he could think of,
to paliate her grief; and as a proof of the sincerity of his wishes for her
happiness, instantly wrote a letter to Melvill, which he directed to the post
house at Calais, acquainting him with the alteration of his sentiments, and
kindly re-inviting him to Oak-Hall.

CHAP. XX.
-- Nature craves
All dues be rendered to their owners! now
What nearer debt in all humanity
Than daughter to the mother?
Troilus and Cressida^.
AS Maria had now gained her father's consent to an union, which, she flattered
herself, would one day take place; notwithstanding the fears she had, lest
Melvill should meet abroad with some lady, whose beauty, joined to her ill
usage might easily efface all remembrance of her former kindness; the
tranquillity of her mind was soon in some degree restored, which added to her
youth and natural strength, began to reestablish her health; the roses that so
long had left her cheeks, began now to recover their accustomed bloom; and as
after a tedious gloomy winter, all nature gladdens at the approach of spring,
so there was no one in the house, or neighborhood, who did not really rejoice
at Maria's recovery, which was in a short time totally completed: -- and thus
the family at Oak-Hall, of which, AEmily still made one, all but Maria,
regained their former serenity and peace.

When Mr. Clunch found that Sir Thomas was no longer an advocate for him with
Maria, he was easily induced to retract his claim, and in a few weeks after,
married the daughter of one of his father's tenant's, with whom he probably
found more real happiness, than ever he could have done with a person, whose
sentiments and pursuits were so widely different from his own.

As Sir Henry Summers had now been absent much longer than he at first
intended, AEmily began to be not a little surprised thereat, as well as puzzled
to find out what business he could have there to detain him so long; nor could
she avoid observing, that he had never made mention of it in any one of his
letters; however, as he wrote constantly to inform her of his welfare, and as
Mr. Martin had in the last letter given her a hint of an intended visit, she
was easily prevailed upon by Maria to remain at OakHall; where, by their mutual
desire, Charlotte Howard now was.

Nothing therefore was wanting to complete the felicity of this family, but
Melvill's return, which Maria had waited for, some-time, with the greatest
resignation and patience; but when the period was elapsed, whereat she had
flattered herself with the pleasing expectation of beholding him, and in which
she was most grievously disappointed, her former uneasiness began to return,
and from the natural inclination which she had for solitude, soon settled into
a melancholy despondence, when as if adverse fate had not sufficiently
tormented her, Mr. Howard received a letter from Melvill, wherein he informed
him -- "That he had just recovered from a violent fit of illness, and was
preparing to leave Paris, where he then was, in order to visit Madrid; that it
still remained his firm resolve to endeavor, by a quick succession of new
objects, to recall his heart from Oak-Hall; that as he should be continually
upon the move, it would be impossible for him to hear from England; his design
in which was* to avoid seeing the very name of Hartry, that nothing might
retard the cure he hoped in a short time to work in his misplaced affections."

It was very apparent from this, that he had never received the letter Sir
Thomas sent after him to Calais: and although the news pierced poor Maria to
the heart, yet still, to oblige her parents, she endeavored to assume the
placid smiles of cool indifference: Oh, what a painful task to wear a cheerful
countenance with a gloomy heart! -- Out of duty and complaisance to them she
entered into company, though at the same time she longed to be alone, to
indulge her melancholy reflections on this unfortunate affair, which was the
more so to her, as she could blame no one for it but herself: her two bosom
friends, AEmily and Charlotte, endeavored all in their power to comfort her,
the latter of whose company she was remarkably fond of, as she knew by fatal
experience the torments of divided love, and would sometimes humor her
affliction, by talking of Melvill, in return for which, Maria would sympathize
with her in her grief, for the long, long lost Charles Hartry; in this manner,
by each having a friend to share in their afflictions, the burden lay the
lighter upon either: -- But as these reflections will not deliver poor Maria
from her miserable situation; and as I at present see no probable means of
doing it, I must be contented to leave her as she is, and take some further
notice of AEmily's affairs.

It was now in the delightful month of May, about six in the evening, while our
female friends were sitting in a natural alcove, formed by surrounding
jessamines and woodbines, their attention absorbed, in listening to a natural
concert of the feathered choristers around, superior far to any which the rigid
rules of art can dictate, when they were suddenly surprised by the appearance
of a gentleman, whom, on his nearer approach, AEmily discovered to be no other
than Mr. Martin; who, to add to her joy, informed her, that her uncle would be
there the ensuing morning: the first salutations were scarce over, before
Charlotte and Maria took an opportunity of leaving their friend to enjoy,
without reserve, the company of that man, for whom alone she seemed to wish to
live: AEmily saw, or at least fancied she saw, an unusual seriousness painted
on his countenance, nor could she forbear asking him the reason; but he evaded
an explanation, by the weak excuse of being fatigued by his journey; though
this was not the real cause, as the reader will presently be convinced. -- The
next morning, agreeable to what Mr. Martin had told her, AEmily had the
satisfaction of embracing her uncle; who in a short time alter his arrival, not
a little astonished her by the following discourse.

"It may not now my dear AEmily be improper to acquaint you with the cause of
my so sudden expedition, at which I don't doubt you were very much surprised;
but I am sure you will be much more so, when previous to what I have to say, I
must assure you, you are not my niece; nor did I, till within this short time,
know any relation you had in the world." -- AEmily's surprise at hearing this
piece of news, may be much better imagined than described; however, as no word
could convey a proper idea of her astonishment, she sat silent, and suffered
Sir Harry to proceed without interruption. -- He had informed Mr. Martin, who
was then present, of this affair before; and indeed this was the cause of that
inquietude which AEmily had taken notice of the preceding evening; for when he
found there was no ties of kindred between Sir Harry and his ward, and still
heard the warm manner in which he spoke of her, he began to be under some
apprehensions, left in his old age he should play the fool, by singing amorous
ditties to the bloom of nineteen; so ready are we to surmise whatever our fears
dictates. -- Sir Harry now related to AEmily all the circumstances relative to
his finding her, that the reader has before heard in the former part of this
history; and then proceeded as follows.

"Soon after this extraordinary affair happened, I was telling to a circle of
gentleman, none of whom chose to believe me, but all persisted in attributing
to me a larger share thereof than I had any right to. And although I then, and
ever since have used all possible means to discover your parents* it has been
to no purpose; till a short time ago an intimate acquaintance, one of those to
whom I had mentioned the circumstance, and now residing in Ireland, sent me
word, that he had discovered the parent of my AEmily; and if I wished to be
fully satisfied thereof, desired my immediate attendance at Dublin. -- You may
easily imagine that I did not hesitate one moment what step to take; the hurry
of my departure will sufficiently evince to you, the eagerness of my curiosity.
-- On my arrival in Dublin, my friend at whose desire I had made the journey,
informed me, that he had met with the lady, concerning whom he had wrote to me,
after the following manner; by the accidental misfortune of her foot's
slipping, she had fallen down in the street, had he not, by the greatest good
luck, been behind her, and immediately led her into an adjoining shop: when she
was a little recovered from the fright which this accident had thrown her into,
she found that she had happily received no other hurt, than a slight scratch on
the hand by a post, on which she had endeavored to save herself from salling;
when, on taking out her pocket book to search for a bit of sticking plaster to
apply to the wound, an open paper fell out, which he picked up and gave her,
though he could not avoid first reading it as he held it in his hand, having
seen some words he recollected elsewhere; and was amazed to find it contained
the same words, as that which I discovered pinned on your breast, and which I
had frequently shown him. -- So extraordinary a circumstance awakened his
curiosity; and in the way to her lodgings, where common civilities obliged him
to attend her, with many apologies for the question, he begged to know on what
occasion those words were wrote, and as he assured her, that he had other
motives than curiosity for his inquiry, she readily satisfied him; at the same
time, giving him the history of her life, from which he was convinced it could
be no other than your mother. -- At my desire he immediately introduced me to
her; and having before informed her, what share I had in the business, she was
as eager to relate as I was to hear, the story of her woe; though both our
desires sprung from different motives; mine, from the hopes of making a worthy
woman happy, for such, from my friends account, I was sure she must be, by
delivering to her arms a daughter, whom a monarch might boast of; and hers,
from the expectation of becoming a joyful mother, at a time when she had so
little reason to look for such a blessing: -- She therefore satisfied my
curiosity, as follows.

CHAP. XXI
-- Virtue, though of winds and waves the sport.
By passions shaken, and by dangers crossed,
On life's great sea, is never wholly lost;
Some power divine conducts her swelling sails,
And of her due reward, she seldom fails.

BORN and bred in retirement and ease, at more than a hundred miles distance
from the capital of England, my youthful days were passed in one continued
round of innocent amusements; educated under the fostering wing of indulgent
parents, whose utmost wishes were their childrens happiness; my inclinations
never learnt to stray, but where my duty led them; the smiles of benignity sat
upon my youthful countenance, every circumstance of life conspired to make me
blessed: -- I had a brother whom I loved dearly as myself: and as our ages were
nearly equal, our studies and pursuits were made so too, under that man, who
was at once our tutor and our parent: -- I read the Classics and learnt French
with him, and to return, he was sometimes permitted to take a lesson on the
guittar with me; but as we were only suffered to use these as amusements at our
leisure hours, by thus being taught to consider in the light of indulgences,
what were really edifying and useful studies, we of course made much more
progress therein than if we had looked upon them as inflicted tasks, which we
were obliged to perform.

As my father's estate was not sufficient to enable him to bring up my brother
independent of the world he gave him leave to choose his profession, when
pitching on the army, he immediately bought him a commission in the first
regiment of guards, and sent him to London, to perform the duty which he owed
his king and country, not without many tears on both sides, at his departure.
-- You may easily imagine how much I felt for the loss of a brother, whom I
loved with such tenderness: but as he promised to write to me frequently, by
the alternate assistance of my books and my guittar, I made a shift to support
at least the appearance of tolerable spirits; though I will own, I felt this
blow more severely than I dared then confess; -- but as the All-wise being
never does any thing without proposing some end thereby* so this had one great
good atttending it; for as I have since found, by fatal experience, that I was
born to undergo many misfortunes -- this, so early in life, served to inure me
to what I since have suffered; and what was then the cause of so much
affliction to me, on a cool retrospection, appears to be nothing, in comparison
of what I since have felt: -- for thus we always swell our present pain, till
some severer grief arrives, which shows what is past, without extenuation or
increase in its true light.

I thus give you the history of my family, because in my brother's, my own is
included. -- About a year after his departure, he informed us by letter, of an
intended visit, having obtained leave of absence for three months; and that he
should bring a particular acquaintance, who was a brother officer with him:
accordingly, in a few days he arrived, attended by his friend, whose name was
Modish: this gentleman, who was a lieutenant as well as my brother, seemed by
nature formed to please the women; had I said for their destruction, my own
circumstances would too fatally justify the expression, as I can with truth
affirm, that I have never felt the influence of joy, since first I knew him;
but still I don't repent of my acquaintance; for wheresoever he is, may heaven
protect him! -- he had not been long at my father's before his behavior too
plainly convin'd me of his sentiment; in short he soon found an opportunity of
declaring his passion for me, in the warmest terms; nor will I pretend to play
the hypocrite, by saying I was displeased at it and though prudence, as he had
no fortune, but the income of his commission, would not suffer me to receive
his addresses openly as it would have been madness in me, to have imagined that
my father ever would agree to the match, yet in private I gave him all the
encouragement that modesty would allow of, or his generosity have asked.

I was now one-and-twenty, and had just received a thousand pounds left me by
an uncle, and which was all the fortune I had independent of my father; and, in
short, Sir, my affection for him was so deeply rooted, that he too easily
prevailed upon me to fly from the best of parents, and receive him as a
husband: -- he then wrote to my brother, acquainting him therewith, and
desiring him to break the affair to my father, and entreat his forgiveness;
after which we proceeded to London, where we waited for some time, in daily
expectation of an answer, but were amazed to find ourselves disappointed,
especially as Mr. Modish had had the precaution to desire my brother to direct
to him at a certain coffee house; thither he went every day, but every day had
the mortification of a disappointment: -- and although my husband's regard for
me, seemed every moment to increase; in such a situation, I was far from being
happy: -- the consideration of being neglectfully deserted by my parents, and
all that my soul held dear in the world, except the partner of my heart, was
too tormenting a thought for me not to be sensibly afflicted with. -- We had
been in town about two months, when the following misfortune happened to
deprive me even of the pleasure which my husband's company afforded.

He was returning home one night from the coffeehouse, about twelve o'clock,
elevated in liquor, when a person from behind, gave him a slap on the shoulder.
-- Imagining he was beset by foot-pads, turning suddenly round, he fired one of
the pistols which he always carried with him, and instantly saw the person who
had thus attacked him, fall to the ground. A crowd of watchmen immediately
assembled, drawn thither by the report of his pistol -- but -- good heavens! --
what was his consternation, when he found the person he had shot, to be no
other than my brother, and whose slap on the shoulder, which was a mark of
familiarity and affection, had been thus fatally misconstrued. -- Concluding
that he had certainly killed him, under pretense of fetching a surgeon, he ran
home, and informing me of this melancholy accident, took half my fortune, which
luckily was in the house, and tenderly embracing me, hurried away to preserve
himself.

As he suspected, so it happened, for my brother died in less than an hour, and
rewards were immediately advertised for the apprehension of his murderer: --
oh! Sir! think what a situation this was; -- in one sad hour, deprived of all
my future prospects of felicity -- my dearest brother dead; -- my husband
flown, I knew not where, and stigmatized as his destroyer; -- hourly branded
with the name of villain, for as no one knew the truth of this affair, every
time it was told, added to his discredit, and it at last reached my father's
ears; maimed and villainously wrested every way to suit the purposes of
avaricious relations; so that all he heard was, "that my husband was the
murderer of his son."

According to the cruel expectation of the malicious propagators of this
report, he soon died: -- nor did my mother long survive, both their ends being
not a little hastened by this misfortune. Thus, Sir, was almost the whole (...)
at once annihilated by an accidental^ error; into which the best of men might
easily have fallen.

In this accumulated distress, I had no friend to comfort or assist me, and
though Mr. Modish had promised to inform me of his fate, I still remained
entirely ignorant thereof, having never once heard from him since his
departure; when, to crown all my misery, I found myself with child: although I
had a pretty large sum of money left, it would daily diminish, and as I had no
prospect of getting more, I even then began to anticipate the tortures of
poverty. -- At the usual time, I was brought to bed of a daughter; and about
six weeks after my delivery, had the luck of meeting with a lady, who had
generosity enough to believe my story, and humanity enough to promise to assist
me: nor did she fail to keep her word; in a few days after, she told me that a
widow lady, to whom she had mentioned my misfortune, had kindly offered to take
me with her to Ireland as a companion, but that my having a child was an
insurmountable obstacle -- and now, Sir, shall I not forfeit your good opinion?
by owning, that by the melancholy prospect before me, I was drove to make use
of the following stratagem: -- having frequently heard your character for
humanity extolled, I conveyed my little darling to a place were I fancied you
were sure of seeing her, with a paper pinned to her breast, on which I wrote
these words. -- Unknown stranger, whosoe'er thou art that find'st this luckless
babe, shut not your ears against the tender cries of youthful innocence, but
pity, cherish, and receive her; in return for which she will far o'erpay your
generous care by her endearing prattle. -- Having heard, that according to my
expectations, you had taken her into your house, I was much pleased at the
success of my scheme, and with joy set out for Ireland, though it was not a
little allayed, by my never having heard from Mr. Modish, who had now been gone
near a year: -- In short, Sir, not to trouble you with any unnecessary
particulars, I remained here with my patroness, till her death, which happened
here about half a year ago, when in return for my services, she left me her
whole fortune, amounting to near ten thousand pounds: and being thereby put
into a station of life, superior to my utmost wishes, I was preparing to set
out for England, to make enquiries after my daughter, when I learnt
accidentally from this gentlemn, what was her situation in the world: and (...)
there is nothing wanting to complete my (...), but some tidings of Mr. Modish,
of whose ^ate I am entirely ignorant, though he has been absent near twenty
years.

CHAP. XXII.
The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,
And all that honors, all that wealth ever gave,
Await alike the inevitable hour?
The paths of glory lead but to the grave.
GRAY'S ELEGY.
THUS, continued Sir Harry, did Mrs. Modish fully satisfy me, with regard to
her being the real parent of my adopted AEmily: I therefore brought her with me
to London, where she now is, and whether I don't doubt you will joyfully
accompany me to morrow, to pay your duty to a woman who is every way deserving
the title of your mother -- And although, my AEmily, you are not my niece,
nevertheless we are related, as I find your father was brother to my cousin
Modish, whom you have often seen; and with whom, if the reader will revert to
the fourth chapter, he will find sir Harry had a discourse on the subject of
his behavior to AEmily; -- when he endeavored to dissuade him from the noble
and humane resolution that he had made. -- How little did he then know he was
arguing against his own niece! -- I have also, added Sir Harry since my return,
on enquiring of my cousin concerning the fate of his brother, heard that he was
lost on his passage to Italy; for which place he had embarked to avoid the
officers of justice. As his marriage was an entire secret, he never had an
opportunity of communicating it to his brother, who was then abroad; and who,
till my information, never had the least suspicion thereof.

On observing that AEmily could not refrain from tears, at hearing the fate of
that man to whom she owed her birth; he said, "Indeed, my dear, this sorrow is
unnecessary, as you never knew the person whose loss you are lamenting; and as
heaven has been kind enough to restore to you a parent, who I am sure, will
perform every duty, and amply supply the place of both father and mother. --
This, my AEmily was the only reason why I desired you to defer your marriage
till after my return: for as you have now a parent to apply to, mine is but an
assumed authority; though I am convinced, she will readily give her consent to
every thing which may contribute to your happiness."

As Mr. Martin was now entirely delivered from those apprehensions, which we
hinted at above he soon recovered his usual flow of spirits: and congratulated
AEmily on her new acquisition, in terms of the greatest tenderness; as did the
rest of the family at Oak-Hall; who were immediately made acquainted with this
happy revolution. -- Even poor Maria seemed to forget the cause of her
affliction, and share in the general joy. -- The next morning Sir Harry ^et out
for London, attended by Martin and AEmily, though not without being first made
to promise, that they would return with Mrs. Modish, and there celebrate the
nuptials of her daughter.

To describe the meeting between AEmily and her mother, would require the
efforts of a stronger pen, than my poor inexperience is master of; let it
suffice to say, that each was highly pleased with the acquisition of so
deserving a relation; and that this lady readily consented to her daughter's
marriage with Mr. Martin, whom she from that moment considered as her son. --
Sir Henry having generously presented his adopted child with ten thousand
pounds, these happy people accompanied by Mrs. Modish, returned to Sir Thomas
Hartry's, where, in a short time, Martin's happiness was completed, by being
put in possession of the truly amiable AEmily.

Although Maria, out of regard for her friend, could not refuse being present
at the wedding, the reader may imagine how much this renewed her grief; the
thoughts of having lately been to the same church, on so different an occasion,
and the melancholy circumstances attending it; all served to revive that
sorrow, the first tumults of which were as yet scarcely subsided; and though
her breast at this juncture, was truly the seat of mourning and affliction, on
her face she wore apparent marks of joy: -- thus then, all were, or at least
seemed happy. Sincerity and affection here went hand in hand, and cordially
embraced each other: but mark the mutability of all human affairs -- oh, vain
man! who can control his fate? or dare to say, Tomorrow is my own? -- The joy
that this family might truly boast, and the happiness which fate seemed to have
provided for them, for many years to come, were at once cruelly destroyed, by
an accident as unforeseen, as unprovided for.

The day after their marriage, AEmily proposed a ride, which the unfortunate
Martin too readily acquiesced in; and they were scarce got a hundred yards from
the house, before her horse took fright at some linen hanging on a hedge: when,
not being the most expert horse-woman, she lost her seat, and was thrown with
the most violent force, with her head against the foot of a tree, from thence
she was taken up and carried home speechless: -- On an examination of the wound
by a surgeon, he declared it to be mortal. -- Would to heaven his report had
been fallacious! but as he foretold, in a few hours, the fairest flower which
earth ever saw, or heaven ever destroyed, departed from a place where her
felicity was but just begun! -- Oh Providence! how unsearchable are all thy
ways, when the very means that we contrive for our amusements, are thus
conducive to our destruction? for, to add to the poignancy of this misfortune,
Martin was the first who, in order to amuse AEmily, had insisted on her
learning to ride. How little did he then imagine the fatal consequences, which
were one day doomed to attend it! -- Common griefs admit of common palliative
consolations; but alas, poor Martin! who shall speak comfort to affliction
great as thine? -- in one sad hour deprived of wife -- bride -- mistress. --
Let the Stoic, pampered with delicacies, from his bed of down, despise the
pinching gripes attendant on poverty; -- then let him smile at misfortunes, and
defy their point; -- but show me the man who, when the pressing hand of stern
adversity is on him, will talk thus: who when his heart is sick with grief, and
his eyes dim with tears, can still preserve his resolution, and I will worship
him like a descended angel.

CHAP. XXIII.
Can storied urn, or animated bust,
Ba^^ to its mansion call the fleeting breath?
Can honor's voice provoke the silent dust?
Or flattery sooth the dull cold ear of death?
GRAY's ELEGY.
SURE never was found such a scene of complica^^^ (...) we here meet with at
Oak-Hall! -- at once dashed from the height of prosperity and happiness to the
lowest step of misery, that even premeditated malice could have contrived. --
Poor Mrs. Modish! -- no sooner to be sensible of the soul-taught feelings of
parental love, but thus to be obliged to feel the pangs of an eternal
separation! -- See this, ye vain ones of the world, and learn how little value
you should set upon your present happiness, when you are thus liable every
minute to be deprived thereof. -- But to proceed.

The affliction of the company at Sir Thomas Hartry's on this occasion, beggars
all description. When their first shock was a little over, Sir Henry removed
Mrs. Modish from a place, where every object served but to renew her grief, by
reminding her of her departed AEmily, but Martin insisted on staying there to
mingle his tears with those of the whole neighborhood, till after her
interment. -- As this was too extraordinary an affair long to remain secret;
the whole country were soon in tears, for the fate of the most deserving woman
of her early age. -- This blow added to those shocks she had lately received,
had nearly been the occasion of Maria's relapse* but, by the friendly
conversation of Charlotte, her mind was diverted from the continual
contemplation of those things which occasioned her grief.

Time, that alleviates most sorrows, seemed but to increase that of Martin's,
who now determined to revisit London, a month having elapsed since the burial
of his AEmily; during which time, he had never failed daily watering her grave
with his tears. -- The evening before his departure, he went there alone; and
having spent some time in the contemplation of that spot, which contained (...)
his ravished soul once held dear, the following words (...) spontaneously from
his lips: "Hushed be each breeze! -- ye warblers stop your throats, -- for she
is gone! -- ^he fairest flower of the creation is destroyed! -- Death, like an
untimely frost, has nipp'd those beauties, which lately shone with such
distinguished excellence! -- I never more shall hear the music of that voice,
-- that form no more shall bless my longing eyes! -- Lay light upon her breast,
ye turf, -- happier therein than I: -- all nature's joyful save myself alone.
-- I wander insensible to all the sweets around me; unknowing and unknown, like
our first parents when drove out of Eden; all that is past appears like a
dream, and all before me, dreary solitude. -- Yet let me not complain; O
Heaven! thy ways are just; thou gave and thou take away." -- So saying he
returned to the house; and according to his design the next day set out for
London. -- I will therefore now take my leave of so melancholy a prospect, and
follow Mr. Melvill, whom I left in the post-chaise on the road to Dover.

CHAP. XXIV
That passion which harrows the soul,
By reason we strive to remove:
But reason's too weak to control
A passion so powerful as love.
The OPERA of TOM JONES.
ALTHOUGH Melvill as has been before related, had thus with the most noble
resolution, hurried from the sight of that person by whom he fancied himself so
much injured; yet like the famous Greek of old, he bore the fatal arrow in his
heart, and in an almost distracted state, arrived at Dover just as the packet
was setting sail for Calais, on which he embarked, and in a few hours reached
the end of his voyage, from thence proceeded with the utmost rapidity to Paris,
where he had not been long, before the fatigue of traveling, to which he was
so unaccustomed, joined to his uneasiness of mind about Maria, whom, however he
might flatter himself, he could not so soon forget; threw him, as the reader
has before heard, into a violent fever.

This was a most shocking situation for so young a traveller, confined to his
bed in a strange place, without an acquaintance to speak to, or a friend to
give him any assistance: he had just learnt French enough whilst a boy, to ask
for what he wanted, but not to hold any conversation in the language; so that,
if I may be allowed the expression, all the intercourse he could have, was with
his own thoughts, and indeed he there found full employment; -- he repeatedly
cursed the day of his nativity, and oftener that of his first acquaintance with
Maria, as all (...) kindness she had hitherto shown him, served but to make her
infidelity appear the stronger, and in more detestable colors; of which he
sometimes determined, on his recovery to return and accuse her; but then he
recollected, this would rather serve to increase, than heal his wounds, for he
was conscious, that she had still the firm possession of his heart, the
thoughts of seeing her the wife of another, was more than he could bear.

During his illness, as his only amusement, he had recourse to reading, but not
understanding French sufficiently to read in that language, and as the English
books he there met with, were very indifferent, his studies gave him but little
satisfaction: -- he by chance met with the following ode, with which he was
highly delighted, as being so conformable to himself.

The author does not present this ode to the public as his own production, but
as one of the most beautiful pieces of detached (...) he ever remembers to have
met with.
ODE to DEATH.
I.
Oh death, thou gentle end of human pain,
Why is thy stroke so long delayed?
Why, to a wretch who breathes but to complain,
Do thou refuse thy welcome aid?
Still will thou fly the plaintive voice of woe?
And were you are dreaded, only aim the blow.
II.
Oh leave, fantastic tyrant, leave
The young, the gay, the happy, and the free,
On them bestow a short reprieve,
And bend thy fatal shaft at me;
The beauteous bride, or blooming heir,
Let the resistless arrow spare,
And aim at this grief-wounded heart,
That springs half way to meet the welcome dart.
III.
Still must I view with streaming eyes,
Another and another morn arise,
Are my days lengthened to prolong my ^ain?
Enough of life's distress I Have seen,
A finished wretch in youth's first bloom,
By early sorrow ripened for the tomb.
(...) this manner did he amuse himself during his illness, which happily was
of no long duration, for being conscious that nature is her own physician, and
by having fair play, sooner or later will effect a cure, he suffered her to
take her regular course; and in a few days got well enough to satisfy his
curiosity, by seeing every thing in Paris worthy the attention of a traveller:
-- he was a constant attendant at the comedy, the opera and all public places,
in hopes by a diversity of entertainments, to forget Maria, and for the minute
in which his mind was engaged by other objects, he succeeded; but the instant
he was alone, his thoughts, as if by instinct, were at Oak-hall, and painted
her to him, laughing at his sufferings.

In this manner did he live for some time, daily undergoing the most
excruciating torments, till tired with the same rotundity of amusements, which
however pleasing, by repetition will at last grow insipid, he resolved to visit
Spain, and immediately made the necessary preparations for his journey; but
before I remove my reader from Paris, I cannot help mentioning an affair which
happened to our hero during his stay there.

Having occasion to hire a servant, he desired the master of his hotel to
recommend him one, and he accordingly the next morning introduced to him an
Englishman, who being asked by Melvill several questions concerning his reasons
for thus leaving England, gave the following whimsical relation of his own
life; which, as he had a (...) facetious manner of relating it, probably
afforded more entertainment at the time, than my reader may now find in it.

CHAP. XXV.
To this one standard, make your just appeal,
Here lies the golden secret learn to feel;
Or fool, or monarch, happy or distressed,
No actor pleases who is not possessed.
LLOYD's ACTOR.
AS you cannot possibly, Sir, disprove or contradict any thing a stranger shall
say of himself, it (...) as easy for me to make you believe I am the son of a
judge as not, and indeed I am; of as just and excellent a one, as any in the
three kingdoms: -- of horses, -- I m^^n; for as I acknowledg^ that old
fashioned virtue "sincerity," to be my characteristic, I must (...), that my
father was (...) at a large inn on the north road, and my mother, chambermaid
in the same house, both excellent in their respective stations, I assure you;
-- they no sooner met, than they conceived for each other a violent affection,
the consequence of which was, that she proved with child; but my father soon
making her an honest, virtuous woman, this character she has maintained ever
since, though I was born within two months after their marriage. -- I was sent
to learn to read and write at a neighboring charity-school, in which
accomplishments, I made a surprising progress; and having finished my
education, began to assist my father in his business, but this way of life, not
at all suiting my romantic inclinations, for, as I knew myself, from hearing
others say so, to be a lad of parts, I could not bear to be obscurely buried in
a stable; but aspired to much higher things: and, as a natural genius will
never lie dormant, I gave very early proofs of mine, and proceeded with such
rapidity and success, that at the age of fifteen, I was cast for
transportation, for robbing a hen-roost; but the judge taking pity of my youth,
reversed the sentence and ordered me to be whipped; after which correction, I
was remanded to my old employment of -- "a quartern o^ half a peck," -- I hope
you will remember the (...), Sir." -- In which way of life, I continued for some
time, and being (...) with bootless prayers to my father, that he would suffer
me to visit London, now determined to wait no longer for his permission, which
he still obstinately refused.

This I was urged to, not only from a natural desire to see the world, but from
having followed his example; in short a girl in the town was, or at least said
she was with child by me, and as I had no reason to doubt the truth of her
assertion, I thought flight the best method to escape the officers of justice,
for whom I had conceived a particular aversion, ever since the age of fifteen.

I had no sooner projected this glorious scheme, than I put it into execution,
and with a small stock of clothes, and less money, set out early one morning,
without taking leave of any one except my Dulcienna, who with tears in her
eyes, poor girl begged me to desist from my intention; but in vain. -- I was
adamant -- steel -- the glorious purpose of my mind was fixed, nor was I to be
diverted from it, ^y the prayers and entreaties of a silly (...).

My violent inclination to see the world, made me with case support the fatigue
of my first day's (...); but, in spite of every thing, nature will (...) her
course: and I was very near sinking beneath my burden on the second. My
situation was truly critical; I longed to return, but my courage forbade it; to
proceed was dangerous; but as absolute necessity obliged me to fix on
something, I was forced to put on the face of intrepedity, and proceed with all
the strength and speed I was master of: though, notwithstanding my utmost
endeavors, I could not reach the place I had destined for my that night's
residence; but falling short of it, at some miles distance in the skirts of a
large town, just made shi^t to crawl to a neighboring (...): on entering
which, I was almost struck dumb with astonishment at what I saw before me. In a
corner, on one poor melancholy truss of straw, s^t a tall, genteel^sh woman; in
her hands she held an old scarlet coat, li^'d with blue, of which she had
turned the inside out; and was industriously trimming it with white paper, in
so artful a manner, as ingenuously to conceal all the patches, which from
length of time, and constant wear, were pretty numerous: near her was another
wom^n, more inclining to the girl, in whose face were pictured all the marks of
vanity, nor did her action contradict my suspicions; as she was washing about
ten or a (...) pieces of old lace, and some other ornamental trifles, which she
afterward very curiously joined (...), and made into a most superb head-dress,
splendidly decorated with bits of (...)-stone glass, etc. thinly scattered to
make up a show, to please that part of the world, whose sole ambition is to
feast their sight. Not far from them on the ground, lay two men, fast locked in
slumber, forgetting misery; and, at a little distance, sat a man and a woman;
who, by the dismal light of a single solitary candle, were reading out of the
same book: at the other end of the barn, was a person very busy in ornamenting
and fitting up, what I afterward found to be the stage, where kings and
princes marched in all the (...) pomp; though at that time it was occupied on
one side, by a cow and a calf, and on the other, by two jack asses.
Notwithstanding I had seen so very little of the world, I did not want to be
informed, that these were a company of strolling commedians, preparing for
their next night (...) task. In a supplicating tone I told them my story, and
begged leave to take up my lodging there for one night; they very humanely
granted my request; and having refreshed me in a sparing manner on bread and
cheese, directed me to a vacant corner of the barn, where I lay down; and
overcome with my excessive fatigue, soon fell a^leep: in which happy state I
had been some hours, when I was awaked by a person crying in a hoarse voice
Why, this is well -- this is blow for (...) -- Where (...)! interrupted I,
rising in a fright (...) body was fighting, and that this (...) was thus
expressing his approbation of it: (...) they soon convinced me of my error, by
informing me, (...) Mr. Rantum was only rehearsing the part of Zanga, in the
Revenge; which play was to be performed that evening, as the written bills
specified, by a company of performers from the theater royal.

As I was naturally of a vollatile disposition, the drollery and variety of
(...) peoples lives pleased me so much, that I longed to become one of them;
and therefore informed them, that I should be glad to be engaged as a person,
willing to do every thing in his power; and having in a short time agreed on
the terms, I was in^olled one of the company, with all the usual forms.
Agreeable to their design, the Revenge was that evening performed, with
universal applause: the characters were, in general, what (...) call, well
supported; but Zanga in particular, (...) Mr. Rantum played, to the admiration
of those who seemed to understand him, and the utter astonishment of those who
did not: he had formerly been at London, in Drury (...) Theater, where he was
employed in the characters of footmen, guards, etc. and I am even credibly
informed, that he once played the part of a bear in a pantomine; but be that as
it may, it is certain that he still retained so high an opinion of the London
actors, that he copied one of (...) very minutely in he character of Zanga, as
some crit^^s said, and reared so very loud, that he did not thoroughly recover
his speech for three days afterward.

There now opened to me fresh scenes every day, of which I had not before, as
indeed how should I, the least idea. To recount to you the various intrigues
that now presented themselves, especially the amorous advances of Mrs.
Faintwell, who took pains to inform me, that every young man who had a mind to
succeed, should form a connection with some lady of merit in the company; it
would perhaps appear the effect of vanity, though most certainly Mrs.
Faintwell, who was old enough to be my mother, and who had possessed eight real
or nominal husbands, absolutely proposed going by my name, that we might live,
and taste the sweets, without the inconvenience of matrimony: -- to tell also
the various shifts we were obliged to make, in the performance of our pieces,
would appear romance; however, we gained considerable applause where ever we
went -- I say we, because I belonged to the company; -- though hitherto I had
done nothing more than sweep the stage, snuff the can l^es, swelled the train
of a theatric prince, and walked in a white shoat at Juliet's funeral
procession ^pin'd with envy, at seeing the (...) and (...) other's met with,
while I, with my shining talents remained in dismal obscurity. -- However,
conscious of my own abilities, I began to think to appear in some more elevated
(...); and accordingly consulted Mr. Rantum; of whom, before I proceed, it may
be proper to say something -- the property of some daubed canvass, and
tarnish'd tinsel clothes, so much increased the natural pride of this important
person that he considered and used the members of his company as slaves;
thieves to the men, and expressions equally gross to the women, were common
with him; and a very (...) ^^gree of contradiction could rouse him to real
knockdown arguments with his fist; supposing himself the best actor upon earth,
he could not bear the least appearance of a slight; which occasioned him once
in the character of Alexander, to deprive Hephestion of a tooth, for supposing
he laughed at him; he was as selfish as proud, and took care, eve^ when there
was tolerable success, to glean so much, under pretense of stock-debt, that the
company were very little above begging; which occasioned them to be very
comical in tragedy and sad in commedy.

Upon application to our managers, he readily granted my request: desiring to
know what I chose to come out in. Being naturally of an aspiring disposition,
and not in the least doubting my tragical powers, I had pre-resolved, like the
sun from behind an obscuring cloud, to break forth more glorious, for having
been thus concealed; and therefore pitched upon Jachimo, for my first attempt:
Mr. Rantum said, that I knew Cymbeline to be a play for which they were not at
all prepared: and which would inevitably put them to great inconveniences in
the performance; but that having conceived a regard for me, he would oblige me
by having it represented; and as an additional proof (...) play Leonatus
^osthumus. -- The parts therefore were accordingly cast, and Mr. Rantum very
kindly gave me some (...), relative to my attitudes, voice, etc.

In less than a fortnight we were all ready for the rehearsal: and the bills
gave notice of " Cymbeline to be performed, the part of Jachimo by a young
gentleman, being his first appearance on any stage."

This, of course filled the treatre, alias the barn, with all the neighboring
families: and as the fatal hour drew nigh, when all my future fame was to be
laid at stake, I ^elt myself in a situation not to be described. -- The warning
bell at length ringing -- I appeared, and the house re-echoed with applause: --
I went through the first act as well as could be expected; but when I stole an
inestimable bracelet of black ribbond from Imogen's arm, who was reposed on a
white sheet, laid over the skeleton box used in pantomime: the success (...)
with, was inexpressible, beyond my most sanguine expectations: her bedchamber
indeed, (...) answer that inimatable (...) by the immortal Shakespeare: the
(...) silvered silk, proud Cleopatra (...) Roman, but the patch work of (...)
from enquiring eyes, by (...) describing the (...) and the (...) thus you see
we endeavored to come as near the original as possible; and our audience being
kind enough, to take the w^ll for the deed, the whole went off with an uncommon
eclat.

And give me leave to observe, that till within these two years, when the
managers of Covent Garden, have very judiciously had one painted on purpose; I
have frequently known a scene exhibited in this excellent play, which had no
more resemblance to the description given of it, in the subsequent act, than
that which our itinerant company was obliged to make use of: necessity indeed
was plea sufficient for them; but surely at the theaters royal, it is so great
an absurdity, and so glaring an affront offered to the understanding of the
public, as scarcely to be overlooked, or forgiven by any audience: for when we
hear those beautiful lines: -- It was hanged
With tapestry of silvered silk; the story
Proud Cleopatra, when she met her Roman,
And Cyndus swelled above the banks, or for
The press of ^oats, or pride, a piece of work
So bravely done, so rich, that it did strive,
In workmanship and value; which I wondered
Could be so rarely, and exactly wrought,
Since the true life on it was --
CYMBELINE;

I say Sir, when we hear this glorious and animated description, we naturally
refer our ideas, to the scene of which it is spoken: but which upon
recollection, we shall find, was something ridiculously trifling, and foreign
to the purpose: but to proceed -- in the battle scene, I gained great honor,
when struck with the (...) of a guilty conscience; my nerveless arm refused its
office, and obliged me to yield to Posthumus, his Romish weeds disguised by a
carter's frock; but at the conclusion, I will not say I deserved, but I will
venture to assure you, that I was loaded with vast applause; the men approved,
and the women said I was quite a charming creature: which to do Mr. Rantum
justice, I must attribute to his teaching me the full use of my lungs, which
were naturally strong, dismissed me with their echoing hands.

Thus you see, on what trifling, insignificant points, depends the ^ame of an
actor, whose profession is, of all others, the most arduous and uncertain.

As I succeeded so happily in my first attempt, you may (...) I did not stop
there; and thinking no doubt, that my comic powers, were equally good with my
tragic: I determined my next appearance should be in comedy; when fixing on Sir
Harry Beagle, in the Jealous Wife, for my coup d'essai, came off as well as I
had done in Jachimo; though to do my audience justice, I must own, that here
for once in their lives, they were pleased with, and gave due praise to simple
nature; for having been bred in a stable the greatest part of my life, the
smack of my whip, which alone gained me great applause, had from constant
custom, become so habitual, that very little art was required to support the
character in a forcible manner.

Not (...) take up too much of your time. I appeared in a variety of
characters, and by an attention to such trifling particulars, gained all the
applause I wished for, and much more than I really deserved; however, entering
into a quarrel to support the consequence of my old lady, who at the age of
fifty-six, with a most corpulent figure, wanted to play Juliet, and other
girlish parts: Mr. Rantum and I decided the matter by a bruising match, in
which I came off victorious, but the vanquished manager took his revenge by
discharging me, and being hissed out of every company I afterward attempted,
it became necessary to accept the place of valet de chamber to a gentleman who
was coming over to Paris: and where I had no doubt of finding employment; but
being discharged by my master for attending the comedy instead of him; to my
great mortification, I am now convinced, that the French encourage no poor but
their own; which has obliged me thus to offer my services to you, Sir, and by a
pretty thorough knowledge of that great city, I hope to prove myself very
useful.

FEMALE FRIENDSHIP, OR THE INNOCENT SUFFERER. A MORAL NOVEL. VOLUME THE SECOND.

Virtue alone is happiness below,
And our best knowledge is ourselves to know.
HALLOWELL: Printed by HOWARD S. ROBINSON. For NATHANIEL COGSWELL. 1797.

FEMALE FRIENDSHIP; OR THE INNOCENT SUFFERER.
CHAP. XXVI.
Show me the man (...)
That can administer to minds diseased;
Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow,
Raze out the written troubles of the brain;
And with some sweet oblivious antidote,
Cleanse the full bosom of that perilous stuff
Which weighs upon the heart.
MACBETH.
OUR burlesque theatric hero, having finished his narrative; Melvill engaged
him as a kind of guide, during his stay at Paris, which was about three weeks,
but prudently considering him as one of those who knew too much of low life to
be trusted, dismissed him on setting out for the capital of Spain; on his
arrival at Madrid, our disconted traveller hired lodgings in ane of the most
capital streets, and by frequenting all public places soon contracted a larger
sphere of acquaintance than Spanish reserve, especially to foreigners, seemed
to admit; however, he avoided any particular intimacy except with Don Carios,
who was the only son of a grandee and of one of the most respectable families
in that kingdom. -- This young gentleman was about two and twenty years of age,
handsome in person, elegant in appearance, modest in behavior and undaunted in
danger, constant in friendship, sensible charitable and generous: No wonder
that with these qualifications Melvill and he contracted a sympathetic and
mutual esteem for each other, which in a short time grew into the most
disinterested friendship.

Don Pelajo, the name of Don Carlos's father, had formerly been in the wars,
where he had distinguished himself much for his bravery; he was judicious,
brave (...) prudent: polite and affable to those who were acquainted with him,
but to strangers appeared to have the national haughtiness stamped upon his
deportment; yet even then he rather created respect than disgust, he ma^ried
when very young, but inheriting rather too much of the Spanish jealousy, his
wife led not the happiest life, and left him at the age of twenty nine, a
widower with two children, viz. a son and a daughter, what the former was, the
reader has already heard, I will now, as near as I am able, draw the picture of
his daughter Juliana; who when Melvill first saw her, was about eighteen years
of age. Her size of a delicate medium, her complexion so beautiful that had it
not been the same from her youth, malicious scandal, would have said it was
artificial, her person was genteel, her hair and eyebrows of a beautiful brown,
the former curling in ringlets, over her ivory neck, seemed like a gorgeous
net, to entrap the heart of all beholders, the latter formed two exact bows
over her large blue eyes, which very few dared to look on twice, and her teeth,
to borrow an expression from a favorite author, were like polished ivory set
in a coral bed. -- These personal accomplishments, joined to a good natural
understanding, much improved by art, made the lovely Juliana, the most
accomplished young lady in Madrid.

Such were the father and daughter to whom Don Carlos introduced Melvill as one
of his most particular friends, such was the family by which our hero was much
caressed, and in whose acquaintance he thought himself extremely happy.

Don Pelajo gave him a general invitation to his house, which to rid himself of
those disagreeable thoughts concerning Maria, that he knew would intrude upon
solitude, he co^dially accepted and made almost constant use of: Don Carlos and
he were scarce ever asunder, as instead of calling each other, every time they
met, gave an additional satisfaction to both, always finding that reciprocal
satisfaction when together, which sensible men must meet with in conversing
with persons of equal knowledge

Though in their intercourses Melvill thought himself happy, still there was a
certain Je ne scais quoi in his countenance, that plainly showed he was not so;
Don Carlos could not avoid observing this uneasiness; the real cause of which
the reader knows; and with all the tenderness of affection, insisted on being
acquainted therewith: Melvill could refuse nothing to so dear a friend, and
therefore informing him of the affair concluded with a determined resolution to
forget her, in which he was not a little strengthened by the salutary advice of
his second self, for so he frequently called Don Carlos.

Juliana, though young, had received several offers from men of leading family
and fortune, but conscious that her own estate must one day be very
considerable, she thought herself thereby endowed with an undoubted right, to
please herself in so momentuous a choice; at least such were the arguments her
own mind furnished her with, to paliate what many deemed imprudence, though the
real truth was no other, than that her time was not yet come, she had yet never
seen any one for whom she felt a tender partiality, but alas! of how short a
duration was her enjoyment of this pleasing indifference; for on her first
introduction to Melvill, she was seized with a sensation her heart had hitherto
been an (...) stranger to, her spirits were so fluttered and her (...) was so
disordered, that it was with (...) made any return to the many compliments
which he paid her, and although when he took his leave, her head was so
disturbed, with the thoughts of this English stranger, as totally to destroy
her nights rest, still young and unskilled in all the arts of love, she could
assign no reason for the unusual palpitation of her heart; though her eyes
always sparkled with an additional satisfaction when in his company, and as
very few days passed in which she had not this pleasure; love had made a great
progress in her affections, before she knew it by any other name, than that of
"regard for so dear a friend of her brother's."

Admiring and admired, our hero would have been completely happy, had not that
felicity, as I before said, been destroyed by the thoughts of the seemingly
perfidious Maria, who, in spite of himself, was always the subject of his
private meditations, and although to all outward appearance, he seemed
perfectly easy and composed, still he pined inwardly, and would frequently
exclaim, "Wretch that I am, why was I ever fool enough to declare my passion
for a worthless woman, who must now laugh and despise me for my folly?
Dissembling hypocrite! thus cruelly at one blow to blast my happiness for ever,
just too when I had figured to myself prospects of felicity (...) many years to
come; as an additional misery must I still be doomed to dote upon a woman, who
in open violation of truth and honor, has, after the most solemn promises,
devoted herself to another. No! since she has thus forfeited my esteem, I can,
or must endeavor to banish her from my thoughts."

CHAP. XXVII.
Hence, bashful cunning,
I am your wife, if you will marry me;
If not I Will die your maid; to be your fellow
You may deny me; but I Will be your servant
Whether you will or no.
The Tempest.
WHILE he was thus one day railing against the unfortunate Maria, Don Carlos,
who through a slight partition had heard all he said, unexpectedly entered the
room, and taking his hand in the most affectionate manner, "Indeed said he, my
dear friend this must not be, you promised to drive this English beauty from
your mind, and from your seeming tranquillity and composure, I flattered myself
you had succeeded, remember Henry, those wounds heal ill, which men do give
themselves.

"Oh Don Carloss! interrupted he, I had as you say resolved to forget her, and
firmly meant to keep my resolutions, but alas! I find that I am unequal to the
task, that I have imposed upon myself -- must I confess to you, that I am not
master of my own intents -- that once* amiable girl has such an ascendency over
me; that one thought of her destroys the noblest purposes of my soul. -- I
cannot live without her, and as fate has cruelly thus placed her beyond my
reach -- my final infelicity is sealed.

"For shame, for shame! cried Don Carlos, have you no sense of honor or
resentment of so deep an (...). -- What! when a woman has used you so
shamefully -- still to entertain a passion for her -- rouse yourself and be in
reality the man you seem; consider, if the false ungrateful idol of your
hearts, by her ill usage cannot provoke you to a retaliation, yet consider I
beseech you how criminal it is both in religion and honor to cherish a passion
for another man's wi^e. Think but seriously of this, and from my thorough
knowledge of your heart, I am convinced you will manfully endeavor to forget
her -- Promise me that you will do all in your power toward it, and do not
thus tamely, suffer your passions to overcome your reason."

"Yes, cried Melvill, I am convinced -- I see the justness of your arguments,
and am resolved, henceforth to abandon every consideration of Oak Hall. --
Allons, let us attend your father, who by this time waits for us."

"No, answered Don Carlos, I must first beg your (...) for a few minutes, to
something I have to say."

His friend having bowed assent, he proceeded as follows:

"I little apprehended, when first I commenced an acquaintance with you, that I
should ever have so much occasion to repent thereof, nay, do not imagine that
it is on my own account, seeing him look astonished, on the contrary I know no
man, for whom I have a more sincere regard, nay affection, nor can any one have
more intrinsic merit, but I am sorry, very sorry for one person in this family,
that ever you visited Madrid, as I have great reason to fear, that she is
thereby rendered unhappy for life; you cannot, after what I have said, be
ignorant that I mean the poor captivated Juliana; I must deem her unfortunate,
though by no means culpable, as I do not at all wonder at an inexperienced,
sensible, ingenuous girl, fixing her affections though hastily, on (...)
deserving an object; from the first moment of your arrival, she admired you,
and from her frequent interviews, loved, before she scarcely knew by what name
to title her regard; from her behavior, you surely must have suspected it: I
did, and by the following accident, discovered that my suspicions were not
groundless. --

You must have taken notice, that she is perfectly acquainted with the English
language, nor is she a bad proficient either in the practical or compositive
parts of music, and the other day I was assured of her regard for you, by
overhearing her singing the following little sonnet to her guittar, both the
music any poetry of which, are I find of her own composition.

I.
When Henry first my eyes admired,
I madly thought myself his friend;
Too soon I found 'twas love inspired
Those hopes on which my joys depend.
II.
Ah! may my Henry grateful prove
And make me generous, kind returns;
So may that friendship, turn to love,
Which in his genial bosom burns;
III.
Juliana then, supremely blessed;
Shall by sweet experience prove,
Of every earthly charm possessed
The angelic bliss of faithful love,
On hearing this, I taxed her with her weakness, if it may so be called. By
nature formed (...) and candid she disdains a falsehood of the slightest kind;
therefore generously confessed that she preferred Mr. Melvill to every man in
the world, -- and making me her confident; though she said it must call a blush
into a maiden's cheek, to own her love: desired me to inform you thereof.

Here they were interrupted and Don Carlos was obliged abruptly to break the
thread of his discourse.

CHAP. XXVIII.
-- The worm of peace is surety,
Surety secure; but modest doubt is called
The beacon of the wife; the tent that searches
To the bottom of the wound. --
Troilus and Cressida.
THE next time our two friends were alone, Don Carlos resumed his discourse
from the former chapter.

Conscious, said he, that your affections, were already pre-engaged, though on
an undeserving object, I endeavored to persuade my sister to think no more of
you, and to encourage her thereto, have, for which I hope you will pardon me,
broken the sacred bond of friendship; by informing her of your unhappy
attatchment to Maria, though but in part, as I did not mention any thing of her
being already married, only assuring her, that your whole heart was fixed on a
young lady in England.

Like you my Henry, she was too much in love to hear reason, and it was in
vain, that I urged a favorite sentiment of her own to induce her to forget you
-- they never knew to love who knew to change. -- I in vain asked her what she
should think of you, were you thus dishonorable to transfer your affections
from one to the other, it all signified nothing. -- But as you must, from fatal
experience, know the difficulty of overcoming a misplaced affection, better
than I can pretend to inform you; I will say no more upon the subject. -- In
short, she insisted on my declaring it to you, which as she had been candid
enough to confess it, I could not refuse; nor could I break my word with her,
without adding thereto, the more flagrant crime of falsehood. I have also, as I
though it my duty, informed my father of this affair, who would most joyfully
accept of you for a son in law; I need not surely add, what I hope you are
already convinced of, that I should be highly pleased to join the more
endearing name of brother, to that of friend -- but I fear it will never be --
all that I can now add, is, that I am sorry poor Juliana' happiness depends
upon your answer, as I think, I too plainly read it in your (...).

While Don Carlos was thus speaking, Melvill stood in the greatest perplexity,
undetermined what (...) reply, but finding his friend was waiting for an
answer, as the only resource, he begged some time to consider of so friendly a
proposal and promised to inform him of his resolution, in writing the ensuing
day, after which, they hurried to their usual gay companions, whose vivacity
however was not able to efface the gloom, which the above conversation had
spread upon Melvill's countenance; and when he retired to his bed, it was
without the least inclination to sleep.

He lay ruminating the greatest part of the night on the business of the
subsequent day, so delightful a prospect was not easily renounced. -- A
beautiful virtuous young lady with an immense fortune, were strong temptations
for a man in his circumstances, so very ill used too by that woman where he had
garnered up his heart. -- All these, were great incitements to him to resolve
to abandon Maria for ever and marry Juliana; but then the thoughts of entering
into such an engagement, when he was convinced how firmly his affections were
otherwise fixed; wounded his conscience as a man of honor and integrity, far
too sensibly to suffer him to commit so base an action.

After a long and violent conflict; he determined to make this sacrifice to
Maria; in which he was not a little strengthened, by the first gleam of hope
that he had entertained since his departure, and which shot across his mind
presenting her to his view in her original simplicity and virtue.

Oh the axtatic thought! but alas! it was but the glimmering of a transient
ray, which even the most wretched will sometimes entertain; and which like the
burning taper's light, will be the most apparent, where our darkness and
despair are in the extreme.

A drowning man will catch at every straw. However be that as it may, it fixed
him firmly in her favor, and he had the satisfactory consciousness of having
acted right, and in consequence thereof wrote the next morning as follows.

DEAR CARLOS,
THE honor you intend me, by an alliance to your family, calls for my warmest
and most grateful acknowledgments; permit me, therefore, to assure you, that I
shall always regard it, as a pleasing testimony of your friendship and esteem;
though, at the same time, I must entreat you so excuse me, if for several
reasons, I beg leave to decline your friendly offer; for although I know no
family, of whose affinity I should be more proud, having a great value for Don
Pelajo and yourself; and a most sincere regard for the lovely Juliana; still,
as a great deal beyond esteem is necessary to render the marriage state happy,
and, as by my affections being otherwise unfortunately placed, your sister will
be deprived of that love which every man ought to have for his wife; I cannot
be base enough, from the paltry consideration of money, or the supposed spirit
of revenge, to make a worthy woman unhappy, by giving her my hand without my
heart.

I must therefore wish the generous Juliana, all the felicity this world can
afford, with some more deserving man: -- but, lest my presence should be fuel
to her unhappy passion, I will in a few days remove from Madrid, that absence
may help to effect her cure.

Believe me to be, dear Carlos, much shocked at a separation from such
estimable society; allow me to have a due sense of the honor and happiness
intended me; and view me as one, who will always be proud to subscribe himself,

your very affectionate friend, HENRY MELVILL.


On receipt of the above, Don Carlos hastened to his friend, to thank him for
his kind and prudent intentions, with regard to quitting Madrid; and, at the
same time, insisted on his giving up all thoughts thereof: "as, added he, it
cannot answer no end, Juliana being in a few days going to spend some months
with a relation in the country; you must therefore absent yourself from my
father's till then; and, in the mean time, I Will inform her of your answer." --
which he accordingly did.

This truly amiable girl bo^e the disappointment of her hopes and wishes
heroically; and only replied, "Although so painful to me, I cannot but applaud
his fidelity to some more happy woman; -- may she be deserving of him! and
though I can never be happy, I may perhaps learn contentment."

The time had slipped away ^o agreeably, during our hero's stay at Madrid, that
he had already been there much longer than he at first intended; and, at the
earnest request of his Spanish friends, now wrote to Mr. Howard, to inform him
of his intention of residing there some weeks longer; but that, as it would not
be long enough for him to hear from England, he should not subjoin, his
address. Though this was mere matter of opinion as it was morally impossible,
that he could give any tolerably exact guess at the duration of his stay there,
he did it on purpose that he might hear nothing of Maria, whom he now flattered
himself, he was in a fair way of forgetting.

Vain man! when once affection's rooted in the breast, it is not the dictates of
reason, the immensity of distance, or the grave remarks of frigid prudence,
which can remove it! -- Had he not taken this unaccountable whim into his head,
his felicity might soon have been completed, by having the still unmarried
Maria in his arms: -- but Mr. Howard being thus excluded from any possibility
of writing to him, happiness and he seemed as widely distant, as on the first
day of his departure from England; to which place I must beg to transport my
reader, and leave Melvill with his friends at Madrid, endeavoring to forget a
woman who still doated on him.

CHAP. XXIX.
It Is sweet and commendable in your nature,
To give these mourning duties to your father:
But you must know your father lost a father,
That father his, and the survivor bound
In filial obligation, for some term
To do obsequious sorrow.
HAMLET.
HAPPY in so faithful a friend as Charlotte Howard to sympathize with her in
all her afflictions, after the first tumults of her grief, which AEmily's death
had occasioned, were in some degree subsided, Maria began again to indulge
those melancholy reflections that Melvill's departure had occasioned. With the
heart felt tortures of an unaffected sorrow, she lamented his absence: -- she
grieved for him, it is true: but then that grief was allayed, by sometimes
hearing of his welfare from Mr. Howard; by the consolatory reflections, that he
must one day return: that when he found his error, his former love would
revive, with an additional ardour, for having been thus suppressed; and by the
consideration that they might then be happy, in an union that was no longer
opposed by the harsh commands of an austere parent -- on the contrary, Sir
Thomas endeavored all he could to make her forget his former ill usage; -- he
was continually inventing new pleasures, to divert her from that melancholy,
which the quick succession of two such unfortunate accidents had given her a
turn to: nor was his endeavors wholly unsuccessful; her former serenity of
mind and countenance began, in some measure, to return, to the unspeakable joy
of her over fond parents; -- she again began to be the sprightly Maria Hartry;
-- dutiful to her parents; obligingly good natured to all who knew her; --
beloved by the whole country: -- and from the above considerations, possessed a
tolerable degree of happiness, when another unforeseen accident happened to
deprive her of it; which although it is what every one must meet with, some time
or other, was nevertheless very unexpected at that period; -- being no other
than the death of Sir Thomas, after a few days illness.

Maria felt this loss the more severely, as her father's fondness for her
seemed every day to increase; having as it were, had her restored to his arms,
from the mouth of the all devouring grave: we may therefore reasonably
conclude, that with a heart possessed of extreme sensibility, her grief for the
loss of so good a parent, would be almost immoderate: but being a natural
affliction, no one attempted to restrain it.

Lady Hartry was much too good a woman, not to be sensibly concerned for the
loss of a man who had been united to her by the tender ties of wedlock: neither
could she be supposed to feel the same degree of sorrow for him, as if their
lives had been one continued round of harmonious concord, which no one can
imagine to be the case; as here is was rather a match of obedience to the
inclinations of others, than from any choice of her own: but So Venus wills,
whose power controuls
The fond affections of our souls;
With sportive cruelty she binds
Unequal forms, unequal minds.
FRANCI'S HORACE.

On the death of Sir Thomas, Mr. Howard and Charlotte, removed to Oak-Hall;
that by their company and conversation, they might support the drooping spirits
of the widow and her daughter. -- On opening the will of the deceased, they
found that he had left the whole of his estate to his only son Charles Hartry,
in case he should ever return to own it; out of which, he was to pay the
undermentioned legacies; to his mother, lady Hartry, during her life, the sum
of one thousand pounds annually; to his sister, twenty thousand pounds on
demand; to Charlotte and Melvill, each one thousand pounds; leaving it, as his
last desire, that the latter on his return, should marry Maria; and to Mr.
Howard, whom he appointed his executor, for his trouble therein, two thousand
pounds; but, in case his son should not return, he bequeathed his estate to his
wife, on the same conditions: and after her death, to his daughter Maria; who
now finding herself in possession of an ample independency, determined to offer
it to Melvill, on his return; for which having waited for some months, with
great patience, and no sign thereof appearing, she again began to relapse into
her former melancholy; which Mr. Howard perceiving, proposed to lady Hartry, in
order to diversify the scene, a journey to Bath; saying, that himself and
Charlotte would accompany them.

In hopes of re-establishing her daughter's health, that was visibly declining,
she readily agreed to this proposal; and they, in a few days, accordingly set
out on their journey. Maria was pleased at leaving a place, where every object
served but to remind her of the many happy days she had formerly spent there
nor was her joy a little increased, by the heartfelt satisfaction of being
accompanied by her dear Chalotte: however not to be troublesomely minute, I
shall pass over the particulars of their journey, and proceed to that time when
they were safely lodged on the parade at Bath.

As pleasure was their sole pursuit, their chief care was to spend their time
with the greatest satisfaction to themselves: and as this is by most people
supposed to consist in being a continued round of company, they were the next
day waited on by a number of people, Who all with address and civility came,
And seemed vastly proud of subscribing their name.
New Bath Guide.

Ba^h was now in its greatest splendour; that is to say, was so very full, that
a lodging could scarcely be had for love or money: they met with many families
of their acquaintance, who soon introduced them to a larger circle, and to all
the public places. A few nights after their arrival, they went to the rooms,
when as is usual on the appearance of any new faces, a buzzing whisper ran
round the company -- such as, who are they? when did they come? where do they
lodge? the youngest is amazing handsome? and many other remarks, equally
curious and impertinent, which all people think custom has given them an
undoubted right to make, on the appearance of strangers. Maria, indeed looked
uncommonly beautiful; the gloominess of her habit was well suited to her
countenance, which had a pleasing mark of sorrow diffused over it, occasioned
by her late loss: -- affliction had touched her looks with something that was
scarce earthly, still she was ^emenine.

CHAP. XXX.
Came there a certain lord, neat trimly dressed
Fresh as a bridegroom, and his chin new reaped,
Shaved like a stubble land at harvest home;
He was perfumed like a milliner;
And 'twixt his finger and his thumb he held
A (...) which ever and anon
He gave his nose, and took't away again.
The first part of King Henry IV.
CHARLOTTE being an unusual smart girl, soon engaged a partner for the evening;
and Maria had not been long seated, before Lord Dapperwit advancing in a minuet
step, with a pert, though genteel air, begged the honor of her hand, which she
as politely refused; adding, that she did not intend dancing that evening.

With any other man th^n Lord Dapperwit, here the conversation would of course
have dropped; but he with a polite effrontery replied, that he had come to the
rooms with the same intention; but on seeing so amiable a lady, could not deny
himself the satisfaction o^ asking her (...); but since she was not inclined to
^o him th^^ fav^^^, begged he might have the honor of (...) by her: she nodded
assent, and my (...) his place accordingly. Before I proceed, it may not be
improper to give some further account of this nobleman, who being possessed of
a very large estate, thought himself thereby qualified to do whatever he
plesed; which pleasure his lordship once carried so far, as very narrowly to
escape being run through the body, for pleasing to be insolently rude to a lady,
whose cause a gentleman in company chose to espouse, and called his lordship to
a pretty severe account for his behavior; nor was this the only scrape he got
into, by the invariable disposition of doing whatever he had a mind to, because
he had money: but he looked upon them all as actions worthy a buck, in which
ideal character it was the height of his ambition to shine.

Being of course a pattern of pertness and affectation, this entirely obscured
his natural parts, which were, in themselves, far from contemptible; and, in
proper hands, might have been made use of to the establishment of a commendable
character: he likewise though it himself very witty, always endeavoring to appear
so, by abusing every body he saw, whether he knew them or not, in what he
called a pleasant vein of humor; which only served to render him in the eyes
of all sensib^e people more thoroughly ridiculous: for it was as Churchil says,
-- Aiming at wit, though levelled in the dark.


Hearing himself talk, right or wrong, was the height of his ambition; he was,
in short, what is generally understood "by a polite man of quality;" that is to
say, he was a mean sharper at Arthur's. -- a frantic buck at the Thatched House
-- a numscull politician at the Cocoa Tree -- and a coxcomb every where; and
though no one was more exactly constant in running the rapid and tedious circle
of polite pleasures; yet his love for gaming was by far the most predominant
passion, he contrived to allot the greatest part of his time to the indulgence
of that passion: and as Bath is perfectly calculated to prosecute such a scheme
he generally attended there every season, to impose on ^he ignorant, with some
of those tricks, which his (...) in town, from being as wise as himself, could
not ^e taken in by: and indeed this was his business in the rooms at that time:
but Maria unluckily happening to strike his view, ^e determined to ask her to
dance, which he did in the urgent manner above related.

He was no sooner seated, than he began to ask several familiar questions; --
as, how long she had been at Bath? -- how she liked it? -- how long she
proposed s^aying? -- with many others equally trifling and it significant: to
all which Maria answered with the greatest complacence and good nature.

The conversation had for some time stopped when she unhappily at once gave him
an opportunity of resuming (...), and displayed his satirical (...), by
inadvertently asking, if he knew who the gentleman was, that was then dancing a
minuet?

"O! that madam, said he, is, enter nous, as errant a rascal as ever lived; I
never heard his name; -- but am perfectly acquainted with his character, which
is all I desire to know of him; for he is a fellow whom nobody chooses to be
seen with. -- He is worth money* which he gets in London by stock-jobbing, and
comes down to Bath every year to spend it, by setting up for a beau; -- but you
see madam, he has not the true natural air, -- it is all studied, -- all
affected; he moves as aukwardly, as if he never had a laced coat on before; --
a perfect puppet on wires; -- like the print of grown gentlemen taught to
dance, -- ha! ha! ha!"

"Do you see that lady in the mazarine blue and silver sack? -- she, madam, was
no more than a milliner's apprentice in Tavistock street, when Sir Henry Rattle
took her into his good graces." -- Thus was this popinjay running on, abusing
people, without one word of truth, and many whom he had never before seen, as
an amusement for a young lady of sense, above scandal; thinking that, as with
most others of his acquaintance, he could thus chatter himself into her good
graces.

With what justice may the rigid moralists of the age exclaim against so
shocking a prostitution, both of time and words! and yet is it not amazing,
that though every body seems convinced of the truth hereof, they should all be
encouragers of these modern Foppingtons, by regarding their folly as a fit
object for ridicule and laughter, rather than contempt or neglect.

CHAP. XXXI.
Blame not the belles, since modern times can show.
That ape of female foppery, called a beau.
The CONNOISSEUR.
LORD Dapperwit having for a long while thus ^at wearying his hearer, with all
the insignificance of folly, though at the same time with the most superficial
insolence of pride, at length grew so troublesome, that poor Maria could no
longer bea^ him with any degree of patience, she therefore thinking to get rid
of him, hastened to another part of the room; but our modern Lothario, was not
to be so easily shaken off: for, immediately following, he again seated himself
close at her elbow; in short, she several times shifted har station, and he as
often pursued her, all the while making attempts to find where she lodged,
which she had (...) determined not to let him know, justly imagining, that if
she did, he would be a continual torment to her.

His lordship not at all discouraged by the evasive answers he received, still
kept with her, continuing to prattle an infinity of small talk, or rather
nothing, i^return to which, she scarcely spoke ten words the whole evening; so
that though they were together, he could hardly be said to enjoy her company.

Quite harrass'd with this coxcomb's importunity, as her only resource, though it
was then early, she determined to leave the rooms; which resolution she
communicated to her mother, who was (...) at ^^ards; at the same time informing
her of the (...), as she likewise did her friend Charlotte: when my lord, from
over-hearing a few words, guessing what was her design, insisted on attending
her home: and she as strongly insisted that he should not, however, he was much
too well bred a gentleman to take any denial, and all her remonstrances would
have signified but little, had not an intimate, of my lord's such another as
himself, luckily at that instant, laid hold of his button, to tell him some
important gambling event, during which lucky interim, Maria made her escape,
inwardly pleased, as she then thought, thus to have got rid of so troublesome a
puppy; but alas! it proved far otherwise; for when my lord perceived that she
was gone, without his having been able to find out her place of residence, he
began abusing the person who had thus stopped him.

"I wish Mellifont, said he, with all my heart, you had been at the devil, ere
I Would met you; for I have been in company the whole evening with the sweetest
girl upon earth, and now your d -- 'd unlucky face has prevented me from
finding out where she lodges; she has given me the slip as I live. -- Egad she
is a delicate morsel, and I would not loose her for five hundred pounds."

"Oh, is that all, answered his friend, don't let such a trifle give you any
uneasiness, for, in the common course of things, no girl in Bath can be
concealed from me many days; -- but here, I can at once put you into a sure
method of discovering her: -- she seems intimate with the lady, meaning
Charlotte* that is dancing with Sir Thomas Atwell, who will most assuredly wait
on his partner tomorrow; it will therefore be the easiest thing in life, by
only speaking to him, to gain some further particulars concerning her."

"You have nicked it, my dear boy, replies his lordship, and then, my buck." --

"And then, what! interrupted Mellifont, why, surely you can have no design to
metamorphose yourself, from the gay lord Dapperwit, into a sober, sedate
husband." --

"Husband! re echoed his lordship, pardonnez moy, no such intentions, on the
word of a gentleman, -- the farthest thing in the world from my thoughts; -- oh
^he burgeois. -- Matrimony indeed! -- no, no, I have other chemes (...)
agitation: -- I suppose the girl has little or no fortune, and I think, she
cannot have ma^y objections to being housekeeper to the right honorable lord
Dapperwit, -- you understand me, -- ha, Mellifont, but as I shall most likely
want your assistance, call on me tomorrow evening, when we will talk further
on the subject: -- ^on't fail me: -- till then, adieu, -- and in the interim,
-- vive l'amour; -- and thus the two friends parted.

The reader must by this time perceive what were this nobleman's intentions,
with regard to Maria; he made no doubt, but that it would be an easy matter for
a person of his figure and consequence, to do what he pleased with a silly,
credulous girl, for with him every girl was such; he therefore made it his
business to wait on Charlotte's partner the next day, and from him learnt all
that he desired to know concerning Maria* and though he was not a little
pleased at this discovery, yet at the same time he began to consider, that as
she was a girl of fortune and knowledge, he should meet with more difficulty in
the execution of his scheme, than he was at first aware of; and as he saw no
probability of ever bringing it to perfection, was on the point of resolving to
give up all further thoughts thereof, when Mellifont, according to appointment,
entered the room; but as this gentleman, will in all likelihood, cut no (...)
figure in this part of the history, I must beg (...) make my readers better
acquainted with him, that when they know his character, they may not be
surpised at any of his deeds; for it is the actions which proclaim the man.

CHAP. XXXII.
To be obliged to minister to another man's vices for a wretched subsistence,
is to degrade human nature below the brutes. SCHOOL for RAKES.
MR. MELLIFONT was the youngest son of a gentleman in Shropshire, and therefore
of course, he could not be supposed to have fortune sufficient to enable him to
live independent of the world: this being the case, he was placed out in the
capacity of a clerk in one of the most capital mercantile-houses (...) London,
the regularity of which life, did not suit the gaiety of the young gentleman's
disposition; who finding the air of the city too heavy for his constitution,
made frequent excursions to the other end of the town, and was sometimes absent
from his business a week together, for which, on his return, he was always
severely reprimanded by his master; but these (...), instead of producing any
amendment, (...) to heighten his dislike to the counting house; he was
therefore rarely seen in it, but commencing at once the petit maitre and fine
gentleman, (characters, which too many young men are ambitious of attaining)
took lodgings near Covent Garden, and wasted his time in what is commonly
called a continual round of pleasure, or in other words, of noisy debauchery,
and profligate excess.

As it was very well known, that on the death of his father, he must come into
four thousand pounds, which had been settled on him by his grandmother, he
found people enough ready to advance him money, at an exorbitant interest.

In this manner did he live, contracting debts on the strength of his future
fortune, never once considering, that he was spending it, without the
enjoyment, or even possession thereof: -- buried in vices and obscenity, the
recollection of which, in his cooler moments, filled him with inexpressible
anguish; for every man must sometimes think, ruining his constitution, and
vitiating his principles, to say nothing of his continual fears lest he should
be arrested by some of those people whom he had disappointed in promising them
payment; but as he never gave himself time or trouble to think seriously, for
any continuance, these things could make but a momentary impression on him.

He continued in this course of life for nea^ four years, during which time, he
contracted a numerous acquaintance among people of the ^ame stamp with himself,
on all of whom he pa^s'd himself for a man of fortune; and, under this
character, gained something from most of them, that is to say, he learnt
convenience from pick-pockets and sharpers, cringing from pimps, audacity from
bullies, and the noble (...) of contrivance from prostitutes: under which five
heads, we shall conclude the whole circle of his acquaintance: he was now in
continual axpectation of his father's death, which at length happened; not a
little hastened by his favorite sons behavior, to whom he had frequently
represented the unavoidable consequences of such proceedings, but in vain: --
pleasure was the object of his pursuit, nor did he care at how dear a rate he
purchased it, though were by the death of an indulgent parent.

This happy time once arrived, he came immediately into the possession of his
long expected fortune, and notwithstanding he had been pre acquainted with the
exact sum, was amazed to find himself much poorer than he was aware of; for,
after having paid the money he had borrowed, with the interest thereof, his
tailor, hosier, etc. out of the four thousand he had received, he found himself
in actual possession of but five hundred; a good stock ^loaths, and some little
dear bought experience.

He now, for once in his life, began to think seriously; he considered, that at
the rate he went on, he should soon see the end of his five hundred pounds; and
as necessity is the mother of invention, began to look out for some method
whereby he might increase it; when only two presenting themselves to his fancy,
namely, either to buy a share in some shop with the money he then had, or else
continue in the state of a fine gentleman, and by persuading some rich widow or
heiress, for once in THEIR lives, to step into a hired carriage, thereby be
enabled to ride in his own, for the rest of HIS; he was not ^long in
determining upon the latter, which was far the most agreeable to his
inclinations; and from his great skill in the art of imposition, had so far
brought his scheme to bear, a^ to be on the point of running away with a young
(...), on whom he had palm'd him* himself for a nobleman of (...), when the
prying officiousness of his intended lady's chambermaid, (...) his title was
borrowed, and that all his estate, and of course his gentility, consisted in a
laced coa^, an^ a large stock of impudence, the latter of which qualifications
he stood greatly in need of, to extricate himself from the affair.

Thus by an unexpected blast, were all the (...) his future felicity destroyed,
just when he had brought them to the summit of perfection; and as he now found
it would be impossible to put his scheme into execation in London, he hurried
down to Bath on the same errand, where he became personally acquainted with
Lord Dapperwit, who was before by no means ignorant of his name or profession,
though for reasons best known to himself, he had chose to conceal them from
Maria; for ^indeed this was the gentleman whom he had represented as a
stock-jobber.

One would imagine that this nobleman must re^ive a peculiar pleasure in thus
considering people in characters which they had no right to, as it was his
constant practice, and which, as he valued himself very much upon it, he
sometimes facetiously, and not improperly termed, a masquerade in the mind's
eye.

But to return from this digression: lord Dapperwit thinking Mellifont would be
a useful man in the execution of any villainy, made him an (...) living with
him as a companion, and occasional upper servant, or in other words, as a
servile parasite, o^ whom he might tauntingly exercise all his cruelty, without
any dange^ of resentment, which was joyfully accepted; and surely, this very
circumstance of agreeing to live with any nobleman on such terms must to every
delicate mind, sufficiently show the man in his true colors: for what person
who has the least degree of principle or honest pride, would, while (...) to
provide for himself, stoop, and conform to all the humors of a debauched
nobleman for a subsistence, which notwithstanding he may live in all the
splendor and expense of pomp, is still shameful scandalous and mean; must not
an^ man ^eel a (...) degree of innate satisfaction, when sitting down to a
p^ain homely meal, which he knows to ^e the (...) nest industry, than to be
pampered with delicacies for some well executed act of wickedness, by a rascal
of a lord? -- but nature has fashioned strange creatures in her time, and one
of these was Mellifont.

CHAP. XXXIII
One (...) another's heels,
So fast they follow.
HAMLET.
THE gentleman, whose history I related in my last chapter, entered the room,
just as my lord had determined to give over all (...) pursuit of Maria; crying
with his usual impudent vivacity; -- "Well, (...) lord, may I give you joy? --
have you found out who this ^air incognita is? -- this terrestial angel?"

"Yes, replied his master, with a sullen discontentedness, -- I have, -- her
name is Hartry, -- she has twenty thousand pounds at her own disposal, and as
it will therefore be impossible to put my schemes into execution, I have
resolved to think no more of her." --

Impossible? there is nothing impossible to your lordship's parts, titles and
fortune, rejoined Mellifont, I thought you had been a man of more intrepidity,
than to give up a girl, because she has money; that will indeed prevent your
making the intended proposals, but it can be no impediment to the
accomplishment of your wishes." --

"How, how, demanded my lord, eagerly."

Why, replied he, it will be an easy matter to watch her some night from the
rooms, -- put her into a wrong chair, -- have a carriage waiting. -- force her
into it, -- whirl her down to your house in Wales, where it will be impossible
for her friends to find her; and then you know force and fear may induce her to
what her inclination perhaps would resist."

"Bravo replied my lord, E'gad that will do; 'twill make a noise in the world,
and give a double relish to delight; thou shall be my oracle and direct all; I
must now dress, and hope before morning, to nick Sir John Softhead out of a
thousand: call on me tomorrow forenoon, and we'll settle the glorious plan of
amorous operations."

Thus were these two villains planning schemes for the ruin of an innocent
girl, while she was unknowingly giving them an opportunity of putting them in
execution, by going to the rooms a few evenings after the above conference.

On her entrance the first object that struck her eyes was Mellifont: who
having already prepared every thing necessary, hastened to inform my lord of
this lucky circumstance; who thought proper not to make his appearance, till it
was time to execute their project.

Unhappily for poor Maria, the night seemed to favor their design, being very
rainy, accompanied with a great deal of thunder and lightning.

On her wanting to go home, to her great surprise, her servant was not to be
found: and she, of course, prevented from getting to her chair: while she was
standing in this situation, my lord, who had taken care to have her servant
made drunk at a neighboring alehouse, appeared, and finding what was the
cause of her dilemma, made her an offer of his sedan, which was just by, and
which after some little apology, she was too easily prevailed on to accept.

While they were standing together, in the course of conversation, he had asked
her, whether she was afraid of the lightning? of which having expressed great
apprehensions, when ^e put her into the chair, he made that a plea for (...)
her to draw the curtains close; which she accordingly did. My lord, elate with
joy at his success, now walked as fast as he could before the chairmen, to show
them the way; and whom the reward of a couple of guineas, made proceed at an
unusual rate.

They had already got upon the turnpike road, when our heroine, thinking they
were very long in carrying her home, opened the curtains, to see where she was;
-- but, good heavens! what was her astonishment, when she sound herself in an
open country, near a mile from Bath, and lord Dapperwit, whom by the moon being
just risen, she could easily distinguish walking before, at a small distance.

When she had so far recovered, from the first violent effects of her
amazement, as to be able to speak, she begged the chairmen to stop, and i^form
her, whither they were carrying her; to which she received no other answer,
than being desired to sit still: -- but, added one of them, "I believe your
journey with us is almost at an end: as I think I see the carriage before us."
--

She then too plainly saw into my lord's villainy; and with tears in her eyes,
entreated the chairmen to return: -- in vain did she endeavor to persuade
them; -- in vain did she promise any reward; -- it was all to no purpose: --
had it been their inclination, it was impossible; her seducer was just before
and had his eyes constantly fixed upon the chair.

As her only resource therefore, she was obliged to call in patience to her
assistance and hope the best.

The chair having now stopped, my lord handed her into a post coach; at the
same time telling her, that it would be to no purpose to make any resistance;
which she was too well convinced of before: and considering that, as it was
impossible for her to escape, she should fa^e the better, if she gave them no
occasion to use her roughly, quietly seated herself in the carriage next to her
betrayer: -- Mellifont who had been waiting for them, having previously placed
himself on the other side, and in this situation, they drove away at an immense
pace, a profound silence for some time being observed by all the parties.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Can the poor seaman's humble prayer,
When high their heads the billows beat,
To silence hush the flood?
Can the lamb's feeble cries restrain.
The midnight horrors of the plain,
When lions roar for food?
II.
So weak is reason to control,
Or sooth the tempest of the soul,
When passions tear the breast;
Though earnest the expiring groan,
Though moving as the plaintive moan
Of innocence distressed.
HOYLAND's POEMS.
DURING the first ten miles of their journey, poor Maria was dissolved in
tears, and her swelled heart beat, as if it would have burst its tender prison,
in which state of melancholy insensibility, like an ox going to the slaughter,
or a lamb dumb before its shearers, did she remain for some time; till,
recollecting that her tears would do but little toward her enlargement, she at
last took courage to speak to her seducer. --

In the most pathetic manner, she entreated him not to make her miserable for
life, by thus dividing her from all that she valued upon earth: -- she made use
of every argument in her power to persuade him to restore her to her friends;
but alas! she found they were in vain. -- Had she been endowed with the
persuasion of a Cicero, or a Demosthenes, they would all have been ineffectual;
he was therefore surely not to be worked upon, by what he deemed, the
supplications of an unschooled girl: he was pleased to the highest degree, at
the success of his scheme; and only answered to all that she said with
sullenness, or by a cutting misplaced raillery.

They had traveled in this manner, about three hours, when they stopped to
change horses; which, ^s Maria knew they must do, she had flattered herself
with the expectation of then finding some means for her escape; but our
determined Lothario, thanks to the school of vice, in which he had been
educated, was not so bad a master of his trade; -- he had taken ^care to have
proper relays of horses on the (...), and therefore, without being delayed any
(...) time, they traveled in this expeditio^s manner, till about ten o'clock,
when he asked Maria, if she chose any breakfast? which being (...) gave fresh
orders to his servants to proceed; saying, (...) he should not stop till the
afternoon. And as (...) thought himself too for from Bath to ^ear being
^vertaken, he endeavored to enter into conversation with her, by asking a long
string of impertinent questions; to all which she answered with the utmost
civility and complacence, thinking it best so to do; but her attention was too
much engaged, by the melancholy prospect before her, to suffer any one to share
in it but Melvill; of him indeed she secretly thought, and for his sake
determined to part with her life, sooner than, what was to her, and should be
to every woman, dearer than life, -- her honor.

About four o'clock they alighted to dinner, at a lone farmhouse, from whence
there was no possibility of her escaping, nor any person to compassionate her
situation; so that the hopes with which she had hitherto buoyed herself up,
were now entirely destroyed: and not to trouble my readers with all the
particulars of a disagreeable journey, I shall content myself with saying,
that, after having proceeded at a most furious rate, for a night and a day, she
^ound herself in an old ruinated mansion, without any other house in sight; in
what part of the world she could not tell: but from the immense mountains
behind, she judged it to be, as indeed it really was, on the borders of Wales;
-- on her arrival at this mansion of vice, as it was then late, she was
conducted into a bed chamber, by a person who, from her appearance, she took to
be the house keeper.

Having no inclination to sleep, for indeed her misfortune, touched her too
nearly, to suffer her to take any rest, she threw herself upon the bed, without
undressing; and, having spent some hours in fruitless endeavors, to gain a
short respite from her misery, by slumber, the following lamentations broke
from her lips:

"Wretch that I am! where will my calamities end? am I forever doomed to be the
sport of fortune? -- alas! why was I not permitted to die while an infant, and
by that means to have escaped the many miseries I was born to suffer? -- but
let me not arraign the All-wise, for through his goodness, I may still be
happy; although the path, to my weak sight, appears inextricable." --

"Oh Melvill! were you but acquainted with my sufferings, and knew how much I
stand in need of your assistance -- I Am sure you would joyfully bestow it; but
why do I still think of him? or, to what purpose do I own my love? he quits his
native land to fly from me: -- but my poor mother! -- what tortures now must
she endure? alas! how must her dear heart bleed for her afflicted daughter?" --
In this manner did she spend the greatest part of the night, while he that was
the cause of her misfortunes, slept as serenely, as if blessed with native
innocence; but, as misery cannot endure for ever, the tender nature of Maria,
being almost wo^n out, at length gave way to peaceful slumber, that balm of
hurt minds, chief nourisher of life's great feast; and she had, for some time,
lost her senses in a delusive dream, when the entrance of a servant, who came
to bring her fresh ^loaths, awakened her, to recollect the poignant situation
she was in.

As soon as she was dressed, she was conducted to my lord who after breakfast,
began to take some unjustifiable liberties with her; upon which she a* again
implored him on her knees, not to detain her longer against her will: and
attempted to represent to him, the sinfulness of his inhospitable treatment;
but as, to use his own expression, he was not then in a humor for moralizing:
he left her, saying, that he would give her two days for consideration thereon*
but that if, at the end of that time, she still obstinately refused to gratify
his wishes -- force should prevail.

This was a terrible declaration for the afflicted Maria; who fixing her lovely
eyes steadfastly on the ground, seemed for some time stupefied by thought; at
length rising triumphantly, she exclaimed "Yes -- it shall be so -- I am
determined -- firmly fixed -- that if before the end of two days, no apparent
means for my escape are found -- I will at once put an end to all my
heart-rending miseries -- by -- by what? oh distracting thought! by suicide."
-- Then again dropping on her knees, and clasping her hands, she cried, "I know
the heinousness of the crime, I have resolved to commit -- I see it in its full
force -- terrible to think of, and shocking to human nature -- but still I hope
for mercy -- I hope that the absolute necessity for the action -- my prefering
death, and that by my own hand too, to the loss of my honor, will, in some
measure, palliate and atone for the attrociousness of the deed; and that the
all-wise Being will in another world, pardon the wickedness of a crime, which
misery and despair have drove me to in this -- a crime, which even under these
circumstances, makes my nature shudder, and almost abhor her own resolves."

CHAP. XXXV.
There is some soul of goodness in things evil,
Would men observingly distill it out.
HENRY V.
WHEN our heroine had made the dreadful resolution, with which I concluded my
last chapter she seemed much more calm and easy than before: and in order to
amuse herself, took up her favorite author, Shakespeare, which lay on a table
by her; when on opening it, the first words on which she cast her eyes were, --
Against self-slaughter
There is a prohibition, so divine,
That cravens my weak hand.
CYMBELINE.

On reading this sentence, it was with the greatest difficulty, that she could
support herself, after the impious determination she had just made, she could
not look upon it as entirely accidental, but on the contrary, rather considered
it as a rebuke from above for the sinfulness o^ her intentions, and as a
warning against executing them; in vain did she attempt to argue with herself,
that it was merely fortuitous (...) she pitched upon that particular (...)
could not be persuaded of it, and if that was the (...), she determined to
(...) thereby: -- in short, the firmness and intrepidity she had just boasted
-- were vanished -- the light in which she had before considered the deed, to
make it justifiable, was changed -- thrice happy would it be, were every one
(...) to reap advantage from an accident, I do not mean in the like case, as it
is to be hoped, that no one, however unhappy, will ever be thus induced to
forget the supreme duty which he owes to his Creator and himself; neither would
I be understood to signify, that every one is blessed with so timely and
forceable a warning; all that I would wish to inculcate by these reflections,
is, to advise the children of adversity, when they have made a resolution,
however trifling or momentous, previous to the execution thereof; seriously to
ask their own consciences, whether, what they are about to do is justifiable,
either in the sight of God or man? and I am thoroughly convinced, they will
need no other monitor to advise them what course to take.

But to return to poor Maria, the above affair made so deep an impression on
her mind, that she could no more recover her tranquillity, but almost distracted
by the equal counterpoise of doubt and fear, passed the day in the most painful
uncertainty which way to act; and after a restless night, rose in the morning
regarding herself as a victim, destined for a sacrifice, to the base purposes
of infamous nobility: and although she had now laid aside all thoughts of
revenging herself upon herself, still she resolved to part with life, in
preference to her honor, well knowing, that the former is a debt which all
must pay, and that nothing ever can justify a deprivation of the latter;
however before she attempted to repel force by force, she dedetermined again to
use all her rhetoric, to persuade him to relinquish his designs: and as she
knew he had no love for her, exclusive of gross gratifications, which disgrace
the character of a man: she flattered herself, that when he should see the
crime in its true light, that some spark of that goodness, nature has planted
in every breast* would check the violence of his passions; but we are all too
apt to judge of others by ourselves, this was her own way of thinking, and
therefore she vainly thought, it must be his likewise. --

Happy indeed, would it have been for her, had her opinion been founded on just
grounds, as he would then never have violated the laws of humanity, by thus
basely violating her inclinations and peace of mind; however luckily she had no
occasion to make use of her elocution, had it depended on that only, it would
indeed have gone hard with her; -- but while she was sitting at breakfast,
Mellifont, whom she had not before seen since her arrival, entered the room,
and having enquired after her health, etc. told her the occasion of his visit,
as follows:

"I have, said he, madam, much against my inclinations, been concerned in
bringing you here, but it was not in my power to avoid it: I am a dependant on
Lord Dapperwit, and must obey his commands; -- he knew it, he knew that I da^ed
not act contrary to his will, and therefore ungenerously used his power, by
making me a party i^ this affair; from the beginning of which, I sincerely
pitied you, though I dared not openly express it, but am now come to convince you
thereof: my lord is (...) out, and will not return till the evening, if you
please, I Will conduct you to your friends -- but, as by so doing, I must
inevitably lose my subsistence; I shall expect a handsome gratuity for running
this (...)."

As our heroine was not in a condition to hesitate she readily promised him a
thousand pounds, as soon as he should deliver her to Mr. Howard, and thanked
her preserver in the most expressive terms, for his goodness; -- after which,
they set out together on foot, and having walked about two miles, arrived at an
inn, from whence they took a post chaise, and proceeded with all speed toward
Bath.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Adversity with poignant dart,
By wounding purifies the heart,
Expels each baleful weed?
She prunes each wild luxuriant shoot,
Her scion bears the nobler fruit
Of virtue's heavenly seed.
The EXEMPLANT MOTHER.
WHEN Maria had got so far from the house of her betrayer, as no longer to be
under any apprehensions of a pursuit, she again took an opportunity of thanking
her deliverer, in the most grateful terms: tho he was by no means deserving
thereof, as it was not honor, but avarice, which actuated him in this affair;
and, to say the truth, he was in it playing the double villain, having just
before, received a large sum from lord Dapperwit, for his assistance in
bringing away Maria: and was now injuring that nobleman, by aiding and being
privy to her escape: indeed he made no scruple of the latter, as it was
performing a good action; had it not, it would have been the same; for
friendship, gratitude, and every other virtue, would have given way to that
demon, self-interest.

When within about fifty miles of Bath, Maria had the happiness of meeting Mr.
Howard, who was then going in search of her. Great was the joy on both sides,
at this unexpected re-encounter: after the expression of which, our heroine
took an opportunity of informing Mr. Howard of all that had happened to her,
since their separation; as likewise of her promise to Mellifont; to whom, after
having made proper acknowledgments for his behavior, he g^ve a draught on his
banker, payable at sight, for the agreed on sum, with a cordial invitation into
-- shire; and having dined together, they then parted, Mellifont for London, to
receive his thousand pounds, and Mr. Howard, with his charge for Bath: on their
road to which place, he gave the following answer to her questions, concerning
the reason why they had so long delayed sending in quest of her.

"Indeed my dear, said he, you totally mistake the affair, as I can assure you,
that we proceeded with all possible expedition, in our endeavors to recover
you; when, after waiting a tedious length of time, we found you did not return
from the rooms; -- you may easily imagine the consternation we were in, and
with what painful anxiety we spent the rest of the night; -- in the morning I
made strict enquiry after you all over the town, but to no purpose; nor could
we tell what to think of so extraordinary an affair; we had no suspicion of
lord Dapperwit, nor indeed of any one else; and should have been totally at a
loss what course to have taken, had it not been for an anonymous letter, I that
day received, informing me, you were carried to London. This as I have since
discovered, was sent by the lord's own orders, to put us into a wrong track;
however in consequence thereof, I immediately set out for town, making
inquiries after you at every inn on the road, though, as you may imagine, to no
purpose. I now began to suspect the trick that had been played me; when
remembering that Lord Dappperwit was missed from Bath, at the same time with
yourself, without any one being acquainted with his design; and likewise
recollecting that he had a house in Caermarthenshire, I thought is most likely
that were he your seducer, he had carried you thither, and therefore resolved
upon paying him a visit; on my road to which place I was, when my joyful
meeting with you, happily prevented me from pursuing my journey: and I hope we
shall soon distribute happiness to a miserable family by our arrival at Bath."

Maria then made tender inquiries after her mother and Charlottee, whom he
informed her were well when he left them; but that he was under great
apprehensions, lest the grief which lady Hartry must inevitably feel, for not
hearing of her daughter, would be too much for her constitution, which was
already not a little impaired, by the repeated shocks she had lately undergone:
nor were his suspicions groundless; as on their arrival they found her ill in
bed, and Charlotte in a situation almost similar.

To describe the meeting between these friends, requires the efforts of an
abler pen than mine; I shall therefore by dropping a curtain over so pathetic a
scene, leave every one ^o figure to themselves what I cannot find terms to give
them an adequate idea of, and content myself with observing, that there was
never a stronger proof of the verity of the old remark, "That we find more joy
in the company of one that is reg^in'd, than twenty, who have never been lost;"
than in this instance.

As lady Hartry's peace of mind was now restored, she daily grew better, and in
a short time, had no other remains of her disorder left, than an unusual
langour of spirits; when judging it most expedient, to leave Bath as soon as
possible, they determined to spend the ensuing winter in London, at which place
they arrived without any m^teri^l accident* and were soon comfortably settled
in a ready furnished house in Pall-M^ll, where, as neither of the young ladies
had ever been before, they found sufficient employment for all their
leisure-hours.

Having thus ^rought them to so sa^e a place, I shall now quit them, and once
more beg my readers company, to visit an old acquaintance at Madrid; though
before I take my entire leave of London I cannot forbear communicating to him a
piece of news, at which, I don't doubt, he will be full as much surprised, as
were the newly arrived family; who, at their first interview with Sir Henry
Summers, had the mortification of hearing from him, that Mr. Martin, who, for
the first three months after poor AEmily's death, seemed inconsolable for her
loss, and to have vowed a state of perpetual celibacy, was on the point of
marriage with a young lady of immense fortune. --

Since such is the unaccountable caprice of the inconstancy of human nature;
who will place any confidence in the resolves of man? which too often like
characters graven upon sand, are liable to be effaced by every adventitious
blast.

CHAP. XXXVII.
-- She never told her love
But let concealment like a worm in the bud,
Feed on her damask cheek: she pined in thought,
And sat like patience, on a monument, smiling at grief.
SHAKESPEARE.
WHILE Maria was involved in those distressful circumstances, Melvill remained
if not happy, at least tranquil, with his friends at Madrid, whose company he
found ^o agreeable, that he seemed to have renounced all inclinations for
returning to England; and although he was conscious, that his presence there,
would in a few months be necessary on account of his coming of age; still it is
very uncertain, when he would have prevailed upon himself to make the voyage,
had it not have been for the death of po^r Juliana; who, however her outward
behavior, might indicate a total annihilation of her unhappy passion, still
inwardly retained the same ardent affection for our hero as ever, which
notwithstanding there separation, instead of abating, seemed every day to
increase; but having once refused her hand, she had too much commendable pride,
to endeavor to gain by solicitation, the affections of a man, who could not
love her from inclination, and though she was conscious of the impropriety of
her conduct, had not resolution to abandon him from her mind, but inwardly
lamenting her unhappy fate, she pined in thought; and in the blooming vigor of
her life, became a martyr to a misplaced passion. --

Death alone, could give a respite to those tortures from which, during her
woe-fraught life, she knew no ease. --

To you, ye virgins, who by nature are endowed with an uncommon share of
tenderness and sensibility, this story is addressed; whose minds, like the fair
surface of an unsullied snow, are susceptible of every impression, which the
rude ^oot-steps of the passing traveller, may chance to make: -- In every age,
-- in every clime, -- al^ sages have agreed, that examples strike, when
precepts ^ail; -- in lovely Juliana's lot, behold, the sad effects of
disappointed love: from her example, learn never to fix your heart upon a
stranger, until you know whether he is deserving of, or has it in his power to
receive the gift: -- suffer not your eyes to gaze on his admired perfections,
lest when you express your approbation you should imbibe the poison of a
hopeless, and thereby finish your existence; -- leave not your parents, sister,
-- brother, -- friend, to mourn for their departed child, or friend: -- let
this poor maiden's couse, serve-as a boy for you; to shun the rock which she
has split on; so shall the living by the dead be taught, -- but a truce with
grave reflections; -- she is gone: -- peace attend her spirit, -- for
impotently vain is every lamentation for her loss: or in short, any loss of a
temporal nature.

The whole family imagined Juliana's disorder to be a consumption, but with,
her latest breath, and never till then, did she confess the miserable cause of
her indisposition: -- a broken heart.

Nobody that was acquainted with her perfections, when living, could help
pitying her fate, when dead; as did Melvill, perhaps more sincerely than any
other; but finding that although involuntarily, he nevertheless was considered
as the sole author of her death: and that instead of a hearty welcome from Don
Pelajo, he met with nothing but a cold reception, with far-fetched compliments;
he determined once more to visit his native soil, though he dreaded to see a
place, where he had once experienced such uninterrupted felicity, and much more
to see her, who was the cause of all his uneasiness; but for the above reason,
finding it absolutely necessary, he made no long hesitation on the subject, and
taking a tender farewell of Don Carlos, who still retained his former
friendship for him, in a few days set out for Paris, which place, he had
promised some acquaintances there, (...) make in his return home; and thinking
a surprise would be far the most agreeable: he deferred writing to Mr. Howard,
till he could with certainty, inform him of the day of his arrival.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
If this be true the gods do mean to strike me dead with mortal joy.
CYMBELINE.
ON our hero's arrival at Paris, he was easily prevailed upon by some English
gentlemen, who were there on a party of pleasure, to make that the place of his
residence for a month, about half of which time had elapsed; when having
occasion for some stockings he went to a hosiers in the rue de St. Germain; on
his entrance of the shop, he observed behind the counter, a young man in half
mourning, of whose face, he had some confused remembrance, but no particular
idea: his address was easy and genteel, without pertness, and in his whole
behavior, there was a politeness superior to what we generally meet with, in
people in that rank of life; -- at which Melvill was not a little surprised,
especially as by his conversation he found, that he was not a native of France,
and that therefore his gentility was far different from that officious
politesse, so naturally the inherent qualification of every frenchman: and it
still running in his head strongly, that he had seen him somewhere before; he
could not forbear asking him the question.

"Very likely, replied the young man, as I perceive we are countrymen." --

Melvill finding from this laconic answer, that he did not seem desirable of
entering into particulars: from his unwillingness to give any man unnecessary
pain, dropped the subject: some general conversation concerning England, then
passed, and Melvill having bought what he wanted, was leaving the shop; when,
by some accident, a ring dropped from the hosier's finger, which being the
nimbler of the two, our hero picked up, and was returning to its owner; when
casting his eyes on it, he saw under the crystal, on a piece of white satin,
curiously worked with hair: the letters, ever them was tied, a true-lovers
knot, the ends of which, were held by two turtle-doves, that were flying
different ways; and on a label annexed, was the following French motto; le plus
loin, le plus liee. The greater the distance, the tighter the knot is tied.


Having examined this ring very attentirely for some time, he exclaimed -- "No,
it is impossible; it can never be;" and returing it to the hosier, with a low
bow said -- "Will you not Sir deem me very impertinent, if I desire you to
favor me with an account how you came by this ring?" By no means, replied his
countryman; it was given me some years ago by a young lady, to whom I then had,
and still have, a most inviolable attatchment; she worked it a^ as you see,
with her own hair: and when she put it on made me swear never to part with it;
which vow, I mean faithfully and solemnly to observe: the device I need not
explain to you -- the letters are equally the initials of either of our names,
which I once flattered myself, would some time or other be the same; but
adverse fate ordained it otherwise: nor do I, at this instant know whether she
is living or dead." While he was thus speaking. Melvill's countenance underwent
several changes; and observing that he had finished, with great energy
exclaiming, "Yes, Sir, she lives; and you may both be happpy."

He inst^n^ly stew into his arms, crying, "Good God! that ever I should
recognize my long lost friend, Charles Hartry, in the person of a hosier at
Paris!" Charles, for it was really him, beginning now to recollect his friend
and play fellow, returned the embrace with equal (...), and they mutually
congratulated each other on so unexpected (...). When their first (...)
subsided, Sir Charles, for such the (...) must know he was, though neither
Melvill, (...), did, made tender enquiries after his own, and Mr. Howard's
family; of both which Melvill gave him all the account he could: nor did he
forget to inform him of the happy change in Sir Thomas's affections. -- He
likewise related to him every circumstance of his sister's behavior toward
him; as also his adventures since that fatal day; and concluded, by informing
him of his intended journey to England, to which place, he now hoped, he would
accompany him.

Sir Charles having no longer the same reasons for absenting himself as
heretofore, readily coincided with his proposal: but some time being necessary,
for him to get rid of his business, our hero was detained longer at Paris, than
he at first intended; which however, being on so agreeable an occasion, gave
him very little concern: -- During their journey he gave Melvill the following
account of his adventures, since his departure from Oak-hall, which he had
purposely refered as an amusement for that time.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Oh happiness! thou pleasing distant thought!
Through what variety of untried absence,
Through what new scenes of anguish must I pass?
The wide uncertain prospect lies before me,
While clouds and sunshine gain by turns upon it.
ANONYMOUS.
IT is surely unnecessary for me to inform my dear Melvill, of the reasons for
my departure from Oakhall; he must, during my stay there, too often have seen
the unhappy cause.

In my younger days, he must have observed, that unjust taunts, and menaces,
were the only returns I received for duty and humility; but being once arrived
at a discretionary age, when divested of every juvenile prejudice, I could see
things in their true light; and, finding it was not in my power to please my
father, by the most careful assiduity, I thought his behavior justified me, in
resolving at once to rid him of an object, which was so disagreeable, thrice
happy, that I am no longer so, and myself of a life that I was most heartily
tired of, by endeavoring to find that tranquillity among strangers, which the
unaccountable caprice of a parent deprived me of at home. As it was, in all
probability, the last time I should ever trouble him, I made no scruple of
taking away fifty pounds, which he had given me to pay to some tradesmen; and
packing up a few clothes in my portmanteau, I set out early one morning, on my
own horse, as you must have heard, without communicating to any one what were
my intentions; nor did I stop to take one farewell of my most amiable
Charlottee; though I now declare to you, that could I have had the least idea
of what I afterward suffered, only from the consideration of the excruciating
tortures, which my behavior must necessarily give her, she never should have
had so melancholy a cause for her affliction.

As London was a place which I had a most earnest desire to see, I determined
to go thither immediately, and by getting employment as a clerk, in some
merchant's counting house, for which, by my education, I was very well
qualified, at once make myself independent of him, whom, by all the laws of
^^ture, and paternal tenderness, I had a right to expect assistance from.

Accordingly arriving at the place of my destination, without any adventure
worth troubling you with, I the next day, disposed of my horse for twenty-five
pounds; and thus finding myself master of ^ear fourscore guineas, determined to
remain sometime out of employment, that I might have an opportunity of
satisfying my curiosity, by seeing every thing worth notice in London; and
having expended near a fourth part of my capital, in some unnecessary
superfluities, commenced the man (...) taste; I frequented a genteel
coffee-house, was constant at the theaters, and all other public places of
diversion; which of course drew me into a numerous acquaintance; most of whom,
by my appearance, mistaking me for some newly fledged heir of quality, paid me
their constant court, in hopes of having their share of my spoils. And London
had opened to me such a scene of false pleasure, that I had not been there many
days, before I found my money reduced to something under thirty pounds: I now
considered at the extravagant rate I went on, the remainder could not last
long; and therefore began seriously to think of getting into some employment:
in order for which, I constantly read all the advertisements, in hopes of there
meeting with something to my purpose, but to my great sorrow, had every day the
(...) of a disappointment.

I had now been in London a fortnight, and found myself no nearer gaining of my
point than on the first night of my arrival; however, having still twenty
pounds le^t, I thought, with frugality, it was a provision for some months: and
indeed, happy it was, that I proceeded with such prudence, as I should
otherwise have lost the sweetest sensations that I ever enjoyed, having in a
short time after this an opportunity of employing almost my whole possessions
in an act of charity: you stare at hearing a man talk thus, in an age when
many, whose riches are immense, would refuse a shilling to assist a starving
fellow creature: but suppress your astonishment, till you have heard the
particulars. Having one evening been prevailed upon to sup at the tavern, where
I had foolishly thrown away a couple of guineas, at the billiard table; I was
walking home, condemning myself for my folly, when my attention was awakened in
a very extraordinary manner.

It was between twelve and one o'clock in the morning; when, passing by a
genteel house, I heard the most violent screams, which gave me reason to
suspect that some injury was committing, on a person, who, by the voice I knew
to be a woman; and presently after I saw the door opened, and something white
thrown with the greatest violence into the middle of the street: but, gracious
heaven! (...) was my astonishment, when on my nearer approach I found it to be
a woman almost naked. By the assistance of the watch I helped her up, and
having, with the greatest difficulty brought her to herself, she begged me, in
the most supplicating manner, "to take pity on a wretch, whose only abode,
without my generous assistance, must be in the street, at once exposed to the
inclemency of the weather, and all the domine^ing insolence of office." I found
by her manner of expression, that she once had known far happier days. What her
person was, it was impossible to discern: -- her hair was dishevelled, and hung
loose upon her neck, which, with her eyes, and face, was beat in a most
terrible manner: however there was something altogether, which loudly called
for my compassion, and not being proof against her tears, I called a coach, and
putting her into it, drove to my lodgings.

During our little journey, her tears seemed totally to impede all her powers
of speech; nor were they at all abated, by the difficulty, which on our
arrival, I found in getting her admitted: my landlady objected strongly against
it, for the honor of her house; and indeed, every circumstance considered,
there was nothing very unreasonable in her objections; undoubtedly taking an
unknown female, at that time, to a single man's lodgings, carried far from a
good (...) with it: however, as I stood pretty high in her good graces, by dint
of persuasion I at last gained my point; and having resigned my bed to the
stranger for that night, went to lie wi^^ another lodger in the house: but my
mind was too full of this adventure, to suffer me to get any rest. Rising very
early, I ran (...) give a succinct account thereof to my landlady; -- who being
a good kind of good woman, I do not mean according to the general implication
of that term, I fancy, sincerely believed all I said, and, at my instigation,
helped this miserable unfortunate to some clothes: to whom, as soon as she was
dressed, I sent my compliments, desiring her company to breakfast; and having
returned a suitable answer to my message, she in a few minutes, entered the
room, where I was waiting for her.

She was a tall, genteel, well made woman, and notwithstanding her eyes, and
the other parts of her face, bore apparent marks of the bruises she had
received -- I could still distinguish that she was handsome; her teeth were
remarkably fine, and as her dress now in some measure, corresponded with the
dignity of her figure; she had an undoubted right to the title of a fine woman.

On her entrance, I saw that she wanted to say something to me, but could not
-- I saw the gratitude of heart hanging upon her lips, and pressing her
utterance; conscious that she felt more than she (...) power to express, I
arose, and endeavored to relieve her, by enquiring after her health; I then
led her to a chair, where she was no sooner seated, than the sense of the
obligation she had to me, overcame her, and bursting into tears, she cried, "Oh
Sir! what shall I say to you? -- how? -- in what manner shall I thank you? but
words are insufficient, far, far too faint, to express the feelings of my soul,
at this interesting minute; and although I am convinced, that a man who could
have the heart to do such an act, must judge what my sensations are; still I
shall never he able to return you sufficient thanks, for your goodness, to a
poor wretch, who without your assistance, by this time, would have been no
more."

"Oh Sir, you may enjoy the moral, social satisfaction of having snatched from
perdition a person in the complicated distresses of nakedness, and want and
what is still much worse, loaded with a (...)-reproaching conscience."

I never in my whole life, had more occasion for words, than at this instant,
and never made a worse use of them. I wished to say something to sooth her
feelings; but for a long time, was at a loss; the dignity of her appearance,
joined to the penetrating softness of her tears, quite overcame, me; and it was
not till after a long silence, that I recollected myself so far, as to beg she
would not distress me, by saying any more on a subject equally painful to us
both -- to assure her, that I had done nothing, but what I hoped every man
would have done in the same situation: from which, as it was but my duty, I
could claim no merit, and that if I really had any -- I was sufficiently
overpaid by consciousness of having acted right: -- that as I was a man, I
could not see the distresses of my fellow creatures, and divest myself of
tender feelings -- nor indeed would I have parted with them at that moment, for
the wealth of the Indies.

She now seemed something composed, and I had the satisfaction of seeing her
eat some breakfast; after which, she again thanked me in the politest manner,
and in terms, which at once showed her gratitude and good sensethough at the
same time she loaded herself with reproaches, as the cause of all her
misfortunes, and seemed but little short of a state of absolute desperation. --

I endeavored to solace her afflictions, by begging that she would look upon
me, as a person, inclined to do every thing in his power to ^erve her; and then
represented to her the sinfulness of not placing a just hope in providential
protection; she thanked me for my friendly intentions, and added, that were I
acquainted with her history, I should not only blame and despise, as much as I
was now inclined to serve her."

My reply was natural, and came of course -- "I could not think so, and that of
a recital of her story, would not give her to much pain, by the recollection of
past misfortunes, she could not oblige me more, than by favoring me with it:"
-- she replied; that my behavior gave me an undoubted right to know it, and
notwithstanding it would unavoidably recall to her mind, things she could wish
ever to forget: -- and though she must run the hazard of forfeiting my good
opinion, by laying open to my view, the catalogue of follies, or rather vices,
she had been guilty of; nevertheless, she could refuse nothing to a person to
whom she had so powerful an obligation, and accordingly instantly related it;"
to which as it may serve for a good lesson to all young people of the female
sex; and will not be totally useless to ours: I shall make no scruple of
begging your attention, I give it in her own words, which were, as you will
find, in the following chapter.

CHAP. XL.
-- Better I were distract,
So should my thoughts be severed from my griefs
And woes, by wrong imaginations lose,
The knowledge of themselves.
KING LEAR,
IN order to inspire you with a (...) of my own misfortunes, I must first give
you some account of my family, as from one unworthy part thereof, all my
unhappiness has proceeded: my father whose name was Barton, was a gentleman of
a ghost estate in Gloucestershire: when I say good, I would be understood to
mean, that it was amply sufficient to purchase every real necessary of life,
though not large enough to furnish the ridiculous and prejudicial
superfluities, which his openness of heart wished to command, and which he was
imprudently determined, at any rate to procure; you will excuse me Sir, for
thus touching upon the frailties of a parent; but as you have an undoubted
right to my most candid ingenuity, I must acknowledge, that extravagance was
his foible, and has been my ruin.

He married my mother, with whom he had a fortune of five thousand pounds,
while he was very young, and from the uniform propriety of her conduct had
never any occasion to repent of his choice; about a year after which, she was
brought to bed of a daughter, who, being the first tender pledge of mutual
love, called for all the attention of her parents, which they, in their
fondness readily bestowed: nor while a child, was her innocent prattle ever
tiresome, rather ever new; and in the extatic moments of parental joy, they too
vainly thought their happiness complete; but alas! how was that felicity
damped, to have the mortification of observing, when their daughter was arrived
at tha^ period of life, where the disposition being no longer hid by the
inadvertent sallies of a sprightly youthfulness, begins to show itself in its
true colors; that she was ill-tempered to excess, peevish, discontented, and
to crown all, possessed of a height of malevolent pride, that must necessarily
render her odious to every beholder: in short, she was totally destitute of
that affability and complaisance, which alone can make every young lady
agreeable.

No wonder, that her parents did not feel the same cordiality of affection for
her, that they would have done, for one of whom they had less reason to
complain; but (...) all the powers of nature stiring within, still informed
them that she was their child. -- No circumstance in their behavior, ever
indicated the least want of a true parental regard! -- her wishes were her
will: -- nor would it have been possible for her to observe the alteration in
their hearts, had they not found another object on whom to bestow their
tenderness -- I mean myself; who was born when my sister was about fifteen
years old.

It is easier for you to imagine, than me to describe, the joy, as I have since
been informed, which my father felt upon this occasion -- I quickly became a
favorite with the whole family, except my sister, by whom I was secretly as
much detested, as I was admired by my parents; which in their absence she
always took care to express, by the most cruel treatment; not that it arose
from consciousness of having lost a place in their hearts, but her pride could
ill-brook so powerful a rival therein as myself; and out of a false spirit of
resentment, at the age of two-and-twenty, she went off with a neighboring
baronet, for she had external charms to attract a man of gallantry; with whom,
after a long search, her parents heard she lived in a most scandalous manner,
in open defiance of every law of modesty or honor.

Her afflicted father, imagining that an alienation of his affections was the
cause of this imprudent step, wrote to her, in the most soothing and
affectionate terms, earnestly entreating her to return, and promising to
receive her with open arms; -- freely to forget and forgive all her past
behavior: -- when, would you think? that equally insensible to the justness of
his remonstrances, and the tender kindness of his solicitations, she had the
cruelty to return for answer, "that she would never conform to all the
capricious whims of a younger brat, while she had the means of existence in her
own hands; and could live without the assistance of those, whom the world
called her friends."

Oh, Sir, think what my poor father must ^eel at this instant! to see his own
daughter in the downhill toward perdition; lost to every sense of duty to her
parents, or her God.

I* was too young to experience any degree of affliction; but being completely
blessed in the entire affections of my parents, whose love for their darling
seemed every day to increase.

My juvenile years passed in the most pleasing and harmonious manner. -- Thus
happy, inattentive, did I live; nor ever knew what it was to feel the pangs of
agonizing sorrow, till my dear mother's death, which happened when I was about
sixteen years old.

With her I might justly say departed all my joy: thrice happy had I been, if
heaven in commiseration of my youth and inexperience, had kindly suffered one
grave to have contained us both; but fate reserved me for superior woe: sure I
was born beneath the influence of an unlucky planet, which on the thread of my
existence, stamped the party-colored doom of misery.

The poignancy of that affliction, which from the tender sensibility of my
father's nature, he must of course be supposed to have felt, for the loss of so
good, so loved a wife, gave rise to a disorder, in which after having lingered
for near a twelve month, his physicians assured him to be the last stage of a
confirmed consumption: and the fatigue which I underwent in attending him,
through every gradation of this flattering malady, joined to my grief for the
approaching death of the tenderest, best of parents, soon rendered (...) much
more sit to ^ull in (...) repose, than to experience the heartfelt toil of
nightly watching by a sick father's bed.

In short, Sir, not to trouble you with any unnecessary particulars, his
distemper seemed every moment to increase: and finding the fatal moment of his
dissolution nigh, he called me to him, when gently pressing my hand, his ^eeble
eyes, half drowned in briny tears, he pronounced words, which made so deep an
impression on my young mind, as never to be erased, but by the all-subduing
hand of time.

"Oh, my dear child, cried he, how shall I dare to look up to you for
forgiveness? In what words shall I entreat you to pardon me, for the most
attrocious crime that parent ever was guilty of.

"Oh my Betsy, I have cruelly deceived you; -- nay, I have deceived myself and
all the world; my unbounded love for you, has made me inattentive to my own
concerns; I have lived too fast, and have now the agonizing reflection, that I
must quickly leave you, liable to every insult, which unguarded virtue meets
with, without having it in my power to provide for your subsistence; at a time
too, when, from your age, you have most need of some experienced band, to guide
your unwary youth, through this wide, precarious, and turbulent world: -- my
whole estate is mortgaged for more than its real worth; a false mistaken pride,
with an unguarded, therefore ill-applied, generosity, have been my ruin: my
only care has been, to appear insignificantly grand in the eyes of that world,
who must hereafter inevitably despise me, at a time, when all my attention
should have been fixed upon your future establishment and ^elicity. When my
poor eyes are closed in endless night, what will you alone -- helpless and
innocent do? no friendly counselor to advise; no hand to lead your young feet,
through the broad path of vice, which opens such a scene of tempting, dangerous
pleasure to inexperienced youth, that they perforce must yield to it, and for a
single moment of sense-deluding gratification, undergo a life, perhaps an
eternity of future woe. But my child, arm yourself with resolution, and when I
am no longer present to assist you, remember the last precepts of a dying
parent -- Confide in the all-wise Being; do not distrust him, and he will never
forsake you: nor let the flowery, eye-catching paths of sensual enjoyment,
tempt you to depart from the thorny, difficult one of virtue."

"While you are virtuous, my child, you may be happy in yourself, and despise
the vanities of a mistaken world: do thus while young, and when the stealing
steps of age draw on, you will be delivered from the tortures of a
self-condemnation, and the influence of shame, remorse, or terror: embrace
religion with ^ervent cordiality, and be happy: for all ^er ways are
pleasantness* and all her paths are peace." -- Then clasping his hands, with
uplifted eyes, he added, "still may the omnipresent Providence, look down with
pity on your youth, and by his power conduct you guiltless, through that
intricate maze of wickedness in which you are placed; so when supported by the
sweet influence of a balmy hope, you will never lose the innocence of heart of
which you are now possessed; nor, when bowing under complicated distresses,
sink under the gloom despair."

Here his voice failed him: and in a few moments he sunk into eternity, leaving
me an orphan, destitute of every necessary of life.

Forgive Sir, said she, bursting into tears, forgive this tribute, which nature
requires me to pay to the memory of a poor, fond, though indiscreet father; --
on whom I can never think, but with a reverential awe. Having indulged her
commendable filial grief for a few moments, she proceeded as follows:

CHAP. XLI.
Oh what avails, how once appeared the fair,
When from gay equippage, she falls obscure,
In vain ^he lifts her livid lips in prayer,
What man so mean, to recollect the poor!
From pla^e to place by unsee'd (...) drove!
As fainting fawns from thirsty blood hounds fly
See the fad remnants of unhallowed love!
In prisons perish, or ^n dunghills (...).
ANONYMOUS.
I FOUND all that he had said, with regard to his affairs, but too strictly
true; for as soon as his death was known, his creditors instantly seized upon
his effects, which they ^old to pay themselves as far as they would go.

Thus situated, you can but imperfectly imagine the distress I was in. -- The
house and estate were the property of a gentleman to whom they were mortgaged;
and who politely gave me leave to remain there, till I had an opportunity of
providing for myself elsewhere.

Not to dwell too long on so melancholy a s^bject, my father had been dead
about a week, when I was surprised by a visit from a lady, of whom I had no
knowledge* -- I had indeed, some confused idea of her face; but no particular
remembrance of it: however, not suffering me to remain long in this
uncertainty, she made herself known to me, in the person of my eldest sister;
and addressing me in the most affectionate manner -- with marks of a real
penitence, confessed the crimes she had been guilty of; and added, "that time
having brought her to a just sen^e thereof, she had persuaded Sir Henry Rakish,
the baronnet with whom she went off, ^o marry her; -- but that heaven did not
permit them long to enjoy their happy union, her husband having died about two
years before, leaving her mistress of a handsome fortune." -- She added, "that
after her behavior* she thought it to no purpose, to attempt a reconciliation,
during her father's lifetime; but hearing of his death, and the circumstances
of his affairs, she could not bear, that so near and deserving a relation
should want, while it was in her power to assist her;" and concluded, by
insisting on my going to live with her -- As I had before heard of the death of
the above mentioned baronnet, I made no scruple of believing all she said to be
true; which were welcome tidings to a person in my distressed situation: we
therefore, the next morning, set out for London, at which place we arrived
without any material accident.

I had now no reason to complain of my lot, as my sister behaved to me with the
greatest tenderness and affection.

For three weeks I thought myself, and really was completely happy. She went
but very little abroad, though there was no day passed, in which she was not
visited by a number of gentlemen, most of whom took particular notice of me:
but as I thought it no more than they would have done of any other person, not
totally destitute of beauty, I looked upon all the compliments which were made
me, as things of course, and therefore paid no further attention to them.

There was one gentleman in particular, whose name was Hartrop, who always
behaved to me with an uncommon degree of politeness and warm civility; and he
was really an agreeable man, I will confess that I was very much pleased with
his conversation.

I was frequently alone with him, when he never behaved in any manner, that was
not consistent with the strictest reserve and delicacy; nor had I the least
suspicion of the villainy of his intentions, till one particular day, when
having dined with us, my sister left us alone, saying, that she had some
business which would not long detain her, and begged me to entertain Mr. Hartrop
till her return.

We had not been together many minutes, before he began to take some
unjustifiable liberties with me* whereat I was* as you may imagine, exceedingly
astonished, and desired to know what he had seen in my behavior, to authorize
such proceedings? but he only laughed, at what he called my airs and beginning
to be intolerably rude, caught me in his arms, and having insulted me with
language, too gross for me to repeat, avowed the baseness of his intentions.

On my crying out he begged me to be silent: to induce me to which, he added,
that my noise would be but little regarded in a house of that kind.

Disengaging myself, I desired to know what he meant by casting reflections on
my sister's habitation? -- but he would not enter into any altercation, and
catching me again in his arms, notwithstanding my utmost struggles, would soon
have overcome me, had it not have been for a great cry of fire, which made him
leave me, in order to take care of himself; but luckily, the alarm was
occasioned by nothing more than a chimney at the next house.

On running up stairs in my fright, I there found my good sister, whom I had
imagined to be out, which added to what (...) had said, raised in my breast
some thoughts, not much to her honor or humanity, however, I thought proper to
keep them to myself for the present* (...) d^^ermining to be more circumspect
for the (...)

After expressing (...) ^^^^nishment at finding her there, I informed (...) of
Hartrop's behavior, and desired that she would never again leave me alone with
him; in reply to which, she told me, "that she was just returned home, and had,
as well as myself, on the cry of fire, run up stairs," and then flew out in the
most bitter terms against Har^rop, saying, "that she was amazed at his
insolence, in daring to offer any rudeness to a person beneath her roof, -- and
vowed she would never speak to him again; -- for that as I was under her
protection, she should look upon it as an affront offered to herself, and would
let him know it." --

In pursuance of this determination, she instantly wrote a note, wherein she
acquainted him with her resolution, though, as I have since been informed, she
took care that he should never receive it.

Thus by this well-counterfeited anger, did she entirely hush my former
suspicions, and I really believed, that she had no concern in the plot; though
I am now convinced, it was a (...) contrivance of her own to ruin me; but (...)
affectionate cordiality of her behavior, would not (...) suffer me to
entertain any thoughts injurious to her honor; and I was again giving myself
up to the enjoyment of that golden dream of happiness, which my luxurious fancy
had painted, when my (...) peace of mind, was at once destroyed, by the cruel
artifices, of that base designing woman, under whose protection I had placed
myself, and whom natural affection, should have made a second parent.

She one night, out of a pretended indulgence, as ^^e said, to dispel that
gloom from my countenance, which my father's death had occasioned: and which
was not yet worn off, carried me to the play, which being a diversion I had
never been partaker of, I was not a little pleased with my evening's
entertainment.

When we came out of the theater, to my great surprise, the servant who had
been ordered to meet us, was not to be found; and having looked for him some
time in vain, least I should catch cold, by coming immediately from so intense
heat, into the night air; my officious sister insisted on my stepping into an
adjoining tavern, till a coach could be called, which I was too easily induced
to agree to: and thus, under the hypocritical mark of friendship, and an
affected concern for my welfare, did she seduce me to my ruin.

To my unutterable astonishment, I found that she was extremely well known at
the house, and being at (...), conducted into a room, some wine was brought, of
which I unluckily drank a glass or two, but do not remember any thing farther
which passed that night.

I only know, that when I awaked in the morning. I found myself in a situation
not to be described, -- in a strange room, deprived in one fatal night, of all,
my soul held dear; -- my virtue! -- and my fame -- when, to add to my
misfortune, I saw in my undoer the villain Hartrop. --

Educated as I had been, with the strictest sense of female chastity; -- think,
Sir -- oh think, what must be my sensations, at that dread moment, -- grief,
despair, and anger, by turns possessed my soul: -- I raved I tore my hair, -- I
beat my breast, -- and was for some time, quite frantic. --

Exhausted passion at length gave way to the moderate grief of reason, and I
began seriously to consider, that it was to no purpose, to attempt to revenge
myself: -- my honor was gone, nor was it in any human power to restore its
spotless purity.

I might then, with strict propriety, repeat the lines of our mellifluous
Waller: O that I had my innocence again!
My untouched honor! but I wish in vain*
The fleece, that by the dyer, once was stained,
Never again, its native whiteness gained.


Although I was now thoroughly persuaded, that this was a mercenary scheme of
my vile sister's; nevertheless, as she was the only person whom I knew in town,
I weakly determined to apply to her, and flattered myself, that when she began
heartily to reflect upon her actions, she might take pity on my helpless
injured youth and innocence; and therefore I immediately proceeded to her
house, but was informed by the servant, "that she was out," --

"Out," (re echoed I, knowing it to be impossible, -- but the wretchedness of
my situation, at that instant, striking on my mind in its full force; turning
away, with tears trembling in my swollen eyes; I had only the power to exclaim,
-- "good heaven!" my affliction, touched the heart of the servant, who,
re-calling me, informed me that my sister had ordered herself to be denied, --
that she had been instrumental to my ruin, by having preconcerted the scheme
which had been made use of; -- and that I was not the only innocent person by
many, whose happiness she had destroyed in the like manner. --

I thanked him for an information of what, I but too strongly suspected before,
nor could I help lamenting to him, that any person, whose heart like his, was
softened with the least drop of gentle pity, should find his habitation there.

Then bursting into ^ears, "infamous woman, cried I, who devoid of every
particle of human tenderness, or relative affection, is not content, with
having totally destroyed her own peace of mind, but like an infernal fiend,
would plunge me (...) for a pecuniary recompense, destroy the happiness of an
only sister."

Without virtue! -- without friends to advise or protect, I was half
distracted, and walking along not knowing whither I was going. --

I had luckily in my pocket, a twenty pound ban^ note, which my father had
given me previous to his death; and having tired myself with wandering to no
purpose, hired a lodging, suitable to the poverty of my situation.

CHAP. XLII.
Expose thyself to feel* what wretches feel,
That thou may shake the superflux to the
And show the heavens more just.

HAVING attentively revolved in my mind, what was the most probable method to
gain a reputable livelihood, which would furnish me, if not with happiness, at
least with temporary ease; I at length fixed upon the only plausible one that
presented (...); that of going to service; which resolution, I communicated to
my landlady, who generously believed my story, and promised me her friendly
assistance, in getting a place.

In the mean time, I wrote to several people who (...) formerly been friends of
my father's; setting ^orth my distress, and supplicating their relief, -- from
some I received no answer, -- from others, scorn and reviling; -- in short,
mockery, contempt, and neglect, were the only returns I received for meekness
and humility.

By the recommendation of my landlady, with whom I soon became a great
favorite, by showing an industrious disposition; I went after several places,
but my having no one to give me a sufficient ^^^racter, was a material and just
objection, with every body.

I was thus therefore obliged to sit down contented with the misery of my
situation, without any prospect of comfort, for the present, or provision for
the future; when to add to my wretchedness, I found myself with child; my money
was near gone, and I now began to experience, all the torments of approaching
penury and want; -- my landlady was my only friend, and she, poor woman, had it
not in her power to assist me far, -- all that she could she did, (...) amply
possessed of humane feelings, those riches of the mind, though poor in worldly
possessions.

When my time drew near, I grew more poignantly wretched, -- my clothes went
piece by piece, for a present subsistence; and I was at last delivered of a
dead child, being void of common necessaries, -- with scarcely bread to ^at, or
garments to cover me, I have often since, wondered how it was possible to
support myself, through so severe a trial, as I might have exclaimed with
J^ffier, There Is not a wretch that lives on common charity,
But's happier than I am; for I Have known
The luxurious sweets of plenty, every night,
Have slept with soft content about my head,
And never waked but to a joyful morning:
Yet now must fall, like a full ear of corn,
Whose blossom's escaped, yet's withered in the ripening.


But not to trespass on your time and patience, in this day of heavy
affliction; I should certainly have perished, had it not been for the goodness
of my charitable hostess, who assisted me, even to an injury of herself; and
without her generous interposition, I should once have been turned naked, and
p^nnyless into the street, by a person to whom she owed some money, who said,
that it was because she kept lodgers, who could not pay, that he was so long
deprived o^ his due, and was therefore coming up to execute his cruelty, and at
the same time to reproach me with my crime; when this good woman interposed
(...) my behalf, saying, -- that if I was innocent, it (...) inexcusable
barbarism in him; -- if guilty, I had (...) to bear, without the severity of
his reflections: -- which well-applied truth, had the desired effect, and saved
me from immediate ruin. --

Amidst these accumulated misfortunes, I had still the satisfaction of knowing,
they were not the consequences of my own wickedness, and therefore, without any
reproaches of conscience, had still those balmy inexpressible feelings,
attendant on oppressed virtue. --

Though I was unhappy, I was not yet culpable -- O that I could now say so,
with the same truth; and that I had never experienced the many miseries, which
for ever wait upon once lost purity: -- notwithstanding all my sufferings,
heaven endowed me with superior constitution, and I at last recovered strength;
but what was the consequence? -- to become a scandal to my sex, and odious to
myself: -- without money, without friends, -- and yet with some remains of
beauty le^t; -- what could I do? -- I had no hopes from my unnatu^al sister; to
procure a service I found was impracticable, -- my character was gone; nor did
I know any one, who would be responsible for my honesty. --

In these distressful circumstances, must I confess, to you, what course I
took? -- no, -- you must but too easily guess it, -- and save me the painful
repetition of my guilt, -- with reason may you shudder; I do myself, at the
horrid recollection; yes Sir, prostitution, shameful prostitution, was the lot
of that person, who once ^ad lived in all the splendor and expense of
flattering indulgence; in which detestable, scandalous manner, I have existed
for these two last years: but to recount all the various vicissitudes of
fortune, that I have experienced within that short space of time, would be
tedious, and perhaps offensive. --

Upon a general review, you would find me sometimes wallowing in all the
affluence and dissipation, which luxurious fancy could invent; at others,
bowing beneath the complicated miseries of want, infamy and sickness, obliged
for a present subsistence, to give up all thought of my eternal welfare, by
sinking myself a degree below the brutes, occasionally to flatter, and caress a
man my soul abhored: if I looked round, I saw none, but wretches like, or worse
than myself, who dead to every nicer sense of shame, or honor, would prostitute
their very souls for hire; oaths, blasphemies, and imprecations, were their
constant discourse: all which, and much more, than it is in the power of words
to describe, I was obliged to undergo: how justly does Row, in describing the
lives of these out casts of society, say, To know no thought of rest, to have
the mind
Still minist'ring fresh plagues, as in a circle,
Where one dishonor treads upon another,
What know the fiends beyond it?


Oh heaven! did women but seriously consider the gulf of wretchedness, into
which they plunge themselves, when once they adopt vicious measures how
earnestly would they endeavor to preserve their virtue, even though it were
but in appearance; yet all this I could bear with patience, if I may be allowed
the expression; my bodily sufferings, were the lightest part of my woe, they
were trifling, in comparison of the reproaching stings of tyrant conscience,
which one minute's recollection, never failed to bring: if ever I thought
seriously -- it near turned me mad -- I could not bear it -- and, give me leave
to observe to you, that it is for this reason we see so many of these unhappy
women, in hopes of obtaining some respite from their tortures, as their only
resource, flying to that odious vice of drinking, which, being what I could
never be prevailed on to practice; I perhaps felt my misfortunes more severely
than any other; for every moment informed me, how fatally repugnant, my present
course of life was, to all hopes of eternal blessedness, though at the same
time, I had it not in my power to take any step, toward procuring my pardon.
--

For how could I attempt to open my lips in prayer to that God, in violation of
whose most sacred laws I was daily living. --

This thought, from which notwithstanding my utmost efforts, my attention was
scarcely ever divided, harrowed up my soul, and strewed continual thorns across
my path. --

Many, many times have I prayed for death, to hide me and my shame, from the
observing world; for where on earth, was comfort to be met with, for a wretch
like me.

I have sometimes, in hopes of finding it, excluded myself from all society;
but though I could fly far from the scene of guilty pleasures, still I could
not upon myself -- to have forgot my own wickedness, I must have resigned, or
violently stopped all the powers of sensation; the former I could not do, and
the latter I had grace enough to avoid.

I have endeavored to drown recollection, in a continual round of noise and
dissipation; but nature cannot always live upon the stretch; and if one serious
pause intervened, then, cried she, clapping her hand upon her breast, I found
my judgment here; here I felt more than can be expressed.

The only amusement that endowed me with the least transient degree of
tranquillity, was reading; and that, though it molified my sorrows for the
present, could not effectually divert my thoughts, from the only subject I
detested: I too painfully found, that study and pensive retirement, though they
may sooth for a time, in the main give additional force to natural or acquired
melancholy.

After I have told you the heart rending troubles, which we poor wretches are
doomed to suffer, and many others, that it is impossible for me to give you the
least idea of; will you not be very much surprised, when I assure you that out
of the number of unhappy prostitutes, which infest this town, very few are to
be met with, who do not deserve the title of sensible?

Impossible, you will say, that sensible women would lay themselves open to the
many miseries which, in such a state they must necessarily meet with -- I agree
with you, that nothing can be a stronger proof of their imprudence, though not of
weak understanding: and sorry I am to add, that by far the greatest part of
them may, with justice, attribute their afflictions to the perfidious hypocrisy
of your sex; nay, parents themselves are frequently in a great measure
accessory thereto: for if a girl, who has no other fault than her attachment to
a worthless object of affection, has as is commonly the case, in an unguarded
hour, been drawn in, under the most (...) promises of marriage, to commit a
trespass on virtue, she may for ever repent of* the doors of her parents, and
the whole world, are instantly shut against her.

Without friends, without virtue -- she must be an amazing instance of laudable
prudence, not to revenge herself, upon herself by falling into a course of
(...): -- and by thus making that vice, which before was but inattention, ruin
herself forever.

Here I cannot help observing that the injustice of the world is no where more
apparent, than in the distinction made, in the censures passed upon the
frailties of the two sexes, is it not hard, Sir, that man, a lawless libertine,
may roam, commit at large every folly, every vice which youth, intemperance, or
his vicious inclinations prompt him to, and he shall not suffer in the eyes of
the world? -- when if woman, poor, weak woman, who being most liable to fall,
should have greater allowance made, if she deviates ever so little from the
narrow path of virtue, immediate ruin is the inevitable consequence.

The generality of the world cruelly imagine, that when a woman has lost one
virtue, she can never recover that goodness of principles, she has so
imprudently thrown away; but I stand a fatal example, to the injustice of such
an assertion: however time immemorial, having rendered it, an almost thoroughly
received opinion, every attempt to abolish it must be vain, and fall of itself.
-- Therefore to return to my story.

Being thoroughly satiated and harassed, with the infamy attendant on this
deplorable course of life, I once determined, by learning some trade, whereby I
should be enabled to get my livelihood in an honest manner, to draw myself out
of it: for which purpose I saved all the money I could, and learned the
millinery business.

Having the good luck to succeed therein, I had almost recovered my peace of
mind, when another of the trade, envious of my success, sound means to steal a
quantity of fine lace, belonging to a lady of quality, which was then in my
possession.

There was no one but what believed me guilty of the theft or fraud -- in vain
did I assert my innocence -- as I had no money to replace the goods, I lost my
custom, and thought myself happy, in not being prosecuted for a robbery.

I now found myself in the same deplorable situation as before: at last was
taken into keeping, by a single gentleman, which sheer necessity forced me to
accept.

With him I lived much happier than heretofore; being no longer subject to the
pinching (...) of unhous'd poverty; and flattered myself, that by my behavior,
I should be able to retain his affections, till I Would saved money enough to
re-establish me in my business, in some obscure corner of the kingdom, where my
unhappy story was not known: but alas! I still was doomed to be the sport of
fortune; -- for the gentleman with whom I lived, coming home one day in liquor,
found me talking to a young tradesman, of whom I was ordering some goods; and
though he did not mention any thing at the time, on his return in the evening, he
stripped me, and having beat me in the most cruel manner reproached me with a
crime I never had been guilty of, inconstancy to him; and, as a proof thereof,
named the tradesman he had seen in the morning.

In vain did I protest my innocence: be turned me naked into the street, as you
saw -- where I should certainly have perished, had it not been for your
unmerited, unexampled kindness.

This Sir, is my history, without disguise or paliation; and if I have been
guilty of great faults, I hope you will think them rather the consequence of
irresistible necessity, than cultivated vice -- and that I am therefore more
deserving of your pity than contempt.

CHAP. XLIII.
The quality of mercy is not strained,
It droppeth like a gentle rain from heaven
Upon the place beneath; it is twice blessed,
It blesses him that gives and her that takes.
MERCHANT of VENI^
THUS, continued Sir Charles, did Miss Barton finish her painful history --
throughout which there appeared such an air of unaffected ingenuity and perfect
contrition, that I could not disbelieve her.

There is a certain charm in probity which strikes upon the mind, like light
upon our eyes; conviction attends it; and if what she had told me was really
true, as indeed I had no reason to suspect the contrary, I thought her much to
be pitied; nay own, I felt myself deeply interested in her future welfare: --
therefore made her an offer of my lodging, which, with a great many apologies,
for the trouble she had already given me, out of a principal of delicacy, she
modestly declined, and would have instantly departed; but conscious that she
had no other friend to apply to, and that neglect must renew her wretched
scenes of life again, I would not suffer it: -- I could not bear, that a
person, whose temporal, and perhaps spiritual welfare I had so much already
contributed to, should again throw herself away, from a punctilio of civility;
and therefore insisted on her remaining where she was, till I could find her
some employment in the millenery business, which I determined immediately, to
look out for; and to my great satisfaction, in a few days had the luck of
meeting with a person, whose health obliging her to retire from London, she was
willing to yield up her shop, on the condition of being paid half the profits
thereof, during her life time: and with the recommendation of my landlady, who
procured security, I had in a short time the pleasure of conducting Miss Barton
to her new habitation.

I never heard such expressions of sincere gratitude, as this generous,
sensible, though abused creature made me: expressions were the only way she had
of showing it, and on my presenting her with ten pounds for immediate use, I
had the inexpressible pleasure of hearing that she thought herself happy -- and
though I considerably distressed myself by assisting her, I must own, that an
innate satisfaction, preferable to all the riches of this world, shed a
pleasing balm upon my delighted heart.

I now found my cash reduced to a very low ebb, and therefore grew every day
more solicitous about getting some employment; and as heaven will never suffer
any one to experience the least inconveniency for having performed a good
action; I, in a short time was recommended to a young gentleman, who was going
to Antigua, to take possession of a large a state, and wanted a person to
attend him as a companion de voyage. Although it was not my intention to leave
England, nevertheless as the terms offered me were very good, and as I was
naturally of a volla^^e disposition, I made no scruple of determining to
accompany Mr. Morton to Antigua; and accordingly in a few weeks set ^a^l for
that place.

Knowing that nothing was more likely to render dependence tolerable, than to
acquire my patron's esteem; I determined to find out his foibles, if he had
any, that I might play my cards in the most suitable manner, without degrading
my own nature.

By a little circumspection* I soon discovered that he was far from sensible --
consequently exceeding vain of his personal qualifications -- and not a little
addicted to the fashionable ^ollies of the age: but to give you, in two words,
a just idea of his character, he might with the strictest propriety, be (...) a
mere petit maitre.

Thus circumstanced, I had nothing to do, but to use his own weapons against
himself; and was therefore constantly approving the elegance of his figure, the
neatness of his leg, etc. -- By which means I ingratiated myself so far in his
favor, that before we arrived at the end of our voyage, my will was his* yet I
never meant to make any bad use of my influence.

He was vastly ^ond of hearing himself talk; but being unluckily endowed with
no great powers of eloquence -- he was obliged to supply this deficiency by art
-- and some trifling reading, joined to a tolerable memory, furnished him with
scope for superficial conversation, which consisted mostly of quotations, and
commonly -- the same over and over again.

It was his greatest glory, that he wanted nothing but a title, which he
designed to purchase, on his return ^o England, to render him a complete fine
gentleman.

Such was Mr. Morton, from whom I daily received distinguished marks of (...)
and esteem; and as a seafaring life was an entire novelty. I was not a little
delighted with my voyage, which was completed in the usual time, of fair
weather and favorably winds.

My patron finished his business in about two months -- and a few days before
the time (...) on for our return to England, made me his (...), i^ an affair,
of which I had not before ^he least suspicion.

He informed me, that having danced, about a month before, with he daughter of
an eminent planter, he had (...) that instant been desperately in love with
her; and had accordingly made proposals to her father, which (...) refused,
because if she married an Englishman, he must by that means, lose the pleasure
of her company -- which from his age and infirmities he stood not a little in
need of, to support his drooping spirits: but however* that the young lady, not
having the same ^^jections to visiting England, which influenced her father,
had kindly agreed to elope with him, the night before his intended voyage; --
and he therefore begged my assistance toward the execution of his project.

I was not very fond of the affair, and attempted to remonstrate to him the
dangers of a discovery; but he was too much in love, to listen to any thing,
but what the violence of his passion prompted: and seeing him thus firmly
resolved upon it, gratitude would not suffer me to withhold my aid.

Having therefore previously prepared every thing necessary for the appointed
night, Mr. Morton, myself and a servant, repaired to the destined place --
where we waited a full hour beyond the time, whereat we expected the young lady
to have appeared -- and considering that lovers ever run before the clock, our
surprise increased not a little.

At length my too amorous patron, beginning to grow very impatient, his
beauteous dulcinea called to him from a window, and had only just time to
inform us, that their scheme was discovered by the treachery of a servant; and
therefore exhor^^^ us to provide for (...). So saying she retired -- and we
were about to do the the same, when to our great mortification, we found
ourselves surrounded by six men; whose number however did not discourage us --
and we, for some time, fought very obstinately, till Mr. Morton unluckily
receiving a violent blow on the head from a cutlass, the person who had struck
him, seeing him fall, instantly took to his heels, as did all his companions,
leaving me and the servant who had accompanied us, to carry my unfortunate
patron home, without any further interruption.

But alas! the mischief he had received was irretrievable -- as the surgeon
whom we sent for to examine his wounds, ingeniously declared, that he could not
live till morning: and therefore advised him to settle his affairs; which
having done, he called me to him, and desiring, that after his death, I would
convey his will to England -- put a purse into my hand, containing notes an I
cash to the value of five hundred pounds -- after which he received the
sacrament: and as the surgeon had foretold, at ^ix in the morning died, in the
flower of his age.

A man whose every word and action was dictated by the passion of vanity.

CHAP. XLIV.
-- I see m^n's judgments are
A parcel of their fortunes, and things outward
Do draw the inward quality after them
To suffer all alike.
ANTHONY and CLEOPATRA.
AS fortune now seemed to smile upon me, I flattered myself with the pleasing
prospect of entering into some way of business on my arrival in England; for
which place, according to Mr. Morton's last desire, I set out in the first ship
that failed; and as I had some fellow-passengers, who justly deserved the
epithet of agreeable, the beautiful serenity of the weather, joined to my
tranquillity of mind, rendered that by far the happiest period of my li^e: and
elate with joy, at the success of my expedition; we judged ourselves to be
within about six days sail of the British channel, when we discovered two large
ships to the leward, which proved to be Algerine men of war; whereupon we
immediately crowded all the sail we could, but to no purpose, the Turks came up
with us the next day; and as it was in vain for a merchantman to oppose two
such large ships; they bearded our vessel, and having made the whole crew
prisoners, loaded us with irons, and conducted us captives into Algiers, the
place of their destination.

As soon as we landed, we were carried to the Bashaw's palace, who claims every
tenth man, as his share of the slaves; and as I did not happen to fall to his
lot, I was carried with the rest of my countrymen, into the public
marketplace; where, as there were but twenty of us, a Targe^een, a t^tle of
respect given to the better sort of inhabitants at Algiers, came to bargain for
us all; but seeing me of a puny make, and ^ot robust enough for his work, he
refused to have me; and I was afterward ^old at a low rate, to a person who
rather looked like an overseer for some body else, than one who had bought me
for himself: nor was I mistaken in my conjectures, he carried me to my owner,
who was a woman of seemingly about fifty years of age, and of a very forbidding
aspect. -- I was now put to my work, which was to cultivate a small piece of
ground, that supplied all necessaries for the family; which indeed was not
large, as it consisted only of my mistress, a negro maidservant and myself.

Thus situated, I had formed a much worse opinion of slavery, than it deserved:
or perhaps I was more lucky, in getting into this family, than many others, who
had met with the same misfortune; -- indeed, I could not accuse my mistress of
the least severity, -- she frequently eyed me when at work, with the greatest
attention, and as I fancied, took peculiar pleasure in thus looking at me. --

I had not been there long* before, by the following accident, I discovered
that she was not a native of Algiers, while I was one day at work, in order to
amuse myself, I began singing a French song, which chancing to overhear, in an
affable obliging manner, she asked me if I understood French, and on my
answering in the affirmative, began a conversation with me in that language,
wherein she asked me several questions relative to my country, family, and so
forth, and from that naivete in her expressions, which no strangers can ever
attain; I was convinced, that she could have been born in no other country,

A short time after this, she removed me from the garden to the house, where I
served her in the quality of a footman, and had now much less reason to
complain of my lot, than before, -- and without any prospect or expectations in
the world* -- had not the mere word of slavery (...) me, I should not have been
at all anxious about changing my situation; but as every Englishman has an
inflinctive veneration and desire for liberty, so I was determined to procure
mine, for which I had like to have suffered most severely.

As my mistress treated me rather with the familiarity of a friend, than the
austerity of a superior, I was not, like other slaves, under the least
restriction or confinement -- wherefore rising one morning before the rest of
the family, I hurried down to the sea side, hoping there to find some vessel,
wherein to make my escape -- but my eagerness leading me beyond the limits
allotted to those in bondage, I was discovered by a spy, whose business it was
to watch the conduct of the slaves, and carried before the viceroy, who
sentenced me to the ba^^oon, for you must observe, that though individuals may
treat their slaves with what lenity they please; nevertheless there are some
general rules, which we are all obliged to conform to; but to proceed, the
battoon is a punishment inflicted by a strong st^ff about six feet long, in the
middle whereof, are bored two holes, through which a cord is put and fastened
on the other side by large knots; by this means, the cord forms a loop, and
both the feet of the offender being put therein, two men, one at each end of
the stick, lifting it up in their arms, twist it, till they are fast pinched by
the cord, and raising them, the soles upwards, the sufferers head hanging upon
the ground in this posture, he receives as many strokes thereon as the council
shall appoint; I was sentenced to receive two hundred, but my mistresse's
meditation saved me from the torture; with whom I every day became a greater
favorite, and as she had long laid aside all that haughtiness and reserve,
with which the people at Algiers, generally treat their slaves, I began to
think, that she entertained thoughts of me, not much to her honor, and as the
sequel will show, I was not totally mistaken in my suspicions, though she had
other motives for her behavior, than what I at first imagined.

CHAP. XLV.
Whilst the smoothe streams of pleasure glides,
Whilst life rolls on in rapid tides;
Hope gilds each rising morn.
Whilst every zephyr, breathes perfumes,
Whilst every path, with roses blooms;
We fear no latent thorn.
Exemplary Mother.
MADAM la Bijoux, so was my mistress called, frequently at my leisure hours,
employed me in reading some French author to her, and I had lived in this
situation about four months, when being one day thus busied, she not a little
surprised me, by the following discourse. "After my behavior, said she, Mr.
Hartry, for I had informed her of my name, it would be ridiculous in me, to
pretend to disguise my sentiments any longer: -- I do not mean it, -- nor am I
ashamed of them, -- yes Sir, -- I will freely confess my love for you." --
"Love for me madam? interrupted I -- Yes Sir, continued she, for you; -- but
hear what I have to say, -- before you attempt to reply: -- I have said that I
love you, and as a proof thereof, will now place some confidence in yon: -- I
am a French widow, and possessed of a fortune large enough to render two people
of moderate desires, completely happy, It is not, as you may imagine, from
inclination, that I make this the place of my residence; the reason is as
follows:

"About four years ago, which was a twelvemonth after my late husband's death,
-- a gentleman one day in private, attempted to take some liberties which were
not consistent with his honor, or my virtue; when in the height of my
resentment, I snatched his own sword that hung near me, and without giving
myself time to consider the consequences, unhappily stabed him. --

"It was impossible for such an affair to remain long a secret; -- and as I
knew justice must inevitably take her course, I had no other way of saving
myself, but by flight: -- therefore packing up what money and jewels I had by
me, I escaped to this place: where I have lived ever since, though it is far
from my (...), to end (...) here. --

"I have lately heard (...) against me is dropped, which (...) Paris with
safety, -- I shall i^ a (...) days set out for that place, and having (...)
regard for you -- shall now (...), by other ways than (...) you an offer of my
hand and (...)." --

It is (...) for me to give you a just idea of my astonishment at hearing her
talk thus, nor was my terror much inferior to my surprise -- (...) howeever
ardent my desire might be to regain my liberty, I could not think of purchasing
it (...) such a price; -- though at the same (...), as I knew her to be a woman
of violent passions, I did not know how much a refusal night wound her pride,
nor to what lengths it might carry her -- for which reasons, I determined to
act with the greatest caution, least by exciting her resentment against me, she
should be drove to any extremities, nor can I answer how ^ar this apprehension
would have operated on me, had it not been suppressed by the recollection of
poor Charlotte, for whom my affection was still most lively, however my manner
of leaving her might indicate otherwise.

Conscious that it would be to no purpose to argue upon mutual affection with a
woman of her violent passions, as my only resource, I determined to adopt a
fraud, which under such circumstances, I thought excusable -- and therefore
thanked her in the politest terms that I was master of for the honor she
intended me; but added that it was impossible ^or me to accept of it, as my
^and was already unluckily disposed of in England, and assured her, that I
should always conside^ ^er regard, as the greatest honor which could be
conferred on me.

Then concluded by lamenting the perverseness of my fate, in thus putting it
out of my power to accept her offer; while I was thus informing her of my
resolution, I observed that she eyed me with great attention, and as I knew I
was uttering a falsehood, I believe I spoke with a very bad grace. --

Having waited sometime in expectation of her answer, she at last cried in a
presumptuous tone: -- "Very well, Sir -- this is a good, a very plausible
excuse, and had you thought of it sooner, I might have been a dupe to your mean
subterfuge, -- but I can now see through so poor, so shallow an artifice; I see
that I am disagreeable to you, -- but since you have had the audacity to
provoke my resentment; beware the consequences, -- dread the anger of a
slighted woman: good heaven! that I should ever subject myself to a refusal
from my own slave."

Hereupon I attempted several times to appease her rage, but in vain, she was
so hurried away by her passion, when once her pride was alarmed, that she would
hear nothing, and left me in no very enviable situation, as I knew I had every
thing to fear from the violence of her temper.

CHAP. XLVI.
Hope springs eternal in the human breast,
Man never is but always to be blessed.
POPE'S ESSAY on MAN.
IT has often been remarked that there are no lengths to which the anger of an
offended woman, will not carry her, when like the troubled sea, and raging
wind, contending in a ^it of lawless ire, which is the mightier; -- both wild
-- and ungovernable, they suffer themselves to be hurried away by the rapid
stream of passion, and will not suffer the noble pilot of our actions, --
reason, to have the smallest power.

We indeed daily see instances hereof, though at the same time, we cannot be
blind to the many exceptions which may be made to it; for some women there are,
whom nature has fashioned in so meek and mild a mould, that they will rather
subject themselves to a second injury, than attempt to revenge the first. --

These, ye youths, are jewels worthy of your preservation; and when in a female
you find goodness and beauty joined, regard her as the immediate welfare of
your souls.

Such were the reflections which Madam la Bijoux's behavior occasioned, and in
which I was busied, when I was interrupted by the maidservant, whom I before
mentioned, and who came to inform me, instigated as she said, by her regard, of
something that nea^ly concerned my safety; that she had overheard her mistress
tampering with two negroes to murder me, in the evening, on my road to a place,
where she had promised to send me.

I sincerely thanked the honest girl for her intelligence; and as the only
method to escape ^he intended blow, hastened to Madam la Bijoux, of whom
having, on my knees, begged pardon for my behavior, I assigned the following
reason as the cause: That I imagined, she had only made so kind an offer, to
see how for my presumption would carry me; but that having now found my error,
I was willing to accept of her generous proposal, and should think myself ever
happy in the (...): -- I believe she suspected my being acquainted with her
in^ention* by the hesitation she made; but as her passion was now subsided, and
having as you will presently (...), very good reasons for her clemency, she was
not long in resolving what course to take, and in a few days we set sail for
France: on our arrival (...) we were immediately married, (...) proceeded to
Paris.

Judge, if you possibly can, (...) was my surprise, to find myself* before I
had been twenty hours in the place, arrested at different suits* (...) upwards
of five thousand pounds; being debts she had contracted some time before. -- In
the most violent agitation of mind, I was hurried to prison, and now began to
see the infamous traitoress in her true colors; especially as I was in a short
time informed by the master of the hotel, where I had stopped on my arrival,
that she had left his house immediately after my seizure, without communicating
to any one what were her intentions.

This affair, as you may suppose, made a great noise in the town, the major
part of which was soon convinced of my innocence and as some of the principal
inhabitants were kind enough to interest themselves in my behalf: I was soon
released, and sound myself in possession of five hundred pounds, which the Due
de Choiseul had, on hearing my story, been generous enough to collect for me.

As soon as I was at liberty, my first business was to enquire after my wife;
nor was it long before I had the mortification of hearing, that she was very
well known at Paris, having long exercised (...) scandalous profession in that
place; during which time she had contracted these debts, which not being able
to pay, she had cheated her creditors, by escaping to Algiers.

You may judge of the situation of my mind, on considering of my near alliance
to such a woman; and surely I shall not be thought destitute either of
tenderness or Christianity, for saying, that my grief was alleviated, by
hearing in a few days, that she was found drowned in a pond, near the suburbs;
occasioned as I suppose, by her apprehensions of being brought to public
justice.

As a Christian, I sincerely lamented her unhappy fa^e, though without any of
^he tender solicitudes of a husband.

Finding myself now in possession of five hundred pounds, and surely I may say,
of some little experience, having been, in one week, a bachelor, husband, and
a widower; I bought a share in the shop where I first met you, and the other
proprietor dying soon after, the whole business, which was pretty considerable,
devolved upon me; and in this situation I might have enjoyed an uninterrupted
felicity, had it not been destroyed by the continual expectation of happier
days. And give me leave to observe, that the contententment o^ three fourths of
mankind is hindered by the same method. Men lose their present pleasure, by
looking for what is to come: and though many people are thoroughly convinced of
this; nevertheless there is such a powerful charm in hope, that we cannot help
cherishing it, and thus -- foolishly sacrifice all our present felicity, to the
emptiness of vain expectations.

But I beg your pardon, said Sir Charles, I am troubling you with reflections,
occasioned by my own adventures; which can be no amusement or information to
you, as they only tend to show, that, notwithstanding all make happiness the
wished for goal, we never find one arrive at his destined point.

CHAP. XLVII.
You have many goodly days to see,
The liquid drops of tears, that you have shed,
Shall come again, transformed to orient pearl,
Advantaging their loan with interest,
Of ten times double ^^in of happiness.
King Richard III.
IN this manner did our friends amuse themselves during their journey; and Sir
Charles, notwithstanding what he said, could not help enjoying the future in
the present: he was innately happy, to think the time was near, when he was to
be restored to the arms of his fond, expecting parent, and to meet all his soul
held dear in the person of his Charlotte.

In the mean time, poor Melvill was distracted by the painful, suspended
alternative of doubt and fear, wavering in his breast.

He could not bear the thought of seeing that woman the wi^e of another, whose
(...) he hoped to have been the chief instrument (...) and thus was ^he unhappy
Maria condemned as (...), by a man on whom she do^ted with the most extravagant
fondness.

Our travelers at length landed at Doveri^ the dusk of the evening, and were
proceeding to the ^own, when their assistance was called for, by a young man,
whom two others were forcing into a boat against his inclination, and who
having made all the resistance in his power, was nearly yielding to superior
strength, when our two friends appeared in view, whose aid he begged with great
earnestness, which as they never r^^us'd to innocence oppressed, they soon made
the two ruffians quit their hold, and conducted the person they had rescued to
an inn in the town -- where as soon as lights were brought, fixing his eyes
steadfastly on Melvill, he had only the power to cry, Good God! and fainted away.

Our travelers had observed the emotion in his face, and were ready to catch
him as he fell; -- and having, by the help of drops, etc. brought him to
himself; the color no sooner began to come into his cheeks -- than Melvill,
with the like exclamation, fainted away like wise. --

Sir Charles stood between them both, in the greatest perplexity, not knowing
what to imagine from so extraordinary an accident; -- however, he did not
remain long in this uncertainty: for when Melvill came to himself -- starting
up he cried -- "It is, it is Maria;" and was running to catch the stranger in
his arms -- when woe-fraught recollection, stinging him like an adder -- he
retreated, and fixing his eyes in frightful stillness, exclaimed, "Yes, you are
indeed Maria -- but -- " what? not Maria Hartry, no, "odious detested Clunch."
-- So saying, he ^^ll back in strong convulsions, into the arms of his friend;
who now began to see a little more clearly into this misterious affair --
Maria, for it was really her, stood trembling, and ready to assert her
innocence; -- and forgetful of Melvill's present insensibility, in a feeble
voice interrupted with tears, cried, "No, poor mistaken Melvill -- I am not the
abject thing you think me -- but I cannot blame you, appearances were strong
against me -- yet I am still Maria; the same ^ond maid you left me, and in that
thought my happiness is complete." -- Then catching her brother, though unknown
to be such, by the hand, added, in a most moving accent -- "Oh, Sir, did you
but know my history -- I am sure you would drop a tender tear, in pity of my
woes: but do, dear Sir, persuade him of my innocence; -- for innocent I am, you
may believe m^^"

"I do, replied Sir Charles, -- I will belive you, what I know you are, a
miserable guiltless maid -- I know your history, and know you both unfortunate
-- but better times will come and soon: for still he loves, and often to me has
spoke of you in tender terms."

Melvill being now somewhat composed, our heroine disclosed to him every
circumstance, which the reader has before heard -- though it was not till after
a long while, that he could be persuaded of the truth of what he heard.

When he began to talk and think a little more collectedely, and was convinced
of the reality of his bliss -- he caught the now happy Maria in his arms, and a
most tender and affecting scene ensued -- too tender, too affecting for my poor
pen, even to attempt a description of.

When they had indulged their mingled transports of grief, surprise, and joy,
for some time, and an interval of moderation gave them leave to think of
something else besides their love; new wonders waited for them all to hear and
see -- Maria to find a friend, and long lost brother, for whom she had often
figh'd in vain; but by whose presence all her past cares were far overbalanced
-- and with whom she at once congratulated, and condoled: congratulated, on his
accession to a title and fortune -- condoled with him, for the loss of a tender
and affectionate father. These indeed appeared almost as miracles to both our
heroes; yet notwithstanding, the measure of their joy was now completely full,
Sir Charles could not refrain from dropping a tear, as a tribute due to the
memory of his father: nor did Melvill forget to sympathize with two such
friends for their loss. When their mutual amazement was in some degree
subsisted, Melvil^ tenderly enquired of his Maria, by what strange accident,
she had come into the situation, from which they had so happily delivered her.

"By the villainous artifices of a man, said (...), from whose snares, I hope I
shall now be entirely free." -- She th^n related to them circumstantially, what
the reader has before heard concerning lord (...), and -- proceeded as follows
-- "We were no sooner settled in London, happy in the thought of my having so
well escaped him, than he came there likewise, and finding out where we lived,
by the treachery of a servant, got introduced one evening, while the family
were all at the play: -- and again carried (...) away by force. That I might be
less likely to be rescued, he brought me these clothes, in which he ordered me
to dress myself; I dared not but to obey, and (...) he hurried me down to this
place, intending, I suppose, to carry me abroad, had not Providence ^hus
mercifully sent you to my assistance."

Thus (...) all cleared up; and (...) congratulations, (...) they ^arted. The
next (...) some clothes of (...) London, with (...) they arrived that evening.

(...) that at Dover -- (...) through (...) at seeing Sir Charle^, and Mr*
(...) no longer withheld his consent from making this worthy pair happy.

From what has been said, the readers will naturally expect, two marriages nor
will they be disappointed.

In about a fortnight, Sir Charles led his Charlotte, and Melvill his Maria to
the altar, and the same day saw these two happy couple, united by indissoluble
ties.

Sure never were found a happier set of people! if our heroines were handsome,
when their husbands first knew them, they were now more exquisitely so, as time
had brought to perfection those beauties which were then but in the blossom.

Having thus disposed of my principal personages, I must, after the example of
my betters, likewise give some small account of the other characters mentioned
in this trifling work.

Don Carlos married an agreeable lady in his own country, with whom he finds
all the happiness that so worthy a man deserves, and still corresponds with
Melvill as a friend.

When my lord Dapper wit was convinced that he must give up all farther
thoughts of Maria, ^e hastened over to Ireland, to avoid being called to at
account at the old ba^ly for his behavior; however ^er, he received the just
(...) of his wickedness there, for (...), (...) old trick, of doing what he had
a (...) through the body for (...), by a hot-he^ded West-Indian.

When (...) Charles Hartry, according to promise called upon Miss Barton, he
was agreeably surprised at finding her in possession of an ample fortune, as
being heir at law, to her infamous sister, who was justly killed by a fall from
her horse, and died without a will.

The grief which Mrs. Modish felt for the loss of her truly amiable AEmily
joined to the still severer affliction, that she underwent, to find how
slightly grounded Mr. Martin's affection had been for her, gave rise to a
disorder that too quickly put an end to her days.

Sir Henry Summers is still possessed of that charitable benevolence of
disposition, which forms so conspicuous a part of his character, though Mrs.
Martin's death has occasioned in him a thoughtless inattention, which no time
can ever efface.

Melvill soon after his marriage, bought an estate near Mr. Howard's wherein
Maria, himself, and lady Hartry live.

Sir Charles and Charlotte, live with Mr. Howard, and thus do these two
families, happy in themselves, find faithful friends, and agreeable neighbors
in each other.

THE END.

