PRESIDENT DWIGHT's DISCOURSE, AT THE FUNERAL OF DR. GOODRICH.

A DISCOURSE, PREACHED AT THE FUNERAL OF THE REVEREND ELIZUR GOODRICH, D. D.
PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN DURHAM, AND ONE OF THE MEMBERS OF THE CORPORATION OF
YALE-COLLEGE; BY THE Reverend TIMOTHY DWIGHT, D. D. PRESIDENT OF YALE-COLLEGE;
NOVEMBER 25th, 1797.

Printed at the Request of the Congregation.

NEW HAVEN; PRINTED BY T. AND S. GREEN.

A FUNERAL DISCOURSE.
ECCLESIASTES IX.I. -- The Righteous, and the Wise, and their Works, are in the
hand of God.


THE uniformity of the divine dispensations toward the righteous, and the
wicked, was to Asaph, as he informs us in the 73d Psalm, a source of great
perplexity and distress. It appears, that he was deeply, and for a long time,
employed in meditating on this mysterious subject; and, the more he considered
it, the more he doubted and desponded. Reduced, at length, to a state bordering
on agony and despair, he exclaimed "I have cleansed my heart in vain, and
washed my hands in innocence; for all the day long have I been plagued, and
chastened every morning."

From the prosperity of the wicked, and his own great adversity, he was led
ultimately to indulge these unhappy sentiments, and to feel as if God had no
rest, no kindness, no peculiar care, for righteous men. This dangerous mistake
was however rectified, and these censurable feelings were removed, when he
afterward went to the sanctuary of God. Then understood he the end of the
wicked. He saw them set in slippery places, and ready to be cast down to
destruction. He saw, that whatever apparent errors were found in the
dispensations of God, in the present world, would be finally proved not to be
errors, by their connection with future dispensations; that the Providence of
God was one great scheme, reaching through time, and through eternity; that the
parts of it, existing here, were to be explained by their consequences,
existing hereafter; that, thus explained, all would be, and would be found to
be, right; and that God would appear, as he had declared himself, and as a
perfect Being must be, the uniform friend of the Righteous, and the uniform
enemy of the impenitently Wicked.

Solomon, a man of more extensive views, close observation, and profound
research, than Asaph, and assisted by the very discoveries made to Asaph, was
enabled by the Divine Spirit to form more comprehensive, and more accurate
ideas of this mysterious subject. Calmly and carefully examining the
circumstances of men, and the Providence of God, he saw clearly, that "all
things come alike to all; and that there is one event to the righteous and to
the wicked." With these views he also determined easily and certainly, that
there is "no knowledge of the love or hatred" of God to any person "by all"
that part of his Providence "which is before us" -- by his prosperity, or his
adversity; and that he may be in either of these situations, and still be
wicked, or still be righteous.

For all these things Solomon also discovered a reason, which satisfied him of
the propriety of such a system of dispensations; viz. that all these things are
in the hand of God. This Infinite Being, who rules all things, the greatest and
the least, the best and the worst, alike, with universal and irresistible
dominion, rules them, also, with a government perfectly wise and good. In the
hand, and under the management, of such a Being, nothing, which is wrong,
whatever may be the appearance to us, can exist; and nothing, which is right,
and upon the whole desirable, can fail to he accomplished. Things, which to our
Minds are strange and perplexing, do indeed exist in immense multitudes. But
this ought to be expected. The works of an infinitely wise and powerful Being
must of course transcend our comprehension. They must suit the nature, the
skill, wisdom, power, and goodness, of such a Being, and must wear the
impressions and proofs of his Character. Such a Character, we know, is far
removed from our comprehension; the particular displays of such a Character
must, therefore, be often equally incomprehensible. The works of such a Being
must be designed to reach, either in their nature, or in their consequences,
through eternity and immensity. Hence the propriety of their existence must, in
a great measure, depend on things wholly unknown to us, and must, in a great
measure, be hidden from our fight.

No works of God ought to be expected to partake of this mysterious character
more than his dispensations to the righteous, and to the wicked. Moral beings
are formed for endless duration; and all dispensations toward them must,
therefore, have a future reference, and involve consequences, which will extend
through eternity. Hence all the Providence of God respecting such beings must
be in the number of the most mysterious and incomprehensible events. The
difficulties and perplexities found in this subject ought then to be considered
as things of course, as things necessarily arising from the nature of the
subject.

Solomon has, therefore, exhibited this subject in the manner, which is most
proper, most accordant with truth, and most adapted to quiet uneasiness, and
relieve perplexity. We do not, indeed, see the reasons, why things are as they
are; but we see sufficient reasons to believe, that, though thus unknown, they
are wisely ordered, and will terminate in the most desirable manner.

Among the mysterious dispensations of God to the righteous, and the wicked,
the prolongation of the lives of the wicked, when useless, and when noxious to
society, and the untimely termination of the lives of the righteous, when most
useful, has, to me at least, seemed peculiarly perplexing. The wicked often
live to annoy and distress mankind, and live to advanced age, safe from
sickness, accident, and violence; while the righteous, not unfrequently, are
cut off in the morning, or in the meridian, of their usefulness; when all their
talents, their knowledge, experience, and wisdom, their virtue, weight, and
influence, are in their full strength, and appear to have risen to this height,
only to be destroyed. In this situation the Mind, adopting the words of
Inspiration, slightly altered, almost instinctively cries, "Wherefore have thou
made such men in vain?"

To remove these impressions, and to introduce into their place such, as are
more just and evangelical, is the object of this discourse, and the drift of
the text, on which it is founded. If the melancholy event, which has called
together this Assembly, has affected them in such a manner, and with such
thoughts, as it has affected me, scarcely any subject can be more suited to the
occasion. The deceased was taken from the world in the full strength of all his
usefulness, and while employing all his faculties in the great business of
doing extensive good. In the view of such an event the serious Mind searches
for a satisfying cause of the dispensation, and is ready to spend its thoughts,
if not in murmuring and repining, yet in useless wonder, and censurable
perplexity.

To dispel these thoughts, and the emotions springing from them, no
consideration can operate so effectually as that, suggested by Solomon in the
text. "The Righteous, and the Wise, and their works, are in the hand of God."
To a coincidence with me in this opinion my Audience may perhaps be
advantageously led by the following observations, in which I shall endeavor to
state the real force of this important declaration.

In the first place, it teaches us, that there is no reason why we should
wonder, that they are so disposed of, or that their concerns are ordered in
such a manner.

In the great kingdom of the universe purposes infinitely numerous, and
infinitely important, are to be accomplished, of which we have no
comprehension. As the purposes are unknown to us, so the proper means of
accomplishing them are also unknown. If we knew the ends, we should probably
often see the means to be proper, and fitted to the end. The use* which God
intends to make of the righteous and their works, when he removes them from the
present world, we cannot know. It lies beyond the grave, in a world invisible,
in a state unknown. Were we acquainted with that world, with the state of
intellectual society in it, and with the employments and interests of the
inhabitants, the difficulties, attending such events of Providence, as respect
them, might probably vanish; but, while these things are unknown, we can form
no judgment of the propriety, or impropriety, of such measures. In the nature
of the case, therefore, we see sufficient reasons to determine, that God must,
of course, order his Providence in this respect, in a manner mysterious to us.
That it should be mysterious is wholly to be expected, and that it should not
be mysterious cannot rationally be expected. Instead, therefore, of wondering
why this part of Divine Providence is mysterious, we ought rather to wonder if
at any time we see it divested of mystery. The dispensations are mysterious,
because they are the works of God, because they are planned and executed by an
infinite Mind, and because they reach in their consequences throughout
eternity. The ways of such a Being reaching through such an extent must be
necessarily incomprehensible to beings of yesterday, who know comparatively
nothing. With this consideration in view, our doubts, of this nature, retire of
course, our perplexities vanish, our fears, that the world is not wisely and
happily governed, are removed, and our murmuring against that government is
effectually prevented.

Asaph, had he thus thought, and thought as extensively as Solomon appears to
have done, would never have concluded, that he had cleansed his heart in vain.
With his excellent disposition he would willingly have left the whole subject,
unknown as it was, to the disposal of God, and rested quietly on his wisdom,
equity, and conduct of the universe. All who are like Asaph in disposition,
will, if they remember, and realize, tne declaration of Solomon, entertain the
same views, and experience the same resignation.

2ndly. The same declaration assures us, that the Righteous are disposed of by
design, and not by accident, and according to the pleasure of God, and not of
any other.

We are accustomed frequently to call the dispensations of Providence by names,
very ill expressing their real character. We style them accidents and
contingencies, good and ill luck, good and ill fortune, happy and unhappy
chances. Our success and our disappointments, we attribute to our forecast and
prudence, or to the want of them, to our industry and exertions, or to our
negligence and sloth, or to an unknown somewhat, which we term nature, fortune,
or chance. With such words in our mouths, and the corresponding sentiments in
our hearts, we often boast of our seize, and glory in our talents and
efforts.

Our wisdom and energy have, at times, unquestionably a share in effectuating
the good, which we enjoy; as our folly and indolence have in accomplishing the
evil which we suffer. God uses us as his instruments in promoting his designs.
His kingdom is a kingdom of means, in which the faculties and exertions of his
creatures are continually employed by him to accomplish his own glorious
purposes. At the same time it is still true, that "a man's goings are of the
Lord." Paul at the utmost can only plant; Apollos can only water; God, and God
only can give the increase. Pride and boasting have, therefore, no foundation
in the nature of things. Reason, as well as Revelation, says, "Let him, that
glories, glory in the Lord."

Providence, while it employs our faculties, influences also by ten thousand
unforeseen events our various purposes, directs our steps, and regulates our
lot, both in the present and future world. A stroke of lightning, the stumbling
of a horse, a defect in a bridge, a leak in a ship, a worm, a fly; an atom,
have deeply affected the affairs of men, disconcerted ambitious designs, ruined
vast enterprises, and changed wholly the state of individuals, nations, and
ages. Creatures, on whom these things can so greatly operate, ought to be far
removed from boasting of themselves, or of their seize.

Luck, fortune, chance, and accident, are names, which, if seriously used, have
no meaning. Not a sparrow falls to the ground without our heavenly Father. Not
a hair less, nor more, than the allotted number, is found on our heads. All
things are providential; all are of God; all are the result of wisdom,
contrivance and determination. The least sustain this character as truly as the
greatest. From this the only just view of events the mind is naturally and
greatly led off by a customary use of the language, which I have reprobated.

Whether we are disposed to this method of considering events, or not, we
cannot hesitate to regard in this manner those events, which respect the
righteous, if we receive and realize the declaration of the Text* They, and
their works, their talents, and their interests, are in the hand of God.
Nothing, which befalls them, can be the result of accident. Every thing, on the
contrary, must be foreseen, chosen, and provided for, and of course is adopted
from full knowledge of the propriety of its existence.

As God is the supreme, and all present, as well all knowing disposer, so
nothing can befall the righteous, but in accordance with his will, and as the
result of his pleasure. The opposing wishes, aims, and efforts, of other beings
are here exerted in vain. "My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my
pleasure" -- "I work, and who shall let it?" -- is his own language on this
subject. None can let, i. e. hinder, his work. Every dictate of that counsel,
however minute, will be exactly accomplished. These declarations, true as
applied to all things, have a peculiar ground of truth as applied to the
righteous. He, who attends so minutely to sparrows, as to number their days,
and limit their lives by exact bounds; who suffers not a hair of our heads to
fall without his providence; knows perfectly, that righteous men, rational,
immortal, and destined to dignified employments and endless happiness, are of
more value than many sparrows. Raised by their character, endowments, and
services, to that rank of being, in which he vouchsafes to call them his
friends, they are had in everlasting remembrance. No moment fleets through the
reign of time so rapidly, no period rolls so distantly in eternity, as ever to
occasion them to be forgotten. Every thing which they do, and every thing which
they need, is fresh in the Infinite Mind; the former will be certainly and
bountifully rewarded; the latter will be punctually and amply bestowed.

3dly. That the Righteous are disposed of with equity.

"Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?" is a question, carrying its
answer in itself to the conscience and conviction of every considerate man.
Injustice finds here no room for admission, even in thought. The proofs of the
justice of a particular* dispensation, indeed, may not, and often will not
appear; but the proofs, that all, which is done by God, is done with perfect
justice, are too plain, and too conclusive, to need a refutation.

Scarcely more necessary is it to mention the amazing importance of this
consideration. The terrible effects of injustice, even in an earthly ruler, are
so dreaded by all men, as to create, whenever they appear, the greatest
agitation and distress. No human convulsions have more shaken, or astonished,
the world than those, which have chiefly originated from this cause. Thrones
have been subverted, rulers destroyed, oceans of treasure expended, and oceans
of blood poured out, to avert, or to remedy, the evil.

On known and exact justice all men, on the contrary, wholly and comfortably
rely for such decisions and measures, as are most interesting to their
wellbeing. All men also, who are not themselves unjust, acquiesce in such
measures and decisions, as are seen to be just; nor can a higher commendation
be given, nor a more important duty required of him, who rules over men, than
that he is, or must be, just ruling in the fear of God. So high a place,
indeed, does the virtue of justice, or righteousness, hold, that it is perhaps,
as often as any other, made to stand as a description of all that is virtuous.
The Text is one example, and the pages of Scripture teem with innumerable
others.

In the Infinite Ruler this glorious attribute claims an infinite distinction.
From all the injustice of earthly rulers, as well as from private wrong, there
is beyond the grave, a final appeal. There a tribunal is erected, at which,
there a Judge exists, before whom, every wrong, suffered here, will be
redressed, and every right denied or wrested here, will be secured. Fraud may
here plunder, lust pollute, ambition enslave, and cruelty torture; but the
victim will there find a complete remedy for his wrongs, and an ample
recompense rendered into the bosom of his enemies. The poor, the deluded, and
the suffering, will there be gloriously exalted, and the proud man fall, and
the mighty man be brought low before them. This is the final solace for every
present wrong, the refuge, the home, of the persecuted and oppressed.

But from that tribunal there is no appeal. Whatever decisions are there given
will be ultimate decisions. No future, wiser, juster judge is yet behind, to
revise and correct the errors there committed, or to redress wrongs there
inflicted. Eternity is written on every sentence, and immutability instamped on
every allotment. How dreadful, beyond measure, in this case would be injustice?
injustice remediless and hopeless? Through what a duration would it extend,
with what knowledge would it be contrived, with what power would it be
enforced? The Creation would be one great prison, clanking with the chains, and
echoing the groans, of agony and despair.

Against all these wrongs, against every wrong, all creatures are by the
perfect justice of God wholly secured. The Righteous, particularly, neither in
their death, nor in their future being, will find a right invaded, or an injury
done. The determinations of God will command their entire approbation, and
reflect the highest glory on his government. To all that he orders, and to all
that he does, Wisdom and Virtue will subjoin their solemn Amen.

4thly. That they are disposed of with wisdom.

By this observation I intend, that in the disposal of the righteous valuable
ends are proposed and accomplished. No caprice, prejudice, or passion, is
indulged or gratified. On the contrary, with a complete knowledge of all that
is practicable, necessary, or desirable, and a disposition to pursue that, and
that only, which is most desirable, a plan is formed and pursued, by which, in
the most direct manner, the purpose will be certainly brought to pass.

The ends, which are here in view, respect both the individuals, who are the
immediate subjects of the disposal, and their fellow creatures, and undoubtedly
are found both in the present and the future world.

We are not usually able to trace with precision the ends, which are by these
dispensations to be accomplished, in the present world; yet we have sufficient
reason to believe, that such ends are really in view, and are actually
accomplished. All events, here, lead to those, which follow them; and they to
others, in perpetual progress. In some cases we are able, at least in an
imperfect degree, to perceive the connection and design. This, however, can
never be done, until the events referred to, have taken place. The foresight of
man reaches but a little distance, and that distance in a manner very
imperfect. Future objects are involved in mist and obscurity; and the human
eye, when it sees them at all, sees them in delusive colors, and of forms and
sizes, which mock detection, and elude inquiry.

The wisdom, virtue, friendship, instructions, and example, of a righteous man
obviously produce, after his decease, greater effects on those, whom he leaves
behind him, in many instances at least, than the same causes produced, when he
was living. Dying words are always affecting words; and the instructions of a
righteous man, who has left the world, possess the character, and the power, of
dying words. They are remembered with more care and solemnity, and felt with
greater force, than when he was alive. When he was present and acting with us,
when his interests at times clashed, or were thought to clash, with ours, when
by his example he cast a shade on our conduct and character, and when with his
voice he reproved and restrained our faults, we naturally became impatient,
cool, unfriendly, and prejudiced. His worth in our minds was lessened, or
denied; his instructions doubted and disregarded; and his person viewed with
dislike, and even with malignity. But when he is gone, our prejudices cease. We
call to mind his excellencies with a more candid spirit, and view his conduct
without the intervention of selfish interests. Many things, which in his life
he said, and did, and which were then unfavourably received by us, are now
acknowledged to be true, just, and important. His whole character becomes thus
more amiable and excellent in our view, and commands more extensively our
reverence and imitation. From one righteous man the transition is easy to
others, and to all; and from them our respect is naturally extended to their
distinguishing attribute. Righteousness, which makes them the peculiar objects
of our regard, becomes itself more valuable in our eyes; and gives birth to a
train of sentiments in our minds, which not unfrequently grow into reformation
and excellence of life.

This is but one of the numerous important ends, accomplished in this world by
the removal of the righteous. Not unfrequently are they removed from this
world, that they may be taken away from the evil to come. From sin and
temptation, from toil and sorrow, from the degeneracy of their children and the
miseries of their friends, from the sufferings of their country and the
persecution of the church of Christ, a deliverance unspeakably desirable is
granted to them by the infinitely merciful God. Their bodies rest from their
labors in the peaceful grave, and their spirits, ascending to the mansions of
eternal quiet, gain a similar release from the bondage of sin. From every
snare, and every enemy, they finally escape, and calumny, injustice, and envy,
follow them with eyes vainly malignant, and with curses that roar unheard and
unregarded.

When persons of high eminence for talents and virtue have long acted a
conspicuous part on the stage of life, and appear to be necessary to the
well-being of mankind, God not unfrequently intends, when he calls them away,
to show the surviving world, that he is perfectly able to carry on the designs
of his providence without their agency. The importance of individuals to the
system of things rises, at times, too high in the public estimation, and
prompts us to forget the all sufficiency of God, in the strong sense we
entertain of the excellence of men. This, though a natural, is an unhappy
error, and is often best eradicated by the removal of those, who have
innocently and virtuously contributed to its existence.

In many instances he teaches us in an affecting manner, that we have regarded
the deceased with affections undue and unwarrantable. Good men can be loved too
much. Among the numberless idols of the human heart, they, not unfrequently,
find a place. To love them is felt to be justifiable, and known to be
commanded. The mind, conscious of rectitude in this indulgence of affection, is
frequently inattentive to the danger of indulging it to excess. A darling
child, a venerated parent, a beloved husband, or wife, steals, insensibly, the
heart from God; and often renders the return difficult, perhaps impossible,
without a removal of the idolized object.

At the same time the contrary evil is not less frequent, or unhappy. The value
of righteous men is often unseen, neglected, and despised; their services are
requited with obloquy and unkindness; and their persons are made the objects of
hatred, abuse, and persecution. No inhabitant of Sodom was probably less
esteemed, or befriended, than Lot; and no Israelite of his time than Elijah.
From men thus disposed the righteous are removed, in judgment. Nor is the
judgment less, because it is unregarded, or regarded with pleasure. The death
of a good man, which is considered by us as a benefit, will on that account
prove the more certainly a curse. The hardness of heart, which is thus
manifested, is of all curses the most dreadful, and by the very event, which
excites our pleasure, is surely and dreadfully increased.

This detail might be easily extended beyond the limits of your patience. The
instances already mentioned are sufficient to illustrate the point in
discussion.

Of the particular ends, designed at in the future world, by the removal of
good men from this, we know nothing. A general exhibition, only, is made to us
in the scriptures, of the state of being beyond the grave. From this we are
assured, that their translation to that world is intended to accomplish
purposes, in the highest degree important and desirable. None, there, are idle,
or useless; but all are far more active, able, and useful, than they could have
been here. Superior powers, directed to sublimer objects, and actuated by more
excellent dispositions, are there engaged in nobler exertions, and more
dignified employments. To these exertions, and employments, they are directly
summoned by their Maker, and enter upon a career of more distinguished
usefulness to themselves, their fellow creatures, and their God, which will
know no end

5. That they are disposed of with kindness and mercy.

We know, says the Apostle, that all things do work (or labor) together, for
good to them that love God; to them who are the called, according to his
purpose. This is the end of the united labors of all beings, and all events,
of God, and of good and evil beings in his creation. In the hands of a Being,
who has contrived, and who is directing, all things for this glorious end,
those who love him cannot but find unspeakable good will manifested in every
employment, and in every concern.

From this world of toil, of sorrow, and of sin, they are removed forever. No
more shall their strength be wasted by weariness, their health impaired by
langour and pain, or their comfort and peace destroyed by enemies and dangers.
No more shall their eyes be pained by the sight of families corrupted,
perverse, and hopeless; of friends alienated from God, religion, and life; and
of a world in guilt and ruin. No more shall they be called to war with lust, to
struggle with temptation, or to endure the stings of scorn, the shafts of
malice, or the iron hand of oppression. Their hearts shall no more be wounded
by conscious guilt, and shameful backsliding. When they take their flight from
this great prison, they will bid a final adieu to every enemy and evil, and see
the distance between themselves and their enemies widening forever. Toil, pain,
sorrow, fear, and death, time, temptation, and sin, recede from their flight,
and the tumult roar, and rage, behind them in vain.

In the mean time they ascend to God, and return to their final home. In his
children they find none but friends, from his hand no communication but of
love, and in his house nothing but joy. With expanded minds, and purified
hearts, with strength incapable of decay, and activity superior to fatigue,
they enter on a course of enjoyment perpetually enlarging. Ransomed of the
Lord, returned and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their
heads, they are acknowledged as sons, and kings, and priests, to God the
Father, and live and reign with him forever and ever.

Those, whom they leave behind them, will, if informed with the evangelical
spirit, and regarding the solemn dispensation with attentive wisdom, share in
the kindness, of which their deceased friends so largely partake.

The grave of a good man is one of the most instructive of all earthly objects.
We there behold the end of the course even of virtuous life; of wisdom as well
as of ambition; of worth as well as of wickedness. The humble origin of man is
there traced in our kindred to corruption, to worms, and to dust. There we
summon up to solemn view the trials, the labors, and the excellencies of him
who is gone; the patience with which he bore affliction, the fortitude with
which he endured danger, the resolution with which he surmounted difficulties
and vanquished enemies, the peace with which he heightened enjoyment, the faith
with which he quickened diligence, the hope which gleamed through the gloom of
despondency, and the prayers which invoked and drew down from heaven the
supporting energy of the Infinite Spirit. What objects can so interest,
enlighten, quicken, and sustain? In what other place can these possess equal
influence?

From this affecting scene we also lift our eyes to the distant, invisible
world, and trace our departed friend far on his final and glorious flight,
hastening to the endless reward of all his labors, sufferings, and virtues. We
see him escaped from every danger, and victorious over every enemy. The
conflict is passed; the day is won; and the palm of eternal triumph awarded.

Here, more than in any other place, we learn so to struggle, endure, and
overcome. Here we learn to lean upon the God, on whom he has leaned, and to
trust in the Savior, in whom he has trusted; to despise the world, which he
has proved to be vanity, and to seek the inheritance, which, endless and
sincere, he has sought, and obtained. In a word, heavenly mindedness, the
ornament and beauty of virtue, is a plant, which eminently flourishes and
blossoms around the grave of a righteous man.

To the affecting occasion, which has called us together, these observations
are so naturally applied, that my audience have probably anticipated me in
making the application. We are called together, my friends and brethren, to
follow to the house, appointed for all living, a wise and righteous man. In his
death each of us finds an affecting concern. To one is most strongly presented
the image of a departed friend; to another of a departed minister. One will
most deeply regret an obliging neighbor, another a prudent counselor, a
third a lost benefactor, and a fourth a spiritual guide. All naturally form
their claims upon the preacher; and their claims he feels and acknowledges. The
demand is too just, and the occasion too affecting, to be unfelt by any heart,
not wholly unacquainted with feeling.

Among those, who are most deeply concerned in the departure of the Deceased,
the surviving Family claim our first regard. To them he stood in most of the
important relations, in which he is remembered by others; and in some, in which
he was known to them only; relations peculiarly important and endearing. To
them, therefore, to the bereaved widow, and her mourning children, to the
brethren, sisters, and other near relatives, let me first address the
instructions and consolations of the text.

While you, Madam, your Children, and your near Connections, are mourning the
loss of this beloved Friend, to you and your children the best of all friends,
God only excepted; while your more distant Connections around you stand uniting
their sorrows with yours, and mingling with your tears their own tears of
sympathy; let me, whose office it now is, attempt to administer to you, and to
your fellow mourners, such consolations, as your distresses will permit.
Imperfect they may be; but they may still be found of real use.

The heart, when sorely wounded, is, I am well aware, ready to revolt at the
thought even of consolation. In such a case, the words of Thomas are but too
naturally adopted, "Let us go also, that we may die with him." Still the
scriptures furnish comfort in every distress. The consolations, which they
give, are the consolations of God, who knows perfectly the nature of the wound
which he has made, and who, in his Word, has mercifully provided a balsam to
assuage its anguish. Be mine the task to point it out to you, to induce you to
use it, and to aid you to possess yourselves of its healing power.

To this purpose no considerations are, unless I greatly mistake, more
naturally, or effectually adapted, than those suggested by the text. When
events deeply and sorely affect us, it is no small support fully to realize,
that they are contrived, chosen, and accomplished, by the infinite God; that,
though mysterious in themselves to such shortsighted creatures as we are,
though contrary to our wishes and expectations alike, and though opposed to all
which we should think proper to be done, there is still in them nothing of
chance, of caprice, or of enmity to us. The consideration rises still higher,
and our support becomes still stronger, when we call to mind, that this design
and its accomplishment are directed by perfect equity; and that the
dispensation, when scrutinized by the strictest eye, must be approved of as
perfectly right. Still more pleasingly must we be affected, when we remember,
that consummate Wisdom conducted the event, pursued important ends, and
selected this as a necessary mean of promoting them; and that such ends may be
realized by ourselves, if we wait with patience, examine with care, and act
with wisdom and piety. But our consolation will be most effectually found, when
we further remember, that the same event is the fruit of infinite kindness and
mercy to ourselves and ours.

All these supporting considerations attend the death of a righteous man, and
all the circumstances of his death. It may be sudden, awful and peculiarly
painful to the human eye. He may die, far from his family and friends; and they
may be prevented of the power, and frustrated of the wish, to attend him in the
last moments, and to do for him the last kind offices. All these are
unavoidably distressing to us; but every one of them, however unaccountable it
may seem, is contrived and executed by God with entire wisdom, justice,
kindness, and mercy. The Lord does not willingly afflict the children of men;
but, as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him.

Say not then, my suffering friends, that your cup is filled with bitterness
only. Bitter indeed it is, but it is still sweetened with mercy. Think what
would be your situation, if you were now mourning, as those mourn, who have no
hope. Call up to view the image of a graceless husband, of an unprincipled
father, of an abandoned brother, and compare it with the character of him whom
you have lost. How affecting the contrast? How incalculably different might
your situation have been; how unspeakably more pungent and agonizing your
sorrows? In your remembrance nothing rises, but the prudence, the care, the
instruction, the kindness, of the friend, the father, and the husband; the
wisdom, the piety, and the dignity, of the christian, and the minister. What a
train is here presented to the mind? Who, when called to mourn, would not
choose so to mourn?

All this, you will instinctively answer, is a mere description of the
greatness of our loss. Let me reply. Could you wish the case otherwise? Could
you at this moment be willing, that one virtue less, or in any less degree, had
entered into the character of the deceased?

In the mean time, let me exhort you not to forget blessings, because they are
past. How much longer than the common lot have you enjoyed the presence,
instructions, and kind offices of the deceased? How long has he formed, and
increased, conjugal happiness; trained up his children in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord; commanded his household to follow after God; and walked
exemplarily before them in the statutes and ordinances of the Redeemer? How
long, how faithfully, and how uniformly, has he exhibited the benevolence of a
friend, and a brother? Forget not, in the height of your affliction, such
blessings as these. Forget not, that they came from the same God, who has now
called you to sorrow and tears.

Let me also exhort you affectingly to remember all those amiable things in the
deceased; whose value you declare by the sorrow, with which you lament the loss
of them, and to remember them as motives, as guides, and as an example, all
prompting you to pursue the same desirable conduct. "Go thou, and do likewise,"
is the instruction, which should close the account, and the remembrance, of
every virtuous example. An example so near, so beloved, cannot want motives to
enforce it. All the just, important, evangelical things, which the friend whom
you mourn has said, and done, will now, as they rise in your view, appear
invested with a new force and solemnity. They will come as instructions from
the invisible world, and as an example from beyond the grave. In this affecting
character let them be heard, reverenced and obeyed.

Commending you now to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to
build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them that are
sanctified, suffer me to direct my attention to the Congregation, over which
the deceased has so long presided as a Minister of Christ.

My friends and brethren, you are bereaved of a friend, connected with you in a
relation, which is plainly one of the nearest and most important in the present
world. With the manner in which he has sustained this relation, and discharged
the duties of it, to you, I am not, though a stranger to you, wholly
unacquainted. From his preaching and conversation, and from the information of
others, I know him to have adopted the doctrines of grace; doctrines
acknowledged as the true, doctrines of Christ by the great body of those, who,
in every age and country, have been esteemed orthodox Christians. In accordance
with these doctrines he looked for salvation for himself, his family, and his
flock. These were the object of his unshaken attachment, and the subject of his
fervent exhortations; were extensively understood by him, and ably defended. In
these he lived, and in these he died.

From his mouth you have heard them weekly, and I need not tell you, with what
ability, learning, fervor, and uniformity, set forth in full display from the
beginning to the end of his ministry. In conformity to these doctrines you have
ever been called to Faith and Repentance in the Lord Jesus Christ, and to the
Love of God and mankind. You have been taught, that man is a depraved and
ruined creature, condemned by the law of God, and with no means of return, or
reconciliation, in himself; that in Christ alone is your hope for forgiveness,
acceptance, and eternal life; that your salvation is a reward not of works, but
of the grace of God; that the faith of the Gospel is Faith which works by
love, purifieth the heart, and produces every good fruit; and that by this
Faith alone you are united to Christ, and interested in the blessings of his
redemption.

All these are doctrines humbling to human pride, and wounding to human
obstinacy. They lay man low at the footstool of divine mercy, and unclothe him
of that self righteousness, which he thinks his ornament and glory, but which
is indeed a garment of rags, and a wreath of shame. Nor less alarming are they
to the fears, than humbling to the pride, of sinners. That quiet and security,
in which a hard heart and a stupid mind love to rest, they disturb and destroy;
and present to impenitence nothing but danger, terror, and death.

Men who love to be at ease in Zion, and who cherish the pride and pleasure of
self righteousness, are usually enemies to the doctrines, which I have
mentioned. While these doctrines, and the preachers of them, are a savor of
life unto life to them who are saved, they are also a savor of death unto
death to them that perish. To many of the Congregation in this town, both
living and dead, they have doubtless proved the means of life; to some,
perhaps, they have served only as means of awakening resentment, opposition,
hardness of heart, and final unbelief.

According to these doctrines the deceased lived before you; daily exemplifying
their influence on his faith, and on his conduct. The example, which he set,
was the example of prudence, diligence, truth, justice, kindness, and
godliness. In all the relations, of life he showed, that he believed and lived,
as he urged you to believe and live. You know, though I am ignorant, whether
you received his words, as the words of a friend and a minister of Christ, or
whether he has all the day long stretched out his hands to a gainsaying and
disobedient people. Search your hearts, and enquire what is the account, which
you will soon be obliged to give.

He is now gone; gone to the world of departed spirits; gone, we trust, to
receive the approbation of his Lord, and the reward of a faithful servant. He
is removed from your esteem, your love, your kind offices, your communion and
your knowledge. At the same time he is placed beyond the reach of your
resentment, opposition, and unkindness. Intercourse between you and him has, in
this world, ceased forever. But let me exhort you to remember, that you will
meet again, and at the close of a little period will stand face to face. Both
he and you will be called to give an account of his ministry, and the manner in
which it was received by you; of what you believed, and what you practiced. You
will then meet with other views, and other feelings, than some, which you have
been wont to experience here. Here many interests, aims, pursuits, prejudices,
and passions, of this world have occupied your minds, and greatly colored and
obscured your views of future things. But eternity will then have begun to you,
and all these earthly things will have disappeared. Passion and prejudice will
then have ceased to operate, and truth naked and entire will be brought out to
view.

At that time, those of you, who have cordially received from his lips the
instructions of righteousness, will meet him with joy. His witness will redound
to your everlasting happiness, and yours will be to him a crown of glory. He
will bless God for giving you to him as a diadem of beauty, as an everlasting
crown which shall never fade away; and you will bless the same God for giving
him to you, as a minister of righteousness, and the means of your salvation.
What a meeting will this be? What a progress will be made in friendship thus
begun, a friendship to be enlarged and improved through an endless duration?

How different will be the interview between him and those of you, should any
such be found, who have rejected his words of truth? Are you prepared to
allege, before his Judge and yours, the reasons which induced you, when he
called, to refuse; and, when he stretched out his hand, to disregard; to set at
naught his counsel, and to receive none of his reproof. Are you ready to
declare to your Judge, that you hated this truth, kingdom, and character,
despised his grace, grieved his spirit, accounted the blood of the covenant an
unholy thing, and crucified afresh the Lord of glory by your unbelief? Soon
will you follow him to the grave, and be numbered, as he is, with the dead.
Soon will you stand before God, and give an account of every work done in the
body, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil. This,
of all considerations the most affecting, the most amazing, can never be more
properly urged, or more happily realized, than on the present occasion. Let it
not pass without some lasting good to you. Think, I beseech you, how soon you
are going -- to whom -- on what errand -- with what preparation -- to what end.

You have lost a minister, long settled over you in the things of the Lord.
Many of you know not by experience either the difficulties, or the dangers, of
such a situation. Most of you have arrived at manhood since he commenced his
ministry; many of you have been born since that period; and not a few have been
baptized by his hand. In this situation suffer a friend to you, and to your
children, to suggest to you a few interesting truths.

In former years you have been happily united; within a period of moderate
length, I have been informed, your union has been less perfect; in your present
state it may become less perfect still. A variety of causes, incapable of being
foreseen by men, may lead a flock, without a shepherd, to scatter and to stray.
But if disunited, you can be neither virtuous nor happy.

To prevent this sore evil, let me, not wholly unexperienced in cases of this
nature, exhort you to mark any, who may attempt to cause divisions among you,
and to avoid them. Cultivate, with sedulous care, peace and good will in your
neighbourhoods. In all your affairs conduct yourselves with calmness, with
deliberation, without passion, and without haste. Shun hard speeches. Watch,
with alarm, the beginnings of party spirit; and remember, that the fruit of
righteousness is sown in peace, of them that make peace.

Carefully regulate your families, and punctually preserve your family worship.
Train up your children for God, and walk before them in all the commandments
and ordinances of the Lord blameless. Make your houses houses of God, and your
families families of piety, peace, and love. As your public privileges are
lessened, prize your private ones more.

Continue the public worship of God among you, without ceasing, and (...) a
neglect of the Sabbath by shutting the doors of his house. Inattention will
soon grow into negligence, negligence will soon be confirmed into a habit, and
that habit will soon become an evil which cannot be cured.

Recall to mind, as far as you can, the just and evangelical things, which from
time to time have been said to you by your deceased pastor; lay them up in your
hearts, and practice them in your lives.

As speedily as you can, reestablish among you the ministry of the Gospel. Seek
an evangelical minister, who will not shun to declare to you all the counsel of
God. Such an one will, indeed, declare to you many painful and humiliating
things; but they will still be the things of God, and will make you and yours
wise unto salvation.

In your closets ask daily of God his direction and blessing. Prayer, offered
with sincerity and faith, was never offered in vain. If you will thus ask, he
will give, and give liberally without upbraiding.

Finally, my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in
the work of the Lord; and remember, that your labor shall not be in vain in
the Lord.

3. Let me now address the subject to the Ministers of Christ who are present.

My beloved brethren, a great man is fallen in our Israel to day; a man of
distinguished learning and understanding, of unusual prudence, and of singular
skill and experience in the concerns of congregations, churches; and ministers.
Recommended by tried wisdom, he was, as you well know, very extensively
employed, and confided in by both minister and people, throughout the state. By
both were his useful labors acknowledged in composing their differences, and
directing their interests. To you, to me, to all with whom he was connected,
the loss is great and affecting. In the congregations, in the churches, and
especially in the University, of this state, every weighty concern will remind
us of his important services, and force us to feel what we have lost. His
talents were not only great and distinguished, but they were also of that most
useful kind, which we call practical. Such talents are eminently fitted for the
service of God, and for usefulness to mankind. In whatever he was called to
judge, or act, he made it his first business thoroughly to examine, and fully
to understand. This he accomplished by diligent scrutiny, close attention to
both sides of disputable points, a careful investigation of principles, and a
cautious consideration of consequences. For this important business his
thorough knowledge of the human character qualified him in an eminent degree,
as did also his strong powers of judging, and his peculiar coolness and self
possession. Not less important were his attention, patience, and perseverance,
in investigating. In these most useful things he was at once an eminent
blessing to mankind, and a most profitable example to us. No man living
probably so well understood the interests of our University, or for more than
twenty years took so active and important a part in its concerns. Few so well
knew the interests of our churches, or so ably and so extensively served them.
I trust his services will be, by us at least, gratefully remembered.

God has now taken him from us in the full strength of all his powers, and at
the height of his usefulness. Let this dispensation be, at once, a solemn
monition to us of our own approaching dissolution, and of our duty to imitate
his diligence. Let us be quickened by it to faithfulness, zeal, and constancy,
in the service of our Master. Times like these furnish a minister with abundant
employment, and demand of him unusual diligence, faithfulness, and fortitude.
The industry of infidels, their perseverance, their fanaticism, present to us a
powerful stimulus to equal, if we cannot excel, them in constancy and exertion.
Long has it been a just and melancholy complaint, that vile men are more
assiduous in their labors, than virtuous men; and that a bad cause is usually
sustained with more vigorous and unremitted efforts, than a good one. Let us
endeavor, that this shall no more be truly said, where we are engaged.
Troubles and dangers, instead of discouraging, ought only to quicken our
resolution, faithfulness, and zeal. They that are with us are more, and
mightier, than they that are against us. For discouragement there is no room;
for exertion there is abundant. When our fathers and brethren are taken away,
their labors devolve on those, whom they leave behind. Let us resolutely take
up the burden, and God will give us strength to carry it. What will give us
boldness and peace in the presence of Christ at the judgment? What, but
faithfulness in his service?

We shall indeed meet with rebuffs and scoffs, with obloquy and opposition. But
to us these things are of no real consequence. God is far more slighted,
abused, and reviled, than we are. In the same manner was Christ treated; and in
a degree unspeakably more gross and injurious. Like him, let us set our faces
as a flint against all opposition, and he will support and bless us. Let us be
constant and unwearied in our prayers and labors, and we shall certainly be
heard and prospered.

4. I will now close the discourse with an address to this numerous Assembly.

The Friend, the Minister, whose remains are shut up in yonder coffin, a few
days since was living and acting in the midst of you, his neighbors, his
friends, and his flock. He has finished his earthly course, and has been
summoned by his Master to the invisible world to give an account of his
stewardship. He will not return to you, but you will soon go to him. You will
soon close your eyes in the iron sleep, will inhabit the dark and narrow house,
will become the prey of corruption, and the feast of worms. Your bodies will be
mingled with the common dust, and be changed into the cold clod of the valley.
But they rest not here. There is beyond the grave a resurrection to immortal
being.

How vain, how momentary, is your present life, when viewed as a period of
enjoyment for a reasoning mind? How important and solemn, as a period destined
to secure the attainment of endless virtue and happiness? On it, transient and
visionary as it is, hang heaven and hell, immortal glory and excellence, and
interminable wretchedness and depravation. Ask the first hoary head, which you
meet, and he will tell you, that his own protracted years are, in his view, a
vapor, which has appeared for a little time, and is now vanishing away; that,
compared with that ocean of eternity, on the shore of which he now stands,
ready to launch into the boundless deep, it shrinks into a single drop; that
its contentions were the jarrings of children, its hopes the dreams of a night,
and its happiness the painted form of a cloud, changing, fleeting, eluding the
grasp, and mocking enjoyment. How few of you will reach the period to which he
has arrived? How many of you will probably die, before you are aware, suddenly,
early, unprepared?

Ask yourselves how you will feel, and what appearance you will make, when your
bodies, at the call of the Archangel, and the trump of God, shall spring from
the grave, when bone shall rejoin its bone, when the frame shall be clothed
with flesh, when the Spirit of God shall breathe upon the lifeless mass, and
cause it to awaken into endless existence; and when you, together with the
unnumbered millions of the great family of Adam, shall again stand upon your
feet, as an army of incomprehensible multitude? What will be your emotions,
when you shall see the Son of Man descend from heaven in the clouds; and all
the kindreds of the earth shall wail because of his coming? Stretch your view
forward to this amazing scene, and bring it home to your thoughts; consider the
final day as arrived, and realize your personal appearance, and concern, in its
affecting transactions. Behold the Redeemer, arrayed in the glory of his
Father, and surrounded with the innumerable company of Angels. Listen to the
shout, which bursts from the mouths of all the host of heaven, and rends the
universe. Mark around you the immense congregation of saints and sinners, of
the friends and the enemies of the Judge; his friends arrayed with the smiles
of transport, and his enemies overwhelmed with dismay and horror. Hear the one
great company exclaim, O Death! where is now thy sting? O grave! where is now
thy victory? and the other call to the rocks and to the mountains to fall on
them, and hide them from the wrath of the Lamb. But they call in vain; for lo!
the mountains and the rocks themselves, with the great world in which they
stand, are kindling on every side with ten thousand fires* and dissolving in
one immense, united conflagration, surrounding the earth, and ascending to the
heavens. See the elements melt with fervent heat, and all the buildings, arts,
and labors of man swept away at a stroke by the besom of destruction. See the
Righteous, escaped from the universal ruin, are caught up to meet the Lord in
the air; while the Wicked, left behind in inexpressible agony, wait with
supreme dismay the approach of the Judge. Trembling, amazed, despairing, they
are forced to the left hand, the place of disgrace, confusion, and misery.
Listen to the solemn sentence, "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
kingdom, prepared for you from the foundation of the world;" and mark the
ecstasy on the faces of the happy throngs, who are thus welcomed to endless
life. Listen again! What do ye hear? "Depart, ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels." Follow the scene one step farther.
Behold the Judge, again ascending through the heavens, with his glorious and
happy followers, to the world of everlasting joy. Pursue their path through
yonder skies, and trace them rising, approaching, entering the mansions of life
eternal. Cast now your eyes downward, and see, wrapped in the clouds of death,
the miserable companions of evil spirits, sinking to the world of silence and
darkness, of sorrow and despair. See them for the last time vanishing from your
sight, while the gulf yawns to receive them, and closes on them forever.

Look, my friends and brethren, into your own bosoms, and ask your consciences,
in which assembly you will be numbered, and to which world you will wing your
flight, on this great and dreadful day.

APPENDIX.
THE Reader will probably not be displeased with a short account of the life of
Doctor Goodrich. Doctor Goodrich was born of a reputable family in the parish
of Stepney, in Wethersfield, Octo. 26, O. S. 1734; He received his literary
education at Yale-College, was admitted to the degree of Bachelor of Arts A. D.
1752, and to that of Master of Arts A. D. 1755, and was the same year appointed
a Tutor in that seminary. In 1756, Nov. 24, he was ordained pastor of the
Church and Congregation at Durham; and, in 1776, was chosen a member of the
Corporation of Yale-College. Nov. 17, 1797, he set out from his house on an
annual visit to the Collegiate Lands in the County of Litchfield. The following
Sabbath he preached at Litchfield, and on Monday rode to Norfolk. He lodged at
the house of Capt. Titus Ives, and went to bed in his usual health and
cheerfulness. In the morning he rose early, and, having partly dressed himself,
fell upon the floor in an apoplectic fit, and expired, in the 64th year of his
age, and the 42d of his ministry. His remains were brought to Durham on the
succeeding Saturday, and followed to the grave by his Family, Church, and
Congregation, and a numerous concourse of strangers. Mrs. Goodrich and six
children, viz. five sons and a daughter, survive him.

The following character, given of him by the Rev. Enoch Huntington of
Middletown, See the Middlesex Gazette of Dec. 1st, 1797.
who was intimately acquainted with him for many years, will with much
propriety close this account.

"As a husband, a parent, a friend, how endearing, faithful and valuable he
was, they best can tell, to whom he stood in such ^^lations. As a scholar he
comprehended the circle of the liberal arts and sciences. He excelled in the
languages, in Latin, Greek and Hebrew; in the Mathematics, and in Philosophy;
but Divinity was his peculiar study. As a Christian Divine he was solid,
judicious, established with grace; equally free from the wildness of enthusiasm
and the rigors of superstition. His reading was extensive, his memory
tenacious, his piety substantial, his gravity commanding; his profiting
appeared unto all men, and his praise is in all the churches. He was a wise
counselor and peacemaker, a friend and lover of his country, and of mankind."


