AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED AT WORCESTER, ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN
INDEPENDENCE; JULY 4, 1797.

BY DR. OLIVER FISKE.

PRINTED AT WORCESTER, MASSACHUSETTS, BY ISAIAH THOMAS, JUN.

SOLD BY HIM AT HIS BOOKSTORE, SIGN OF JOHNSON's HEAD -- JULY -- A. D. -- 1797.

WORCESTER, July 4, 1797.
AT a MEETING of a large number of GENTLEMEN of this and the neighboring
towns, to celebrate the ANNIVERSARY of the INDEPENDENCE of the UNITED STATES:
--

VOTED -- That ISAIAH THOMAS, BENJAMIN HEYWOOD, Esqs. and Mr. DANIEL WALDO,
Jun. be a Committee to wait on DR. OLIVER FISKE, to thank him for the elegant
and patriotic ORATION he has this day delivered, and to request a copy thereof
for the PRESS.

The COMMITTEE accordingly waited upon him, and received the following ANSWER:

"THAT as a deference to the wishes of his fellow citizens, had influenced him
in accepting so conspicuous a part in the public duties of the day, the same
motive would induce him to comply with their request, so politely communicated
by the gentlemen of the committee."

AN ORATION: PRONOUNCED AT WORCESTER, JULY 4, 1797.
SUMMONED at a ^^ate moment, to perform the duties of this JOYFUL ANNIVERSARY,
you will not deem me either wanting in respect to my auditory, or indifferent
to the blessings we have THIS DAY assembled to commemorate, should I fall short
of your expectations in the execution of the task assigned me.

A MINUTE review of those causes, which, from an almost physical necessity, led
to that crisis which gave us existence as a nation, you might justly deem
impertinent, since the picture of those eventful days is still lively on our
memories, or has been reflected to us from the historic page. The events which
are in connection with our political nativity, are the subjects of infantile
prattle -- an estimation of the blessings of our birthright "grows with our
growth, and strengthens with our strength."

As human nature is constituted, government is as necessary to the existence of
society, as are the rational faculties of man to his comfort and happiness. The
improvements in government, like every other science, will hold an uniform
progress with civilization.

A CIVILIAN may delineate the features of a government, which, in theory, may
embrace all that is essential to the happiness of the subject -- yet if he
keeps not in view the state of its moral improvement, his labors are but idle
speculation.

UNCIVILIZED by the arts of refinement, mankind are in a state of hostility. Of
this degrading truth, the early history of the World -- but especially of
ancient Europe and modern America, affords most clear and striking specimens.
To ameliorate the ferocity of the human mind, to enlarge its faculties, and to
render man the happy subject of civil government, is the province of education.

THE Amor Patria, in its natural sense, is, perhaps, not the result of the
demonstrable excellence of one's country, so much, as the remote influence of
selflove, which the wise Author of Nature has directed, should be the primary
agent in the affections and conduct of mankind. Among an enlightened people,
where patriotism is benevolence, an attachment to our country is founded on
more noble principles.

HOW far it is the duty of every nation to support its established government,
is not material for us to decide; -- so far as it keeps progress with
civilization, and conforms to the genius of the people, its subjects will feel
such an attachment to it, as will prevent any dangerous innovation.

THAT our form of government is the most perfect that the nature of man will
admit, is not merely the sentiment of those who feel its benign influence, but
is a truth which bears the test of the most enlightened and disinterested
civilian. "There is a kind of government," says the venerable MONTESQUIEU,
"possessed of all the internal advantages of a republic and external force of a
monarchy:" -- And, What is this but a confederated republic?

OUR federal government, adopted by its citizens, from a conviction of its
excellence -- free in its principles -- mild, yet energetic -- where Liberty,
in its true import, is fostered and defended -- and at the same time possessing
in itself the powers of renovation -- while Virtue, on which it is predicated,
remains, will be the object of our confidence and support.

SUBORDINATION, so obnoxious to some of the feelings of the human heart, is
here qualified by a consciousness, that an obedience to our laws is the
voluntary offspring of inclination -- and a deference for our rulers, is no
other than a respect for ourselves.

THE independent State Governments, like the planets in their orbits, revolving
on their own ax^s, are preserved in their specific powers, and relative
situation, by the federal government, which, like the genial sun, imparts life,
comfort, and vigor to the whole.

THAT there are many in our country dissatisfied with its government, is no
conclusive evidence of its imperfection. Until the passions of man subside, and
reason holds an undisturbed empire in his breast, envy, selfinterest, or
ambition, may raise a partial ferment in the community. These ebullitions,
under some governments, are harmless, if not salutary. But in a government like
ours, where the rulers and the people are but the different modifications of
the same mass -- and at stated periods, are molded into the same lump -- these
party heats and animosities are troublesome, if not dangerous.

THAT there are imperfections in our federal government is not to be denied --
it is the offspring of man -- the Sun too has its spots -- but, To what effect
have they been discovered? Its light, its head and vivifying influence, still
subserve the comfort and happiness of man.

TO give us a true estimate of the blessings of our own country, and to attach
us more firmly to our own government, it may not be unprofitable, on this
occasion, to look abroad from our secure and peaceful asylum, to contemplate
the clouds which are yet lowering, or bursting forth in tornadoes upon the Old
World.

ENGLAND, justified by the genius of its government, is feeding on its own
entrails. The image, "part iron and part clay," is fast crumbling, and must
fall under its own weight. Bankrupt, and without credit, she is supported by
charity and indulgence. Pride, which is seldom humbled by adversity, is soothed
under her broken fortune, by the parade of power, and the affectation of her
former greatness. A spirit of disaffection, in the habit of reform, is gone
forth; and, Who shall prescribe its limits?

so numerous and so respectable are the advocates for a change of ministry and
measures, that a manly expression of their sentiments, and a spirited exertion
to effect a reform, is no longer denominated TREASON. The idea of a
transportation to Botanybay, excites no terror. From the livery men to the Lord
Mayor of London, disaffection has been manifested. Their demands for a reform
have already been echoed from all quarters of the kingdom. The navy, the pride
and security of the government -- the bulwork of the nation -- is infected with
the wide spreading eontagion. This weapon, with which alone she can annoy her
enemies, or secure her own existence, seems ready to fall from her nerveless
hand.

THE revolt in the British fleet, and the concessions of the ministry, is a
decisive experiment of the extent of national disaffection, and of the
inability of government to punish its effects. The people, by this experiment,
have learned their power, and they will use it at their own discretion.

THIS crisis, which the gradual change in the feelings and sentiments of the
nation was slowly accomplishing, was accelerated by the unjust and impolitic
interference of government in the concerns of her neighbors. Their endeavors
to aid the cause of despotism abroad, and to suppress the freedom of
investigation at home, have disgraced their annals, and rendered them
contemptible to the world.

WHAT is FRANCE, that mild, that courteous nation -- at whose revolution
commenced the Age of Reason -- and whose motto was THE RIGHTS OF MAN? A
republic of TYRANTS! Under their former government, indeed, they were chastened
with rods -- but since its destruction, with whips of scorpions! For what did
they abolish the Bastile and Inquisition? Thousands of the most innocent and
respectable of their inhabitants have witnessed their refinements upon these
instruments of barbarity!

THE savage of our dreary wilderness, who knows no other laws than the
instincts of ferocious nature, might have received lessons of cruelty and
torture from this polite and gallant people, far beyond what he had ever been
stimulated to by the most insatiate thirst for blood!

IT is most unfortunate for the interest of Liberty, for France, and, perhaps,
for the whole civilized world, that this revolution, which only changed the
form of despotism instead of abolishing it, commenced at so early a period of
their national improvement. Had knowledge been more universally diffused, and
had the people felt the influence of liberty no faster than they could
understand its nature, they might have effected their object, without effacing
their moral principle, and deluging their country with blood. The world might
then have had a second instance of the triumph of reason and philosophy over
the human passions, rendered more impatient of control by the relaxed state of
moral and civil influence, consequent upon the change of national government.

IN extenuation of the excesses of the French, it is but just to remark, that
under their corrupt government it was impossible that republican principles,
when disseminated, should have a vigorous growth. The soil had so long been
choked with the weeds of despotism, and the atmosphere of courts had become so
pestiferous, that the germ of liberty, ere it could expand, was blasted by its
deadly influence.

THE conductors of the French revolution had not sufficiently studied the
science of legislation -- and it should seem, that they were not much
conversant with the volume of human nature -- For surely they could not
intentionally have adopted measures, which in their necessary consequence, must
bring on the crimes and calamities which ensued, and by which they were the
first to suffer.

IN America, where they had first witnessed the flame of liberty, they saw a
free government established with facility. But the task to them was far more
difficult. In the gradual progress of improvement, our country had arrived, in
its manners and government, to that grade next subordinate to the republican
form we wished to establish. We had stability and virtue in our rulers -- the
influence of the clergy, and of the religion which they taught. -- But the
French were anticipating the labors of a century. Every mound was at once
levelled -- law, religion, and every other restraint, was carried headlong by
the impetuous torrent of human passion. The more moderate and virtuous of their
rulers were swept away by the current, or receded from its approach. Their
places were instantly filled by demagogues, whose element is anarchy, and who
exist when virtue is no more!

FACTION now became organized: And the national assembly, so numerous, and of
almost diurnal change, afforded not a channel sufficiently broad for the
torrent of ambition, vanity and enthusiasm, which flowed from the motly rulers
of the nation. The Jacobin club -- that fungus from the hot bed of
licentiousness -- that battering ram of order and government, now sprang up.
Its influence, like the deadly poison of asps, circulated from the vitals to
the extremities, and for a while paralized every sinew of the nation.

AS freedom and happiness were the objects of the people of France in the
commencement of their revolution, their cause was advocated by our countrymen,
with the ardour natural to those, who had so lately traversed the same ground
in pursuit of liberty -- who enjoy its blessings, and know how to estimate its
value. -- This fellow feeling was rendered more lively by the idea, that the
coal which had lighted their flame had been taken from our altar.

LONG and violent was the struggle between our affections for this brave and
oppressed people, and our abhorrence of the crimes with which they were so
early disgraced. With what solicitude have we sought to reconcile our feelings
to their excesses, by imputing them to their eagerness to grasp the heavenly
boon, which the common enemies of the rights of man were endeavoring to filch
from their embrace! With what rapture did we listen to the information of a
victory, when gained in a conflict with the foes of their liberty! But the
subsequent periods of their revolution have been so strongly marked with
features so repugnant to the object of freedom, that to justify their measures,
would be to abandon the principles which inspired and established our own
independence.

HOW far has the pure spirit of Liberty, and a sacred regard to the RIGHTS OF
MAN, influenced the French in their crusades into Germany, Austria and Italy?
-- To the latter of which, Vesuvius, with its boiling torrents of lava, has
never been so destructive.

WHAT but a wanton and insatiate thirst for plunder has impelled them to strip
their public edifices of the relicts of antiquity, and the monuments of their
improvements in the fine arts -- their only boast -- and as dear to them as
their household gods?

WHATEVER are the difficulties which they may be led to combat in their road to
some permanent government, must be left to that GOD who can bring ORDER out of
confusion: -- But may we not justly fear, that when foreign wars shall have
ceased to employ their force and attention abroad -- when their armies shall be
disbanded and again swell their sections -- when their exiles, whether made
such by compulsion or choice, shall return, in the collision of parties, whose
interest is at variance with the public, their own country will be the theater
for the last act of their prowess? Should this be their melancholy catastrophe,
some leader, more fortunate in his resources and intrigue, will catch the
flowing reins, and close the scene, by reducing this illfated people to a state
more abject than that from which they have with so much difficulty emerged. May
that OMNIPOTENT POWER, who governs the nations of the earth by his wisdom,
direct her future Councils, and preserve the World from witnessing so
disgraceful an event!

IT is the pleasing office of philanthropy, to cast the mantle of charity upon
the imperfections of man. In his individual capacity it would be uncandid to
paint his failings in the colors they might bear. But national vices ought
never to be paliated. They arise, not so much from the imperfection, as from
the perversion of the human powers -- and it is our duty to record them as a
memento, particularly to a people whose government is in their own hand, and
who can feel no greater power than their own sovereign will.

PREJUDICES, whether personal or national, are unpleasant in their indulgence,
and, oftentimes, disastrous in their effects. Neutral in our conduct, it is to
be lamented, that we are not more so in our affections. The name of an AMERICAN
comprises all our duty, and should influence all our zeal.

SELFINTEREST is no less the ruling principle of nations than of individuals.
And we may rest assured, that neither French nor English fraternity will avail
us, whenever it shall be incompatible with this principle. This we have already
experienced from both nations. We are their friends, or their enemies -- their
generous allies, or insidious foes, as will best subserve their interest to
consider us. Instead of our vibrating in our affections from one nation to the
other, from any alternate attraction, their conduct should operate upon the
principle of equal and opposite repulsion, to fix us at a point equally distant
from both.

THAT France, through her ministers, has taken some of the most unjustifiable
measures with our country, is a fact not controverted. Giddy with her
astonishing successes, it was not to be expected that she would conduct with
that mild decorum, which maturity of years, and solidity of character, would
inspire. The blame is not wholly hers. To the disgrace of human nature, there
are characters among us, and others, whom our country has disgorged upon a soil
where their disorganising principles can be more fully indulged, who, to
gratify their resentment, avarice, or ambition, would precipitate America to
the lowest point of misery and degradation.

IT is an evidence of the mildness and philosophy of the times, and also of the
impotence of these detestable ingrates, that they are suffered peaceably to
inhabit the country they so infamously abuse.

IT must ever be the fate of neutral nations to be more or less incommoded in
their commercial intercourse with belligerent powers. Laws of nations, and
special treaties, will reciprocally be disregarded, by individuals, in their
pursuit of gain. Whenever such practices become the object of serious notice, a
more prompt execution of the existing laws, or an amicable investigation of
complaints, are sufficient to remedy the evil. But France refuses to listen to
any overtures on the subject. She has reduced piracy to system. -- But she is
not yet so lost to virtue as to decline a justification of her conduct.

OUR late treaty with Great Britain seemed to afford the most plausible
pretext. That this, however, is but a mere apology for her measures, is evident
from her conduct toward the other neutral powers. To destroy the commerce of
England is her policy. To this single point she is willing to sacrifice her own
honor and the interests of her friends.

HER last, her consummate act of injustice and insult, has been offered our
nation in her late rejection of our minister -- who was commissioned to proffer
the hand of friendship, and to remove every ground of jealousy and distrust.

OUR government, uniformly just and pacific, has preserved its dignity by
instituting a renewal of negotiation. Whatever shall be its success, France and
the World will have ample evidence, that justice and moderation have influenced
our measures. -- And we stand ready, whenever driven to the necessity, to give
as ample evidence, that not even France, "rich in her resources and terrible to
her enemies," as she boasts herself, has power to appoint us our rulers, or
intimidate a determined, an INDEPENDENT PEOPLE. We have only to resort with
unanimity to the strong holds of our government; and we may defy every effort
of our enemies.

AMONG the many interesting events since our last anniversary -- or, indeed,
the most noble the world ever witnessed, is the voluntary descent of the
illustrious WASHINGTON from the highest pinnacle of honor to which man ever
ascended, to the unenvied station of private life. His character, which already
seemed beyond the power of human nature to imitate, is now complete.

LONG may he enjoy, in the retirement he has so ardently sought, the blessings
of his grateful country, and the consummate happiness of witnessing the virtue
and prosperity of that people, whose battles he has fought, and whose liberties
defended!

ALTHOUGH this political luminary is retired below the western horizon, his
resplendent rays are yet left as a light to our feet, and a lamp to our path.

IT is a signal instance of the favor of heaven, that the successor of our
late President so nearly imitates his virtues, and, from his public services,
so eminently deserves the highest honors of his country. His republican
firmness, so often tried, will repel the most distant approach of foreign
influence, or domestic intrigue. Versed in the science of government, long may
he continue in its pure and peaceful administration.

ON THIS AUSPICIOUS DAY, while we are recounting the blessings we enjoy in
common with our country, a recollection of the favors peculiar to this
Commonwealth will inspire us with gratitude to that Being, who accommodates
(...) goodness to the exigencies of man. The election of our present chief
Magistrate, is an event highly auspicious -- not only to his constituents, but
to our country at large. Mild and dispassionate in his nature -- candid and
benevolent in principle -- courteous and affable in his deportment -- firm and
inflexible in his duty, justice and unanimity will pervade our councils --
order and harmony our land.

A TRIBUTE of respectful gratitude is due to that venerable patriot, our late
Governor, to whose early and spirited exertions we are so much indebted for
the rich blessings of our Independence. In his voluntary retirement from public
labors, may he find such rewards for his services as shall soften the pillow
of infirmity, and solace the evening of his days.

ALTHOUGH man seems progressing to a state of perfection -- yet the history of
society, and even our own feelings, admonish us, that there are certain limits
in human nature, where a revolution will take place, and we again descend the
vale of infirmity.

IN this grade of our existence, it seems the necessary economy of nature, that
excess should be followed by its opposite extreme.

THERE are stages in the progress of communities as in human existence. The
rise and the fall of empires have equally employed the labors of the historian.

AND while we are contemplating the rising glory and improvement of our
country, let us not be too vainly confident of its uninterrupted continuance.

THE GREAT FIRST CAUSE -- who gave all systems ^^^th --
Formed man with powers to rule his native earth --
Whose equal hand does every sphere control;
And writes his first law -- ORDER -- on the whole:
He fixed the summit where all systems tend;
There writes this mandate -- HERE THY COURSE MUST END.
SHOULD men, while mortal, reach aerial height,
And rival ANGELS in the realms of light:
Like them they would fall -- like them from heaven be hurled,
And reign the DEMONS of some future world.
FINIS.

