MR. DOGGETT'S DISCOURSE. DELIVERED AT THE DEDICATION OF Bristol Academy.

AT a meeting of the Trustees of Bristol Academy, held in the Academy, on
Monday, the 18th of July. A. D. 1796. --
VOTED, That Mr. JOSEPH TISDALE, APOLLOS LEONARD, Esquire. Doct. PEREZ FOBES, JAMES
WILLIAMS, Esquire. and the Hon. SETH PADELFORD, Esquire. be a Committee to wait on Mr.
DOGGETT, and request of him, for the press, a copy of the DISCOURSE this day
delivered, on the Dedication of the Academy.

JAMES WILLIAMS, Secretary to the Trustees.

A DISCOURSE ON EDUCATION, DELIVERED AT THE DEDICATION AND OPENING OF BRISTOL
ACADEMY, THE 18th DAY OF JULY, A. D. 1796.

BY SIMEON DOGGETT, JUN. A. M. PRECEPTOR OF THE ACADEMY.

DELIGHTFUL TASK! TO REAR THE TENDER THOUGHT,
TO TEACH THE YOUNG IDEA HOW TO SHOOT,
AND POUR THE FRESH INSTRUCTION OVER THE MIND.
THOMPSON. NEWBEDFORD (Massa.) -- PRINTED BY J. SPOONER. 1797.

TO THE Trustees of Bristol Academy, THE FOLLOWING DISCOURSE, AS A SMALL TOKEN
OF HIS GRATITUDE AND RESPECT, IS HUMBLY INSCRIBED, BY THEIR SINCERE FRIEND,
SIMEON DOGGETT, jun.

IT IS EDUCATION FORMS THE COMMON MIND;
JUST AS THE TWIG IS BENT THE TREE'S INCLINED.
POPE.
CITIZENS and FRIENDS,
THE abundant diffidence and anxiety, which, at all times, so justly belong to
me, are, at the present, partly lost in the flow of sympathetic joy and
gratitude, which animate my heart to felicitate you on this happy meeting.
While some of our fellow creatures are roaming in the gloomy forest as beasts
of prey; or, in wild enthusiasm and dark superstition, celebrating the rites of
idol and unknown gods; or exulting, with barbarous pleasure, in the
excruciating torture of captive enemies: while millions are draging out a
miserable existence in the dreary countries of ignorance and despotism, or more
awfully bleeding under the cursed lash of slavery; and others, with unfeeling
hearts, wantonly rioting upon these sufferings of their brother-creatures, and
the bounties of Heaven: while thousands are armed with the implements of death
in order to cut and mangle the bodies of their fellow-men, and to shed each
others blood, and whole nations are experiencing all the horrors of war: we, my
Friends, in the ample enjoyment of national liberty, prosperity and peace, are,
this day convened by an occasion connected with every thing great and valuable
to man. This day, by the munificience of an all-wise and directing Providence,
we celebrate the Dedication of a literary institution: an institution, which,
by the grace of God, we would sacredly consecrate to literature, virtue, and
the true dignity of man. Every circumstance of the occasion is calculated to
touch the most noble feelings of our nature; to sublime our hearts to the
throne of God on the swift wings of gratitude and love. And while the occasion
irresistibly claims a tribute of gratitude to the Father of lights and God of
all grace; at the same time, it claims more irresistibly, if possible, our most
ardent prayers; that the God of science, order and virtue, would enable and
dispose us ever to hold in view the sublime objects to which our institution
is, this day, solemnly consecrated; and that those, who are more immediately
concerned, may be endowed from on high, with all that wisdom and fortitude,
which, from time to time, may be necessary to direct the institution in the
ways of truth and virtue. Neither can those, who are intimately concerned in
the prosperity of the Academy, rest its consecration to knowledge and virtue,
on thanksgiving and prayer alone; they will be constrained, from the powerful
voice of duty and interest, to cooperate with the all-bountiful hand of
Providence, by their most ardent resolutions, and spirited exertions.

THUS congratulating each other on the opening of our promising Seminary, and,
together with thanksgiving, by prayer and pious resolutions, sacredly
dedicating it to literature and morality, our minds are naturally arrested by
the great, the all-interesting subject of Education -- Here the importance of
education, at once, opens upon our view a wide field, rich with many of the
most interesting particulars.

EXPATIATING in this delightful field, the objects which education ought to
embrace first catch out attention. These objects, I conceive, are, principally.
Literature and Morality: by the former to inform and direct the understanding;
by the latter to meliorate the heart, to conform the affections, will, and
conduct to the rules of rectitude, or will of our Maker and great Moral
Governor.

WHATEVER might have been the reason, either some deficiency in those who have
been employed in conducting youth, or an idea that the heart is unalterable
otherwise than by an immediate miracle of the Divine hand, or some other
reason, it is a melancholy truth, that the morality of youth has not been
considered, so much as their literature, the province of the instructor. While
unwearied pains have been taken to give learning to youth, to give them skill
in the arts, and knowledge in the sciences; the habitudes of the heart, their
dispositions, tastes, and sentiments, on which moral character is grafted, have
been too much neglected. There is doubtless great connection between truth and
virtue, between the understanding and the moral habitudes of the soul; so that
by informing the understanding there is strong probability that the morality
will be improved: yet it must be confessed that this connection is not an
inseparable one; since we have the unhappiness, sometimes, to see gentlemen of
the first learning and abilities, the lowest sunk in depravity and vice. We
have the unhappiness, sometimes, to see souls widely expanded in knowledge,
awfully maculated with the dark shades of vice; angels in understanding, devils
in conduct. Hence we see education, which is designed to prepare youth for the
sequel of life, to render them useful, respectable, and happy, will be
immensely deficient, unless it be professedly extended to their morality, as
well as their literature. The constitution of human nature proves the propriety
and importance of doing this. The prominent principles of our nature are those
of Imitation and Habit. Youth are ever learning to do what they see others
around them doing, and these imitations grow into habits. Fact and experience
prove to us that every function of the body, every faculty and capacity of the
mind are, more or less, affected and directed by imitation and habit. How
infinitely important then is it, in early youth, when every power, and capacity
is pliable, and susceptible of any direction or impression, so to manage
education, that imitation may turn the young mind to virtue as well as
knowledge, and habit confirm him in both. Not only then are we to educate our
youth in arts and sciences, but also, as says the Apostle, in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord.

BEING so convinced of its consequence, I cannot forbear adding Manner, as
another object which education ought to embrace. Though the head be filled with
science, and the heart with sentiment, though knowledge and virtue mark every
trait of the character, constraint and aukwardness of manner will, in a
measure, render the person forbiding and repulsive, lesson his influence, and
detract from his usefulness. Hence while education strives to form the mind to
learning and virtue, it will not fail to embellish both with the ornaments of
ease and grace of manner. One blessed with such an education, will command that
influence which his substantial acquirements justly challenge, and will
diffuse, wherever he goes, light, virtue, love and joy.

HAVING pointed at the great objects which education ought to embrace, the
importance of it will more fully appear by opening our eyes upon that dignity
and happiness which the Creator designed for the human race. When we analize
man, raptures of solemn joy and gratitude must fill our hearts to see what
greatness, sublimity, glory and happiness our faithful Creator designed for
him! The erect posture, the curious and wonderful structure, and the commanding
countenance of man, all indicate the superior powers of his soul. As an
intellectual being, how wonderful is man! Through his senses, as so many
windows to his dark body, the knowledge of the material world is beamed upon
his mind. By reflecting on the powers and operations of his own mind, he rises
to a knowledge of the spiritual world, of angels, of God. By discernment and
reasoning he sees the agreement and disagreement of his ideas; the broad
effulgence of knowledge and truth illumine and expand his soul. Curiosity urges
his ardent pursuits of knowledge, and, through an equisite sense of truth, his
feelings are enraptured with her view. By memory he calls from oblivion scenes
that are past; from experience corrects his errors, and reenjoys the delights
of life. His imagination wings his soul with fire; traverses all that is grand
and sublime in the universe; ascends the skies, surveys the shining orbs and
bright intelligencies of immensity, and, from nature, rises to nature's God. As
an active and moral being, still more wonderful is man! His body, formed to a
variety of operation, is pliable and energetic; his mind is quick and powerful
as the electric spark. His soul is winged with the most animating passions.
Desire of happiness and aversion to misery, love and hatred, hope and fear,
rouse all the faculties of man, and command his greatest, noblest exertions.
Implanted in the heart is conscience, the monitor of Heaven, as by the hand of
God, diffusing peace and joy through the virtuous soul; and punishing vice by
the torture of remorse, and the awful forebodings of guilt. Thus endowed, man
has the honor of being made capable of religion; of rising to a knowledge of
the invisible God, the Creator and Governor of the universe, of his attributes
and will; capable of the sublime affections of piety, of gratitude and love,
adoration and obedience. To complete the dignity and happiness of man, God has
constituted him a free and moral agent; while supporting, delegated to his mind
an ample, an unembarrassed power to direct all his active faculties. So exalted
is the human race in the scale of beings, that while the Creator, of his other
works said, They were very good; of man He says, In the image of God created
He him! If we, for a moment, look without us, we shall be still farther
convinced of the dignity and happiness designed for our race. Man is
constituted king of earth. Hence the revolving seasons, the air and fouls of
heaven, the vast ocean and its inhabitants, and the cattle upon a thousand
hills, all bespeak his glory. But if we just glance an eye of faith into our
holy religion, what has hitherto been said of human greatness dwindles to a
point. Here we find life and immortality, beyond the grave, brought to light.
Here we find, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the
heart of man, the things, the dignity and happiness, which God has prepared
for the virtuous. And, what is more than all, that all the human race might be
raised to this invisible height of perfection, the blessed Emmanuel, the only
Son and image of God, left his throne in heaven for a humble residence on
earth; assumed humanity, and even died to disembarrass us from those
depravities, which might sully our glory.

SUCH are the greatness and value of human nature, and such her powers and
capacities. But where, in this world, is much of all this known, or realized
and enjoyed? The experience of fact replies, only there, where have been
enjoyed the blessings of education. All these intellectual, active, and moral
powers and capacities, experience shows us, are under the influence of the
great principles of IMITATION and HABIT, which Deity, for the wisest purposes,
implanted in our nature; and hence, by the powerful hand of a well-directed
education, and due attention, may be vastly heightened and improved; or, by
neglect and vicious indulgence depressed, enervated, if not finally destroyed.
Let us, for a moment, look at the savage of the wilderness natively possessed
of all this dignity and value of nature, but untouched by the moulding hand of
education. Destitute of all the arts of civilized life, he roves a naked animal
in the uncultivated forest. His intellectual powers lying unexercised and
undirected, his ideas, his language, and his knowledge are confined within the
small compass of his chase. His passions undisciplined, are ungovernable,
impetuous, and awful. Ignorant of his own origin and value, of God and
religion, he adores the sun and stars, and bends his knee to the rude image
formed by his own unskilful hand. And not only is the heart, which embraces the
whole family of man, constrained to weep over millions of the human race, who,
through the deficiency of education, are low sunk in barbarity; but even in
civilized life, where the means of education, and the light of religion are
enjoyed, even among the highly privileged Americans, the tear of humanity is
frequently started, to see many of our brethren, some of whom the most
excellent of nature's works, through the neglect of education, and by bad
example, in a situation almost as pitiable as that of the roving Tartar. How
infinitely different is the character of him, whom a well-conducted education,
and due attention, and the grace of God, have brought upon the stage of action!
In him all the noble powers and capacities of human nature are improved and
exalted, and still progressing. Truth and knowledge illumine and expand his
mind. His understanding is broad as the heavens. Swayed by reason, his
imagination and his passions are calm, and regular as the heavenly orbs.
Unshackled by superstition, his candor is diffusive as the light. His
conscience unhurt by the Torpedo of vice, is tender and delicate as the
sensitive plant. Freed from prejudice, his faith, founded on evidence, is firm
as the overlasting mountains. Flowing from conviction, his morality is steady
as the sun in his course. His zeal and devotion, being according to knowledge,
are, without enthusiasm, uniform, rational, sublime. Such an one is dignified
and happy in himself, honorable to his connections, useful to the world,
loved, and respected by all, blessed of Heaven, and preparing for the society
of angels in the city of God.

BUT the field of the importance of education is not yet fully explored.
Widening our view upon nations, still greater objects arrest our attention.
What but the blessings of education raise the improved and civilized nations of
Europe so far above the roving tribes of Africa? Though the arts of civilized
life may originate from necessity, yet it is by the improvements of knowledge
that their principles are investigated, without which they never will be
carried to any considerable perfection. The principles unfolded by mechanical
philosophy have given birth to all that variety of machinery by which labor is
abridged, and the arts of life improved. Commerce very much owes her existence
to the advancement of science. By this means the vast ocean is navigated, the
most distant nations, which it flows between, made acquainted with each other,
and their various productions exchanged to the advantage of both. In short, "in
civilized life every thing is effected by art and skill," both which, in a
great measure, are the gifts of education -- "Whence, by the way, a person who
is provided with neither, (and neither can be acquired without exercise and
instruction) will be useless; and he that is useless will generally be, at the
same time, mischievous to the community. So that to send an uneducated child
into the world is injurious to the rest of mankind; it is little better than to
turn out a mad dog, or a wild beast into the streets."

BUT the infinite importance of education, in a national view, appears in still
brighter colors, from this eternal truth, That the mode of government in any
nation, will always be molded by the state of education. The throne of tyranny
is founded on ignorance. Literature and liberty go hand in hand. Every ray of
knowledge which darts through the dark cloud of ignorance that rests on an
inslaved nation, threatens death to the despot. The dark ages of gothecism
opened an ample field for ecclesiastical tyranny. While the Pope of Rome and
his satellites established, in the ignorant minds of Europe, the doctrine of
the Pope's infallibility, that he was Peter's successor, vicegerent of Christ,
and held the keys of heaven, the kings of Europe trembled before him, and laid
their treasures at his feet. As the sun of science has been rising upon Europe,
the papal throne has been melting; and the prospect now is, that his holiness
will soon be no more. In those dark ages also, the ridiculous doctrine of the
divine right of kings being instilled into the ignorant mind, the authority of
despots became the authority of God, and their subjects prepared tamely to
suffer every indignity. But as the increase of knowledge has gradually given
those nations better notions of the equal rights of men, tyranny has been
proportionally declining. Let general information, and a just knowledge of the
rights of man be diffused through the great bulk of the people in any nation,
and it will not be in the power of all the combined despots on earth to enslave
them. Of this truth France may be an example. Of the influence of education on
government, the history of our own nation affords us a most happy specimen.
Convinced of the vast consequence of literature our pious ancestors gave the
earliest attention to the education of their youth. By this means, information
was generally diffused through the Colonies, and many of our citizens were
profound in science, the rights of man, the histories of nations, and political
wisdom. Thus guarded, vain were the attempts of Britain to oppress us.
Separation was the consequence; independence the issue. Guided by the same
potent hand of literature, our lives are crowned with a government which
secures to us all the blessings of society, and civil liberty. That we may
transmit to posterity our happy government pure and uncorrupted, let the
glories of education ever be our theme.

WERE it not unnecessary to say more on this head, the inestimable value of
education would still vastly magnify by viewing its connection with our holy
religion.

THOUGH at first, christianity was miraculously sent from heaven to earth, by
the hand of a glorious mediator, the continuation and propagation of it, in the
world, depends, under Providence, almost entirely on education. "Christianity
is an historical religion, founded on facts which are related to have passed,
upon discourses which were held, and letters which were written, in a remote
age, and distant country. The records of these things are preserved in
languages, which have long ceased to be spoken in any part of the world."
Obvious it is then that education, and most probably the clergy, are necessary
to perpetuate the evidences of our holy religion, and to interpret those
ancient writings, in which this religion is contained.

NOT to dwell longer on this most copious head; filled with the infinite
consequence of education to man, the mind is naturally turned, and most
powerfully excited to consider the way and means by which it may be most
successfully advanced.

ONE of the most important particulars is, that the great work of education be
begun in early life. As soon as the powers and capacities of the mind begin to
unfold, the directing and fostering hand of education should be applied. The
time of human life is too short and valuable to suffer a moment of it to pass
away without improvement. Beside, the work of acquiring a good education,
filling the mind with knowledge, and moulding it into virtuous habits, is a
work of vast labor. Life is short; science and improvement infinite.

NOT only so, but such is the constitution of nature, the young mind can not be
stationary. The great principles of imitation and habit will operate. Hence, if
the skilful hand of education does not, as its faculties unfold, turn the mind
right, by directing these principles, they will, through bad example and
indulgence, turn it wrong. And, what is more, the turn, which the young mind
receives while it is tender and pliable, and its powers and capacities are
unfolding and maturing, is very stubborn, and, probably, will, in a measure,
continue until, and, awful thought! beyond death. Perhaps under five years of
age, some impressions and principles are set upon the mind and manners of the
child, which he will carry through life. Experience has, long since, drawn this
observation into a decided maxim. A great poet expresses thus: "It Is education
forms the common mind;
"Just as the twig is bent, the tree's inclined."
And one, who, for almost three thousand years, has been renowned for his
superior wisdom, has left us this all-interesting maxim, in still more decisive
terms. Train up a child in the way he should go; and when he is old, he will
not depart from it. Upon these principles it is that we so urgently recommend
early education. Upon these principles it also is, that a late education is
encumbered with many embarrassments. Entering late upon education, the Scholar
not only has his learning to obtain, but bad habits and erroneous prejudices to
correct. Very few have abilities adequate to the arduous task. Though such an
one may become accurate in theory, it is lucky if his old habits do not cause
him to blunder in practice. Though his knowledge may be fine, he is very liable
to have his manner constrained, and his execution bad.

FEMALE education is another particular very essential as a means to its
general, and far advancement.

WE have seen, education ought to begin with the beginnings of understanding.
At this eventful period of life, the little folks are in the arms of their
mothers. Has the mother been well educated, is the tender parent a good
preceptress, the fortunate child is at the best school in the universe, while
in its mother's lap. As the faculties of the young mind expand, she will with a
delicate and skilful hand nurture and direct it to knowledge and virtue. The
pupil being constantly with, and strongly attached to the mother, will assume
her as an example of perfection, and imitate her every look, word, and gesture.
These imitations will soon grow into habits, and probably fix traits upon the
child's mind, speech, and manners, which will be durable as life. Hence the
maxim, as is the parent so is the child; and hence the inconceivable
consequence of female education.

BESIDE, such is the happy constitution of nature, that wherever Ladies are
highly improved by a well directed and refined education, there the gentlemen
will soon become so. It is an aphorism, which it must be confessed carries much
truth with it, that the fair part of creation rule the world. Would they,
guided by the wise dictates of a virtuous education, give their approbation
only to those who were, (considering their circumstances) duly informed and
virtuous, we might venture to affirm, scarcely an uneducated, irregular man
would be seen in society. Permit me then, Ladies, to say, on you it very much
rests to fix the boundaries of human improvement. The Creator has put it in
your power to reform the world. Let not the idle, dissipated character share
your caresses, and the work is done. Doing this, you will have the honor of
doing more than all the magistrates, moralists, and preachers in the world.

WHEN we consider the dignity, value, and happiness a good education adds to
the human mind, how surprising it is that, in this, one half of the human race
have been so basely neglected! -- especially when we consider how a refined
education in them reforms the world. This doubtless is a trait of barbarity. In
the savage state, where strength is honor, the delicate female is depressed
far below the dignity of her rank. As civilization and improvement advance in
families or nations, female education gains ground, Ladies assume their proper
rank, and command respect. Happy am I to observe this trait of barbarity in our
country, rapidly wearing away. May that glorious era soon commence, when a
virtuous and refined education shall adorn the fair daughters of America --
then dissipated gallantry shall be banished society, and modest virtue be
triumphant.

IT is obvious to observe, that Good Instruction is another very essential
particular in the means of advancing education.

IT is as easy for the scholar to learn right as wrong. Let him be taught
right, and his learning will be so of course. Whether he be so or not, the
scholar, as he ought, thinks his teacher is right; follows his precepts, and
copies his example. On these truths the following general rule is erected for
the election of Instructors: Such a character, as you would wish your child to
be, choose for his instructor. Would you wish your child to be a blunderer and
a guesser in learning, without points or accuracy; thus let his instructor be,
and the work is done. Would you wish him vulgar in his diction, horrid in his
pronunciation, and awkward in his manners; then choose an instructor of such a
mould. But, as better suited to this enlightened age, in which we have the
happiness of living, do you wish, as I am persuaded you do, to have your
children right and accurate in their learning, easy and graceful in their
manners, and sentimental and regular in their morals, then choose for their
Instructor, a scholar, and gentleman, and a christian, and your ardent and
noble wishes, by the blessings of Heaven, will be gratified.

IT is most painful and gloomy to the patriot and philanthropist, to observe,
that the instuction of our youth has, through mistake, or deficiency of
patronage, too generally fallen into inadequate hands. But we are animated,
happy in the consideration, that the good sense of the people is now rapidly
correcting this mistake. Raptures of enthusiasm fill our hearts in anticipating
the golden era, when Socrateses shall again be schoolmasters.

BUT in addition to good instruction, there must be great attention and
exertion on the part of the scholar.

WHERE the work to be performed is great, the time to perform it in short, and
the reward ample, every possible exertion is naturally called into act. This,
my young Friends, is your situation, who are making the first advances in
education. Your object, as you have already seen, is most great and noble: it
is the improvement of your natures in every thing amiable, virtuous, and
praiseworthy; that you may be satisfied with, and happy in yourselves, joy to
your parents, honor to your instructors, useful in this world, and happy in the
next. To obtain that good education, which secures these great objects, is an
amazing work: a work which calls for your greatest attention, care, resolution,
industry, and most ardent prayers. Many difficulties are to be encountered,
many self-denials assumed. The hill of a literary and virtuous education is, in
some parts, steep, craggy, and laberious. But be not discourage; its assent is
more easy as you advance, and its sublime summit is irradiated with a broad
effulgence of glory. On this summit fix your eyes, and no exertions will seem
too great, no attention tedious.

ESPECIALLY will this laborious attention be urged upon you, by the
consideration of the shortness of youth. When the age of manhood arrives, as it
soon will, the great objects of life, profession, domestic establishment and
cares, duties to your country, and extended connections will crowd upon you,
and command your attention. The age of youth, when the mind is free from all
these cares, is the time which God has appointed to obtain education, and
prepare for manhood. This time is too short and precious to squander a moment
of it, in useless trifles and amusements. It is a mistake that youth is the age
for idleness and diversion: it is the age for education, on which depend your
future prosperity, and greatness.

I have reserved for the last place, one of the most essential means to the
promotion of literature, I mean, that of the encouragement and patronage of
Government, and gentlemen of distinction and ability.

HONOR and profit are objects which have a very commanding influence on the
minds of men. Let the government of a nation, and its able characters, who have
these to bestow, amply confer them on teachers, and virtuous literary merit;
and that nation will soon become distinguished in education -- Gentlemen of the
first character and abilities will aspire to the noble profession of
instructing youth -- Youth will be animated, enthusiastic in their attention,
and thousands of citizens emulous in the course of improvement. The golden ages
of literature, which are immortalized on the page of history, in Greece, Rome,
Florence, France and England, all are replete with facts which testify to us
the vast consequence of this encouragement and patronage. But we need not go to
distant ages and nations for the proof of this; our own prosperous country
affords us a sufficient one. Those States in the Union are the most
distinguished for the general diffusion of information, where the Legislature
of the State and able individuals have been the most active and liberal in
their encouragement and patronage. I presume we shall not injure our sister
states if we say Massachusetts justly claims a rank among those of this
description. Numerous, noble and distinguished are the monuments of her
exertion in the glorious cause of education. On these we might exhaust the
language of panegyric; but the recent instance of the liberal patronage of
literature, which ornaments Bristol County, and felicitates our present
meeting, more immediately commands out gratitude, and claims a tribute of
acknowledgment. The voice of duty is, let the magnanimous sentiments of
patriotism be a grateful return -- The voice of duty also calls for a grateful
tribute to the noble patronage of individuals, with whom the Government have
entrusted their character and liberal deposite -- And, I presume, with my own,
I shall gratify the feelings of my audience, if I add, as another claim of our
gratitude, the spirited, but, disinterested exertions of a distinguished
character, General DAVID COBB, who removed from Taunton is Gouldsbury, in the
Province of Maine, a few weeks before the Academy was opened.
who now blesses another clime.

PERMIT me to say Gentlemen, by accepting the honorable appointment of
Trustees to our infant Seminary, you accept a great and Solemn trust. The
expectations of the community are justly upon you. On you it rests to manage
the Institution, that it may, under your auspices, effect the all-important
objects for which God, and our Legislature designed it; the diffusion of
knowledge and virtue, among our fellow citizens. Your task is arduous, your
responsibility is great; but the dignity of the object, will not fail to
animate the generous heart with resolution, zeal, and unremitting perseverance.
With such an object in view, you have on your side the good wishes and ardent
prayers of all the virtuous; you have on your side, the Providence of that God,
who is the great Father of Lights, and Conductor of the Universe. Persevere
then with the same spirited, noble exertions with which you have begun; that
Bristol Academy may, in the diffusion of literature and morality, be a great
and permanent blessing to the county and community, and hold an honorable rank
among the flourishing Seminaries which adorn and bless our country.

IMPRESSED with grateful sentiments for the attention and candor of this large
and respectable audience, and convinced of the infinite consequence of
education to us all, I cannot but beg leave, in the close of our subject, again
to call your attention to it. It is from the want of education, that,
notwithstanding the native dignity of human nature, millions of our race are
now low sunk in barbarity; clothed with the unwrought skins of animals,
subsisting, as beasts of prey, by the precarious events of the chase, covered
with little else than the canopy of heaven, exposed to all the elements of
nature, hostile, and awfully cruel in their dispositions, ignorant of their
origin, or destination, of the one only living and true God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, worshipping idols, and living and dying but a little exalted above the
beasts of the forest. It is from the want of education, and so of a just
knowledge of the rights of man, that almost the whole of the human race have,
from their first creation to the present day, been draging out existence under
the iron sceptres of tyrants and despots, and bleeding under the cursed lash of
slavery. It is from the want of education, or from an erroneous one, that the
pure religion of Jesus has been so basely maculated, and debased with
superstition and absurdity. The kingdom of antichrist was laid in ignorance;
and by this the Pope of Rome, for more than a thousand years, swayed the horrid
scepter of ecclesiastical tyranny, over all the nations of Christendom. It is
from the want of a right education, that we have the humiliation and great
unhappiness, to see many of our fellow citizens inveloped in darkness and
prejudice; many wretched between the demands of idleness and poverty; many most
shockingly debased in the corruptions of obscenity; many, for their outrages on
society, draging the chain in the horrid dungeon, or suspended on the shameful
gallows; many devoted to dissipation, and the gratification of ungovernable
appetites and passions. In short, it seems not too much to say, that almost all
the vices and evils of life may be traced back either to the want of an
education, or an erroneous one.

BUT how refulgent is the contrast of a right education! By this all the
dignified faculties of man are improved, and directed toward that exalted
state of perfection and happiness for which the Creator designed him. By this
he becomes conscious of his own dignity, and rises into self-satisfaction, and
enjoyment. By this he becomes useful to the world, a crown of glory to his
friends, and respected and loved by all. By this he becomes acquainted with the
wonderful works of God, which are every where spread around him -- and by this
he becomes acquainted with our holy religion, is impressed with its precepts,
and directed to heaven. By education nations enjoy all the blessings of
society. Agriculture, manufactures, and commerce, which bless mankind with all
the necessaries and conveniences of life, are perfected by the all-powerful
hand of education. By this also the government of a nation is molded, and its
citizens rise to a knowledge of the rights of man, and the enjoyment of civil
liberty. In short, by this only, a nation is made happy at home, and
respectable abroad.

SUCH then, my friends, being the immense value of education, let all embark in
its cause. Let government, and able individuals offer their patronage and
encouragement. Let parents exhaust their tenderest affections in this glorious
work. Let teachers realize and carefully discharge the amazing responsibility
which lies upon them. Let both sexes equally share in those exertions; let them
be begun early, and no time be lost. Let youth be impressed with the value of a
good education, and the laborious attention necessary to acquire it. Let their
exertions be measured by the greatness and value of the work, and the brevity
and value of the morning of life, and correspondent to the anxious wishes,
prayers and exertions of their parents and instructors. As all of us are
equally interested in the great and common cause, let us, in heart and hand,
unite to advance it, and the blessigns of God will attend us.

AMEN.

