Christianity Vindicated, IN THE ADMIRABLE SPEECH OF THE HON. THO. ERSKINE, IN
THE TRIAL OF J. WILLIAMS, FOR PUBLISHING PAINE's " Age of Reason." 24 TH JUNE,
1797.

FROM THE TWELFTH LONDON EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY J. CAREY, No. 83, N. SECOND-STREET, FOR G. DOUGLAS,
No. 2, SOUTH THIRD-STREET.

1797.

* Often has the Public had occasion to applaud Mr. Erskine's efforts in the
cause of LIBERTY and PAIN, when Pain was the friend of Liberty and Good Order
-- now that he has become the enemy of Revelation, and has tarnished his fame
by an infamous apostasy, Mr. Erskine is no longer his advocate, and brings his
unrivaled talents in support of CHRISTIANITY -- The sincere Religionist, the
pure Moralist, and the good Citizen, will rejoice to see this great Orator
siding with the cause of RELIGION, and, with all the powers of a deep judgment,
a refined imagination, and an irresistible eloquence, successfully stemming the
mischievous torrent of Error, Impiety, and Infidelity.

COURT OF KING'S BENCH, WESTMINSTER, JULY 24, 1797. BEFORE LORD KENYON AND A
SPECIAL JURY, The KING v. WILLIAMS, FOR PUBLISHING PAINE'S AGE OF REASON.
(ON THE PART OF THE PROSECUTION.) MR. ERSKINE'S SPEECH.
GENTLEMEN OF THE JURY,
THE charge of Blasphemy, which is put upon the record against the printer of
this publication, is not an accusation of the servants of the Crown, The
prosecution was promoted by the "Society for the discouraging of Vice, and the
promoting of Virtue" -- A similar institution has lately been set on foot in
Dublin. -- Quere. Would such a Society be useful in Philadelphia? -- AM. EDITOR.
but comes before you sanctioned by the oaths of a Grand Jury of the Country.
It stood for trial upon a former day; but it happening, as it frequently does,
without any imputation to the Gentlemen named in the panel, that a sufficient
number did not appear to constitute a full Special Jury, I thought it my duty
to withdraw the cause from trial, till I could have the opportunity which is
now open to me of addressing myself to you, who were originally appointed to
try it. I pursued this course, however, from no jealousy of the Common Juries,
appointed by the laws for the ordinary service of the Court, since my whole
life has been one continued experience of their virtues; but because I thought
it of great importance, that those, who were to decide upon a cause so very
momentous to the public, should have the highest possible qualifications for
the decision. That they should not only be men capable, from their education,
of forming an enlightened judgment, but that their situations should be such as
to bring them within the full view of their enlightened Country, to which, in
character and in estimation, they were in their own turns to be responsible.

Not having the honor, Gentlemen, to be sworn for the King, as one of his
Counsel, it has fallen much oftener to my lot to defend indictments for libels,
than to assist in the prosecution of them. But I feel no embarrassment from
that recollection; since I shall not be found today to express a sentiment, or
to utter an expression, inconsistent with those invaluable principles for which
I have uniformly contended in the defense of others. Nothing that I have ever
said, either professionally or personally, for the Liberty of the Press, do I
mean to deny, to contradict, or counteract. On the contrary, I desire to
preface the discourse I have to make to you with reminding you, that it is your
most solemn duty to take care it suffers no injury in your hands. A free and
unlicensed press (in the just and legal sense of the expression) has led to all
the blessings, both of Religion and Government, which Great Britain, or any
part of the world, at this moment enjoys, and is calculated still farther to
advance mankind to higher degrees of civilization and happiness. But this
freedom, like every other must be limited to be enjoyed, and, like every human
advantage, may be defeated by its abuse.

Gentlemen, the defendant stands indicted for having published this book, which
I have only read from the obligations of professional duty, and which I rose,
from the reading of, with astonishment and disgust. Standing here, with all the
privileges belonging to the highest Council for the Crown, I shall be entitled
to reply to any defense that shall be made for the publication. I shall wait
with patience till I hear it. Indeed, if I were to anticipate the defense which
I hear and read of, it would be d^^aming, by anticipation, the learned Counsel
who is to make it. For, if I am to collect it, even from a formal notice given
to the prosecutors in the course of the proceedings, I have to expect, that,
instead of a defense conducted according to the rules and principles of English
law and justice, the foundation of all our laws, and the sanctions of all our
justice, are to be struck at and insulted -- What is the force of that
jurisdiction which enables the Court to sit in judgment? -- What but the Oath
which his Lordship, as well as yourselves, have sworn upon the Gospel to
fulfill. Yet in the King's Court, where his Majesty is himself also sworn to
administer the justice of England, in the King's Court, who receives his high
authority under a solemn Oath to maintain the Christian Religion, as it is
promulgated by God in the Holy Scriptures, I am nevertheless called upon, as
Counsel for the prosecution, to produce a certain book described in the
indictment to be the Holy Bible. No man deserves to be upon the Rolls of the
Court, who dares, as an Attorney, to put his name to such a notice. It is an
insult to the authority and dignity of the Court of which he is an officer;
since it seems to call in question the very foundations of its jurisdiction. If
this is to be the spirit and temper of the defense; if, as I collect from that
array of books which are spread upon the benches behind me, this publication is
to be vindicated by an attack of all the truths which the Christian Religion
promulgates to mankind, let it be remembered that such an argument was neither
suggested nor justified by any thing said by me on the part of the prosecution.
In this stage of the proceedings, I shall call for reverence to the sacred
Scriptures, not from their merits, unbounded as they are, but from their
authority in a Christian Country; not from the obligations of Conscience, but
from the rules of Law. For my own part, Gentlemen, I have been ever deeply
devoted to the truths of Christianity, and my firm belief in the Holy Gospel is
by no means owing to the prejudices of education (though I was religiously
educated by the best of parents), but arises from the fullest and most
continued reflections of my riper years and understanding. It forms at this
moment, the great consolation of a life, which, as a shadow, must pass away;
and, without it, indeed, I should consider my long course of health and
prosperity (perhaps too long and uninterrupted to be good for any man) only as
the dust which the wind scatters, and rather as a snare than as a blessing.
Much, however, as I wish to support the authority of Scripture, from a reasoned
consideration of it, I shall repress that subject for the present. But, if the
defense shall be as I have suspected, to bring them at all into argument or
question, I shall then fulfill a duty which I owe not only to the Court, as
Counsel for the Prosecution, but to the Public, to state what I feel and know
concerning the evidences of that Religion which is reviled without being
examined, and denied without being understood.

I am well aware that by the communications of a Free Press, all the errors of
mankind, from age to age, have been dissipated and dispelled, and I recollect
that the world, under the banners of reformed Christianity, has struggled
through persecution to the noble eminence on which it stands at this moment,
shedding the blessings of Humanity and Science upon the nations of the earth.
It may be asked, by what means the Reformation would have been effected, if the
books of the Reformers had been suppressed, and the errors of condemned and
exploded superstitions had been supported as unquestionable by the State,
founded upon those very superstitions formerly, as it is at present upon the
doctrines of the Established Church? Or how, upon such principles, any
reformation, civil or religious, can in future be effected? -- The solution is
easy -- Let us examine what are the genuine principles of the Liberty of the
Press, as they regard writings upon general subjects, unconnected with the
personal reputations of private men, which are wh^^^y foreign to the present
inquiry. They are full of simplicity, and are brought as near perfection, by
the Law of England, as perhaps is consistent with any of the frail institutions
of mankind.

Although every community must establish supreme authorities, founded upon
fixed principles, and must give high powers to Magistrates to administer laws
for the preservation of the Government itself, and for the security of those
who are to be protected by it; yet, as infallibility and perfection belong
neither to human establishments, nor to human individuals, it ought to be the
policy of all free establishments, as it is most peculiarly the principle of
our own Constitution, to permit the most unbounded freedom of discussion, even
by detecting errors in the Constitution or Administration of the very
Government itself, so as that decorum is observed, which every State must exact
from its subjects, and which imposes no restraint upon any intellectual
composition, fairly, honestly, and decently, addressed to the consciences and
understanding of men. Upon this principle, I have an unquestionable right (a
right which the best subjects have exercised) to examine the principles and
structure of the Constitution, and, by fair manly reasoning, to question the
practice of its administrators. I have a right to consider and to point out
errors in the one or in the other; and not merely to reason upon their
existence, but to consider the means of their reformation. By such free,
well-intentioned, modest, and dignified communication of sentiments and
opinions, all nations have been gradually improved, and milder laws and pure
religions have been established. The same principles, which vindicate civil
contentions honestly directed, extend their protection to the sharpest
controversies on religious faiths. This rational and legal course of
improvement was recognized and ratified by Lord Kenyon, as the Law of England,
in a late trial at Guildhall, when he looked back with gratitude to the labors
of the Reformers, as the fountains of our religious emancipation, and of the
civil blessings that followed in their train. The English Constitution, indeed,
does not stop short in the toleration of religious opinions, but liberally
extends it to practice. It permits every man, EVEN PUBLICLY, to worship God
according to his own conscience, though in marked dissent from the national
Establishment, so as he professes the general Faith, which is the sanction of
all our moral duties, and the only pledge of our submission to the system which
constitutes a State. Is not this system of freedom of controversy, and freedom
of worship, sufficient for all the purposes of human happiness and improvement?
-- And will it be necessary to either, that the Law should hold out indemnity
to those who wholly abjure and revile the Government of their Country, or the
Religion on which it rests for its foundation?

I expect to hear, in answer to what I am now saying, much that will offend me.
My learned Friend, from the difficulties of his situation, which I know, from
experience, how to feel for very sincerely, may be driven to advance
propositions which it may be my duty with much freedom, to reply to; and the
Law will sanction that freedom. But will not the ends of Justice be completely
answered by that right, to point out the errors of his discourse in terms that
are decent and calculated to expose its defects; or will any argument suffer,
or will public justice be impeded, because neither private honor and justice,
nor public decorum, would endure my telling my very learned Friend, that he was
a fool, a liar, and a scoundrel, in the face of the Court, because I differed
from him in argument or opinion? This is just the distinction between a book of
free legal controversy, and the book which I am arraigning before you. Every
man has a legal right to investigate, with modesty and decency, controversial
points of the Christian religion; but, no man, consistently with a law, which
only exists under its sanctions, has a right not only broadly to deny its very
existence, but to pour forth a shocking and insulting invective, which the
lowest establishments, in the gradati^^^ of civil authority, ought not to be
permitted to suffer, and (...) soon would be borne down by insolence and
disobedience, if they did.

The same principle perva^es the whole system of the Law, not merely in its
abstract theory, but in its daily and most applauded practice. -- The
intercourse between the sexes, and which, properly regulated, not only
continues, but humanizes and adorns our natures, is the foundation of all the
thousand romances, plays and novels, which are in the hands of every body. Some
of them lead to the confirmation of every virtuous principle; others, though
with the same profession, address the imagination in a manner to lead the
passions into dangerous excesses. But, though the Law does not nicely
discriminate the various shades which distinguish these works from one another,
so as that it suffers many to pass, through its liberal spirit, that upon
principle might be suppressed, would it or does it tolerate, or does any decent
man contend that it ought to pass by unpunished, libels of the most shameless
obscenity, manifestly pointed to debauch innocence, and to blast and poison the
morals of the rising generation? -- This is only another illustration to
demonstrate the obvious distinction between the works of an author, who fairly
exercises the powers of his mind, in investigating doctrinal points in the
religion of any country, and him who attacks the rational existence of every
religion, and brands with absurdity and folly the state which sanctions, and
the obedient tools who cherish, the delusion. But this publication appears to
me to be as mischievous and cruel in its probable effects, as it is manifestly
illegal in its principles; because it strikes at the best, sometimes, alas! the
only refuge, and consolation amidst the distresses and afflictions of the
world. The poor and humble, whom it affects to pity, may be stabbed to the
heart by it. They have more occasion for firm hopes beyond the grave, than
those who have greater comforts to render life delightful. I can conceive a
distressed, but virtuous, man, surrounded by children, looking up to him for
bread when he has none to give them, sinking under the last day's labor, and
unequal to the next, yet still looking up with confidence to the hour when all
tears shall be wiped from the eyes of affliction, bearing the burden laid upon
him by a mysterious Providence which he adores, and looking forward with
exultation to the revealed promises of his Creator, when he shall be greater
than the greatest, and happier than the happiest of mankind. What a change in
such a mind might be wrought by such a merciless publication? -- Gentlemen,
whether these remarks are the overcharged declamations of an accusing Counsel,
or the just reflections of a man anxious for the public freedom, which is best
secured by the morals of a nation, will be best settled by an appeal to the
passages in the work, that are selected by the indictment for your
consideration and judgment. You are at liberty to connect them with every
context and sequel, and to bestow upon them the mildest interpretation -- [
Here Mr. Erskine read and commented upon several of the selected passages, and
then proceeded as follows:]

Gentlemen, it would be useless and disgusting to enumerate the other passages
within the scope of the indictment. How any man can rationally vindicate the
publication of such a book, in a country where the Christian Religion is the
very foundation of the law of the land, I am totally at a loss to conceive, and
have no ideas for the discussion of! How is a tribunal, whose whole
jurisdiction is founded upon the solemn belief and practice of what is denied
as falsehood, and reprobated as impiety, to deal with such an anomolous
defense? Upon what principle is it even offered to the Court, whose authority
is contemned and mocked at? If the Religion, proposed to be called in question,
is not previously adopted in belief, and solemnly acted upon, what authority
has the Court to pass any judgment at all of acquittal or condemnation? Why am
I now, or upon any other occasion, to submit to your Lordship's authority? Why
am I now, or at any time, to address twelve of my equals, as I am now
addressing you, with reverence and submission? Under what sanction are the
witnesses to give their evidence, without which there can be no trial? Under
what obligations can I call upon you, the jury, representing your country, to
administer justice? -- Surely upon no other than that you are sworn to
administer it under the oaths you have taken. The whole judicial fabric, from
the King's sovereign authority to the lowest office of magistracy, has no other
foundation. The whole is built, both in form and substance, upon the same oath
of every one of its ministers, to do justice, "AS GOD SHALL HELP THEM
HEREAFTER." -- What God? and what hereafter? That God, undoubtedly, who has
commanded Kings to rule, and judges to decree with justice; who has said to
witnesses, not by the voice of Nature, but in revealed Commandments, "THOU
SHALL NOT BEAR FALSE TESTIMONY AGAINST THY NEIGHBOR;" and who has enforced
obedience to them by the revelation of the unutterable blessings which shall
attend their observances, and the awful punishments which shall await upon
their transgressions.

"But it seems this course of reason, and the time and the person are at last
arrived, that are to dissipate the errors which have overspread the past
generations of ignorance! -- The believers in Christianity are many, but it
belongs to the few that are wise to correct their credulity! Belief is an act
of reason; and superior reason may therefore dictate to the weak. -- In running
the mind along the long list of sincere and devout Christians, I cannot help
lamenting that Newton had not lived to this day, to have had his shallowness
filled up with this new flood of light. -- But the subject is too awful for
irony. I will speak plainly and directly. Newton was a Christian! -- Newton,
whose mind burst forth from the setters cast by nature upon our finite
conceptions: -- Newton, whose science wa^ truth, and the foundation of whose
knowledge of it was philosophy. Not those visionary and arrogant assumptions
which to^ often usurp its name, but philosophy resting upon the basis of
mathematics, which, like figures, cannot lie. -- Newton, who carried the line
and rule to the utmost barriers of creation, and explored the principles by
which, no doubt, all created matter is held together and exists. But this
extraordinary man, in the mighty reach of his mind, overlooked, perhaps, the
errors, which a minuter investigation of the created things on this earth might
have taught him, of the essence of his Creator. What shall then be said of the
great Mr. Boil, who looked into the organic structure of all matter, even to
the brute inanimate substances which the foot treads on. Such a man may be
supposed to have been equally qualified with Mr. Pain, to "look through
Nature, up to Nature's God." Yet the result of all his contemplation was the
most confirmed and devout belief in all which the other holds in contempt as
despicable and drivelling superstition. -- But this error, might, perhaps,
arise from a want of due attention to the foundations of human judgment, and
the structure of that understanding which God has given us for the
investigation of truth. -- Le^ ^^at question be answered by Mr. Lock, who was
to the highest pitch of devotion and adoration a Christian. Mr. Lock, whose
office was to detect the errors of thinking, by going up to the fountains of
thought, and to direct into the proper track of reasoning the devious mind of
man, by showing him its whole process, from the first perceptions of sense, to
the last conclusions of ratiocination; putting a rein besides upon false
opinion, by practical rules for the conduct of human judgment.

But these men were only deep thinkers, and ^i^ed in their closets,
unaccustomed to the traffic of the world, and to the laws which practically
regulate mankind. -- Gentlemen, in the place where you now sit to administer
the justice of this great country, above a century ago the
never-to-be-forgotten Sir Matthew H^l^ presided, whose faith in Christianity is
an exalted commentary upon its truth and reason, and whose life was a glorious
example of its frui^ in man; administering human justice with a wisdom and
purity drawn from the pure fountain of the Christian dispensation, which has
been, and will be, in all ages, a subject of the highest reverence and
admiration. But it is said by Mr. Pain, that the Christian fable is but the
tale of the more ancient superstitions of the world, and may be easily detected
by a proper understanding of the mythologies of the Heathens. Did Mi^ton
understand those mythologies? Was he less versed than Mr. Pain in the
supertitions of the world -- No: they were the subject of his immortal song and
though shut out from all recurrence to them, he poured them forth from the
stores ^f a memory ri^h with all that man ever knew, and laid them in their
order as the illustration of that real and exalted faith, the unquestionable
source of that fervid genius, which cast a sort of shade upon all the other
works of man -- He passed the bounds of flaming space,
Where Angels tremble while they gaze;
He saw, till, blasted with excess of light,
He closed his eyes in endless night!
But it was the light of the BODY only that was extinguished; "the celestial
light shone inward." and enabled him to "justify the ways of God to man." The
result of his thinking was nevertheless not the same as the author's. The
mysterious incarna^ion of our Blessed Savior (which this work blasphemes in
words so wholly unfit for the mouth of a Christian, or for the ear of a Court
o^ Justice, that I dare not and will not give them ut^erance), Milton mad the
grand conclusion of Paradise Lost, the rest of his finishe^ labors, and the
ultimate hope, expectation, and glory of the world: A Virgin is his mother: but
his sire
The power of the Most High: he shall ascend
The throne hereditary, and bound his reign
With earth's wide bounds, his glory with the Heavens.


The immortal poet having thus put in (...) ^^e mouth of the Angel the prophecy
of man's redemption, follows it with that solemn and beautiful admonition,
addressed in ^he Poem to our great First Parent, but intended as an address to
his posterity through all generations: This having learned, thou have attained
the sum
Of wisdom: hope no higher, though all the stars
Thou knew'st by name, and all the ethereal powers,
All secrets of the deep all Nature's works,
O^ works ^f God in Heaven, air, earth, or sea,
And all the riches of this world enjoy'st,
And all the rule one empire; only ^dd
Deeds to thy knowledge answerable, add faith,
Add virtue, patience, temperance, add love,
By name to come called Charity, the soul
Of all the rest: then will thou not be loath
To leave this Paradise, but shall possess
A Paradise within thee happier far.


Thus you find all that is great, or wise, or splendid, or illustrious, amongst
created beings, all the minds gifted beyond ordinary nature, if not inspired by
its Universal Author for the advancement and dignity of the world, though
divided by distant ages, and by the clashing opinions distinguishing them from
one another, yet joining, as it were, in one sublime chorus to celebrate the
truths of Christianity, and laying upon its holy altars the never-fading
offerings of their immortal wisdom.

Against all this concurring testimony, we find suddenly, from Mr. Pain, that
the Bible teaches nothing but "lies, obscenity, cruelty, and injustice." Had he
ever read Our Savior's Sermon on the Mount? -- Against all this concurring
testimony, we find suddenly, from this publication, that the Bible teaches
nothing but lies, obscenity, cruelty, and injustice! -- Had the author or
publisher ever read the Sermon of Christ upon the Mount, in which the great
principles of our faith and duty are summed up? -- Let us all but read and
practice it, and lies, obscenity, cruelty, and injustice, and all human
wickedness, would be banished from the world.

Gentlemen, there is but one consideration more, which I cannot possibly omit,
because I confess it affects me very deeply. Mr. Pain has written largely on
public Liberty and Government; and his last performance has, on that account,
been more widely circulated, and principally among those who attached
themselves from principle to his former works. This circumstance renders a
public attack upon all revealed Religion, from such a writer, infinitely more
dangerous. The religious and moral sense of the people of Great Britain, is the
great anchor which alone can hold the vessel of the State amidst the storms
which agitate the world: and if I could believe, for a moment, that the mass of
the people were to be debauched from the principles of Religion, which forms
the true (...) of that humanity, charity, and benevolence, that has been so
long the national characteristic, instead of mixing myself, as I sometimes have
done, in political reformations, I would rather retire to the uttermost corners
of the earth to avoid their agitation; and would bear not only the
imperfections and abuses complained of in our own wise establishment, but even
the worst government that ever existed in the world, rather than go to the work
of reformation with a multitude set free from all the charities of
Christianity, who had no sense of God's existence but from Mr. Paine's
Observation of Nature, which the mass of mankind have no leisure to
contemplate; nor any belief of future rewards and punishments to animate the
good in the glorious pursuit of human happiness, nor to deter the wicked from
destroying it even in its birth. But I know the people of England better. They
are a religious people; and, with the blessing of God, as far as it is in my
power, I will lend my aid to keep them so. I have no objections to the freest
and most extended discussions upon doctrinal points of the Christian Religion;
and, though the law of England does not permit it, I do not dread the reasoned
arguments of Deists against the existence of Christianity itself, because, as
was said by its Divine Author, if it is of God, it will stand. An intellectual
book, however erroneous, addressed to the intellectual world upon so profound
and complicated a subject, can never work the mischief which this indictment is
calculated to repress. Such works will only employ the minds of men enlightened
by study to a deeper investigation of a subject well worthy of their deepest
and continued contemplation. The powers of the mind are given for human
improvement in the progress of human existence. The changes produced by such
reciprocations of lights and intelligences are certain in their progressions,
and make their way imperceptibly, as conviction comes upon the world, by the
final and irresistible power of truth. If Christianity be sounded in falsehood,
let us become Deists in this manner, and I am contented. But this book has no
such object and no such capacity; it presents no arguments to the wise and
enlightened. On the contrary, it treats the faith and opinions of the wisest
with the most shocking contempt, and stirs up men without the advantages of
learning or sober thinking to a total disbelief of every thing hitherto held
sacred, and, consequently, to a rejection of all the laws and ordinances of the
State, which stand only upon the assumption of their truth.

Gentlemen, I cannot conclude without expressing the deepest regret at all
attacks upon the Christian Religion by authors who profess to promote the civil
liberties of the world. For, under what other auspices than Christianity have
the lost and subverted liberties of mankind in former ages been re-asserted? --
By what zeal, but the warm z^^l of devout Christians, have English liberties
been redeemed and consecrated? -- Under what other sanctions, even in our own
days, have liberty and happiness been extending and spreading to the uttermost
corners of the earth? -- What work of civilization, what commonwealth of
greatness, has this bald religion of Nature ever established? -- We see, on the
contrary, the nations that have no other light than that of Nature to direct
them sunk in barbarism or slaves to arbitrary Governments; whilst, since the
Christian era, the great career of the world has been slowly, but clearly,
advancing lighter at every step, from the awful prophecies of the Gospel, and
leading, I trust, in the end, to universal and eternal happiness. Each
generation of mankind can see but a few revolving links of this mighty and
mysterious chain; but, by doing our several duties in our allotted stations, we
are sure that we are fulfilling the purposes of our existence -- YOU, I trust,
will fulfill yours this day!

A Mr. Fleming, one of the Clerks of the Bank, was the only witness called on
the part of the prosecution. He said he purchased the book in question of the
Defendant, at his shop, on the 7th of February last.

The NOTICE, which Mr. Erskine mentioned in his speech was here read, and Mr.
John Martin, the Attorney for the Defendant, readily admitted that he had sent
it those who were concerned for the prosecution.

Mr Kyd made a very ingenious speech for the Defendant. He said he would
endeavor to discharge the duty which he owed to his client, in a manner that
was consistent with the dignity of that Court, and with that decency and
solemnity which he felt belonged to the subject. The question was, Whether the
Author, when he wrote this book, felt as he wrote, and expressed himself as he
felt? -- He humbly submitted, that the inferences, which Mr. Pain had drawn
from the premises, were such as he might have drawn with a fair and honest
intention. Whether those inferences were just or not was a totally different
question. But, if his Lordship and the Gentlemen of the Jury could discover no
wicked or malicious intent, they would not punish a man for a mere error in
judgment. If the Jury could collect no wicked intention in the author from
reading the whole of this performance, he contended he was completely protected
under the right which he and every other man had to exercise the powers of his
mind in discussing any controversial points of religion. Supposing then the
book had been written innocently* he might infer, as a general proposition,
that it was also published with an innocent intention. At the same time he
admitted, that what was so written might be published from a malicious motive,
for which the publisher would be amenable to the laws of his country. The
learned Counsel next selected several passages from this performance, to show,
that the Author felt the most profound reverence and veneration for the Supreme
Being, and denied the truth of Revelation only because he could not reconcile
it to the character and attributes of the Deity. It was stated in that
publication, that the law of Nature was engraven on every man's heart, and that
he might clearly collect the knowledge of that duty which he owed to his
Creator from a contemplation of his works. M. Kyd next endeavored to justify
the charges made upon the Bible by the Author by a variety of passages which he
selected, but which at the desire of his Lordship and the Jury, he did not
read, but only referred to them, and contended, that if these passages were
found in any other book they would be considered as indecent and immoral. He
appealed to the writings of Dr. Lardner, Dr. Bently, and other eminent Divines,
in support of the right of free discussion upon all subjects of a controversial
nature. He then spoke in severe terms of thi^ prosecution, which, he said,
would never have been instituted had it not been for Bishop WATSON'S APOLOGY,
which had been very widely circulated, and had excited a curiosity to read the
book to which it was an answer; and to gratify that public curiosity it was,
that this book, which he believed had been first published at Paris, was
afterward published in this country. Mr. Kyd insisted, at great length, upon
the freedom of inquiry and a free press, and gave the Reformation and
Revolution as two instances of the inestimable blessings which had resulted
from them to this country.

Mr. Erskine made a most eloquent reply. He said, he was bound in respect to
his Learned Friend, as a member of a most honorable pr^fession, to suppose
that he was placed in a very irksome situation, to be called on for a defense
so exceedingly difficult to make, and so extremely delicate to manage, without
violating that common decency that was due to a Court of Justice. He could not
therefore help considering him as entitled to a considerable degree of
indulgence. Mr. Erskine here adver^ed to several of the passages selected from
the Old Testament by Mr. Kyd, and explained the reason of their introduction
into the sacred Writings. The history of man, he said, was the history of man's
vices and passions, which could not be censured without adverting to their
existence; and many of the instances that had been referred to were recorded as
memorable warnings and examples for the instruction of mankind. Mr. E. next
entered most forcibly and deeply into the evidences of Christianity,
particularly those that were founded on that stupendous scheme of Prophecy,
which formed one of the most unanswerable arguments for the truth of the
Christian religion. "It was not," he said, "the purpose of God to destroy free
agency by overpowering the human mind with the irresistible light and
conviction of Revelation, but to leave men to collect its truths, as they were
gradually illustrated in the accomplishment of the divine promises of the
Gospel." Bred, as he was, to the consideration of evidence, he declared he
considered the prophecy concerning the destruction of the Jewish nation, if
there was nothing else to support Christianity, absolutely irresistible. The
division of the Jews into tribes, to preserve the genealogy of Christ; the
distinction of the tribe of Judah, from which he was to come; the loss of that
distinction when that end was accomplished; the predicted departure of the
scepter from Israel; the destruction of the Temple of Jerusalem, which imperial
munificence in vain attempted to rebuild to disgrace the prophecy; the
dispersion of this nation over the face of the whole earth; the spreading of
the Gospel throughout the world; the persecutions of its true Ministers; and
the foretold superstitions which for ages had defiled its worship; -- these
were topics upon which Mr. Erskine expatiated with great eloquence, and
produced a most powerful effect upon every part of the audience. He concluded
with a vindication of the authors of this prosecution. He said, they were men
of the highest character and greatest consideration in the country. Many of
them were charged with the offices of Religion; others of them were clothed
with the robes of Magistracy: most of them were men of deep learning and
thinking* and all of them justly entitled to the thanks of the public for their
noble exertions in the cause of religion and virtue.

LORD KENYON's CHARGE.
GENTLEMEN OF THE JURY,
Being now in possession of all the facts of this case, and convinced, in my
own mind, what conclusion ought to be drawn from them, I am not sure that it is
necessary to say any thing at all to you upon the subject. Gentlemen, before
you proceed to decide on the merits of this or any other cause, it is proper to
see whether the parties litigating stand in a fair light before you. I was
extremely hurt when the learned Counsel for the Defendant thought fit to state
to you, with very considerable emphasis, and a very determined tone of voice,
that, this was a scandalous prosecution. I cannot help wishing that sentence
had not been uttered. Who commenced this prosecution I certainly know not. But
from what fell from the very learned Counsel who has just sat down, I am
inclined to suppose it proceeded from a Society of Gentlemen, instituted for
the most important of all purposes, for preserving the morals of the people; a
society composed of Clergymen and Laymen of the most respectable character in
the kingdom, who, feeling how the country is overrun with profligacy and
wickedness, which boldly raise their heads in defiance o^ the laws of the land,
were determined to see whether, in the first place, by admonition and advice,
they could not stop the torrent of vice and immorality; and, secondly, if that
should fail, to try what could be done by punishment. If people with the very
best intentions, carry on prosecutions that are oppressive, the end may not
always perhaps sanctify the means. But the manner in which this prosecution has
been conducted is certainly not oppressi^^* for, instead of proceeding in the
more expensive mode, the prosecutors went before a Grand Jury of the country*
and it was necessary to obtain the opinion of that Grand Jury before the party
could be put in process. -- Gentlemen, we sit here in Christian assembly to
administer the law of the land; and I am to take my knowledge of what the (...)
is from that which has been sanctioned by a great variety of legal decisions. I
am bound to state to you what my predecessors in Mr. Wollaston's Case (2
Strange, 834) stated half a century ago in this Court, of which I am an humble
member, namely, that the Christian religion is part of the law of the land.
Christianity, from its earlie^^ institution, met with its opposers. Its
professors were very soon called upon to publish their apologies for the
doctrines they had embraced. In what manner they did that, and whether they had
the advantage of their adversaries, or sunk under the superiority of their
arguments, mankind for near two thousand years have had an opportunity of
judging. They have seen what Julian, Justin Martyr, and other Apologists, have
written and have been of opinion the argument was in favor of those very
publications. The world has been lately favored with another apology from a
most learned and respectable Prelate, who calls his work, " An Apology for the
Christian Religion." I shall not decide between the merits of the one and the
other. The publications themselves are in the hands of the world; and I
sincerely wish, in the concluding language of the work to which I have just
referred (I do not affect to use the very words), I sincerely wish that the
author of the work in question may become a partaker of that faith in revealed
Religion which he has so grossly defamed, and may be enabled to make his peace
with God for that disorder which he has endeavored to the utmost of his power
to introduce into society. We have heard today; that the light of Nature and
the contemplation of the works of Creation are sufficient, without any other
revelation of the Divine Will. Socrates, Plato, Xenophon, Tully, each of them
in their turns, professed they wanted other lights; and, knowing and confessing
that God was good, they took it for granted the time would come when he would
impart a farther revelation of his will to mankind. Though they walked, as it
were, through a cloud darkly, they hoped their posterity would almost see God
face to face. This condition of mankind has met with reprehension today. But I
shall not pursue this argument. Fully impressed with the great truths of
Religion, which, thank God, I was taught in my early years to believe, and of
which the hour of reflection and inquiry, instead of producing any doubt, has
fully confirmed me in. I expected the learned Counsel for the Defendant would
have differed the case of the Publisher from that of the Author of this work;
that he would have endeavored to convince you, that, whatever guilt might
belong to the Author, nothing was imputable to the Publisher. He has however,
to my utter surprise, exactly reversed the case. He tells you it was originally
published at Paris in 1794; that the feelings of the author's friends were
wounded by this work, which I call a nefarious publication, and that it was in
a great measure forgotten; and you are now called upon to judge of the merits
or demerits of the Publisher, who has brought forth a still-born work,
forgotten by every body, till he ventured, in defiance of the verdicts of
mankind on the author's political works, to send it forth among the inhabitants
of this country. Unless it was for the most malignant purposes, I cannot
conceive how it was published. It is however for you to judge of it, and to do
justice between the Public and the Defendant.

The Jury instantly found the Defendant -- GUILTY.


