DISCOURSE CONCERNING FAITH AS THE CONDITION OF THE GOSPEL COVENANT, AND AS THE
INSTRUMENT WHEREBY SALVATION IS WROUGHT IN THE HEART BY DIVINE POWER.

WITH AN APPENDIX CONTAINING SOME REMARKS ON MR. LOCKE'S PARAPHRASE AND NOTES
ON ST. PAUL'S EPISTLES.

GEORGE-TOWN: FROM THE PRESS OF GREEN, ENGLISH, and CO. M,DCCXCVI.

TO THE READER.
THE writer of this discourse is persuaded, that many years ago, when he first
began the study of the Scriptures, and for some time afterward, he should have
considered it as an exceeding great benefit if these truths had been unfolded
to his understanding as he has now declared them. And this is his reason for
making them public; that others may receive that benefit which he should have
so highly esteemed during his great embarassment when he was trying to
understand them.

A DISCOURSE, etc.
ACTS, XVIth, 30th and 31st. Verses. "Sirs, what must I do to be saved? And
they said, believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, and thy
House."


THERE are two ways of Salvation mentioned in Scripture.

One is. by a perfect unceasing obedience:

The other is by trusting in the mercy of God, through Christ.

The first is called the Covenant of works.

The second that of Grace or the Gospel.

The first is an impracticable way: the second is possible.

If it be asked why the first should ever be proposed, seeing it is
impracticable, the answer is, it leads the way to the second, which is the only
possible way.

The more strict the first covenant is the more it leads men to see that they
are sinners, and under condemnation; and when they see themselves under
condemnation, and that they cannot come up to the terms of the first covenant
it leads them to seek for shelter under the second.

The terms of the second covenant are contained in the words of the text. --
"Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be saved." which is a plain
and simple condition, and whoever does that, comes up to the standard which the
gospel requires; including this in the idea of believing on the Lord. i.e. To
believe on him and continue to believe -- to trust in him and continue to trust
-- for to believe on the Lord is to trust in him, as when we believe in a man,
we trust in him, in his word or promise.

As God, in his holy word, is said to be loving to every man, and his mercy is
over all his works, and he will have all men to be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the truth, we might suppose that in sending his gospel for the
salvation of men, the terms of it would be made as plain as possible, and at
least as plain as the terms of the first covenant -- and so they are. Believe
on the Lord Jesus Christ is a plain direction. And this is not an arbitrary
condition. It is a necessary one. For by faith the door of intercourse is
opened between God and our souls, and divine communications are made through
faith as the door. God wills our happiness, and in order to it wishes us to be
like him, and in proportion as we are like him we shall be happy, and in
proportion as we are unlike him we shall be miserable. Now God is love -- love
in his very essence -- then according to the degree of our love will be our
happiness, and according to our hatred or enmity to him so will be our misery.
Now there is no way of attaining to this love, but through a sense of his
goodness, and of his benefits conferred upon us; through a belief in his
reconciliation; by considering him as a friend and not as an enemy; and that is
only had through the knowledge of Jesus Christ in the gospel. So that faith in
him is not only the condition required on our part but it is also the door or
way, by which all spiritual blessings, and heavenly tempers and graces descend
into the hearts of all believers, united to Christ their head, as the branch
receives nourishment from the vine. And as the branch must continue in the vine
in order to bear fruit, so must the members of Christ continue also united to
him by faith, in order to bring forth fruit to the glory of God, and to the
strengthening and confirming their faith.

By this state of the case it is very apparent that no other condition is
requisite. And yet the plain gospel is clouded by a multitude of errors which
from time to time have been spread over the minds of men by the great enemy of
souls, as we may well suppose, when he is the only hindrance to salvation. For
we are told that "if our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in
whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of them which believe not,
lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ who is the image of God should
shine unto them:" and that I. Corinthians, I. chap. and 18 th verse. "The
preaching of the Cross is to them that perish foolishness; but unto us which
are saved it is the power of God."

Among the many errors, one in particular seems to have prevailed, and
prevailed the more because it seems plausible: and it is this -- that if a man
believes the scriptures; believes that Jesus Christ is the son of God, and came
into the world as a Savior, and will yield a sincere obedience to the moral
law, he will be saved.

A zeal to religion though a false one seems to have introduced this opinion.
The abettors of this say, that if believing in the Lord or trusting in him will
save a man, then a man may live as he list -- there is no hold upon him; he may
live as wickedly as he pleases, and yet trust to be saved at last. This is a
very common, though unfound objection. And it is to be feared that those who
make it know not what faith in Christ is. When those who are united to him by
faith receive from God the Father and through the son as mediator, all
spiritual blessings; when love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness,
goodness, and all heavenly graces bringing salvation in their train descend
into the heart, will such a one live wickedly? No. He will have as great a
desire to serve God as ever he had to serve sin, "for the love of Christ
constrains him," and he serves as a son and not as a servant. For the fear of
damnation never carried any man to Heaven. It may lead him to Repentance. It is
the hope of glory which purifies his heart and makes him fit for heaven: and
that is to be had through a belief in the promises, obtained through the
knowledge of the gospel.

Although a man should be led astray by a false persuasion of his safety at the
beginning of his faith before he becomes established, yet the assertion is
still true that if a man continues to believe on the Lord he will be saved. So
that if he receives the whole of the doctrine, that of believing, and
continuing to believe, he cannot be injured by it, because he cannot tell that
he shall continue in the faith till he receives the spirit of adoption, and is
sealed with the holy spirit of promise, as the earnest of his inheritance, and
then the love of Christ will constrain him to serve God although he was
persuaded that there was no hell at all.

Another reason for this opinion of sincere obedience may be this,

The law of God must require perfect obedience, every law must exact it: and
none of us can perform every tittle -- that is such a complete obedience as is
required.

Therefore a relaxation of the law must be made, or who can be saved? For which
reason some have supposed that the Gospel Covenant comes in, like a court of
chancery, to mitigate the severities of the rigid law. This is plausible, but a
great mistake.

God intends that we shall be happy by loving him, and therefore to give us
heaven not as a matter of debt but as a favor -- by pardoning our multiplied
transgressions under the first covenant, and so drawing us to love him and be
happy; all which is destroyed by this scheme.

1st. A man who looks to his sincere obedience as one of the conditions of
salvation is thereby kept from trusting in the mercy of God, or in the Lord to
save him; because he can never tell whether his obedience is good enough -- a
sincere obedience cannot be defined: and I never knew an instance of one who
looked to his sincere obedience as the ground of his acceptance that knew what
was to become of him in the next life -- He was always in a state of
uncertainty. Such will sometimes have a glimmering hope; but it is like the
morning cloud that soon passes away.

Some under such a persuasion will have a false hope when their obedience is
very imperfect indeed; and others whose obedience is much better will be
troubled with doubts and scruples concerning their state, and that because,
having chalked out to themselves a second condition besides the one which the
gospel covenant requires, and not knowing whether they have performed it they
cannot trust in the mercy of God and cannot have true peace of mind from a
sense of God's reconciliation; that peace of God, which passes all
understanding; nor that love which casts out fear.

So that when men out of zeal want to establish the doctrine of sincere
obedience in order to shut the door of licentiousness, they little think by so
doing that they actually shut the door of holiness. For holiness is from the
Lord; so is love, if it be distinct from holiness, salvation is a supernatural
work, wrought by a divine power in the heart of believers.

It is a mistaken notion in some to suppose that a man is saved by being lifted
up and carried to a delightful spot. For salvation is in a man's own breast.
The kingdom of God, said our Lord, is within you: and that kingdom we are told
is righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.

2dly. A man under the persuasion of sincere obedience being part of the gospel
covenant, is kept also in a great measure from the benefit he might reap from
the first covenant which was intended to show him his utter helplessness --
that he is under the wrath of God, and must perish unless he can flee to the
mercy of God in Christ. -- But this benefit is lost to him because he has got a
salvo; a mitigation of that severe law that was intended as a schoolmaster to
bring us to Christ that we might be justified by faith; as the apostle writes
to the Galatians, whom he was trying to bring back to the gospel, and who had
been persuaded to depart from it. And such a man not seeing his danger is not
driven to the foot of mercy, and to cast his soul as it were upon Christ to be
saved by him as the only Savior. But the man that thus comes to him he will in
no wise cast out.

The advocates for this third way of salvation have been called upon to show in
what part of scripture it is contained; and though they are unable to do it;
yet they say it is agreeable to the general tenor of scripture.

I must therefore beg leave to quote many passages, that you may judge whether
the doctrine of salvation by faith in the Lord Jesus Christ is not fully
maintained therein, and with this observation that all these are positive
assertions which ought to have more weight than conclusions drawn from
inferences, especially as there is often much fallacy in reasoning.

Then 2dly, I shall from the old testament show that trusting in the Lord
amounts to the same thing as believing on him, because the same blessings, or
as great, are annexed to the one as to the other.

3dly. I shall show what foundation we have to trust in the Lord, as every
faith or trust must have a foundation.

4thly. Shall add a few short arguments, and afterward answer some objections
and conclude.

The passages are as follow:

"He came unto his own, and his own received him not: but as many as received
him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe
on his name." John I. 11 th and 12 th, verses.

"As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the son of man
be lifted up; that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
eternal life."

"For God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten son that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not
his son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world through him
might be saved." John III. 14.15, 16, 17, Verses.

"Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believes on me has everlasting
life." John VI. 47 th Verse.

St. Peter when he was sent to Cornelius to tell him words whereby he and his
house should be saved, among other things when he was speaking of Christ, said
these words, "To him give all the Prophets witness, that, through his name,
whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of sins." Now we should
consider what all the prophets give witness to as the concurrent Testimony of
Scripture.

"What shall we say then, that Abraham our father as pertaining to the flesh
has found? For if Abraham were justified by works he has whereof to glory,
but not before God, for what says scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was
counted to him for Righteousness." Romans IV, 1, 2, and 3 d verses.

"Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord
Jesus Christ." Romans V. and 1 v.

"Behold I lay in Sion a stumbling block and rock of offense: and whosoever
believes on him shall not be ashamed." Romans IX. 33 v.

"Moreover brethren, I declare unto you the gospel which I preached unto you,
which also you have received, and wherein ye stand; by which also ye are saved
if ye keep in memory what I preached unto you, unless ye have believed in
vain." I Cor. XV. and 1 and 2. Here we see that they would be saved by keeping
in mind that gospel which they had received, which confirms what I before
advanced that it is necessary to continue in the faith that God may thereby
work in us that which is pleasing in his fight. It nevertheless still makes
faith the condition; and is no objection to its being the only one.

"That we should be to the praise of his glory who first trusted in Christ.

In whom ye also trusted after that ye heard the word of truth, the gospel of
your salvation: in whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that
holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance." -- Ephesians. I.
12, 13 and 14 v.

"According to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord,
in whom we have boldness and access with confidence by the faith of him." Ephesians
III. 12 and 13 v.

"I am crucified with Christ nevertheless I live, yet not I but Christ lives
in me: and the life which I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the
son of God, loving and giving himself for me." Galatians II. 20 v.

All the hopes we have of heaven are founded upon the promise made to Abraham;
who is called the father of the faithful, and was made by God himself the
father of many nations, because in him should all nations of the earth be
blessed. Therefore St. Paul writes to the Galatians thus, "Even as Abraham
believed God and it was accounted to him for righteousness. Know ye therefore,
that they which are of faith are the children of Abraham and they which be of
says are blessed with faithful Abraham." He writes also, "ye are all the
children of God by faith in Christ Jesus" And again "because ye are sons God
has sent forth the spirit of his son into your hearts crying Abba, Father."
When they are united by faith to Christ their head, they become one with him,
they are children of Abraham, and children of God, and if children then heirs.
So that the benefits of being fixed, permanent believers in Christ are
inexpressible -- And yet attempts are continually making to rob men of these
blessings, by drawing off their attention from these things and by various
devices hindering their faith in Christ Jesus. The Pharisees did it of old --
they shut up the kingdom of heaven against men: They neither went in
themselves, neither suffered they them that were entering to go in. Our Lord
said, "Woe unto you lawyers: for ye have taken away the key of knowledge; ye
entered not in yourselves, and them that were entering in ye hindered." And
this should be a warning to us all not to hinder the success of the gospel;
which a man undesignedly may yet ignorantly do. God had mercy on St. Paul
because he did it ignorantly in unbelief: yet it became a great grief to him,
perhaps as long as he lived.

John VI. 28 th. Heb. X. 38, 39. I. Pet. I. 9.

I. John, V. 13. II. Tim. IV. 7. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the faith. Henceforth -- Romans II. 20. II. Corinthians, I.
24.

I shall forbear any more quotations on this point, these perhaps being
sufficient to establish it: and shall proceed to show from the old testament
that trusting in the Lord amounts to the same thing as believing in him: the
word trust being the term commonly used in the former, whilst faith or belief
is the more general term in the latter, though both are sometimes used in the
old as well as the new.

Isaiah XXVI. 3. "Thou will keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on
thee: because he trusts in thee."

Here we see a man is kept in peace because he trusts in the Lord -- which
answers to St. Paul's saying in the 5th of Romans, "Being justified by faith we
have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ."

Psalm XXXI, 27. "Be strong and he shall establish your heart, all ye that put
your trust in the Lord."

Ps. XXXII. 11. Great plagues remain for the ungodly; but who puts his trust
in the Lord mercy embraces him on every side."

Ps. XXXIII. 17, 18. "Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him,
and upon them that put their trust in his mercy; to deliver their soul from
death and to feed them in the time of dearth."

Ps. XXXVII. 40. "The salvation of the righteous comes of the Lord, who is
also their strength in time of trouble. And the Lord shall stand by them and
save them; he shall deliver them from the ungodly, and shall save them, because
they put their trust in him."

Now they who trust in the Lord are the righteous -- they come up to the
standard which the second covenant requires, and therefore the Lord will save
them.

The last I shall quote on this point is from the CXXV. Ps. and 1st verse --
"They that put their trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Sion, which may not be
removed, but stands fast forever."

By comparing all these together we find that believing in the Lord is the same
thing as trusting in him.

But not only will salvation from wrath be secured to those who trust in him,
but deliverance from temporal evils and dangers also. Whoever can trust in the
Lord will surely be delivered, because by trusting in him they become the
subjects of the promises, and his promises can never fail. Daniel was delivered
in this manner from the lion's den. "So Daniel was taken up out of the den, and
no manner of hurt was found upon him, because he believed in his God."

3dly. I shall endeavor to show what foundation we have to trust in the Lord,
as every faith or trust must have a foundation.

In the first place, it is necessary to believe the scriptures as the word of
God; and every man where the gospel is preached, may, by examination have a
good ground to believe that the scriptures are of divine revelation; and this
according to the clear dictates of that reason with which God originally endued
mankind. Then from the scriptures he may learn that Jesus Christ is the son of
God, and from thence have an idea that he is able to save. Believing that he is
able to save, he may next learn that he is willing to save all that will
receive him as a savior. He may learn that Christ died for all men, and became
a propitiation for sin, so that God may receive sinners without any
infringement of his justice, because a full and sufficient atonement has been
made for their sins. He may further learn that Christ declared that he came to
save sinners -- that he came to save that that was lost.

Therefore every man has good ground to say,

As Christ died for all men, he died for me As Christ came to save sinners he
came to save me. As he came to save that that was lost, he came to save me.
Every man then has a good foundation to trust in the mercy of God, or to trust
in the Lord for salvation. And this is answerable to St. Paul's declaration
that "Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God."

It is true, faith is the gift of God. So are many other gifts which we know do
in some measure depend on ourselves; such as riches, knowledge, and one more
general, not fit to be mentioned.

As faith comes by the word of God it is reasonable to suppose that he gives
faith by enlightening the mind to understand his word; by removing the
blindness cast over the understanding, that a man may discern the truth; may
discern what is true whether he believes it or not.

Some are earnestly seeking after faith as a gift; and sometimes they think
they have it, then again that they are mistaken, making it an uncertain thing.
Perhaps they mean God's gracious act of imputing righteousness to a man, which
is the consequence of faith. "Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him
for righteousness. This imputation is a subsequent act however speedily it may
follow. So is peace. -- Because they believe, and by faith, peace is given:
which may solve the dispute, whether it is because of faith, or by faith as the
means.

Some also wait for certain good frames and feelings, before they can venture
to trust on the Lord. This seems to arise from the opinion that Christ died
only for a certain select number, and then how can they trust in him unless
they had some tokens whereby they might hope to be of that number. But these
frames and feelings are the consequence of faith: if so, and they wait for
these frames before they will trust, they will probably wait in vain.

What says the scripture; Isaiah, "Who is among you that fears the Lord,
that obeys the voice of his servant, that walks in darkness and has no
light? Let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God." This
seems like the way to be enlightened with the light of the living. "Behold all
ye that kindle a fire, that compass yourselves about with sparks: walk in the
light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled. This shall ye have
of mine hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow." Isaiah I. 10, 11. v.

Upon this point I cordially agree with some good divines; that Jesus Christ
being generally offered to the world as a savior, all men have alright to lay
hold on him as a savior, and to commit themselves to him, just as they are,
without waiting for any qualification in themselves, but to come as sinners,
and rely upon him. We may suppose that the publicans and harlots did so in his
day, for they entered into the kingdom of heaven before the Pharisees.

The former had nothing to offer, and therefore could more easily see
themselves sinners, and be more ready to receive mercy and heaven as a free
gift, than the others who had much merit to plead in their behalf.

All men have then a foundation to receive the Lord as a savior, and to look to
him for it, because being God he is able to save: as it is written in the XLV.
of Isaiah, "There is no God else beside me; a just God, and a savior; there is
none beside me. Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth for I
am God; and there is none else."

This is the sum of what I teach --

Look unto the Lord for salvation and he will save you. And as all men have a
good foundation to receive the Lord Jesus as a savior, they who reject him will
fall under the sin of unbelief, which they could not incur if he did not come
to save them.

I. John, v. and 10. "He that believes on the son of God has the witness in
himself: he that believes not God, has made him a liar, because he believes
not the record which God gave of his son."

4thly. I am to add a few short arguments, answer some objections, and conclude.

1. John, VI. 28, and 29. The Jews said to our Lord, in answer to his telling
them to labor for the meat that endures to everlasting life, "What shall we
do, that we might work the works of God? Jesus answered and said unto them,
This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom he has sent."

This declaration of our Lord is a strong argument in support of what has been
advanced.

2. He said himself on another occasion, "all things are possible to him that
believes." And again, "whosoever shall say unto this mountain, Be thou
removed, and be thou cast into the sea, and shall not doubt in his heart, but
shall believe that those things which he says shall come to pass, he shall
have whatsoever be says. Therefore I say unto you what things soever ye desire
when ye pray, believe that ye receive them and ye shall have them."

Now it is not at all more difficult to conceive that a man will go to heaven
by believing he shall go there, than to remove a mountain by believing he can
do it. But he can believe neither the one nor the other without a good reason
for it. A man at the beginning of his faith does not believe he shall go to
heaven; but when the Lord gives him the spirit of adoption, and seals him with
his spirit as the earnest of his inheritance, he then has a good and
substantial reason, to believe that he shall inherit. And by the hopes of glory
he is made fit for glory. "Beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, (we)
are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the spirit of
the Lord." II. Cor. III. 18. And the apostle John says "now we are the sons of
God? and it does not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that when he
shall appear we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is." By beholding
as in a glass the glory of the Lord, i. e. as I apprehend it, beholding now by
faith, we are changed in some degree, so as to behold him hereafter without
fear, but when the time comes that he shall appear we shall be like him or
completely changed because we shall see him as he is, i. e. face to face. This
I think St Peter alludes to when he says, "Hope to the end for the salvation
that is to be brought to you at the revelation of Jesus Christ." For then says
will be swallowed up in vision. "Now we see through a glass darkly; but then
face to face." So then we may say, let a man believe that he shall go to heaven
and continue to believe it, he will assuredly go there. St. Paul says the same
thing to the Colossians "You that were sometimes alienated and enemies in your
mind by wicked works, yet now has he reconciled in the body of his flesh through
death, to present you holy and unblameable and unreproveable in his fight; if
ye continue in the faith grounded and settled and be not moved away from the
hope of the gospel, which ye have heard, and which was preached to every
creature under heaven; whereof I Paul was made a minister." Colos. I. 21, 22,
23.

3. In the LVth chapter of Isaiah it is written "Ho, every one that thirsts,
come ye to the waters, and he that has no money; come ye buy wine and milk
without money and without price. Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfies not? hearken diligently
unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight itself in
fatness. Incline your ear and come unto me: hear, and your soul shall live: and
I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David."

This I apprehend is a figurative expostulation with such as hunger and thirst
after righteousness, showing them a shorter way to be filled than by laboring
and toiling as they do in the painful works of the law, or thinking to attain
to righteousness by what they can do. As the apostle writes concerning the
Gentiles and Jews. "The Gentiles, says he, which followed not after
righteousness have attained to righteousness, even the righteousness which is
of faith; but Israel, which followed after the law of righteousness, has not
attained to the law of righteousness. Wherefore? because they sought it not by
faith, but as it were by the works of the law: for they stumbled at that
stumbling stone." He said a little before "a short work will the Lord make upon
the earth" And this is a short work to attain to righteousness by faith,
instead of laboring for that which satisfies not: and therefore the
expostulation in Isaiah about laboring in vain, concludes with this advice.
Incline your ear and come unto me, hear and your soul shall live: i. e. hearken
diligently to the word of God; get knowledge; hear the glad tidings of the
gospel, and your foul shall live; and the Lord will make an everlasting
covenant with you; his covenant of peace; the same that he promised to make
with the house of Israel -- "I will put my laws in their mind, and write them
in their hearts; and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people.
And they shall not teach every man his neighbor and every man his brother,
saying, know the Lord: for all shall know me from the least to the greatest.
For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness and their sins and iniquities
will I remember no more." For when the Lord sends his love into their hearts,
this love blots out their sins, and they also know him according to the
promise; for God is love, and "he that loves is born of God, and knows God."
I. John IV. And this is the same covenant that is promised to the Jews when
they shall be gathered out of all lands. "I will make an everlasting covenant
with them, that I will not turn away from them, to do them good: but I will put
my fear in their hearts that they shall not depart from me."

A promise is also made to those who continue in the faith that they shall be
set free. In John the 8th chap. 31 v. etc. "Then said Jesus to those Jews which
believed on him, if ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed,
and ye shall know the truth and the truth shall make you free." It is plain
from the following words that he meant a freedom from sin, and this freedom
from sin is obtained by a deliverance from the law: It is not only from the law
that we have the knowledge of sin; but sin has its power from the law. "The
strength of sin is the law." When a man is delivered from the law he is
delivered from the power of sin: as the apostle writes to the Romans. "Sin
shall not have dominion over you; for ye are not under the law but under
grace." Therefore it is through knowledge that we become delivered and that in
our own apprehension. We consider the law as having nothing to do with us, no
more than if a law had never been made, which could have brought us under
condemnation; though it remains as a rule of life, that by it we may regulate
our conduct so as to please God our Father. And by this we see how the
knowledge of the truth can set us free: and St. Paul in a very particular
manner attributes that freedom from sin which the Roman Converts enjoyed, to
their having obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was delivered
them, or as some reader it, into the mould of which they were cast or
delivered. When a man is set free from the law he serves God as a son, and not
as a servant, as our Lord said upon the occasion, "If the son shall make you
free you shall be free indeed."

Again, We may consider faith as owing to a certain degree of humility. As a
proof of this we often see it follow great convictions for sin which humble men
much. The jailor, who spoke the words of the text, we may suppose to be much
humbled by the earthquake; and that it disposed him the more readily to hear
the words of St. Paul which brought him to receive baptism, to believe in God
and rejoice in him. We find too that charity which is the highest attainment,
believes all things, hops all things, as well as endures all things.

Add to this, those who are strong in faith are said to give glory to God: and
that without faith it is impossible to please him, insomuch that the heavy
wrath of God came on Israel because they believed not in God and put not their
trust in his help; whereas Enoch by faith was translated that he should not see
death; and all those worthies we read of, and of whom the world was not worthy,
obtained a good report through faith, though they received not the promise.
From this we judge that faith is no trifling thing; and from all that has been
said to establish this doctrine we may conclude, that to believe in the Lord
Jesus Christ, is the condition required under the Gospel Covenant; and that
there is no other way, as "there is none other name under heaven given among
men whereby we must be saved." Acts, IV. 12 v.

I am now to answer some objections.

Obj. 1st. The maintainers of a sincere obedience or the necessity of works
joined to faith to make out the conditions of our acceptance, have in the
course of time been driven from a former hold which they maintained, and have
since taken shelter in another.

They have been made to see that a man is not justified by the deeds of the
law. This has been made so evident to them, that they now acknowledge that by
faith alone a man is justified, and brought into a state of salvation; but that
hereafter he will be justified by his works. By this subterfuge they hope to
reconcile St. Paul and St. James -- The former they suppose speaks of our first
justification, the latter of our second at the day of judgment. But unluckily
for them, St. Paul almost constantly speaks of justification by faith in the
fight of God -- of that justification which we must have when we appear before
him.

They quite reverse the matter. Abraham was justified by works, says St. Paul,
or if he was justified by works he has whereof to glory but not before God.
Though he were justified here, yet before God, or in his sight, he could not by
his obedience, because no obedience not absolutely perfect can stand before the
absolute purity of God.

"By the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified, in his sight: for
by the law is the knowledge of sin." Romans III. 20 v.

In the 3d of Galatians the same apostle writes, "that no man is justified by
the law in the sight of God, it is evident, for the just shall live by faith."
"If there had been a law given which could have given life verily righteousness
should have been by the law. But the scripture has concluded all under sin,
that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe."

The inheritance was promised to Abraham and to his seed -- that is to Christ,
and all that are his. All that are of Faith are the children of Abraham. If
they become united to Christ by faith or Abraham's children by faith, why
should the badge of their sonship be altered? Why should not the same faith
which constituted them children continue them such? To say that they are now by
faith translated into the kingdom of Christ, but that after they are put into
the kingdom other terms are imposed is quite fanciful, for it has no foundation
in scripture.

"If the inheritance be of the law it is no more of promise, but God gave it to
Abraham by promise." What are the children to do? Why like their father to live
by the promises, be persuaded of them and embrace them, and then the promise
will have effect in purifying their hearts, otherwise not. For the apostle
says, if they which be of the law be heirs, faith is made void, and the promise
of none effect. According to his reasoning I should judge that in proportion as
a man looked to his obedience for his acceptance in the same proportion would
his faith be made void, and the promise of none effect: and this must be the
case of those who look for acceptance on account of their good works at the day
of judgment.

The apostle says further, as the law works wrath -- "therefore it is of
faith, meaning the inheritance, that it might be by grace; to the end the
promise might be sure to all the seed: not to that only which is of the law,
but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us
all." The promise will be sure to all believers both among Jews and Gentiles --
and if the inheritance is first promised to faith is it not strange that it
should be changed to something else; when it is declared that it is of Faith
that it might be by grace, and elsewhere to be of grace and not of works lest
any man should boast -- and elsewhere it is said that "to him that works is
the reward not reckoned of grace but of debt." Which the Lord will not allow
of, because he wills men to love him and be happy -- and to love him by
receiving Heaven as a free gift.

Besides, if St. Paul had any idea of a second justification by works, could he
have concluded his life with this declaration? "I am now ready to be offered,
and the time of my departure is at hand. I have fought a good fight I have
finished my course. I have kept the faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a
crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous judge will give me at that
day: and not to me only but to all them that love his appearing." He rests all
his hope upon his having kept the faith.

St. Ignatius in his epistle to the Ephesians has a very bold expression, "my
soul be the surely of all them that trust in the Cross," which he could not
have used if he had thought any other condition necessary to salvation.

But the epistle of St. James is reckoned to afford a strong argument in favor
of justification by works; at least in the day of judgment: which it becomes
necessary to consider.

St. James asks, "what does it profit, my brethren, though a man say he has
faith, and have not works? can faith save him?" And a little further he says --
"Even so faith, if it has not works is dead, being alone." This is not denied.
It is not contended that a faith which does not produce works will avail any
thing.

But the apostle goes on to declare, that Abraham was justified by works when
he offered up his son -- and that faith wrought with his works, and by works
was faith made perfect: And that the scripture was fulfilled which says,
Abraham believed God and it was imputed to him for righteousness -- and adds,
"ye see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only." --
And at the end of the chapter observes, "as the body without the spirit is
dead, so faith without works is dead also." And this seems to be the conclusion
of his reasoning, that faith without works is dead, which is not denied, it
being a living faith producing works which is contended for.

I will not say that the apostle meant that the works of Abraham and of Rahab
were a justification of their faith in the eyes of men, because these were
secret transactions, but that his meaning was as he says, that Abraham's faith
was made perfect by works, and that his works were a confirmation that he was a
believer, because he thereby fulfilled the scripture which declared him to be
one. This is giving faith its due preeminence. Then when he adds, "ye see then
how that by works a man is justified; and not by faith only," I suppose him to
mean, consistently with what he had said, that as works strengthen faith they
tend to our justification. This may be illustrated thus. A man being alive is
enabled to eat, and eating continues life or enables him to live. So faith
being alive produces works, and works keep faith alive. Yet life is the
principle by which a man can see his friend and enjoy his company, not his
eating which is only a secondary help. In like manner it is faith which enables
a man to see God with Joy; and his works only strengthen and confirm his faith.
For where there is no opportunity of performing good works as in the case of
the thief on the cross, there faith without works is sufficient, and makes it
evident that faith is the essential thing, For salvation depends upon a man's
being in such a state or disposition, as to be able to bear the glory of God.
Faith and love constitute his state, first faith, followed by love, as good
works strengthen faith, then they tend to bring as into a state of
justification in our own mind, or such a state of faith and love as will enable
us to stand before God without confusion, and to love him.

But if a right faith must have good works where is the use of contending in
this manner? It is very useful, and highly proper to clear the truth of those
difficulties with which it is embarrassed; because a man is naturally disposed
to look to his own endeavors for acceptance; even those who know better are
prone to it; and every look or thought of that kind tends to make void faith
and render the promise of none effect.

On the other hand when we consider that nothing we can do will give us any
title to salvation, but that when we have done all we are yet unprofitable
servants, then we shall be more disposed to humility, trust in the mercy of
God, and rely upon his promises.

Object. 2. But it is said, every man shall be rewarded according to his works.

Answer. So they will. Believers will be rewarded in proportion to their works,
and unbelievers will be rewarded -- punished, in proportion to theirs. "Say ye
to the righteous it shall be well with him: for they shall eat the fruit of
their doings. Woe unto the wicked! it shall be ill with him: for the reward of
his hands shall be given him." Isaiah III. 10 and 11 v.

Besides, our Lord told the Jews that if they were the children of Abraham they
would do the works of Abraham and as this is the case that true believers will
do the works of Abraham, when two qualities appertain to the same people, the
promises may be made indifferently to either; or blessings be annexed to both;
as where it is said; "There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit." Romans VIII.

But again it is said, that St. Paul writes to Timothy -- "Charge them that are
rich in this world, that they be not high minded, nor trust in uncertain
riches, but in the living God, who gives us richly all things to enjoy; that
they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate; laying up in store a good foundation against the time to come,
that they may lay hold of eternal life." Now as there is no laying hold of
eternal life but by faith, and it is allowed that good works help us so to do,
there is no force in this objection.

That salvation is not granted to good works we may judge also from this reason.

Good works are only signs or indications of goodness. It is goodness not works
which meet with the reward of heaven. Then a man if he have goodness of heart,
or love will be happy without performing any good works if he dies without
having an opportunity, which is commonly allowed upon this account; because God
foresees what he would do if he had lived, and takes the will for the deed.
They who thus argue still go upon the supposition that good works will obtain
the reward; whereas the truth is, it is the disposition of heart, and not the
outward indications of it that will meet with a reward, and that of course, tho
commonly expressed as if done by a special donation.

Object. 3. As I have mentioned that Christ died for all men as a reason why
all men might trust in him, besides his being generally offered as a savior,
which some believe who do not allow the former, I must answer an objection to
it.

I have been told that St. Augustine believed that be died for all men till he
considered that faith is the gift of God, which kind of reasoning ought not to
be opposed to plain declarations of scripture. The chief argument of the
objectors I mean is this.

As all men are not saved, Christ did not die for all men, for if he died for
all men, all would be saved.

But in answer to this it may be observed, that the death of Christ does not of
itself qualify any man for salvation, or make him meet for heaven. It does not
qualify one of the elect, because it makes no alteration in the heart.
Salvation is wrought in the heart through a faith in the atonement, and a trust
in God's mercy in consequence of it. Therefore this objection should not hinder
us from yielding to positive assertions, which ought not to be bent to
preconceived opinions.

St. Paul writes to Timothy, that God "will have all men to be saved, and to
come unto the knowledge of the truth. For there is one mediator between God and
men, the man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a ransom for all to be testified in
due time." Again St. Peter speaks of false teachers who shall privily bring in
damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon
themselves swift destruction." Both these passages are very plain: the one
showing in expressterms that God is willing that all men should be saved; and
that there is one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave
himself a ransom for all" -- the other, that some will bring upon themselves
swift destruction, denying the Lord that bought them. Now though it should be
said that a ransom for all does not mean all men, but only all the elect, which
seems to be a poor shift, this cannot be applied nor evaded with respect to
those who deny the Lord that bought them, and bring destruction on themselves,
unless they should say that the Lord bought them without dying for them, or
that destruction does not hinder their salvation.

Again, Christ dying for all men does not hinder those who reject him as a
savior from falling under a sin of unbelief. As faith is the condition of the
gospel covenant, so unbelief is the peculiar sin against it; and a horrible sin
it is to make God a liar, in not believing the record which he gave of his son
It is therefore, I suppose, that the "gospel of the kingdom shall be preached
in all the world for a witness to all nations," before the end of the world.
St. Peter also informs us why the gospel was preached to them also that are
dead -- namely that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but
live according to God in the spirit," i. e. that these departed spirits, might
be judged like men living in the flesh, though as spirits they are alive like
God, who is a spirit. For he had just before told us that Christ after his
death preached to the Antedeluvian spirits that lived in the days of Noah; and
this is the reason given for it, that they might be judged like men living in
the flesh.

Another reason why Christ died for all men is this. All men will be raised
from the dead by virtue of this atonement. "For as in Adam all die so in Christ
shall all be made alive." As they will be raised at the last day whether they
believe or not, so did he die for them whether they believe or no, but those
who believe in his death now may have a good ground to trust in his mercy, and
look for salvation through him; through the divine influence flowing from the
glory of the Almighty, and communicated from time to time as he shall think
fit; whilst his death cannot screen from wrath those who believe not in it,
because God in glory will be a consuming fire to unbelievers, and at the same
time the hope and consolation of Israel.

But we may yet consider Christ as a general savior -- that he offered himself
as a general sacrifice for sin; that whosoever will, may lay hold on him as a
propitiation, and look to him for salvation; just as if a fountain was opened
near a town for general use, that whosoever will may take of the water freely.
In this case he died as much for one man as another, though his death with
respect to salvation becomes effectual only to such as apply it to themselves.
Still here is good ground for every man, not only to believe the historical
facts concerning him, but also to trust in him. Whereas when his death is
considered only as intended for the elect, I cannot conceive upon what ground
any man can believe in him otherwise than that he came to save the elect. How
then can any man believe in him for salvation? For though faith is the gift of
God, yet he tells no man that he is one of the adopted till after he is a
believer. "Ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus." and
"because ye are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his son into your
hearts, crying Abba, Father." And if "the spirit itself bears witness with
our spirit, that we are the children of God," then we are children before we
receive that testimony. If no man receives the spirit of adoption till after he
is a believer, how can he with propriety wait for any such token before he can
venture to trust in Christ? or how can he do it unless he receives him
generally as a savior, who died for one man as well as another. It is probably
owing to this, that some get a hope, from a text of scripture applied to their
minds, that they are one of the number for whom Christ died; which hope they
lose after a while and then they are to seek again for some other sign.

But Mr. Hervey and his friends place this matter on a much surer footing. They
consider the Lord Jesus Christ as offered generally as a savior; and as all
where the gospel comes are invited to receive him as such, they all have
sufficient ground to do so, insomuch that they will be condemned if they do not.

If the gospel is to be preached in all the world as a witness to all nations,
and all those, who, having an opportunity of hearing it, reject the Lord Jesus
as a savior, will be condemned for rejecting him, this is a proof that he died
equally for all. And though none can believe effectually but by the power of
God; and though it should be the case, that this power is not exerted but in
behalf of a certain number, yet those who reject Christ as a savior will justly
fall under condemnation, because salvation is open to all; and there is no
hindrance on the part of the Lord? the hindrance being only owing to Satan, who
blinds their understanding: And their rejecting the gospel is a proof that they
are under his power. Therefore the sentence of condemnation can be as well
considered as coming upon them, as that the Lord should swear in his wrath,
that the Jews should not enter into his rest because they had erred in their
hearts and had not known his ways. It is for this reason the gospel will become
a witness against them. But it could be no witness against them, if Christ did
not die as well so them as for others,

I shall now conclude with a few exhortations.

As Salvation is a matter of such great moment it becomes every man to examine
himself whether he be in a good way; therefore according to St. Paul's advice
to the Corinthians it would be proper to examine "yourselves, whether ye be in
the faith; prove your ownselves; know ye not your ownselves how that Jesus
Christ is in you, except you be reprobates," or disapproved, as rendered by
some? Abiding in the faith is also necessary. No time is limited we must abide
in order to bear fruit. Our Lord said, "as the Branch cannot bear fruit except
it abide in the vine, no more can ye except ye abide in me." For some believe
only for a while and in time of temptation fall away; whilst the word in others
is "choked with cares and riches and pleasures of this life, and brings to
fruit to perfection. How necessary is it then to examine yourselves whether ye
be in the faith. This is to be done by comparing your state and conduct by the
word of God. For every man attentive to salvation may under divine teaching
know his state from the holy scriptures. The works of the flesh and the fruit
of the spirit are there described. The fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace,
longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance; and all these
are the consequence of believing and continuing to believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ.

To live under a known and habitual indulgence in sin is without question not
to be in a good state. But as some indulge themselves in fashionable excesses
and think no harm of it, and be in error through ignorance, it is proper to
remind them, that there are three great enemies, the devil, the world, and the
flesh, and it is no great matter which a man is enslaved to in respect to
salvation, as either will exclude from heaven if persisted in. If many did not
deceive themselves and one another, they never could conceive that a man could
serve God and mammon at the same time. It is true it depends upon how much the
heart is affected by the things of the world. God has given us all things to
enjoy in moderation, but when the heart is drawn from him, whether it be by
idols of gold or silver, toys or pleasures it should be a proof to us that we
are not spiritually minded, which is called life and peace. Worldly mindedness
then is also a bad sign. "Love not the world, neither the things that are in
the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For
all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and
the pride of life is not of the Father, but is of the world." I. John. II. 15.
and 16. v. Although it is not a determinate thing how far a man may be attached
to the world with safety, as all men have concerns in it, yet each man by
attention may examine how far his thoughts are weaned from the right object;
and so far the injunction will be a rule to examine himself by. On the other
hand we are told that we know we are passed from death into life if we love the
brethren. This rule is but little attended to, because few think much of the
professed followers of Christ, because of prejudices on account of the walk of
some who make such profession. Many do not consider that some only believe for
a while, and the faults of others are enlarged upon they being more narrowly
watched by their neighbors, who have been awakened in some measure by their
conversions, and are rather glad of an excuse to trouble themselves no more
about such things but to go on in the old way of being saved if they are as
good as others.

A disposition to prayer is also a sign of being in the faith; heavenly
mindedness and prayer being great indications of spiritual life.

Fatherly chastisements for your faults is another mark, "for whom the Lord
loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he receives." And if you
are sons and have any experience in religion you will very sensibly feel the
force of this truth.

And if you have abided, you will preceive the fruts of the spirit, producing a
conduct answerable to them.

But if after examination you find that you have no well grounded trust in the
Lord, and no fruits answerable to it, you should try, by humiliation and
prayer, and diligent application to get your mind informed and get that
knowledge which will enable you to cast your whole dependence upon that
almighty Savior who came down from heaven for us men and for our salvation. And
when you trust in the Lord you will come to see, because the Lord will teach
you, if ye continue long enough to learn, that you have nothing to do with the
law but as a rule of life, whereby you will be judged and chastened as sons,
that you may not be condemned with the world. You will know what it is to be
alive unto God, and will experience the truth of that saying in the Psalms, "I
will run in the way of thy comandments when thou have set my heart at liberty."

On the contrary, if you fall back to the law, by not taking heed to the things
which you have heard, and by not continuing in the doctrine of Christ, you will
find deadness in all your doings, -- that you "build again the things which you
destroyed, and make yourself a transgressor, (Galatians) and that Christ will
profit you nothing because you are fallen from grace."

May the Lord give you a right understanding in all things!

AMEN.
REMARKS ON MR. LOCKE'S Paraphrase and Notes. ON ST. PAUL'S EPISTLES.
MR. LOCK does not seem fully to express St. Paul's meaning in some material
points. For in many places where there is a seeming inconsistency in the
apostle, there is also an appearance of the like inconsistency in Mr. Lock.
This is observable with regard to the great point which has been much canvassed
in the world -- whether our salvation is to be obtained by works or by faith.
Therefore although the exposition in each place should appear just, yet if the
seeming inconsistency is not removed, the enquirer after truth is not satisfied
with it, nor can he be in such case, as long as he is persuaded that there is
no real, but only an apparent inconsistency in the divine writings.

Mr. Lock in his paraphrase on the III. chapter of the Galatians, has these
words -- "As Abraham believed in God, and it was accounted to him for
righteousness; so know ye that those who are of faith, i. e. who rely upon God
and his promises of grace and not upon their own performances, they are the
children of Abraham who shall inherit." And in his notes upon the same chapter
he says, that the blessing -- justification -- righteousness -- life --
inheritance -- being the children of God, therein mentioned, are in effect all
the same thing on one side; and the curse, v. 13th. the direct contrary on the
other side; and also that the blessing promised to Abraham and his seed was
wholly upon the account of faith. Indeed this point he is so clear in, that
there can be no doubt of his opinion about it: for he does not suppose with
some, that the apostle meant only the Jewish law, when he said by the deeds
thereof there should no flesh be justified; but that his meaning was, that men
could be justified by no law whatever -- because every one failing of an exact
conformity of his actions to the immutable rectitude of the eternal rule of
right, will be found unrighteous. Again, upon Ephesians, he says, "The apostle
gives such a draught as in every part of it shows, that in the Kingdom of
Christ they are set far above the Mosaical rites, and enjoy the spiritual and
incomprehensible benefits of it, not by the tenure of a few outward ceremonies,
but by their faith alone in Jesus Christ, to whom they are united, and of whom
they are members."

Notwithstanding these and such like expressions, signifying that it is by
faith and not by works of any kind that we are justified; yet in other places
he asserts, and that as the apostle's meaning, that it is faith and a sincere
obedience joined that will procure us everlasting life. For instance on the 7th
of Romans, speaking of those under the law, he says "their endeavors after
obedience delivered them not from that death which their bodies or carnal
appetites running them into transgressions brought upon them. That deliverance
was to be had from grace, by which those putting themselves from under the law
into the gospel state were accepted, if with the bent of their minds they
sincerely endeavored to serve and obey the law of God, though sometimes through
the frailty of the flesh they fell into sin." Again, "Converts to christianity
are free from condemnation, if they perform what is required of them."

Now in order to reconcile these contradictions, he supposes, that a man before
he is brought into a state of grace, is in a state of death: that he is then as
insensible to spiritual things, as a dead man, and that he can do nothing to
recover himself -- that his being restored is altogether of grace, and that it
is by faith alone; -- But when a man is restored to a state of grace, or life,
or salvation, which are said to signify one and the same thing, then in order
to obtain eternal life hereafter or the Kingdom of Heaven, he must yield a
sincere obedience, which the following quotations may serve to evince.

"It is the favor of God alone through Jesus Christ that delivers frail man
from death. Those under grace obtain life upon sincere intentions and endeavors
after obedience, and those endeavors a man may attain to in this state of
frailty. But good intentions and sincere endeavors are of no behoof against
death to those under the law, which requires complete and perfect obedience,
but gives no ability to attain it. And so it is grace alone through Jesus
Christ that aceepting what frail man can do, delivers from the body of death."
Again, "These two considerations of the kingdom of heaven some men have
confounded and made one; so that a man being brought into the first of these
wholly by grace without works, says being all that was required to instate a
man in it, they have concluded that for the attaining eternal life, or the
kingdom of God in the world to come, faith alone and not good works are
required, contrary to express words of scripture, and the whole tenor of the
gospel: But yet not being admitted into that state of eternal life for our good
works, it is by grace here too that we are saved, our righteousness after all
being imperfect, and we by our sins liable to condemnation and death: But it is
by grace we are made partakers of both these kingdoms; it is only into the
kingdom of God in this world we are admitted by faith alone without works, but
for our admittance into the other, both faith and obedience, in a sincere
endeavor to perform those duties, all those good works; which are incumbent on
us, and come in our way to be performed by us from the time of our believing
till our death."

These show Mr. Locke's opinion very clearly, and the ideas he had of this
matter; but whether they are answerable to what the apostle had on this subject
may be much disputed.

If blessing, justification, righteousness, life, inheritance mean the same
thing, and mean as he says, the thing promised to Abraham and his seed,
sometimes called blessing, sometimes inheritance etc. and a man partakes of
this promise solely by faith without works, then according to his idea of the
two states, the being admitted into the first state was all that the Apostle
meant by receiving the blessing and partaking of the inheritance promised to
Abraham. It was only an admission into an easier covenant, such as Beveridge
compares to a court of Chancery with respect to a court of Common law. So that
the matter as far as it respects Mr. Locke's argument will depend upon what
this inheritance is; for if it means only that spiritual state of grace, which
believers are now placed in as preparatory to the kingdom of heaven, all the
arguments drawn from the expressions about justification by faith, are of no
force when applied to the state of glory hereafter.

With deference to the opinion of that great man, I would suppose, that the
kingdom of Christ was begun in this world and continued on to the other: and
that obtaining an inheritance in him was being translated into his kingdom;
that as christians are now blessed with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
places in Christ, they in him receive the blessing promised to Abraham, In thy
seed shall all nations of the earth be blessed: that when they are now raised
up and made to sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, they are
created in him unto good works; and that being joined to him in one spirit they
are instated in this inheritance, as the sealing of the holy spirit is the
earnest thereof; and that men in this world are possessed of eternal life, and
pass from death unto life, according to our Savior's words.

So far this seems to be St. Paul's meaning with respect to the inheritance;
but not that they were different kingdoms, the admission into which was upon
different terms: for all who shall be found of this kingdom will meet with the
happiness annexed to it hereafter.

Can we suppose that Abraham when he was justified was admitted into an easier
covenant, that required a less perfect obedience than he was in before? and if
we do not suppose it with respect to him why should we in respect to his
offspring? God gave him the inheritance by promise: and he and his seed are the
heirs to it. He was made the father of all that believe, "And all that are of
faith are the children of Abraham. Here is one and the same inheritance
promised to Abraham, and to his seed, then all that is necessary in order to
become heirs to it, is to become children of Abraham; and whatever the term
believer may signify, believers undoubtedly are the true heirs. For which
reason we should stick by this truth, and make it a rule when we get upon sure
ground there to keep footing: otherwise some seemingly contrary scripture will
insensibly push us from it. This has been often observed. Therefore let (...)
adhere to this truth that believers are the true heirs to the inheritance
promised unto Abraham.

But an admission into this kingdom is not only by faith, but the privileges,
as well as the future benefits annexed to it, are also derived from faith. The
same apostle writes thus to the Colossians, You that were sometimes alienated,
and enemies in your minds by wicked works, yet now has he reconciled in the
body of his flesh through death, to present you holy, and unblameable, and
unreproveable in his light; if ye continue in the faith grounded and settled
and be not moved away from the hope of the gospel, which ye have heard etc." In
like manner he says to the Hebrews, "we are made partakers of Christ if we hold
fast the beginning of our confidence, steadfast unto the end." If believers are
now translated into the kingdom of Christ, and if they continue in the faith,
will be presented holy, and unblameable and unreproveable. It shows that it is
either one and the same kingdom, or that the terms or way of admission are the
same, i.e. by becoming and remaining believers.

But to proceed -- Mr. Lock in one of his notes on the 2d of Romans says, "we
see by the doctrine of St. Paul and the new testament, there is one and the
same rule of rectitude set to the actions of all mankind, Jews, Gentiles, and
Christians, and that failing of a complete obedience to it in every tittle,
makes a man unrighteous, the consequence whereof is death." Again, "Every one
failing of an exact conformity of his actions to the immutable rectitude of
that eternal rule of right, will be found unrighteous, and so incur the penalty
of that law." And yet he supposes, that God dispenses with the exact
performance of this eternal rule; and that he accepts of a less perfect
obedience as more suitable to the frailty of men: and that the merits of Christ
are the foundation of this change, so that those who came under this milder
covenant by faith, are not under the law, but under grace. This I judge to be
his meaning. But we no where find that God accepts of a less perfect obedience.
He may pardon sin, and yet require complete obedience; an immutable eternal
rule must forever remain unchangeable. Christ died to pay the penalty of this
law, of this eternal law, but not that the rigor of it should be abated
afterward. It does not seem consistent with the wisdom of God's government
that an obedience to him should in any instance be dispensed with. As governor
of the universe he has a right to complete obedience, and cannot consistently
with that order necessary to be preserved admit of deviations from it: neither
can we conceive how any line can be drawn to distinguish how far these
deviations may be allowed, so as to satisfy the creature: For though God may
define it, yet man cannot, and therefore he must be uncertain of his fate. But
we can conceive how God can be reconciled to men consistently with his justice.
When a perfect atonement has been made for sin* we readily see how the penalty
of the law has been paid, and how our offended creator can love us freely. Then
there is no occasion for introducing this doctrine of sincere obedience. For
sinners being, reinstated by faith, whenever they transgress there is the same
atonement to fly to: Christ is still the propitiatory, or mercy seat; by faith
in whom they can be healed as well as they could at first be restored. So that
this eternal rule of right may still remain as inflexible as ever in its
demands. If a sincere obedience is believed as acceptable, it is likely to
cause men either to be in doubt of their state; or else to think they are good
enough, and so keep them from looking to the mercy seat of Christ. Whereas he
who considers not his sincere obedience, but what the law requires, will be
more apt to look to the mercy of God in Christ Jesus, and by so doing to yield
a more perfect obedience.

This doctrine of being accepted by thus endeavoring to please God, is no
where plainly declared in scripture. It is only from deductions taken up. Then
we will next consider the VIth chapter of Romans, from whence it would seem
that Mr. Lock was induced to embrace it, in order to reconcile the doctrine
there with what he had so strongly enforced of justification by faith alone;
for his comments are otherwise seemingly irreconcilable.

The scope of this chapter seems to be this; to show to the disciples the
consequence that would follow their yielding themselves to the service of sin;
namely that it would produce death. He had just before said that the law
entered that sin might abound, but where sin abounded grace did much more
abound; therefore lest any should say, shall we sin then that Grace may abound,
he asks, how shall we that are dead to sin live any longer therein? he shows,
that they were delivered from the service of sin. He considers sin as a master
to whom they had been subject -- and observes that they were now delivered from
that subjection -- and that sin should not have dominion over them, because
they were not under the law but under grace. Yet from what he says it may be
inferred that they might return to the service of their old master; therefore
he warn them against it, and tells them not to yield to sin, but unto God as
those that are alive from the dead; and that if they do yield to sin the wages
he will give them is death; but that the gift of God is eternal life through
Jesus Christ our Lord. This seems to be nearly the substance of the chapter.
Now Mr. Lock seems to give this interpretation to the passage about sin not
having dominion over them -- "If their obedience were to sin, they were vassals
of sin, and would certainly receive the wages of that master, which was nothing
but death: But if they obeyed righteousness, i. e. sincerely endeavored after
righteousness, though they did not attain it, sin should not have dominion over
them by death. i. e. should not bring death upon them: Because they were not
under the law which condemned them to death for every transgression; but under
grace, which by faith in Jesus Christ justified them to eternal life from their
many transgressions." Again in his note on the 14th verse. "The force of St.
Paul's reasoning here stands thus: You are obliged by your taking on you the
profession of the gospel, not to be any longer slaves and vassals to sin, nor
to be under the sway of your carnal lusts, but to yield yourselves up to God to
be his servants in a constant and sincere purpose and endeavor of obeying him
in all things; this if you do, sin shall not be able to procure your death; for
you Gentiles are not under the law which condemns to death for every the least
transgression, though it be but a slip of infirmity; but by your baptism are
entered into the covenant of grace, and being under grace, God will accept of
your sincere endeavors in the place of exact obedience; and give you eternal
life through Jesus Christ; but if you, by a willing obedience to your lusts,
make yourselves vassals to sin, sin, as the Lord and master to whom you belong,
will pay you ^ith death, the only wages that sin pays."

From hence we see Mr. Lock is of opinion, that sin not having dominion, over
them means, that sin should not bring death upon them, because every
transgression under grace was not punished with death, but under the law it
was. But it does not appear, that the being delivered from the dominion of sin
meant their deliverance from death the consequence of sin, but their
deliverance from their master sin who gave death only as his wages. He repents
it again and again, that the wages of sin is death, and yet asserts that sin
not having dominion over them means, that sin shall not procure their death as
they yield to him in a few instances only, and do not give themselves up
entirely to his sway. But the meaning I think is, that when they were under
grace and not under the law, sin loses it is strength, because "the strength of
sin is the law," and if they were delivered from the law and no longer under
it, sin loses it is force, and consequently has no more dominion over them;
which it would have if they returned again to the law. Therefore the apostle in
this chapter attributes their deliverance to their having obeyed from the heart
that form of doctrine which he had delivered them; or into the mould of which
they had been delivered or cast, i. e. The doctrine of the gospel which he
taught them they had received, and it cast them into that form of thought which
overpowered sin, and made them alive for the service of God. In the same manner
he tells the Galatians, that if they walked in the spirit, they should not
fulfill the lust of the flesh" -- for this is being freed from the dominion of
sin. But it is said, "If ye live after the flesh ye shall die, but if ye
through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live." And this
seems to imply that life will be given to those that obey. But if we reflect a
little we shall not find that to be the case; but that the meaning is, that if
they mortify the deeds of the body they (...) continue to live. For they were
already alive; the expression that they shall die if they live after the flesh,
denotes that they were alive, as well as the whole context. They were made
alive by faith in Christ Jesus, and it was necessary that they should obey in
order to continue so: for if they again yielded themselves "servants to sin,
his servants they were to whom they obeyed whether of sin unto death, or of
obedience unto righteousness." We must remember that believers are the heirs.
They obtain the inheritance and keep it by faith; and as good works are
enjoined as necessary to their future happiness, the easiest way to solve this
difficulty is to suppose, that a certain degree of obedience is necessary to
preserve their faith. If this can be allowed all the difficulty will vanish.
For a proof of it we may refer to what the apostle writes to the Hebrews. "Take
heed Brethren lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in
departing from the living God. But exhort one another daily while it is called,
to day lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. For we are
made partakers of Christ if we hold the beginning of our confidence steadfast
unto the end."

This shows that sin hardens the heart and introduces unbelief. The apostle
also advising Timothy about holding faith and a good conscience, adds, "which
some having put away, concerning faith have made shipwreck;" which further
proves that without obedience there is no continuance in the faith; and it is
conformable to what has been already mentioned, that sin will produce death;
and it does so by destroying that faith by which life is preserved. And that
obedience will confirm our faith St. James assures us when he says, that
Abraham's faith by works was made perfect." So that we may still say that
believers are the true heirs, and yet allow that good works are necessary to
salvation, because they strengthen that faith that men must preserve in order
to partake of the fullness of the inheritance. This seems to be an easier way of
reconciling the matter, than either by saying on the one hand, that faith in
it is nature includes evangelical obedience, or on the other, that good works
are not necessary to salvation, but are only useful, ornamental, and evidences
of a true faith; or even to say with Mr. Lock, That faith alone instates a man
in a way of salvation, and that a sincere obedience joined with faith is the
condition on which he is finally saved; because it is more agreeable to the
tenor of the Gospel, which declares that christians are not only by grace saved
through faith, which is supposed to be the first state they are brought into,
but also that they are "kept by the power of God, through faith unto salvation;"
and that if that which they had heard should remain in them, they also should
continue in the son and in the father."

Now though we could not define obedience so as to know when it was sincere or
not, yet we may conceive a certain degree of it to continue us in the faith,
and that of course; or that a certain degree of deviation (...) moral rectitude
might destroy our faith; and yet this to be very different from saying that
sincere obedience is the condition upon which eternal life is given. It is
different in it is nature, and different in it is consequences; because a man who
considers his future life to depend on his obedience is always under bondage,
and has not the freedom of a Son: whereas a son looks upon the inheritance as
his own, and though he should think it possible to be cast off, yet as long as
he finds in himself no disposition to revolt, he is under no fears about it.
But the case is very different in him "who through fear of death is all his
lifetime subject to bondage."

When Mr. Lock mentions that "Adam's one sin had brought death on the
Gentiles, from which they were all restored by Christ's death, with addition of
eternal bliss and glory to all those who believe in him;" how can he
consistently with this say elsewhere, that a sincere obedience was also a
condition? For the expression of eternal bliss must relate, not to the state of
grace here, but to the state of glory hereafter. But perhaps the word obey was
omitted by mistake. But when he says that those who rely upon God and his
promises of grace and not upon their own performances, they are the children of
Abraham who shall inherit; There it is plain he means the first state of grace
to which they were admitted by faith alone; for he had observed that the
blessing promised to Abraham and to his seed was wholly upon the account of
faith."

And is it not astonishing th^^ (...) should confine this inheritance to the
state of grace only in this life? St. Paul desired to be found in Christ having
the Righteousness of God by faith -- he does not mention it as a thing only to
instate him in the favor of God, but as what he wished to continue and be found
in. And when he was about to be offered up what he seemed to rejoice in was
that "he had fought a good fight -- that he had kept the faith -- that
thenceforth there was laid up for him a crown of righteousness, which the Lord,
the righteous judge would give him at that day, and not to him only, but to all
them that loved his appearing." And this we may readily suppose, because such
as rely upon the promises of God being children of Abraham, would look for him
and rejoice to see him.

FINIS.

