A DISSERTATION ON THE INTRODUCTION AND GLORY OF THE MILLENNIUM. TO WHICH IS
PREFIXED, A Discourse on the TWO WITNESSES.

By ABRAHAM CUMMINGS, A. M.

"We look for the resurrection of the flesh and the thousand years."

JUSTIN MARTYR. Published according to Act of Congress.

BOSTON: Printed by MANNING and LORING. 1797.

CONTENTS.
A DISCOURSE on the Two Witnesses Page 5 I. Who the Witnesses are Page 6 II.
What the Plagues are with which they smite the Earth Page 13 III. What is meant
by their Smiting the Earth as often as they will Page 19 Dissertation on the
Millennium. Preliminaries Page 1 CHAP. I. THE PLAN OF THE SUBJECT PROPOSED AND
EXPLAINED Page 4 CHAP. II. THE MILLENNIUM A NEW GENERAL DISPENSATION OF GRACE
Page 11 SECT. I. There will be a State of Imperfection among Mankind in the
Millennium Page 13 SECT. II. The Millennium introduced by Christ's personal
Appearance Page 16 SECT. III. The next Conflagration not universal Page 41
SECT. IV. The Millennium introduced by the corporeal Resurrection of the Saints
Page 52 CHAP. III. WHEREIN THE GLORY OF THE MILLENNIUM SHALL CONSIST Page 73
SECT. I. The Church Militant in the Millennium will enjoy a New Revelation Page
73 SECT. II. The Millennium rendered glorious by New Heavens and a New Earth
Page 78 SECT. III. Of the Salvation of the Jews in the next Dispensation Page
85 SECT. IV. The Third Dispensation a glorious Exhibition of Christ's Kingly
Character Page 98 MISCELLANEOUS CONCLUSION Page 116
A DISCOURSE ON THE TWO WITNESSES.
REVELATION xi. 6. THESE HAVE POWER TO SHUT HEAVEN IN THE DAYS OF THEIR
PROPHECY, AND HAVE POWER OVER WATERS TO TURN THEM INTO BLOOD, AND TO SMITE THE
EARTH WITH ALL PLAGUES AS OFTEN AS THEY WILL.


ALREADY I hear the objection, "What proper employment has the speaker here in
these deep waters, where so many have sounded and found no bottom?" But such an
objector would do well to consider, that the book before us is the book of
revelation, and not of concealment. In the time of the prophet Daniel, it was
closed up and sealed with seven seals, and so was to continue till the time of
the end. Behold now is the time of the end, and one seal is taken off after
another by the wondrous works of Divine Providence! And even the seventh seal
is now opening by the concurrent explanation of present expositors. Hence the
knowledge of this part of scripture increases from age to age. The book of
Revelation was not put into our hands for no purpose: It is a greater benefit
to us than to those in former ages: It was written more especially for our
learning on whom the ends of the world are come: And he is pronounced blessed,
who reads and hears the words of this prophecy, (Rev. i. 3) and keeps the
sayings which are written therein, which fairly implies that we should labor
to understand what we read and hear. But on the other hand, we should be
careful to maintain Christian modesty, and not pronounce, too positively where
there is but feeble evidence; and a sense of our mental imbecility should be
joined with a spirit of prayer, that Christ, would open our understandings to
understand the scriptures. Infinite Mercy grant this humility and light, while
it is considered,

Who these are, which have power to shut heaven and to smite the earth.

What those plagues are with which they smite the earth. And

What is meant by their smiting the earth as often as they will.

1. Who are these which have power to shut heaven, and to smite the earth?

We fine by the chapter that they are two prophets, two witnesses, two
candlesticks, and two olive trees, which stand before the God of the earth. And
here we must remember that the scripture is the interpreter of itself: There
are, perhaps, few passages of scripture, which have not a key for them, if we
can tell where to find it and how to improve it. Let us then inquire whether a
key may not be found for the particular passage in view. These two witnesses
are the two candlesticks, says the context: But what are the two candlesticks?
is the next inquiry. Look in Zech. iv. 2, 6. 'And he said unto me, What see
thou? And I said, I have looked, and behold a candlestick all of gold, with a
bowl upon the top of it, and his seven lamps thereon, and seven pipes to the
seven lamps which are upon the top thereof; and two olive trees by it, one on
the right side of the bowl, and the other on the left side thereof. So I
answered and spoke to the angel, What are these, my lord? Then he answered and
spoke unto me saying. This is the word of the Lord, etc.' To Zerubbabel. But of
the same nature is the inspired scripture.
i. e. this candlestick, with the things, which accompany it, is the word of
the Lord. The word of the Lord, we know, is the inspired scripture. Therefore
this candlestick must be, that which is now the inspired scripture, and so the
two candlesticks must be the two scriptures, the old Testament and the New.
Zechariah saw but one candlestick; for in his time there was but one Testament
revealed; but John discovers two; for then both Testaments were revealed; both
candlesticks were lighted up.

The two olive trees may perhaps signify Joshua and Zerubbabel, as types of the
law and gospel. For as Joshua and Zerubbabel were two great instruments in the
hand of Christ to build the second temple; so are the law and gospel for
building the antitype of the second temple, which is the church of the living
God, built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets.

Oil is the scripture emblem of the effusions of the Spirit. And as the oil of
the two olive trees was poured into the bowl of the candlestick and lighted up
all the seven lamps; so all the essential spiritual truths, which partake of
the nature both of the law and gospel, were by the Holy Spirit poured into one
Old Testament, and constituted a perfect light. For though the Old Testament
was a light shining in a dark place, yet it was a perfect one; it contained
both the law and the gospel; it contained all that was necessary to practice or
believe in order to salvation; and both Testaments substantially contain no
more. While Zechariah saw one candlestick, he beheld two olive trees, and while
John saw two candlesticks, he beheld no more than two olive trees.

As to the seven lamps, seven we know is the number of perfection. The Lamb has
seven eyes and seven horns, perfect wisdom and perfect power. So these seven
lamps signify the perfect light of the scriptures; for thy word, says David, is
a light unto my feet and a lamp to my path, and the law of the Lord is perfect,
converting the soul.

That these two witnesses, prophesying in sackcloth, must signify the Old and
New Testament, will further appear, if we consider the main design of this book
of Revelation, which was to support and comfort the church wading through Pagan
and Popish persecutions, and to promise her a complete deliverance from all her
dangers. Now, one of the greatest dangers to which the church was exposed in
those dark times, was that of losing the Bible: It was in imminent danger not
only of being grossly corrupted, but wholly extirpated from the earth. The
Bible is the good man's book, better to him than thousands of gold and silver.
What would have become of the woman of Sarepta in the time of famine in Israel,
if Elijah had not been there to feed her with oil? and what would have become
of the woman in the wilderness in the time of Popish famine, if these two
prophets had not been there to feed her with the oil of the sanctuary?
Therefore, is it not highly reasonable to expect that a few verses, at least,
of this prophecy should be set apart to give promises of security to a book so
precious to the church, and which Christ foresaw would be exposed to such
imminent danger; but if no such particular promises are found in this eleventh
chapter, they are not found at all in the whole book of Revelation.

Again; we have further confirmation of what is now advanced, by considering
how unnaturally this prophecy is explained by those who have fixed a different
meaning to it. Some have supposed, that gospel ministers and magistrates,
others that true Christians in general, and the Waldenses in particular, are
intended by these witnesses. But what key does the scripture afford for this
explanation? And, if there is none, what is this but a mere conjectural gloss?
Neither common Christians, ministers nor magistrates are ever called prophets
in other parts of scripture: And why should there be exactly two prophets and
no more for one thousand two hundred and sixty years? Why not rather one
hundred and forty-four thousand, beside a great multitude? for this is is the
enumeration of common Christians in other parts of this book. If the number two
signify only a small indefinite number, and their resurrection is the
multiplication of their number, as so many suppose, some reason ought to be
assigned why, at least, as many as three witnesses do not appear after their
resurrection; but this chapter mentions no more than two after their
resurrection, at well as, before.

Besides, the powers ascribed to these two witnesses are very unnaturally
applied to common Christians or gospel ministers. When. did the Waldenses or
other Christians ever shut up heaven? When did they turn the waters into blood?
When did fire proceed out of their mouths to devour their enemies? Or what have
they done to which these mighty works may be compared by any proper figure of
speech? To evade the force of this argument, it has been answered that the
saints may be said to inflict these plagues on the earth by praying that God
would be avenged on their enemies; but this answer is by no means satisfactory.
When did they ever pray that heaven might be shut up, or that the waters might
be turned into blood, in what sense soever these, plagues may be understood?
Never. This construction therefore is quite unnatural, and assigns those powers
to magistrates, ministers and other Christians, which can in no sense belong to
them by any figure of speech which the Bible elsewhere uses. Yet these
miraculous powers are very applicable to prophets, and consequently to the two
Testaments, which contain the voice of all the prophets since the world began.

The death and resurrection of these witnesses remarkably agree with the
treatment which the two Testaments have suffered from the opposition of their
enemies, and their glorious triumph over them. 'When they shall have finished
their testimony (in sackcloth) the beast, which ascends out of the bottomless
pit, shall make war against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them.' Rev.
xi. 7. That is, the antichristian party in a large and general council at
Basil, in 1437, formed a decree, that it was the business of the church to
determine in what manner the worship of God should be carried on. This blow, to
speak sigurately, took away the very life of the scriptures, and all that for
which they excel every other book in the world. At that time, the four
antichristian parties, which had been at variance by means of three cotemporary
Popes and a difference with respect to communion, were reconciled; as Pilate
and Herod were at the crucifixion of our Lord. This union is here expressed by
their making merry, and sending gifts one to another. 'And they suffered not
their dead bodies to be put in graves;' that is, They would not suffer them to
be buried wholly out of their sight. To bury a deceased person is to manifest
respect for him, and peculiar sorrow for the calamity which has befallen him:
Therefore, the meaning of the figure may be this; The Papists would not suffer
any one to pay that respect to the scriptures which was due, or even to mourn
for the bold impiety which they had committed! Fox's Acts and Mon. Vol. I. page
909. Glass on the Witnesses, page 442. Mosheim's Ecclesiast. Hist. Vol. II
cent. 15.
Three days and an half they remained in this condition, then rose and stood on
their feet. About three years and an half after this Popish decree, the
testimony of scripture was revived and appeared anew, in the reformation formed
by the Bohemian brethren, after they had separated from the Calixtines. Soon
after this, the voice was heard, 'Come up hither. And they ascended up to
heaven in a cloud, and their enemies beheld them;' i. e. the Greeks flying from
Constantinople brought the knowledge of the scriptures into the West, and about
the same time the two Testaments were publicly printed in Germany, and by
Protestant protection ascended up out of the reach of their enemies, as much as
if they had gone up to heaven, so that the Papists could not command them any
longer from that day to this.

Finally, It is the part of a witness to testify for or against any person or
thing. Christ plainly tells us, that the scriptures are his witnesses, when he
says, 'Search the scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and
they are they which testify of me.

II. What are those plagues with which they smite the earth?

Smiting the earth here may mean no other than the voice of their prophecy,
declaring that certain plagues shall afflict mankind. As by a common figure of
speech any one may be said to punish another, when he denounces that sentence
of punishment against him, which is connected with the event; so these two
prophets, by denouncing certain plagues against the earth, may be properly said
to smite the earth with these plagues. Thus the prophet Elisha smote Gehazi by
denouncing against him that plague of leprosy, which should cleave to him and
his seed forever. So the prophet Elijah smote the two captains and their
fifties. 'If I be a man of God,' he says, 'let fire come down from heaven and
consume thee and thy fifty.' Therefore the plagues with which the witnesses
smite the earth, are temporal, spiritual and eternal. All temporal judgments,
earthquakes, sword, famine, pestilence and beasts of the earth are inflicted on
mankind by these two witnesses declaring the existence of them by the voice of
their prophecy.

In the same manner they smite the earth with spiritual judgments; a seared
conscience, a blinded mind, and an awful sterility under the means of grace.
Isa. vi. 9, 10. 'Go and tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but understand not;
see ye indeed, but perceive not. Make the heart of this people fat, and make
their ears heavy, and shut their eyes: left they see with their eyes, and hear
with their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert and be healed.'
With this spiritual calamity were the unbelieving Jews smitten at Rome, while
'they heard Paul persuading them the things concerning Jesus from morning to
evening, both out of the law and out of the prophets.' Paul then quoted the
passage now mentioned, as most solemnly applicable to their spiritual condition.

Of this sort are the plagues spoken of in the text. They are evidently of a
spiritual nature, because no such plagues have ever been literally inflicted on
mankind since the apostolic age. Heaven has not been shut up one thousand two
hundred and sixty years, nor the waters turned into blood in a literal sense;
but in a spiritual sense how awfully manifest have been these plagues in the
Christian world! There has been a great and terrible famine in the Christian
world; not of bread and water, but of hearing the word of the Lord for one
thousand two hundred and si^ty years: That is, from nearly the end of the
second century Then the scripture doctrine began to be explained by Gentile
philosophy, and to be united with tradition as the rule of faith. And after
printing was invented, in 1440, scholastic divinity began to sail.
to nearly the middle of the fifteenth.

A lively type of this was the famine in Israel in the days of Elijah, and a
lively type was Elijah, as well as Moses, of these two prophets. While Jezebel,
the type of the Romish mother of harlo^s, was promoting idolatry and killing
the saints, Elijah's word shut up heaven. 'As the Lord God of Israel lives,'
he says, 'before whom I stand, there shall not be rain nor dew these years but
according to my word.' 'These years;' what years? Three years and an half. Our
Lord tells us, Luke iv. 25. that 'In the days of Elias the heaven was shut up
three years and six months, and great famine was throughout all the land:' And
the apostle James says, that 'Elias prayed earnestly that it might not rain,
and it rained not on the earth by the space of three years and six months.'
This space of time is taken great notice of in scripture prophecy. Three years
and six months are just the same as one thousand two hundred and sixty days,
and just the same as forty-two months, and just the same as a time, times and
an half: for a time is a year, times are two years, and half a time is half a
year. The same is expressed by a time, times, and the dividing of time. That
is, three years and an half, which are half seven. Seven is the number of
perfection, half sever is half perfection, which is utter imperfection: and as
God has measured the duration of his own perfect works by the number seven, so
he has seen fit to measure the duration of these imperfect and wicked works of
men with their sad consequences by just half this number. And as Elijah by his
word shut up heaven and caused a great famine in Israel for three years and an
half; so the two witnesses by the word of their prophecy have spiritually shut
up heaven, and caused a great famine upon the Christian world, for three
prophetical years and an half. And as in the time of famine in Israel the
prophet Elijah fed the woman of Sarepta with oil; so these two witnesses in the
time of Popish famine have fed the woman in the wilderness with spiritual oil,
that she through faith and comfort of the scriptures might have hope. She had
'a place prepared her of God, where they should feed her;' that is, where these
two prophets should 'feed her a thousand two hundred and threescore days.'

Thus it appears, that not a literal, but a spiritual famine was inflicted upon
the earth by these two prophets in the days of Popery; in consequence of which
the waters were turned into blood. To explain which we must consider what those
blessings are, which are in the same manner useful to our spiritual life as
waters are to our natural life.

As there are rivers in the world, the streams of which delight and refresh the
body; so 'there is a river, the streams of which make glad the city of God.' In
the latter flow the waters mentioned in the text: and these waters must
signify, either the inward joys and graces of the true Christian, or the
external ordinances and means of grace; but they cannot signify the former,
they cannot signify the inward joys and graces of the true Christian: for
these, in whatever souls they reside, are never turned into blood; but are in
them, a well of water springing up unto everlasting life. Therefore the waters
of the text can signify nothing else but the outward ordinances and means of
grace.

But how were these turned into blood? Consider what the sad effect was, when
Moses in Egypt turned the waters into blood, to which this passage undoubtedly
alludes. By this change, the waters of Egypt were rendered not only useless,
but exceedingly injurious, and tended rather to aggravate their thirst than
assuage it. So that flood of errors and superstition into which the true
doctrines and ordinances of the gospel were changed in the days of Popery and
by the word of prophecy, was not only useless, but exceedingly injurious to the
souls of men. As good water is very necessary and comfortable to the body, but
when turned to blood, becomes exceedingly hurtful to the body; so the true
doctrines and ordinances of the gospel are very necessary and comfortable to
the soul; but, when turned to superstition and lies, become exceedingly hurtful
to the soul. Among the Heathen and among the Papists, the truth of God was
changed into a lie; and what was the consequence? 'They worshipped and served
the creature more than the Creator, who is over all, God blessed forever.' By
this time it is easy to see how naturally the change of waters into blood
represents the change of truth into a lie, and of genuine doctrines into vile
superstitions: And that this plague was inflicted by the two witnesses, appears
from Isa. lxvi. 4, and from 2 Thessalonians. ii. 8; 'I also will choose their
delusions.' 'And then shall that Wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall
consume by the spirit of his mouth, and destroy by the brightness of his
coming: even him whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power and
signs and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them
that perish, because they received not the love of the truth: and for this
cause God shall send them strong delusions that they should believe a lie; that
they all may be damned who believe not the truth, but have pleasure in
unrighteousness.' But

III. What is meant by their smiting the earth as often as they will?

This may signify the established and infallible connection between the voice of
prophecy and the event. It was a mavelous display of power given to the
prophet Elijah, when he only spoke the word and down came the fire from heaven
and devoured his enemies. A lively and solemn apprehension of this had the
third captain with his fifty, when he fell upon his knees and begged for mercy.
He was apprehensive that the prophet could, if he would, utterly consume him
with all his armed fifty, and his apprehension was just: for the will of that
prophet, under divine inspiration, was the will of God. The same power and will
have the two prophets now treated of. But how unnatural is it to represent the
two Testaments as having exercises of will, says the objector. But why more
unnatural than to represent them as speaking and hearing a voice, as the
scripture itself does? Yet the latter is no more true or natural, when viewed
in a literal sense, than the former, but in figurative language how easy is the
transition from an intelligent voice to a will dictating that voice. Therefore,
as the language of scripture may be properly called the voice of the scripture,
so the sense of that language may be properly called the will of the scripture,
being God's will and the will of all the inspired prophets. Therefore the
meaning of the last clause of the text seems to be, that whatever plagues the
two Testaments denounce shall certainly and infallibly come to pass. The word
of the Lord endures forever: heaven and earth shall pass away before one jot
or tittle of it shall fail. The will of these two witnesses is the will of God:
therefore, whatever threatenings they denounce against the finally impenitent
shall surely be accomplished. Their word has alreadly destroyed a multitude of
sinners; it has brought a deluge upon the old world, fire on Sodom, blood and
famine on Jerusalem, and utter ruin on Babylon; and the same voice of these
prophets has scattered the Jews over the earth: and so, wherever these two
prophets speak against their enemies, they smite; every threatening is a blow,
every word a wound. The everlasting mountains shall be scattered, and the
perpetual hills shall bow; but forever, O Lord, thy word is settled in heaven.

A few inferences shall close the subject.

1. Is the power and authority of these witnesses so very great in the world?
How dangerous then the condition of all those who despise and ridicule them,
and call in question their veracity! Many such bold objects of Christian
compassion may now be observed in the world. As Jannes and Jambres withstood
Moses by endeavoring to represent him as an impostor, so do these men also
resist the truth by endeavoring to represent as impostors these two anointed
ones, which stand before the God of the earth. But they shall proceed no
further than the bounds allotted them by these very prophets, whom they
despise, and whose never-failing predictions assure us, that there must come
mockers to grieve the godly in the last times. Like Jannes and Jambres ere long
their mouths will be stopped, and their folly will be manifest unto all men, as
theirs also was. How swiftly the day approaches which shall burn as an oven,
and all these proud, gospelized infidels shall be as stubble, and the day that
comes shall burn them up, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch!
For, observe the context, 'If any man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of
their mouths and devoureth their enemies; and if any man will hurt them, he
must in this manner be killed.' Here is another evident allusion to the prophet
Elijah; figuratively speaking, fire proceeded out of his mouth when he consumed
the two captains and their fifties.
The threatening is repeated, as Pharaoh's dream was, to show, perhaps, that
the prophecy is certain, and the plague foretold is sure.

And what is this plague? what is this fire? It is the fire which shall burn
the world, the fire of hell; the fire which shall burn the beast and the false
prophet.

If any man will hurt them, i. e. if any man shall take away part from the
prophecy of this book, -- and much more, if he take away all, 'God will take
away his part out of the book of life;' 'and whosoever was not found written in
the book of life, was cast into the lake of fire.' This is the fire which
proceeds out of their mouths: for it is the mouth of the scripture which
denounces that fire, I will make my words in thy mouth fire, says the Lord to
the prophet, Jeremiah, chap. v. 14. The voice of all the prophet^ against the
wicked is fire proceeding out of their mouths.
which shall burn the ungodly forever.

2. How terrible is the condition of all those who suffer those spiritual
plagues, with which these prophets smite the earth: spiritual famine, spiritual
barrenness and mortality of soul under the means of grace! What greater curse
than the sig-tree cursed! 'Let no man eat fruit of thee hereafter forever.'
They have eyes and eyesight, ears and hearing, and yet they neither see nor
hear; they grope at noonday as in the night, and stagger with their eyes open
like a drunken man. Let our speculative knowledge be ever so great, if sin be
indulged, the most perilous blindness remains. It is the very nature of sin to
darken the mind and hold a false picture of things continually before our eyes.
Hence follows speculative darkness with respect to moral things. The righteous
providence of God often gives men over to a bad faith as the punishment of a
bad heart. Such was the punishment of the ancient heathen: 'Because, that when
they knew God,' says Paul, 'they glorified him not as God; and did not like to
retain him in their knowledge; he gave them up to uncleanness, to vile
affections, to a reprobate mind; who changed the truth of God into a lie.' Such
was the punishment of the Jews, cut off for unbelief: The vail is yet on their
hearts, while Moses is read before them. Such was the punishment of the
Christians after the pure and glorious gospel had shone before them; heaven was
shut up over them, as already shown, and their waters turned into blood; and I
think the scripture tells us, Rev. xvi. 13, 14.
that the Christian world shall be smitten once more with spiritual plagues,
with strong delusion, infidelity and false religion. And if so, though the
present age is very corrupt, the next will, doubtless, be more so, both in
principle and practice: for the day of the Lord is at hand, and upon the wicked
God shall rain snares, and then fire and brimstone.

The Christian world are now more guilty than were the ancient Christians,
Jews, or Heathen. Far more abundant is the light against which we rebel.
Doubtless the most fatal and general delusion is at hand; yea, has not the
plague already begun? What opposition, what ridicule do we hear against the
witnesses and their solemn threatenings! What a plague of plagues is that which
is spiritual and eternal! How perilous then is the condition of every
unregenerate sinner at this day! How liable to be smitten by these modern
plagues of delusion, which begin now to be so epidemical! O sinner! now is the
accepted time. This moment fly to Christ and receive the love of the truth,
lest that holy God who is now angry with you every day, should choose your
delusion, and smite you with some modern plague, which shall be incurable and
eternal. Fear not the cross; fear not self-denial; rich are the joys which
accompany you even in this life: But in the future life, O how rich! Eye has
not seen, nor ear heard, neither has entered into the heart of man, the things
which God has prepared for them who love him.

3. What cause of gratitude have we, that these two anointed ones have ever
stood before the Lord of the whole earth, amidst all the opposition of earth
and hell. 'My vineyard' (my church) says Christ, 'which is mine, is before me,'
ever watching for her preservation. So these two witnesses are before him for
the church's sake. The Keeper of Israel keeps the two great lights of Israel.
They torment them who dwell on the earth, and therefore their enemies have been
many and mighty. The Hebrew copies of the Old Testament were almost entirely
destroyed in the reign of the Emperor Dioclesian, but effectual means were
found for its preservation. And what the Papists have done, has already been
observed. Yet the witnesses are still alive, they have risen and ascended, and
their enemies have beheld them with grief and disappointment. The Popish
famine, therefore, is nearly ended. What said Elijah when the famine in Israel
was nearly ended? Get thee up, eat and drink, for there is the sound of
abundance of rain. Such is the sound of the seventh trumpet now at hand; a day
most dreadful to the wicked, and most delightful to the righteous. See! see!
how it approaches with hasty steps! What steps? Revolutions, Oh how wonderful!
in America and Europe. Sit on the ground, for there is not a throne, O daughter
of Babylon; thy plagues are come in one day. Death and mourning and famine, and
the voice of harps and musicians and pipers and trumpeters shall be heard no
more at all in thee; and the light of a candle shall shine no more at all in
thee; and no craftsman, of whatsoever craft he be, shall be found any more at
all in thee. And the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, shall
be heard no more at all in thee.

Awake and sing, thou who dwell in dust, O persecuted Zion! Shine, for thy
light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. Shine by diligence
in every good word and work; let every word be praise, every action love, every
thought spiritual and divine: With this beauteous apparel make thyself ready, O
bride of the Lamb! For even now thy God is on his way, and all the saints with
him. Amen; even so, come, Lord Jesus.

END OF THE DISCOURSE.
A DISSERTATION ON THE INTRODUCTION AND GLORY OF THE MILLENNIUM.
PRELIMINARIES.
THE works of God are a perfect beauty: Light and shade, angel and devil; all
are necessary to constitute this perfection. All his works praise him: the
wrath of man and the rage of elements: every creature is thus engaged in heaven
and earth and under the earth and in the sea. As for God, his way of providence
is perfect. He is wonderful in counsel and excellent in working. Nothing is
made, -- nothing is done in vain through all the immensity of space and
duration.

2. All beauty is constituted by harmony or similarity in variety; such is the
beauty of the natural world. It is full of resemblances, full of imitations
amidst infinite variety.

3. The natural world resembles the spiritual world; otherwise there could be
no such thing as metaphor, type, allegory, or any comparison between matter and
mind.

4. As the works of providence are not less beautiful than the works of
creation, so they are not less conspicuous for similarity in variety. The
annual revolutions, varied in respects innumerable, all have their days and
nights, summer and winter, seed-time and harvest.

The same constitutes the beauty of ages; one order of events in one age of the
world is a lively picture of another order of events in another age of the
world. Hence the propriety of many types in the Old Testament of persons and
things, cities, nations and countries. Hence also appears the reason why so
many prophecies in scripture have several aspects to several different periods
of time, as ever has been allowed by the most learned expositors.

A single sentence in prophecy predicts an event or period of events, with all
its types and antitypes. Canaan was an image of the gospel rest, and the gospel
rest is an image of the Millennium, and the Millennium will be an image of
heaven. Therefore the promise of Canaan to Abraham was a promise and prophecy
of all these Canaans and all these periods of duration. And it is manifest that
the prophecies, in general, of the Old Testament which predict the Christian
dispensation, do in the same language, the same sentences predict the
Millennium, having an aspect to both these happy periods. 'The thing which has
been, it is that which shall be, and that which is done, is that which shall be
done, and there is no new thing under the sun.'

5. Gods, in his infinite love and mercy, has sent us, for instruction, a
present from heaven, a map of his works, past, present, and to come. Blessed
are those eyes which can properly survey it, and those humble hearts which can
be thankful for it! On a map of the globe, cities, mountains, lakes and rivers
in all countries, are distinguished by similar notations. By observing then in
what manner any known country is delineated, we may understand too the
geography of others which are unknown: So on this map of ages, by properly
observing the delineation of any order of events already known to us, we are
the better prepared to judge of the like order of events which are yet future.

6. Small maps of the globe give only some general ideas of its various
regions: So the map before us, though perfectly accurate, is very small, and
affords but a general idea of the stupendous and glorious events which shall be
accomplished hereafter.

CHAP. I. THE PLAN OF THE SUBJECT PROPOSED AND EXPLAINED.
A COMPENDIOUS map of the globe presents only principal objects, while the
innumerable smaller are understood to be in connection with them.

2. The Bible, the most excellent of books, continually presents to our view
the most excellent of God's works, that of Redemption, while it teaches, that
all other works are subservient to it.

3. This work of redemption is commensurate with time, and will not be finished
till Christ delivers up the kingdom to the Father. It is he who carries on this
most glorious work in his triple capacity of Prophet, Priest and King.

4. Accordingly, the Bible has distinguished the order of the work of
redemption by three general dispensations of grace, which seem to be responsive
to these three offices. The first dispensation was peculiarly prophetical; all
the types were so many prophecies, and the prophecies of the New Testament are
little more than the exposition of those which are found in the O^d.

The second dispensation is peculiar for the exhibition of Christ's priestly
character, not only in his own person, but in his people: Every martyr is a
priest, and every martyrdom a sacrifice, by Phil. ii. 17; and the martyrdoms,
under our dispensation, are more numerous than those under the old by a
thousand to one. Christ introduced our dispensation by the voluntary sacrifice
of himself, and still continues to distinguish it from the old by his work of
intercession.

Accordingly, the third dispensation will be peculiar for the exhibition of
Christ's kingly character, not only in his own person, but in his people, as
appears by Rev. v. 10, xx. 4. 'And have made as unto our God kings and priests,
and we shall reign on the earth. -- They lived and reigned with Christ a
thousand years.'

5. The first dispensation was an image of the second, as appears from all the
types of the Old Testament: The first had a Babylon and a vile person to
afflict the church; and so has the second. In like manner the second is an
image of the third, as appears in that, by the concession of the best
commentators, the most important events of both are predicted by the same
sentences of prophecy.

6. The three dispensations must have three revelations or witnesses; the Old
Testament, the New Testament, and the more immediate teaching of Christ
himself. The present revelation explains the old, and the third will explain
both. And will not Christ then appear as the Logos far more gloriously than
ever he did before? It does in a measure appear by Rev. xi. 6, that Moses and
Elijah, two eminent prophets, are used by the Holy Ghost as types of our two
Testaments. Moses turned the waters into bloody, and Elijah shut up heaven. The
Old Testament worship seems to have been a rod in the hand of him who chose
their delusions to turn the waters of the Christian world into blood, as
already explained in the preceding sermon. Popery in part is the misimprovement
of Old Testament worship. Elijah cured the people of idolatry; and for this
purpose the New Testament rather than the Old is remarkably calculated. Hence,
perhaps, it was, that when the three disciples beheld on the mount the
representation of Christ's future glory; the truth of which the Testaments
unitedly confirm, Moses and Elias, rather than other prophets, appeared in
harmonious converse with Jesus. Peter, relating what he saw on the holy mount,
says, (hai echomen beb^i^^^ron ton propheti^on logon) we have more firm the
prophetic word.


The words which Daniel heard, but understood not, (Dan. xii. 8, 9) were closed
up and sealed till the time of the end, and then this sealed book was opened to
John, by a new revelation from heaven. But when John had a similar vision, he
had similar instruction. 'Seal up those things which the seven thunders
uttered, and write them not:' We must therefore expect a new revelation to
explain what the seven thunders uttered. As the sealed words which Daniel heard
were not explained but by a new revelation; so we have no reason to expect that
the sealed voices of the seven thunders will be explained but by a new
dispensation and a new revelation from heaven.

7. Each dispensation must conclude by a day of judgment, severing the wicked
from the just. Thus ended the first dispensation; the Jewish nation were
destroyed, while the Christians, by believing and obeying Christ's word, all
marvellously escaped, a Dr. Newton tells us out of several historians. We do
not ^^ad, any where, that so much as one of them perished in the d^sl^^^tion of
Jerusal^m. Dissertation on the P^^ph^^^^, ^^ol. II. p. 28.
The end of our dispensation will constitute another day of judgment, in which
the separation of the righteous from the wicked will be far more general and
solemn than that of the former. To both these days of judgment the prophecy of
our Savior refers, in the xxivth. of Matthew, and xxist of Luke, which shows
that the former represented the latter. The end of the next dispensation will
be the universal judgment, when all sin will be severed from holiness, and all
the wicked from the just, to associate no more forever; whosoever is not
written in the book of life shall then be cast into the lake of fire.

8. Accordingly there must be three resurrections. At the end of the last
dispensation, there was a resurrection of Christ and many of the saints. At the
end of the present, there will be a resurrection of many more saints. And at
the end of the next, there will be an universal resurrection of the righteous
and the wicked.

The first of these resurrections gave death a wound; the second will give this
enemy a deeper wound, and the third will utterly destroy him. 'For as in Adam
all die,' says Paul, 'so in Christ shall all be made alive. But every man in
his own order, Christ the first fruits, afterward they who are Christ's at his
coming. Afterward Afterward, here, is the most natur^l translation of the
original.
comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the
Father, when he shall have put down all rule and all authority and power; for
he must reign till he has put all enemies under his feet. The last enemy that
shall be destroyed is death.

9. So also there must be three conflagrations. The first destroyed Jerusalem
and the temple; the second will destroy the Christian world, when the Lord
Jesus shall be revealed from heaven in flaming fire; the third will destroy the
last Gog and Magog. They compassed the camp of the saints -- and fire came down
from God out of heaven and devoured them.

To all these three periods that may refer in Mal. iv. 1. 'Behold, the day
comes that shall burn as an oven; and all the proud, yea, all they that do
wickedly, shall be as stubble: and the day that comes shall burn them up,
says the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.'

10. As there are no more than three offices of Christ revealed in his word;
so, by Art. 4th, we are not to expect more than three dispensations.

It will not be denied that the Millennium, or third dispensation, will, if
possible, as much excel the present for the extensiveness of its blessings, as
the present excels the former; and if so, it is certain that all the globe
'will be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea:' and
consequently the third day of judgment must be the day of universal judgment,
and the state of all mankind must then be such as cannot admit of another
antitype or fourth dispensation.

Three dispensations afford a natural construction for that in Matt. xiii. 33.
'The kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven, which a woman took and hid in three
measures of meal, till the whole was leavened.' Jehovah himself is Trinity in
unity, and his works are what they are, because He is what He is. The work of
mediation is a divine, most glorious and perfect work: and "in every divine,
complete work," says the famous Swedenborg, "there is a Trine, which is called
first, middle and last. From this ground it is, that by three in the spiritual
sense of the word is meant what is complete and perfect. And whereas this is
the signification of that number, therefore it is frequently applied in the
Word, when that signification is intended to be expressed, as in the following
passages, where it is written 'that Isaiah should go naked and barefoot three
years.' Isa. xx. 3. 'That Jehovah called Samuel three times, and Samuel ran
three times to Eli, and Eli understood him the third time.' 1 Samuel iii. 1 -- 8.
'That Elijah stretched himself on the widow's son three times.' 1 Kings xvii.
21. And 'commanded to pour water on the burnt offering three times.' 1 Kings
xviii. 34. 'That Jonah was in the whale's belly three days and three nights.'
Jonah ii. 1. 'That Jesus rose the third day.' Matt. xxviii. 1. Not to mention
many other passages, where the number three is named, being applied to denote a
finished and perfect work." Swedenborg's Doctrine of the New Jerusalem, p. 37,
38.
It cannot be impertinent likewise to observe, that the next dispensation is
the seventh millennary: So that in the conclusion of that day both these
numbers of perfection will harmonize, and render the work of mediation a
finished and perfect work.

CHAP. II. THE MILLENNIUM A NEW GENERAL DISPENSATION OF GRACE.
THE positive institutions, which the Old Testament church received in
different periods, may perhaps be called particular dispensations, in
distinction from the whole of them included in the Mosaic economy. For they
were all of one general nature; all were prophetical and typical, all were a
shadow of good things to come; and in those ages no institution was abolished,
when a new one was introduced. Therefore all the Old Testament economy was one
general dispensation of grace. The present state of the church is allowed to be
another general dispensation, clearly distinct from the former. It is now to be
considered, whether there will not be a new dispensation; a new order of
things, with respect to the church and religion, as clearly distinct from the
present as the present is from that of the Jews.

Under the old dispensation, the Jews had a Millennium in prospect as well as
we. They were in constant expectation of a glorious time, in which holiness and
happiness should be general, if not universal; but they considered that
glorious time only as the continuation of their own dispensation, and expected
that the nations would embrace their religion and their kind of government;
that all flesh would worship at their temple, from one new moon to another, and
from one seventh day Sabbath to another. They expected as a nation to have a
portion in this promised glory with the rest of mankind. And in general it
appears, that both the righteous and the wicked among them had the same leading
sentiments on this subject. The nature of our dispensation was doubtless as
well known to the Apostles when Christ arose as to any of the pious Jews; and
yet they ask, 'Lord, will thou at this time restore again the kingdom to
Israel?' Of the like nature are the views and expectations of Christians in
general at this day. The Millennium is at hand, say we, to make our posterity
happy, and all nations happy, under the imperfect government of mere men, by
their embracing the externals as well as the internals of our religion; the
Millennium will be a glorious continuance of our own dispensation.

Now, since these our expectations so nearly resemble those of the Jews, it is
certainly a matter of importance to inquire whether they have any better
foundation in the word of prophecy. It is from the same Old Testament prophecy
that both Jews and Christians have formed these similar ideas of their two
Millenniums. And how plainly do these prophecies declare, that the promised
glory shall be introduced by a day of judgment; 'A day which shall burn as an
oven;' by a resurrection, and by the coming of Christ to take vengeance on his
enemies Isa. lxvi. 15 -- 20. Mal. iv. 1. Isa. xxv. 8. and xxvi. 19, and several
other passages.
who shall have rebelled against the light. These and similar passages, we say,
are figurative; but may not a Christian as effectually deceive himself by a
construction of prophecy too figurative, as a Jew by a construction too literal?

Now, if it can be proved that there will be imperfect holiness and death among
mankind in the Millennium; that the Sun of righteousness will personally appear
in the morning of that day; that there will then be a partial conflagration and
a resurrection; the inference is necessary, that there will be a new
dispensation or order of things with respect to the church, as distinct from
the present as the present is from that of the Jews. Therefore, to obtain
evidence of these propositions must be the attempt of the following sections.

SECTION I. There will be a State of Imperfection among Mankind in the
Millennium.
THOUGH the prophecy of the new heavens and earth seems to have ultimate
reference to the perfect state of glory; yet, by the general consent of
expositors, it includes the Millennium, that brightest image or the heavenly
state, which will ever exist in the world. As the works of creation from one
day to another were more and more excellent, and proceeded from inferior to
superior exhibitions of God's character; so do the works of providence, and
particularly those of redemption. As the present state of the church far
exceeds that of the Jews; so the millennial state will far exceed the present,
and form the nexus between earth and heaven, as soon may appear more clearly.

But still there will be imperfect saints in that time, and multitudes of bold
transgressors at the conclusion of that time: For,

1. In the description of the new earth, (Isa. lxv. 20) we plainly read of sin
and death; that 'the child shall die an hundred years old; This is not foretold
as a curse, but as a bless^ng, as appears from its connection with the preceding
sentence which predicts longevity as a blessing. 'There shall be no more the^
(...) an infant of days, nor an old man who ha^ not filled his days.' Why? 'For
the child shall die at hundred years old.'
but the sinner, an hundred years old, shall be accursed.' And Rev. xxii. 2,
that 'the leaves of the tree (of life) were for the healing of the nations.'
This sentence is not history, but prophecy, and therefore we explain it most
naturally when we consider it as referring, not to that which shall then be
past, but to that which shall exist in the time here predicted. Dr. Gill upon
this passage, laboring to vindicate the millennarian hypothesis, endeavors to
avail himself of the original, and says, "That the Greek here should be
rendered preserving instead of healing;" but the answer is, that healing is the
most natural construction of the Greek word THERAPEIAN, and the other
construction would confound the use of the leaves with the use of the fruits.
Besides, here is an evident allusion to Ezekiel. xlvii. 12, predicting undoubtedly
the same period and the same events; 'The fruit thereof shall be for meat, and
the leaf thereof for medicine.' ^itheruphah from Rapha, signifying invariably
to heal, never to preserve, according to Buxtorf. The Greek (Therapeian) (...)
to have been derived from it.


2. The prediction 'that the kings (or civil powers) of the earth shall bring
their glory and honor into the New Jerusalem,' seems not consistent with a
state of universal perfection.

3. When Satan shall be loosed at the expiration of the thousand years, 'he
shall go out to deceive the nations which are in the four quarters of the
earth.' Rev. xx. 8; but they are not the wicked raised from the dead, as some
Millennarians believe; for when the wicked shall rise again, they will not be
deceived, but undeceived. The resurrection of the wicked is spoken of
afterward, verse 12, 13, with its solemn consequences. A needless, unnatural
reversion and repetition certainly, if Gog and Magog are the wicked raised from
the dead.

4. The ninth verse declares, that 'Gog and Magog compassed the camp of the
saints;' but a state of encampment is utterly inconsistent with the perfect,
uninterrupted felicity of the church triumphant. A camp implies soldiers, and
consequently that there will be in that day a church in a militant and
imperfect state.

SECTION II. The Millennium introduced by Christ's personal Appearance.
IT was the ancient opinion, that the whole thousand years will be the day of
judgment; in the morning whereof shall be the coming of Christ in flaming fire,
and the particular judgment of antichrist; and in the evening whereof shall be
the universal judgment. In the Millennium, Christ 'will judge among the
nations, and rebuke many people.' 'He shall judge the living as well as the
dead at his appearing and kingdom.' 2 Timothy iv. 1. So that the whole Millennium
may be properly termed the day of judgment, and perhaps thousands of years
succeeding it.

Now the inquiry is, Whether Christ will not personally appear when this great
day of judgment shall commence? For the solution of which the following
arguments are submitted to the contemplation of the candid and deliberate
Christian.

1. If this solemn appearance is to be at the conclusion of the Millennium, it
would be natural to expect that some prophecy of that happy time would conclude
by some plain and particular description of Christ as coming from heaven in the
clouds, or in some other manner: For the series of a particular prophecy is
ordinarily parallel with that of its accomplishment; but we no where find,
either in the Old Testament or New, any such description at the conclusion of
such a prophecy. The account of the Millennium in Rev. xxth. though concise is
very particular: And first, an angel comes down from heaven 'having the key of
the bottomless pit.' "This angel is Christ," says Dr. More: "it is he who has
the key of the bottomless pit; it is he who has the keys of hell and of death."
At the conclusion of this chapter, Christ appears on a throne; but there is no
mention of his coming from heaven in any manner whatever.

Those prophecies of the Old Testament, which most clearly predict the coming
of Christ, and the Millennium, plainly represent the former, not as that which
shall succeed, but as that which shall introduce the latter. The description of
the new heavens and earth, Isa. lxvth. and lxvith. chapters, is considered by
the best commentators as a prophecy of our gospel glory and that of the
Millennium, and the former as the figure of the latter. And in chap. lxvi. 14
-- 17, how plainly it appears, that the future glory is introduced by the
coming of the Lord with fire, and with his chariots or clouds ('for he makes
the clouds his chariots.' Psa. civ. 3) 'to render his anger with fury, and his
rebuke with flames of fire.' Now, since it is allowed that our gospel glory
typifies the Millennium, and that the destruction of the Jewish world typifies
the destruction of the Christian world; with equal propriety may we consider
the first coming of Christ as a type or representation of his second coming.
His first coming was with a 'fan in his hand thoroughly to purge his floor, and
gather his wheat into his garner, and to burn the chaff with fire
unquenchable.' Matt. iii. 12. And such will be the business of his second
coming. Here then is a solemn and glorious prediction with a double aspect; to
the first coming of Christ to destroy the Jewish world and introduce our
dispensation; and to the second coming of Christ to destroy the Christian world
and introduce the Millennium, the former being a type of the latter. We have
seen in what order the type has been fulfilled: What doubt then can remain of
the completion of the antitype in the same order?

So in Zech. xiv. we have a clear prophecy of the Millennium ^s introduced by
the coming of Christ, verse 5. 'The Lord my God shall come, and all the saints
with thee.' Whenever the scripture elsewhere mentions Christ's coming with his
saints, it is ever allowed to signify his personal coming: Here then the same
phrase, other things being equal, should have the same acceptance. Besides, it
is a maxim with divines, that the literal sense of scripture should always be
preferred to a sense merely figurative, when it does not oppose the analogy of
faith. Other such prophecies there are, which, for brevity's sake, are omitted;
but which the reader may examine as opportunity may occur.

2. It is holden by all expositors, that the seventh vial will introduce the
Millennium. The sixth vial gives warning of that coming of Christ, which shall
be as a thief, and which shall put the unwatchful to shame, Rev. xvi. 15.
'Behold, I come as a thief; blessed is he who watches and keeps his
garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame.' Whenever the scripture
elsewhere mentions Christ's coming as a thief, it always means his personal
coming. Now, if Christ will not personally appear till the conclusion of the
thousand years, no reason can he assigned why this solemn warning should be
fixed under the sixth vial rather than under the seventh; but if Christ should
appear in the morning of that day, the warning can be no where so properly
fixed as where we find it. q. d. One more vial, and then I come. Now if ever, O
Christians, watch and keep your garments, lest you walk naked, and they see
your shame.

3. At the marriage of the Lamb, Rev. xix. 7, all agree, the Millennium will
commence. But in Matt. xxv. 6, the representation is, that when Christ shall
come as a bridegroom, he will come personally. A (...) accordingly there is
great preparation for this wedding. The bride makes herself ready with
excellent attire, 'fine linen, clean and white,' Rev. xix. 8, "fit for the
entertainment of so great a King, who comes as an husband to dwell with his
wife. This is the scope of the forty-fifth psalm: Solomon's marriage was but a
type of this." See the pamphlet of Mr. Cheevers on this subject.


4. Those scriptures which represent the millennial state as the kingdom of
Christ, describe it in such a manner as affords clear evidence that the world
will then be favored with Christ's personal presence. This is David's kingdom,
so frequently predicted by the prophets; by Jer. xxxiii. 15, 'I will raise unto
David a righteous Branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute
judgment and justice in the earth;' and by Ezekiel. xxxiv. 23, 24, and xxxvii. 24,
'David my servant shall be king over them (my people.) A prince over them, and
a prince among them.' Such is the description of Christ's future kingdom in
Zech. xiv. 9, compared with verse 5th, and in Dan. vii. and 2 Timothy iv. 1. And
the time when the kingdoms of this world shall become the kingdoms of our Lord,
Rev. xi. 15, 18, will be the time when the dead shall be judged, and Christ
will destroy them who destroy the earth. And that this judgment and destruction
will take place at the beginning of that time, appears from Rev. x. 5, 6, 7.
For then Daniel will stand in his lot after resting in the grave. See the 3d
inference of this section, and argument 5th of section 4th. 'The Lord will come
with all his saints.'
This kingdom of Christ will be the New Jerusalem state, of which, when John
had a vision, he heard a great voice out of heaven, saying, 'Behold, the
tabernacle of God is with men!' Rev. xxi. 3. Behold, is an interjection of
wonder. The ancient tabernacle was peculiarly a type of Christ's body. 'The
Word was made flesh, and (eskeenoosen) tabernacled among us.' John i. 14.
Behold a wondrous event! The bodily presence of Christ is with men, 'and he
will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be
with them and be their God.' Therefore the name of New-Jerusalem 'from that day
shall be Jehovah Shammah, The Lord is there.' Ezekiel. xlviii. 35.

5. Is not the waiting of the saints for the Millennium, so often mentioned in
the Old Testament, the same as their waiting for Christ's coming, so often
mentioned in the New? 'It shall be said in that day, (the Millennium) 'Lo, this
is our God! we have waited for him.' Isa. xxv. 9. In Zeph. iii. 8, which is
allowed to predict the Millennium, we are commanded to wait for it. 'Therefore
wait ye upon me, says the Lord, until the day that I rise up to the prey,'
etc. And in Dan. xii. 12, he is pronounced blessed who waits and comes to
the one thousand three hundred and thirty-five days. For this glorious time,
the saints for ages have waited and are still waiting. What time? The New
Testament, which is the expositor of the Old, mentions no time thus waited for
on this side of Christ's coming; but it mentions our ' looking for and
hastening unto the coming of the day of God.' 2 Pet. iii. 12. It mentions a day
when 'to those who look for him, (Christ) he shall appear the second time
without sin unto salvation.' Heb. ix. 28. Of a time when Christians, serving
the living and true God, waited 'for his Son from heaven.' 1 Thessalonians. i. 10. And
when the saints groaning within themselves waited 'for the adoption, even the
redemption of their body.' Romans viii. 23.

6. When our Lord undertook to satisfy his disciples concerning the time of his
second coming, he mentions the most remarkable preceding events; that the
gospel should be preached to all nations for a witness, It is not necessary to
understand the word all here as without limitation. It is well known that the
phrases all the world, the whole earth, and all nations, frequently signify
only a very great part of the world, and of the nations. Dr. Newton says, that
this passage was accomplished before the destruction of Jerusalem; if it was,
certainly this word all has a limited sense. The same passage is again
accomplished in our last days by the Protestant reformation, which is also
foretold in Rev. xiv. 6, as some explain it, and represented by 'the angel
flying through the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach to
them who dwell on the earth, and to every nation and kindred and tongue and
people.' It is generally allowed that this event precedes the Millennium, and
therefore we must necessarily understand the phrase, 'every nation and
kindred,' etc. in a limited sense. In verse 8th, all nations are said to drink
of the wine of Babylon's fornication; but the South Se^^cations never drank of
it, and probably never will.
Matt. xxiv. 14; that there should be much sin and trouble and much persecution
in the Christian world; but not a word of universal reformation, or such a
Millennium as Christians in general are now expecting. He indeed mentions the
Millennium; but he plainly speaks of it as the consequence of his coming. Luke
xxi. 29, 30, 31. 'Behold the fig tree and all the trees! when they now shoot
forth, ye see that summer is now nigh at hand: so likewise ye, when ye see
these things come to pass, know ye that the kingdom of God is nigh at hand.'
Compare this with 2 Timothy iv. 1. When some thought that the kingdom of God
should immediately appear, Luke xix. 11, Christ rectifies their opinion by a
parable. A certain nobleman went into a far country, to receive for himself a
kingdom, and to return. See this text further explained in a note in page 112.


7. The apostles, Peter and Jude, prophetically describing the apostasy and
wickedness of the Christian world, 2 Pet. ii. and iii. plainly represent that
God will put an end to it; not by the general reformation of this sort of
sinners, but by an overthrow, like that of Sodom and Gomorrah. Peter first
describes their character and then their ruin. And Jude says, verse 14, 15,
that 'Enoch, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, (wandering stars)
saying, 'Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of his saints, to execute
judgment upon all, and to convince all ungodly men of all their ungodly deeds,
and of all the hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him.'
Here is not the least hint of a Millennium between this general apostasy, and
the Lord's coming (...) execute judgment.

8. In the viith. chapter of the book of Daniel, we have a most brilliant and
solemn representation of the appearance of Christ and the saints (...) T^a^ of
Christ is mentioned in verse (...) held till the thrones were cast down, (...)
the Ancient of Days did sit, whose garments were as white as snow, and the hair
of his head like the pure wool: his throne was like the fiery flame, and his
wheels as burning fire.' The coming of the faints is mentioned in verse 13; 'I
saw in the night visions, and, behold, one like the Son of Man came with the
clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of Days, and they brought him near
before him.'

Some have supposed that this Ancient of Days is God the Father, and
consequently that the 13th verse predicts Christ's ascension to him; but this
explanation cannot be the true one: for, 1. This description of the Ancient of
Days does not resemble any description of the Father, which the scripture
elsewhere affords; yet it is very similar to that of Christ in the f^^st
chapter of the Revelation. 2. In verse 21, 22, we find that the 'l^ttle horn
made war till the Ancient of Days came:' And the scripture elsewhere says, that
when this enemy shall have finished his work of mischief, not the Father, but
the Son shall come in some sense or other. See 2 Thessalonians. ii. 8. Therefore the
time, when the Ancient of Days and one like the Son of Man shall come, cannot
be the time of Christ's ascension: for the ascension of Christ took place long
before the little horn had existence, and hence it appears that the Ancient of
Days can be no other but He, 'whose goings forth have been from of old, from
everlasting.' The Son of Man too, in verse 13, signifies Christ. "From hence
the Son of Man came to be a known phrase for the Messiah among the Jews, and
from hence it was taken and used so frequently in the gospels" for this
acceptance. Yet this one like the Son of Man, which Daniel saw, must be the
people of the saints, as appears from his being brought to the Ancient of Days,
and from the explanation of this vision in the last of the chapter. To this one
like the Son of Man, Chebar, one like the Son of Man, is a noun singular; so is
g^am Chadhist, the people of the saints. A confirming evidence of the propriety
of this exposition. It is usual for the scripture to speak of a society of
persons under the character of one: The man of sin is a great number of persons.
says the vision, was given dominion and glory and a kingdom; and accordingly
the explanation says, The kingdom and dominion, and greatness of the kingdom
under the whole heaven, was given to the people of the saints of the Most High.
It is holden by all Protestants, that the beast with the little horn is the
Roman beast with Popish power: and here we are taught that, when the Ancient of
Days and one like the Son of Man shall come, this beast shall be slain, and his
body destroyed and given to the burning flame: and what is this burning flame
but that flaming fire in which the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven
taking vengeance?

That this is the personal appearance of Christ and of the saints, appears from
the harmony of this description with those passages, which are allowed by all
to signify their personal coming. Those texts, which confessedly predict this
solemn event, represent it as attended with fire and an innumerable company of
saints and angels: And here we read that 'His throne was as the fiery flame,
and his wheels as burning fire. A fiery stream issued and came forth from
before him; thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten
thousand stood before him.' Here too one like the Son of Man comes with the
clouds, verse 13. And where does the scripture speak of Christ or his saints
coming with the clouds, without intending their personal coming?

Indeed, it seems impossible to conceive how a mere figurative construction can
be fixed on this passage which would render the sense easy and natural. What
spiritual behavior shall appear in the saints hereafter, or what shall be done
to them, which may be compared to their collecting and meeting Christ in the
clouds, by any figure of speech which the scripture uses? But, if we allow this
passage to speak for itself, how exactly it accords with other scriptures,
which declare that 'the saints shall be one; John xvii. 21.
shall be caught up together in the clouds, 1 Thessalonians. iv. 17.
to meet the Lord in the air, and that by the instrumentality of angels, who
shall gather the elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the
other.' Matt. xxiv. 31.
Besides, it is granted by all, that the fulfillment of Daniel's prophecy
extends to the time of Christ's personal coming. There is no other passage in
this book describing that solemn event which may not be as easily figurized as
this. But must we suppose that Christ's second coming is not mentioned at all
in this prophecy? Must we suppose that an event of such infinite concernment to
mankind; to which all the preceding events are subservient, and to which the
prophecy extends; should be wholly omitted in this prophecy? By no means.
Therefore this coming of Christ and the saints must need^ be personal, and that
which shall destroy Popery and the Christian world.

9. The principal events of the above prophecy are briefly predicted, with an
evident allusion thereto, in the second epistle to the Thessalonians. The first
chapter mentions the future revelation of Christ in flaming fire; and as the
subject continues to the next, the Apostle exhorts them not to be shaken in
mind, or discouraged, as though Christ would not appear at all, if he did not
appear in a few years: 'Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him, that ye be not soon
shaken in mind, neither by spirit nor by word nor by letter as from us, as that
the day of Christ is at hand. Let no man deceive you by any means.' Then he
tells them what shall be first; not a Millennium, but a falling away, and the
revelation of that Wicked one, 'whom the Lord shall consume by the Spirit of
his mouth, and destroy by the brightness of his coming.' Here the coming of
Christ, or a like phrase, is three times used in the compass of a very few
verses. The two first verses which have this phrase, are allowed to signify
that coming of Christ which shall be personal; and when it is here mentioned
the third time, the same subject is continued; and the plain design of the
subject is to satisfy the minds of Christians respecting the time of Christ's
personal coming. Therefore, when this phrase is here used the third time, a
figurative sense must not be admitted without some better reason than merely to
support an hypothesis. Such a construction is unnatural; a perplexity of
language without a beauty, and opposite to the Apostle's design, as before
observed, leaving the mind of the Christian as much in the dark as ever with
respect to the time of Christ's personal coming. The argument of Mr. Spalding
on this passage, page 6, appears to the writes worthy of particular notice.
"The Apostle is here discoursing," he says, "concerning the proper coming of
Christ and used the same word, tees parousias, coming, to convey such an idea
in the first verse; and no sign being given of the variation of its meaning, is
could not be used to convey a different idea in the eighth verse, and be
intelligible: for if the same distinguishing mark of the difference, they can
give no instruction. Paul did not use words in this manner. Nothing can be more
unwarranted from the style of his writings, than to suppose he used the word
coming, in the first verse, for the proper coming of Christ, and in a few
following verses before he left the subject, without the least intimation of
varying its meaning, used it again, for his word or Spirit, or for some event
of Divine Providence, we know not what." Can this reasoning be fairly answered?
"It was a point of great importance," says Dr. Newton, in favor of this
comment, "for the Thessalonians not to be mistaken in this particular: because
if they were taught to believe that the coming of Christ was at hand, and he
should not come according to their expectation, they might be staggered in
their faith; and finding part of their creed to be false, might be hasty enough
to conclude that the whole was so. The Apostle therefore cautions them in the
strongest manner against this delusion, and assures them that other memorable
events will take place before the coming of our Lord." Doubtless then this
passage means as it speaks, when it declares that Christ will destroy the man
of sin by the brightness of his coming. So the phrase was explained by Justin
Martyr: "Christ shall appear from heaven in glory," he says, "when the man of
apostasy, speaking great things against the Most High, shall vex us
Christians." Dialogue with Tripho, page 336.


Thus it appears, that the commencement of the Millennium will be rendered
glorious by Christ's personal presence. And accordingly, as this solemn and
happy scene approaches, the signs of Christ's coming begin to appear. Nothing
can be more visible than the following signs of Christ's coming in the moral
world.

Deism, which laughs at the idea of a God in human form appearing in the
clouds, was scarcely known formerly in Christendom; but now it is come, and
come it must, to confirm what it denies, that Peter was a prophet, and Christ
is at hand. 2 Pet. iii. 3, 4. 'There shall come in the last days scoffers,
walking after their own lusts, and saying, Where is the promise of his coming?'
Paul says, 2 Timothy iii. 'In the last days perilous times shall come; for men
shall be blasphemers, ever learning and never able to come to the knowledge of
the truth, men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith; for as Jannes
and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these men also resist the truth.' Jannes and
Jambres withstood Moses by endeavoring to represent him as an impostor; so do
these men also resist the truth by endeavoring to represent all the prophets
as impostors. It is here predicted too that men shall be 'lovers of their own
selves,' which may signify that the expressions of self-love should abundantly
prevail. And, not to mention the abounding of selfish practices, was there ever
an age in which selfish religion was so boldly taught as in this? Was there
ever an age, in which there were half so many teachers highly esteemed, 'who
make sad the hearts of the righteous, whom God has not made sad, and strengthen
the hands of the wicked; that he should not turn from his evil way by promising
him life.' These liberal sentiments tend to produce liberal conduct, carnal
security and licentious practices. Therefore they must prevail, and undoubtedly
will, more and more, over all the Christian world! For it is necessary when
Christ shall appear, that he should find the world in just juch carnal security
as these sentiments most evidently produce; that he should find the world
relieved from the terror of that old fiction of eternal punishment, which
frighted the Popish ages. 'As in the days that were before the flood, they were
eating and drinking, and marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that
Noah entered into the ark, and knew not until the flood came, and took them all
away; so shall the coming of the Son of Man be.' Matt. xxiv. 38, 39.

Another sign of Christ's coming, which now appears, is a general belief of the
contrary. The Christians in general believe that Christ will appear some time
or other, but not quickly. They expect first a long thousand years, happy
years. Already they see Popery declining, knowledge and liberty prevailing, and
presently they expect to see religion too prevailing every where through the
Christian world; not considering that the prevalence of knowledge and liberty
too, the latter being the effect of the former, loudly announce that 'the day
of the Lord is at hand:' for 'even to the time of the end many shall run to and
fro, and knowledge shall be increased.' Dan. xii. 4.

The ancient Christians, it is well known, cherished no such opinion as that
which is now opposed. Polycarp, a disciple of St. John, intimately conversant
with him, and who doubtless knew that apostle's opinion of his own revelation;
expressly taught that Christ would introduce the Millennium by his personal
appearance. So did Justin Martyr, so did all the most eminent ancient fathers,
as Dr. Hammond, a zealous opposer of the millennarians, was forced to
acknowledge. But as Popery prevailed, this opinion failed; and as Popery in the
sixteenth century failed, this opinion prevailed. But now again it is almost
entirely exploded, and the general cry is, Peace and safety -- Salvation for
all men -- brighter days are approaching than were ever enjoyed heretofore --
tomorrow shall be as this day, and much more abundantly. We are come to the age
of reason. If ever there was a cry of peace and safety in any age of the world,
there is now; but what faith the word of prophecy? 'When they shall say, Peace
and safety, then sudden destruction comes upon them, as pain upon a woman with
child, and they shall not escape.' The scripture must be fulfilled, Christ must
come as a thief, and at an hour when men in general have no expectation of him.

What is the state of the Christian world in general at this day, but a sign of
Christ's coming? The Christian world in these last days, is the antitype of the
Jewish world in their last days, as President Edwards has justly observed. "God
in his providence now seems to be acting over again the same part which he did
a little before Christ came. The age wherein Christ came into the world, was an
age wherein learning greatly prevailed, and was at a greater height than ever
it had been before; and yet wickedness never prevailed more than then. So now,
learning is at a great height at this day in the world, far beyond what it was
in the age when Christ appeared; and now the world, by their learning and
wisdom, do not know God. They are miserably deluded; stumble and fall in
matters of religion, as in midnight darkness. Trusting to their learning, they
grope in the day time as in the night; run into (...) manner of corrupt
opinions and pernicious and foolish errors. They scorn to submit their reason
to divine revelation, to believe any thing which is above their comprehension;
and so, being wise in their own eyes, they become fools." -- Hist. of
Redemption, p. 325. 'The wicked shall do wickedly and none of them shall
understand;' they shall not discern the signs of the times.


The Jews of that time had much more knowledge than their ancestors; and how
much more enlightened is the present age than any former one! The Jews had many
among them who maintained the form of godliness, but denied the power; and how
many of this sort have we! The Jews had many Sadducees or infidels among them;
so have we. The Jews could not get evidence enough that Jesus was the Christ.
'How long do thou make us to doubt? if thou be the Christ, tell us plainly.'
Our Deists labor under the same difficulty: "I remember," says Paley, "hearing
an unbeliever say, that if God had given a revelation, he would have written it
in the skies." The Jews said, 'If we had lived in the days of our fathers, we
would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.' Such is
the language of modern catholicism. There were those among the Jews who
compassed sea and land to make one proselyte, without promoting true piety, as
our Jesuits have done in China, India, and other parts of the globe. And yet
there were remarkable revivals of religion among the Jews by the ministry of
John, of Christ and his apostles. So there are now among us. The dawn of our
dispensation appeared in that day among the Jews. The light then was not clear
nor dark; but it was one (remarkable) day known to the Lord, (not to men in
general) not day nor night. So the dawn of the Millennium now appears with us;
a light not clear nor dark; a day known to the Lord, not to men in general, for
they do not discern this time.

The ministry of John was a lively representation of what has been performed
among Christians in the three last centuries. John was Elias. And the Bible,
revived by the invention of the press, and improved by the Protestant ministry,
is our Elias. The glorious effects are as if Elias had visited the world again
to cure the people of idolatry. 'The hearts of the fathers are turned to the
children, and the hearts of the children to the fathers.' Mal. iv. 6. The
thoughts or sentiments of the first Christian fathers, with respect to
religious worship, are brought into union with ours, and ours into union with
theirs; and so the purity of the ancient Christian worship is restored, as the
purity of the ancient Jewish worship was restored by John and by the first
Elias. The reformation of the first Elias was in the conclusion of the literal
time, times and an half of famine. And the reformation by our Elias is in the
conclusion of the prophetical time, times and an half of Popish famine: 'a
famine not of bread and water, but of hearing the word of the Lord.' And thus
that in Mal. iv. 5, has a secondary and antitypical accomplishment, as well as
the rest of that chapter. The same prophecy, which describes the type, must
necessarily describe the antitype. 'I have reserved seven thousand men,' was
the Lord's answer to Elias's complaint. Paul, viewing that time as an image of
his own, declares, 'Even so now there is a remnant, according to the election
of grace.' Seven is the number of perfection: God's remnant is always a perfect
number, amidst all the opposition of sin and Satan. But Paul's time was an
image of ours: therefore we read that, when the witnesses rose, 'there were
slain of men seven thousand,' to the Popish cause. Seven thousand is a great
number; so was God's perfect number after the witnesses ^ose, much greater than
could be naturally expected, considering the sad and dark state of religion
which had preceded. Seven thousand were more than Elias thought of. When the
witnesses rose, there was a great earthquake or revolution; the Greek empire
fell, and the knowledge of the scriptures, with reformation in Europe, was the
consequence. But the learned reader, by considering the original, ( names of
men) will determine whether the comment of Dr. Goodwin and Mr. Jurieu on this
passage is not to be preferred.
And as there were seventy weeks from the time of the return of the Jews from
Babylon to their final ruin; so there is nearly the same portion of time from
the beginning of our deliverance from mystical Babylon to the commencement of
the Millennium. These and other signs which might be noticed, give confirming
evidence that the end of our world is near, and the Judge stands before the
door.

INFERENCES.

1. Hence we must expect, that the Christian world in future will be subject to
much sin and trouble. Licentious opinions and practices will prevail almost
every where. The pure gospel, and those few who embrace it, derided and
rejected. 2 Timothy iii. 1 -- 5. 'In the last days perilous times shall come: for
men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy,' etc. Even the wicked
in time past have been frequently under close restraint by their fear of future
punishment; but for the future, this fear is to be named superstition. Since
the reformation, men have enjoyed a precious opportunity to know and embrace
the truth; but they have not improved it. Therefore God will now choose their
delusions, and first rain snares upon them, then fire and brimstone and an
horrible tempest; this shall be the portion of their cup. And as the restraints
of religion will be cast off, so it is not improbable that civil government
will lose much of its energy, and men will be disposed, not only to think, but
to act, that which is right in their own eyes, in opposition to the welfare of
civil society, as well as religion: For they shall be 'traitors, heady,
high-minded. Presumptuous, self-willed, despising government, and not afraid to
speak evil of dignities,' 2 Timothy iii. 4. 2 Pet. ii. 10. Thus shall iniquity
abound, and great judgments must follow, which yet will not reform mankind; but
they shall harden their hearts more and more, like Pharaoh and his servants,
till the day shall break forth when God will get honor upon them, so that they
shall never despise his Son, nor his word, nor his people any more forever.

2. Hence PERHAPS, we have an easy construction of that in Matt. xxiv. 20,
whatever primary reference it may hove to the escape from Jerusalem. 'Pray ye
that your flight be not in the winter, neither on the Sabbath day.' Winter is
the time when summer and harvest are ended. Summer and harvest are similitudes,
which the scripture uses to represent our accepted time and day of salvation.
'The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and we are not saved.' When Christ
shall appear in the clouds to destroy the enlightened world, their harvest will
be past and their summer ended. The winter of divine wrath shall commence, such
'great tribulation as was not since the beginning of the world to this time;
no, nor ever shall be' Some good expositors consider this expression as
figurative, only signifying that it should be a time of very great calamity.
with that sort of sinners on the earth. Then too the Sabbath will begin, the
seventh millennary of the world, in which the risen and changed saints shall
enter into their rest; but of this rest the wicked will fall short by unbelief,
and vain will be their flight to mercy for relief, or mountains to fall on
them. Therefore pray ye that your flight may be in season, before the winter
and before the Sabbath day: 'for then shall be great tribulation, such as never
was before; no, nor ever shall be.'

3. Hence learn with what propriety the commencement of the Millennium is
called the end of time and finishing of the mystery of God. Rev. x. 5, 6, 7.
'And the angel, which I saw stand upon the sea and upon the earth, lifted up
his hand to heaven, and swear by Him who lives forever and ever, that there
should be time no longer; but in the days of the voice of the seventh angel,
when he shall begin to sound, the mystery of God should be finished.' Time
shall be no longer; that is, the accepted time with the Christian world shall
be no longer; the time of the Christian dispensation shall be no longer. All
those nations of sinners, which have heretofore enjoyed and rejected the
gospel, shall now be as Sodom and be made like unto Gomorrah, and the vineyard,
which they have despised, shall be given to nations bringing forth the fruits
thereof. The mystery of God shall be finished. The hand of the wicked has long
vexed the righteous; and while the latter have been persecuted and counted as
sheep for the slaughter, the former have flourished like the green bay tree.
And thus the providence of God toward the church has been mysterious. He has
suffered sin to practice and prosper for a time, times and an half. This has
been one great part of the mystery of God; a mystery no doubt to angels as well
as men. But now the mystery of God shall be finished, when the Millennium shall
commence, and the seventh angel shall begin to sound. God will now proceed to
'lay judgment to the line and righteousness to the plummet, and reward mankind
according to their works,' and sin will never again be suffered to practice and
prosper as heretofore.

When Daniel had a similar vision, (chap. xii. 7) he heard the man clothed in
linen swear by Him that lives forever, that 'when he,' i. e. the man of sin,
'shall have accomplished to scatter the power of the holy peopley, all these
things,' i. e. all the persecutions of the church, shall be finished. Hence the
propriety of the sense which our translators have given to the phrase, CHRONOS
OUK ESTAI ETI, time should be no longer. To render it the time shall not be
yet, gives to the article the the force of a relative; but there is no
relative, not even an article prefixed in the original. This construction too
depresses the sublimity of this passage. How majestic the posture of the angel!
How terrible his voice as when a lion roareth! How solemn the oath! All to
command the greatest attention to something he is about to utter. What is it?
that the time shall not be yet? that the affairs of the world shall for a
considerable time be as they are at present? No; but something far more solemn
and interesting: Time shall be no longer.

The commencement of the seventh trumpet, the seventh vial and the descent of
New Jerusalem, all synchronize by Mr. Mede's Table. Accordingly, when the
seventh trumpet begins to sound, Time is no longer, and the mystery of God is
finished: When the seventh vial is poured out, there was a voice from the
temple, saying, It is done: And when New Jerusalem descended, -- It is done,
said he who sat on the throne. Here then is a great confirmation, that the
sense which the translators have given to the above phrase, is the true and
proper construction. Hence the seven vials are properly called the seven last
plagues, though they all precede the Millennium.

SECTION III. The next Conflagration not universal.
WHAT a solemn description is that in 2 Pet. iii. 10! 'The day of the Lord will
come as a thief in the night, in which the heavens shall pass away with a great
noise, the elements shall melt with fervent heat, and the earth with the works
that are therein shall be burnt up.' That this conflagration will be such
literally, is manifest in that the apostle does not appear to speak in
figurative language; but with that familiarity of style, which is always proper
for an epistle. It is universally allowed that the deluge was such literally,
and here in a familiar letter Peter tells his brethren, that as the old world
was destroyed by water, so the present world will be destroyed by fire. 'The
elements shall melt with fervent heat;' that is, the present state of the
elements will be in some manner changed with fervent heat. The present state of
the aerial heavens (above which the Psalmist represents the waters to be) will
then be dissolved and pass away. A transition perhaps not much unlike that of
the air and elements in the land of the four cities when fire and brimstone
rained upon them. 'The earth also and the works which are therein shall be
burnt up,' as the land of the plain and the works of it once were. But the
prophecy of the conslagration, like other prophecies, may have different
periods of fulfillment, one at the beginning, the other at the conclusion of the
Millennium. When John had a vision of the final judgment, (Rev. xx. 11 to 15)
he says, 'I saw a great white throne and him that sat on it, from whose face
the earth and the heaven fled away; and there was no place found for them. Then
probably Christ will appear in such majesty and glory as never shall have been
seen before. Of that glory this attending his personal coming may be viewed as
a prerepresentation.


Dr. Hopkins and several others have observed and proved, that Ezekiel's
prophecy of Gog and Magog has two periods of accomplishment; the first
introducing, and the other concluding the Millennium. Now that the first Gog
and Magog will be destroyed by fire, is evident not only from Ezekiel. xxxviii.
22, but from the time of their destruction being that in which the Millennium
shall commence, and then, as already shown, Christ will appear in flaming sire,
taking vengeance. It is also very evident from Rev. xx. 9, that the last Gog
and Magog will be devoured by sire. Therefore, as there will be two Gogs at two
different periods; so there will be two fires at two different periods to
devour them. The first fire, a partial; the last, a complete fulfillment of the
above solemn prediction. The same prophecy we find in Mal. iv. 1. 'Behold, the
day comes which shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, and all they who do
wickedly, shall be as stubble.' Nothing could appear merely in these words,
when first written, to show that they ever would have more than one period of
accomplishment; yet the opposite is maintained by the most approved expositors.
This text was undoubtedly fulfilled in part when the Jewish polity and
dispensation were destroyed; but now, when the Millennium shall commence, it
will be accomplished far more extensively, and at the last period its
fulfillment will be complete.

That then next conflagration will not be universal, appears by Sect. I. which
implies the continued propagation of mankind in the Millennium, i. e. after the
world shall have been destroyed by fire. Now, if that fire should be universal,
how will any part of our species be preserved unless by a miracle? But the
scripture speaks of no preserving miracle in that day, but that which shall
change the saints, transmit them to the clouds and to immortality, in which
state they neither marry nor are given in marriage; but are as the angels of
God in heaven. That God and Magog will be the degenerate posterity of other and
a very sordid representation of their condition.
It is most rational therefore to suppose, that a part of our species will be
preserved without a miracle, and consequently that the fire will not be
universal. And does not the scripture clearly foretell such a preservation, and
that not of one or two families, but of whole nations?

When Peter had finished his description of the conslagration, he adds,
'Nevertheless we, according to his promise, look for new heavens and a new
earth wherein dwells righteousness;' that is, 'according to his promise' in
Isa. lxvth. and lxvith. chapters; for no where else do we find this promise
expressly mentioned in the prophets. Therefore no doubt the apostle Peter and
the prophet Isaiah both speak of the same new earth, With perhaps this
difference, this prophecy of Isaiah may have an aspect to the new and more
happy state of civil society occasioned by our gospel, as a figure of the real
new earth so plainly predicted by the apostle Peter.
and consequently of the same fire as that which shall immediately precede and
be the occasion of it. The prophet having described the blessings of the new
earth, proceeds to tell how they shall be introduced: 'For behold the Lord will
come with fire, and with his chariots, like a whirlwind, to render his anger
with fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire.' Isa. lxvi. 15. This text, as
appears by the connection, was fulfilled only in the type by the first personal
coming of Christ, and the consequent ruin of the Jews. The far more solemn and
extensive fulfillment is yet future, when the Christian dispensation and world
shall be finished, and as much of the globe as the scripture terms the whole
earth, and the whole world, will be destroyed by real fire from heaven. 'For by
fire and by his sword will the Lord plead with all flesh;' verse 16. Yet not
all in the unlimited sense; for observe what follows. 'I will send those that
escape of them to the nations, Tarshish, Pull and Lud, that draw the bow, Tubal
and Javan, the isles afar off, which have not heard my fame nor seen my glory,
and they shall declare my glory among the Gentiles,' etc. This was fulfilled in
the type, when those who escaped the Jewish destruction propagated the gospel
among the nations; and as the best commentators allow that the predictions in
general of this chapter have a secondary aspect to a period yet future, what
reason, which would not beg the question, can be offered why this passage, as
well as the rest, may not look to the same future period? Tarshish, Pull, and
other nations here mentioned, were Pagans, unacquainted with the Jewish gospel;
but when the Jewish economy and nation were destroyed, a brighter gospel shone
upon these nations than was ever enjoyed before.

And there are nations now on the globe which we may venture to call the
antitype of Tarshish, Pull and Lud. They are Pagans, unacquainted with our
gospel, so have a relation to us similar to that which we once had to the Jews.
And when our economy and world shall be destroyed, then will be their time of
love. Then the isles afar off, New Holland, New Guinea, Otaheite, Owhyhee, and
other dark regions, which have not heard God's fame, nor seen his glory, shall
enjoy a far brighter glory than was ever enjoyed before. And thus God's
dealings with mankind will be like what they have been in time past at the
burning of Sodom, the overthrow of the Egyptians, and the ruin of the Jews:
There will be three distinctions of men treated in a very different manner: The
righteous, who will be saved; the enlightened sinner, who will be destroyed;
and the ignorant sinner, who will be spared to take notice of, and improve the
warning. They who escaped the Jewish destruction became our miraculous
teachers; so they who shall escape our destruction may become miraculous
teachers to the rest of mankind, for any thing which yet appears to the
contrary. In that day, 'when the feeble shall be as David, the house of David,'
the royal reigning family, 'shall be as God,' perfectly holy as God is, ('We
know that, when He shall appear, we shall be like him') and 'be as the angel of
the Lord before them,' to guide, rule and instruct them. 'The nations of them
who are saved shall walk (not in New Jerusalem) but in the light of it (...)
which glorious city shall not need the moor nor the sun, the Jewish law nor our
gospel: For the Lamb shall be their light; they will receive instruction
immediately from Christ. This instruction, pure and infallible, they will
communicate to the church militant, and then no wonder they will see eye to
eye, and worship one God in one way; and indeed it is difficult to conceive how
mankind ever should arrive to such universal rectitude and harmony of sentiment
as will accomplish this promise without some new revelation from heaven. The
prevalence of Christian knowledge, and our greatest reformations in these last
days, have done nothing to effect this purpose. Christians are now no more
united than they were in the sixteenth century. The brightest geniuses, the
most extensive knowledge, and the purest visible piety are found in those who
widely differ in sentiment. Such is the weakness of the human mind, and the
blinding nature of sin in the most pious and knowing, that there seems to be
nothing, from the reason of things, which can lead us to imagine that this our
sad state will be much amended, while the present dispensation remains and the
world have only imperfect men for instructors.
This world, so soon to be ruined, is doubtless on this northern side of the
Equator. Here and here only has the gospel shone with the brightest radiance.
Here the four monarchies are. Here sits mystical Babylon. Here the beast and
the false prophet are; and here are they who obey not the gospel, and on whom
Christ will take vengeance when he shall appear. Not that we should limit this
destruction by the Equator, or any other line; but the thing insisted on is,
that where the pure gospel has appeared, there will be this conflagration.
"That some nations will remain for the righteous to reign over" after the
conflagration, was the opinion of Lactantius, Dr. Cresener, and the ingenious
Mr. Mede. -- Mather's Dissert. p. 30, 31, 32. See also Mr. Mede's Comment. p.
129 -- 135; and Diatrib. p. 553.
Here too we see the miraculous Aurora Borealis, an appearance of blood, fire,
and vapor of smoke. And are we absolutely certain that this is not a sign of
Christ's coming? But who ever saw just such a phenomenon in the southern
hemisphere?

Parallel to the text now explained is that in Zeph. iii. 8 -- 10, which
represents the Millennium as introduced by a conflagration. It declares that
God will then pour upon the nations ' all his fierce anger,' and that ' all the
earth shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy.' By this phrase it would
seem at first view as if the whole globe would be destroyed; but the next
verses plainly speak the contrary: 'For then will I turn to the people a pure
language, that they may all call upon the name of the Lord, and serve him with
one consent. From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia, my suppliants, even the
daughters of my dispersed, shall bring their, offering.

Thus it appears, that though the above prophecies may primarily refer to the
ruin of the Jews, and ultimately to the final judgment; yet their next
accomplishment will be the destruction, not of the whole globe, but only of the
whole world. Many enlightened sinner, in the south of Africa, in Asia and
America, though the may suffer great judgments, will, if the above hypothesis
be true, escape the conflagration, agreeable to l.zck. xxxix. 2, and Zech. xiv.
16, 17. But what is meant by the weapons, the sepulture, and soveral other
particulars of Gog and Magog. Will, doubtless be more clearly known when this
prophecy shall be fulfilled, than it can be at present.


INFERENCES.

1. From what has been observed, it is plain that the general events attending
Christ's second appearance, are typified by those which attended his first
appearance. At his first appearance, he gathered in his elect from the Jewish
world, burnt their city and temple, and gave a more glorious gospel to us than
was ever enjoyed before. So in the end of our Christian world, the wicked will
be severed from the just, and cast into a furnace of fire, and the next world,
as presently may appear more clearly, will be filled with such gospel glory as
never was enjoyed before. Behold here the wisdom and goodness of God! That part
of the human race, who wait longest for the gospel, enjoy its brightest glory,
when it appears. And thus 'the elder serves the younger, and more are the
children of the desolate than the children of the married wife, says the Lord.'

2. How gloriously manifest are the wisdom and justice of God in the
destruction of our enlightened world! How reasonable it is that so many
unthankful sinners, distinguished so wonderfully from all the rest of mankind
by a day of grace, should be distinguished too by a day of judgment! So the
Jews were treated: 'You only have I known of all the families of the earth;
therefore will I punish you,' said God. And are we better than they? No, in no
wise. Our knowledge, and consequently our guilt, is far greater than that of
the Jews. In mystical Babylon will be found the blood of all those who were
slain upon the earth. The Christians have slain many more saints than the Jews.
And instead of pitying the heathen, and exerting our utmost to illuminate them
and diffuse the pure gospel among them; we have cheated and robbed them,
enslaved and murdered them. 'Our sins have reached unto heaven, and God has
remembered our iniquities' committed in various parts of the globe; in South
America and Africa, in the East and West Indies.

The advancement of pure religion among the Pagan nations? or private wealth?
which of these has been generally the ultimate end of all our discoveries and
commerce in distant parts of the globe? Is the question difficult? Commerce, in
itself lawful and beneficial, has been carried on in a manner highly injurious
to the Christian cause. The Christian world is the center of the globe for
commerce and commercial wickedness, the great antitype of ancient Babylon and
Tire. In Rev. xviii. 12 -- 18, we may sec our variety store, and the manner of
its utter destruction. And though the present generation may be externally
better than the former, in some respects, and boast, like the Jews, that we are
not partakers with our fathers in the blood of the prophets; yet are we not as
corrupt, and more so, in other respects? How much less odious to the
All-searching Eye is the enlightened blasphemer than the ignorant persecutor!
What licentiousness in principle and practice now prevails every where! What
contempt of religion and the Bible! What horrid atheism opens its mouth against
the heavens! Whom does our increasing infidelity reject? Is it not the same
Messiah who was rejected by the infidel Jews, when the utter ruin of that
people was at hand? Therefore since we, like the Jews, are distinguished from
all mankind by a day of grace; so we shall soon be distinguished by a day of
judgment. And

3. Hence learn how dangerous the modern doctrine is that the Millennium will
be introduced by the ordinary course of providence. There is a generation at
hand who are to see and suffer this fiery storm. The more this doctrine, which
puts it far off, prevails among us, the more probably it will prevail in the
succeeding generations; so that the last generation will be greatly injured,
and rendered destitute of that warning, so necessary for their momentous and
solemn situation. It is as really necessary to be cautious against deceiving
the future, as the present generation.

But what a pity it is, it may be said, that so many great and good things
should be destroyed, such great riches and great improvements in knowledge! The
answer is, 'The Lord sees not as man sees.' Why are many youths, of
extraordinary talents, cut off in the bloom of life? Why have the most
flourishing cities sunk by earthquakes? Why was the Alexandrian library
destroyed by the hand of Providence? Who can tell? 'God's thoughts are higher
than our thoughts, and his ways than our ways.' He can, if he pleases, in that
day find room on the globe to preserve the elements of all useful knowledge. It
is now the creed of multitudes, that the conflagration would be on the whole
for the worse, and their inference is, that it will never come at all; so they
put far off the evil day. And such will be the creed of many in that very hour.
'Alas! Alas!' they will cry, 'that great city, that was clothed in sine linen
and purple and scarlet, and decked with gold and precious stones and pearls:
for in one hour so great riches are come to naught.' The burning of Babylon, it
seems, will be accomplished both mystically and literally, as appears from 2 Thessalonians. h. 8, already explained, Chap. II. Sect. 2. Arg. 5. The mystical burning
is now to be observed at this day. Babylon is consuming by the Spirit of
Christ's mouth in a manner invisible to many; for the operation of spirit is
invisible. But her final burning will be literal and visible; for it will be
effected by the brightness of Christ's coming.


SECTION IV. The Millennium introduced by the Corporeal Resurrection of the
Saints.
NO part of scripture more clearly describes the Millennium, its manner of
beginning and ending, than the xxth. of Revelation. Here the plain account is,
that One, having the key of hell and of death, will come down from heaven, free
the nations from deception, and raise the saints from the dead, who shall reign
with Christ on the earth a thousand years; that the rest of the dead shall not
live again till the thousand years are finished, and then will follow the
general resurrection and judgment; all which is very plain and intelligible on
the truth of the scheme under present inquiry. But on the truth of the
contrary, the chapter is exceedingly difficult to understand. We find, by verse
4th. this happy period introduced by the resurrection of the saints. 'I saw
thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them. And I saw
the souls of them who, were beheaded for the witness of Jesus and for the word
of God, and who had not worshipped the beast, neither his image, neither had
received his mark upon their foreheads nor in their hands, and they lived and
reigned with Christ a thousand years.' That this first resurrection is not
figurative, but literal, may appear by the following arguments.

1. In whatever sense we understand this chapter, whether literally or
allegorically, it is certain here is no account of two sorts of death and
resurrection, in those verses which expressly mention a resurrection, as so
many have imagined; but the plain representation is, that two sorts of persons,
who were dead in the same sense, should revive at two different periods of
time. This must appear to any one who properly and attentively considers this
phrase, 'the rest of the dead.' If this passage is construed to signify two
sorts of death and resurrection, the necessary paraphrase would be worse than
tautology. I saw those who had the temper of the martyrs, and they received
this temper of mind and reigned in a suffering state a thousand years; that is,
some reigned twenty, others forty, sixty or an hundred years, till the thousand
were expired. But the rest of the dead, consisting of both sorts, lived not
again until the thousand years were fulfilled. The above construction cannot
admit of a better paraphrase, and is it not quite unintelligible? In the time
of the American war there were once in the hospital at Cambridge, about forty
sick persons. Three of them were men of eminent piety. A friend of mine at that
time brought me intelligence that these three were restored to perfect health,
but that the rest of the sick remained in the same afflicted situation. But I
soon found to my great disappointment that these three had all along been as
sick as any of the rest. At the next interview I asked this friend what he
meant by telling me such a story. "I meant the truth," he replied, "I spoke
figuratively: there is a great reformation among us. The cause of these three
men has recovered from its unhealthy condition, and their excellent temper of
mind is manifest in our young converts, who are spiritually healed."
"This text," says Dr. Newton, "cannot admit of allegory without the greatest
torture and violence: For with what propriety can it be said that some of the
dead, who were beheaded, lived, but the rest of the dead lived not again;
unless the dying and living again be the same in both, places, a proper death
and resurrection? If the martyrs rise only in a spiritual sense, then the rest
of the dead rise only in a spiritual sense; but if the rest of the dead really
rise, the martyrs rise in the same manner; there is no difference between
them." Dissertation on the Prophecies, Vol. II. p. 337.
"The first and second resurrection must needs be of the same kind," says
President Mather, "otherwise the discourse would be illogical." Piscator says,
"In every rational distinction the opposite parts are of the same kind. Here is
a distinction of dead men living again, some at the beginning, the rest at the
end of the thousand years; but those, who live again after the thousand years,
live as to their bodies: therefore so must the other." First Resurrection, p.
19.


But some, expositors, who appear sensible of this difficulty, have recourse to
another invention in order to turn this plain and easy account of the
resurrection into allegory. The martyrs, they say, will live again in the
revival and flourishing of that cause which they espoused, and which had been a
long time dead among a world of enemies, who will now die in their turn, in
that their cause will die: For Satan will now deceive the nations no more for a
thousand years: and then he will deceive again, and so these old enemies of
religion will live again in the revival of their cause, while the martyrs in
heaven will die again in their cause: Briefly, the righteous and the wicked
will live and die by turns. As if John had said, I saw the souls of them who
were beheaded, and they revived in that their cause revived. I saw thrones and
they sat upon them in that their cause sat upon them; but the rest of those who
were dead, with respect to an opposite cause, lived not again in that cause
till the thousand years were finished. But here is not all the difficulty. What
a needless repetition does this comment fix on this part of the chapter! What
is the expulsion of darkness, but the effusion of light? and what is the
ligation of Satan and undeceiving of the nations, in verse 1 to 3, but the
revival of the martyrs' cause? If so, the account of the resurrection in verse
4th. tells nothing more than what was just told us before. The preceding verses
declare plainly that the martyrs shall revive in their cause, i. e. that their
cause shall revive; and the 4th. verse only repeats the same thing in another
manner. Now it is usual for the word of prophecy to represent the same thing
differently in different visions; but where do we find different
representations of the same event in the same vision and almost in the same
verse? Besides, how uninstructive is the text rendered by this comment! If the
cause of the righteous flourishes and triumphs over all a thousand years, what
person need be told that the cause of the wicked will not flourish for that
thousand years? Again, If the first resurrection be only the revival of the
martyrs in their cause; then the revival of the wicked in their cause after the
Millennium, by the loasing of Satan, will be the second resurrection. Why then
does not the chapter call it a resurrection, as well as the other, the same
subject being continued? Why was this omission? why this sudden, unnatural
transition from one kind of allegory to another? Such a monster in language
should never be imputed to the scripture without some better reason than merely
the vindication of that hypothesis, which puts the coming of Christ far off. It
may be argued that the first resurrection must be figurative, because it is
here said that the souls of those, who were beheaded, lived; not their bodies.
But how often do the scriptures speak by a synedoche like this! 'Every living
soul died in the sea,' means that every living body died in the sen. Christ's '
soul was not left in hell:' His body was not left in the grave. 'O let me
escape thither,' says Lot, 'and my soul shall live:' My body shall live. And
thus the souls of the martyrs lived, i. e. their bodies lived again. Therefore
this passage must necessarily mean that two sorts of persons, righteous and
wicked, who were dead in the same sense and at the same time, revived at two
different periods. The righteous first and the rest after many days, even a
thousand years. Accordingly the prophet Isaiah, predicting this very time,
tells us, (chap. xxiv. 21, 22, 23) that the Lord 'will punish the hosts of the
high ones, which are on high, and the kings of the earth upon the earth, and
they shall be gathered together as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and be
shut up in prison, and after many days shall they be visited.' That then the
moon shall be confounded and the sun ashamed, when the Lord shall reign in
mount Zion and in Jerusalem and before his ancients gloriously.' Jerusalem
which is above shall come down; the ancient prophets and saints will descend
from heaven, assume their bodies, and Christ will reign before them gloriously
in mount Zion and Jerusalem: that is, in New Jerusalem, the true glorified
church collected from all preceding ages.

2. It is allowed by all, that the second event, which this chapter calls a
resurrection, must be understood literally. Therefore, other things being
aqual, the first must be understood so too. That the account of Satan's being
bound and loosed is figurative, is freely granted, and the figure appears at
first view; but this is no proof that the account of the first resurrection is
figurative where the contrary appears at first view. If this account be an
allegory, as so many imagine; then the other resurrection, in the conclusion of
the chapter, is entirely another subject, and has no very immediate relation to
any preceding part of the chapter. But if we can allow the account of the first
resurrection to mean as it speaks, a plain and immediate relation appears
between one part of the chapter and the other, and an easy, beautiful
connection, both of the style and subject, is conspicuous through the whole.

3. It will not be denied, that one great design of this chapter and of this
whole prophecy, was to support and comfort the church under her sore trials of
Pagan and Popish persecutions. Now this great design is certainly most favored
by the explanation for which this section is pleading: It could not be so
comfortable to the martyrs, when they were going to the stake, to believe that
only their cause would revive, as to believe that both they and their cause
would revive together. The martyrs have here a precious promise that, if they
will lose their lives for Christ's sake, they shall save them; that, if they
will suffer for Christ, they shall reign with him. If they will die faithfully,
they shall live again and reign gloriously. And accordingly we are told in
history, that a multitude of martyrs understood this promise literally, and
were greatly comforted by it. And here we may see how unreasonably some
expositors have used the promise of Elias, the manner of its fulfillment, as a
key to this prophecy, by saying that John had the spirit of Elias. The case of
that prophet, and that of the martyrs were very dissimilar. The promise of
Elias was a promise to the Jews; not to that prophet himself: for he had
ascended to heaven long before it was revealed. But the first resurrection was
a promise, not only to the church in general, but to the martyrs of Jesus in
particular, who have been chiefly born since this promise was revealed, and who
stood in peculiar need of such a clear and special manifestation of divine
love, as the literal sense of this promise affords.

4. The same literal sense is confirmed by several other passages of scripture.
In Isa. xxiv. to xxvi. the resurrection of the saints is evidently mentioned as
one of those happy events which shall constitute the glory of the Millennium.
Those chapter declare, that when 'the Lord shall make unto all people a feast
of fat things, and shall destroy the veil which is spread over all nations, he
will swallow up death in victory.' And that this victory is not figurative, but
literal, appears from the apostle's quoting this passage, and expressly
declaring that it will be fulfilled in the corporeal resurrection of the
saints. 1 Cor. xv. 54. Then shall be brought to pass the saying that is
written, 'Death is swallowed up in victory.' And when Paul speaks of the
resurrection of Christ as a proof of ours, he has doubtless in view that in
Isa. xxvi. 19. 'Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they
arise. Awake! and sing, ye who dwell in dust! for thy dew is as the dew of
herbs, and the earth shall cast out her dead.' And the same prophecy declares,
that the wicked shall not then be raised: 'O Lord, other lords besides thee
have had dominion over us. They are dead, they shall not live: they are
deceased, they shall not rise.' Isa. xxvi. 13, 14. That is, they shall not rise
at present: for 'they shall be shut up in prison, and after many days shall
they be visited.' This explanation is not new. This prophecy of Isaiah was
understood in the same light by a number of ancient expositors, both Jews and
Christians. -- See Mather's Dissertation, p. 16.
Chap. xxiv. 22. In chap. xxxv. which predicts the Millennium, we read that
'the ransomed of the Lord (from the grave) shall return and come to Zion with
songs, and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and
gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.' But sorrow and sighing will
not flee away till the resurrection. And in chap. lxvi. 14, the prophet,
foretelling the same future glory, declares, that when the saints shall see it,
not only will their hearts rejoice, but their bones also 'shall flourish like
an herb.'

The departed saints are perfectly holy and much more happy than they were on
earth; but still the marks of God's displeasure for sin are upon them. 'The
Lord has put away thy sin,' says Nathan to David, 'but the child shall die,
and the sword shall not depart from thy house.' The sad consequence of sin,
which serves to keep it in memory, shall yet continue with you. Such is the
case of every departed saint: his sin is forgiven, but not wholly blotted out;
and such his case will continue till the resurrection, by which all the marks
of God's displeasure for sin will be wiped off from his people forever. Hence
we have that in Acts iii. 19. -- 21. 'Repent and be converted that your sins
may be blotted out:' When? 'When the times of refreshing shall come from the
presence of the Lord: And he shall send Jesus, which before was preached unto
you, whom the heavens must receive till the times of the restitution of all
things.'

These passages afford much confirming evidence, that there will be a bodily
resurrection in the Millennium, and that the dead in Christ will rise long
before the wicked. And why this slowness of heart to receive these comforts,
which the prophets have spoken? Would such a distinction be strange or new? We
have no account in scripture that any wicked man ever yet rose from the dead;
but many of the saints have risen already; why then should it be thought a
thing incredible that many more saints may rise long before the resurrection of
the wicked?

5. Several events, which synchronize with the commencement of the Millennium,
are inseparably connected with the corporeal resurrection of the saints. When
the Millennium shall begin, Christ will personally appear in flaming fire, as
already shown; and 'them who sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. The Lord
himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel
and the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise. The Lord shall come
with ten thousand of his saints. The Lord my God shall come, and all the saints
with thee.' And in Dan. vii. the saints come with the clouds to the Ancient of
Days, when the Ancient of Days came and judgment was given to the saints of the
Most High, and the time came that the saints possessed the kingdom. 1 Thessalonians.
iv. 14 -- 16. Jude 6. Zech. xiv. 5. Dan. vii. 22.
Doubtless these very saints appeared to John in vision, when he 'saw thrones
and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them.

It is allowed by the best commentators, that the thousand years will
immediately succeed the one thousand three hundred and thirty-five days. Dan.
xii. 12. And then Daniel will stand in his lot, verse 13. But 'go thou thy way
till the end be: for thou shall rest (in the grave) and stand in thy lot at the
end of the days;' that is, at the end of the one thousand three hundred and
thirty-five days. These days expire with the time, times and an half nearly.
'The man clothed in linen, which was upon the waters of the river, held up his
his right hand and his left hand to heaven, and swear by Him who lives
forever, that it shall be for a time, times and an half, and when he (the vile
person) shall have accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people, all
these things shall be finished.' Parallel to this was the vision of John, Rev.
x. 5 to 7. 'And the angel which I saw stand upon the sea and upon the earth,
lifted up his hand to heaven, and swear by Him who lives forever and ever,
that time shall be no longer.' But in the days of the voice of the seventh
angel, when he shall begin to sound, the mystery of God shall be finished, as
he has spoken to his servants the prophets;' and to the prophet Daniel among
the rest. Accordingly, when the seventh angel shall sound, 'God will judge the
dead, and give reward unto his servants the prophets, to the saints and to them
who fear his name, both small and great.' And what can this reward be, but
Daniel's lot, and the recompense which Christ has promised to the charitable
'at the resurrection of the just?' And that this judgment and reward will be at
the beginning, as well as at the conclusion of the Millennium, appears by
carefully considering, that when 'the seventh angel shall begin to sound, time
shall be no longer, and the mystery of God shall be finished. Then the end will
be of the one thousand three hundred and thirty-five days, and consequently
that will be the time, when Daniel shall stand in his lot. Thus we see that the
time of the first resurrection is the time of Christ's coming, the time of the
conflagration, the time when the mystery of God shall be finished, when time
shall be no longer, when Daniel shall stand in his lot, when God shall judge
the dead, and give reward unto his servants the prophets. How plainly then it
appears from this synchronism, that here is no other than a glorious promise of
the corporeal resurrection of the saints.

To what has now been offered, there are some objections worthy of particular
notice.

1. When our Lord was examined by the high priest whether he was the Son of
God, 'Jesus says unto him, Thou have said; nevertheless, I say unto you,
hereafter shall ye see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of power, and
coming in the clouds of heaven.' Matt. xxvi. 64. Did the high priest die in the
Lord? if not, he will have no part in the first resurrection. How then will he
see the Son of Man coming in the clouds of heaven? To which it may be replied,
that, besides the impossibility of knowing the high priest's character when he
died, and that of others present at this examination; it should be carefully
noted that only the first part of this werse seems to have been addressed to
the high priest in particular: the latter part seems to be addressed to the
Jews as a nation. The verb OPSESTHE is plural, ye shall see the Son of Man
coming, etc. as when he said to the Jews, in chap. xxiii. 39, ' Ye shall not
see me henceforth till ye shall say, Blessed is he who comes in the name of
the Lord;' that is, this nation shall not see me henceforth till ye, as a
nation, are converted.

2. If there should be a resurrection before the destruction of the globe, how
is it true that 'Man lies down and rises not again till the heavens be no
more?' Job xiv. 12. The answer is, 1. That man here may mean, perhaps, the
greatest part of mankind, as it does in some other scriptures. 2. At the next
conflagration the present state of the aerial heavens, as may presently be
shown, will, in some manner, pass away. 3. Suppose any of the Jews in Old
Testament times had been of opinion that there would be a bodily resurrection
of many saints at the end of their dispensation, and consequently before the
final ruin of the globe;
this objection would have been as forcible against that opinion, as it is now
against the opinion that many more saints will rise at the end of our
dispensation. So when Christ declared, John v. 28, 29, 'The hour is coming when
all that are in their graves shall hear his voice, and come forth,' his words
would then as fairly have proved that no saint would rise when he arose; as
they will now prove that no saint will rise at the time of the first
resurrection. The word hour is sometimes used for time indefinitely. The ten
horns received power as kings ' one hour with the beast.' i. e. at one time
with the beast. Rev. xvii. 12. So here 'the hour is coming:' the time is
coming, when all the dead shall be alive. And it may be that the general
resurrection will be accomplished in one hour.

The objection taken from Matt. xxv. 30 to 46 must vanish, when it is
considered that it does not there appear to have been our Savior's design to
measure periods, but only in general to show what a solemn distinction between
the righteous and the wicked will be the consequence of his second coming. We
should also remember, that 'one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a
thousand years as one day.'

When we read too that in Dan. xii. 2, it seems as if all would be raised at
the same time. 'And many of them who sleep in the dust of the earth shall
awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt.'
But even here the revival of the righteous is mentioned first, as it is in
every other text where both are mentioned together, which affords prevailing
evidence that the resurrection of the righteous will be first in the order of
time. But how long first? Daniel's prophecy here does not say; but the
Revelation says it will be a whole day first: and the Revelation is exegetical
of the book of Daniel. "As the prophets often speak of things future as if they
were already effected," says Dr. Newton, "so they often speak of things to be
brought about in process of time, as if they were to succeed immediately; past,
present and to come being all alike known to an infinite mind, and the
intermediate time not revealed perhaps to the minds of the prophets."
Dissertation on the Prophecies, Vol. 1. p. 16^.


INFERENCES.

1. Hence it appears that the Millennium is yet future. There has been no
corporeal resurrection since this prophecy was revealed. The capture of
Constantinople by Mahomet the Second, in the year 1453, with the consequent
ruin of the Greek empire, has appeared to some expositors like Satan let loose
to deceive the nations. Hence their Millennium begins in the year 453. But what
was the condition and behavior of mankind in that intermediate time? Are they
distinguished in genuine history from other ages by knowledge, piety, peace and
happiness? Nothing more remote. Who without pain can read the miseries of our
fellow creatures in the fifth and sixth centuries by the fall of the western
empire, when the Barbarians, without compassion to age or sex, carried fire and
sword, massacre and desperation among the people wherever they went? What vast
desolation afflicted the world in the seventh and eighth centuries, by the
conquest of the Saracens extending far and wide; from Italy to the river Niger,
in Africa; from Portugal to the remotest Indies. Before them was the garden of
the Lord; behind them a desolate wilderness. And what were the ninth, tenth and
eleventh centuries, but the midnight of Popish delusion? Then, if ever, the man
of sin sat in the temple of God, and the house of prayer became a den of
thieves. The twelfth, thirteenth and fourteenth centuries are well known to be
distinguished by the most extensive and bloody persecutions of the
Petrobrussians, Waldenses, and Lollards, that ever disgraced the human nature.
"It is enough to make the blood run cold to read of the horrid murders and
devastations of these times! how many poor innocent Christians were sacrificed
to the blind fury and malice of their enemies! It is computed that in France
alone were slain a million." While the sword of the fierce Othman (horrid
argument) was propagating a false religion by pouring blood and devastation
through the eastern empire. What melancholy ages were these! What kind of reign
upon earth had the saints in this dreadful Millennium! And what matter of
wonder it is, than men eminent for knowledge in divinity and history, should
ever attempt to vindicate this hypothesis! A clear manifestation how necessary
it is that the mind should be influenced, not by great names, but great
arguments, in all our inquiries for the meaning of prophecy, as well as every
other part of the sacred scriptures.

2. The first resurrection will not be merely that of the martyrs, as some have
supposed, but of others who have not worshipped the beast. The propriety of
mentioning the martyrs here expressly is easy to be seen. Other saints in
general are not in such peculiar need of comfort from this promise as the
martyrs were. And perhaps too the reign of the martyrs will be, in some
respects, more glorious than that of most other saints. But there is evidence
that many and perhaps all the saints who shall then have lived, will have a
part in the first resurrection: for then Christ will appear in the clouds, as
already shown; and 'When Christ, who is our life, shall appear,' says Paul,
'then shall ye also appear with him in glory;' that is, in a state of glory in
the clouds; 'and so shall we ever be with the Lord.' Christ will come with all
his saints; 'He will then send his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and
they shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from one end of
heaven to the other.' Matt. xxiv. 31. And when Paul treats of the first
resurrection, he says, 'We shall all be changed in a moment, in the twinkling
of an eye, at the last trump (for the trumpet shall sound) and the dead shall
be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed.'

But when we consider how numerous mankind will be in the Millennium, it may
may be asked, How will there be room on the globe for such a multitude of
glorified bodies? But he who is able to raise these bodies is doubtless able to
find room for them. Many of them may be employed alternately in other parts of
the universe, and open such opulent sources of communication from the numerous
islands of the ethereal ocean, as will cause the next dispensation as much to
exceed the present with respect to knowledge, as the present exceeds the
former. Many of them too may ascend to the third heaven, and there live for a
time, while their lord is upon earth, as Enoch and Elijah did ^^ile he was upon
earth before; and may appear again with Christ upon earth as Elijah did when
Christ was upon earth before. Moreover, he who can raise the dead, can say to
the deep, Be dry. Though the prophecy of the new earth has ultimate reference
to that most glorious state of the church which shall succeed the Millennium;
yet many of the best commentators allow, it will be fulfilled in part when that
happy period shall cornmence. Therefore that in Hag. ii. 6, and Rev. xxi. 1,
may is part be fulfilled literally, as well as mystically, for any thing which
yet appears to the contrary. And if only one third part of the sea should
become land, it would furnish nearly as much room for inhabitants as there now
is on the whole surface of the globe. To what purpose are all the arguments
from the laws of nature in opposition to the doctrine of the n^w earth, unless
our philosophers could know what the lave, of the new nature of the new earth
shall be.


3. Hence it appears agreeable to the ultimate design of this whole chapter,
that the Millennium will be a third general dispensation of grace, a new order
of things with respect to the church militant, as distinct from the present, as
the present is from that of the Jews. It has now been shown, that the first
resurrection will be attended with Christ's personal appearance in flaming
fire, and the inference is necessary that there will be a miraculous
manifestation of things which were never before exhibited to the world. But
more will be offered to confirm this in the next chapter.

4. Hence it is probable, that the thousand years will only be literally such.
The first and second resurrection, with the chapter in general, have a literal
meaning, as already has been shown. Therefore the thousand years, other things
being equal, must be considered as having the same acceptance. Three hundred
and sixty-five thousand years are out of all proportion, as Dr. Hopkins has
justly observed.

The week of days and the week of years, among the Jews, are allowed to be
analogous to the duration of the globe; but the seventh day is no longer than
any other day of the week.

The first dispensation continued four thousand years; the second two thousand
nearly. Therefore the third dispensation, continuing only one thousand years,
has the same proportion to the second as the second has to the first: As two
are to four, so is one to two.

In that day it is allowed, that the imperfect saints will have far greater
degrees of holiness than the imperfect saints have at present, or ever had
heretofore. And therefore sin and its consequences will appear far more
dreadful to them than they appear now to us. And hence their desires and
prayers will be earnest for that far more glorious state of the church beyond
them, in which the prediction of the new heavens and earth will have its
complete accomplishment, and in which the whole church, collected from all ages
and nations, shall appear without spot or wrinkle; sin, sorrow and death being
entirely banished forever.

These considerations must afford some degree of evidence that the Millennium,
though a very bright and glorious day, will not continue, and that it is not a
thing desirable, on the whole, that it should continue longer than literally a
thousand years.

When any particular saint enjoys the lively exercise of grace, he is far more
happy than he was before; yet he forgets the things which are behind, and the
future perfect day is more earnestly desired than cover: So it will be with the
church militant in the Millennium. Her desires for the perfect day will be more
earnest than ever before in any former age. Therefore, comparing future time
with the past, it does not appear rational to imagine that three hundred and
sixty-five thousand years will be suffered to elapse before these earnest
desires shall be gratified.

CHAP. III WHEREIN THE GLORY OF THE MILLENNIUM SHALL CONSIST.
TO every inquiring mind it must now be evident, that the subject will remain
unfinished till something more is offered to show what the happy state of
mankind will be in the Millennium. This shall now be attempted; and may the
Holy Spirit afford humility and light, that only the truth may be exhibited and
the cause of Zion promoted.

SECTION I. The Church Militant in the Millennium will enjoy a New Revelation.
THOUGH nothing will ever be added to the scripture substantially different
from what is now revealed; yet the proposition in view is the necessary
inference from the preceding chapter, and confirmed by several other arguments.

1. The distinction between the present and former dispensation, chiefly
consists in our having a new and more glorious revelation, which abrogates the
old positive institutions; and, besides affording new discoveries, explains
what (...) more obscurely revealed before. As much distinction and a similar
one there will be, we may rationally suppose, between our dispensation and the
Millennium: for it is not improbable that our positive institutions will be
then abolished: We have not the least evidence that baptism will continue
longer than to the end of this world. Matt. xxviii. 20. Nor that the Lord's
Supper will continue any longer than till the coming of Christ. 1 Cor. xi. 26.
And what necessity will there be of such a token to keep in memory an absent
Friend when he shall be present?

2. It will not he denied that several ancient prophecies do, in the same
sentences, predict both the present dispensation and the Millennium, and the
former as the type of the latter. And the propriety of viewing them in this
light plainly appears by prelim. 4. Those prophecies could afford no more
evidence to the Jews that their dispensation would be succeeded by another,
than they now afford that our dispensation will be succeeded by another. We
have seen what their fulfillment was in the type, and hence may infer that their
fulfillment will be similar in the antitype.

3. Under the Jewish economy the ark of the testament was placed in the inner
tabernacle, never to be seen by any one, except the high priest, through that
dispensation. 'The Holy Ghost this signifying,' says Paul, 'that the way into
the holiest of all was not yet made manifest, while as the first tabernacle was
yet standing;' that is, while that old dispensation remained. Therefore, to
open or make manifest the way into the holy of holies, and consequently to
bring the ark of the testament into view, required a new dispensation. Heb. ix.
1 -- 10. Hence it appears, that for any prophet to predict that the ark of the
testament shall be seen, is implicitly the same as to predict a new
dispensation. But when the seventh angel sounded, there were great voices in
heaven, saying, 'The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord
and of his Christ. And the temple of God was opened in heaven; and there was
seen in his temple the ark of his testament.' What is this sudden appearance of
the ark of the testament, concealed for ages, but a figure significant of a new
revelation? The seventh of the last plagues ^s allowed to synchronize with the
seventh trumpet; but when John had seen these plagues, he looked, and behold
the temple of the tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was opened. Rev. xv. 5.
This is undoubtedly the same as that in Rev. xi. 19; and hence it is plain that
the latter ought to stand where it is placed, under the seventh trumpet* Not to
introduce a new chapter and subject, as some expositors have imagined.
The ark of the testament contained the glories of law and gospel. The same is
predicable of the Old Testament, the New Testament, and the future revelation.
The judgment was set and the books were opened, Dan. vii. 10. At the first
coming of Christ the books of the Old Testament were opened by a new
revelation; so at his second coming the books of both Testaments will be opened
by a new revelation.


4. Then doubtless, and not till then, will be known what the seven thunders
uttered. If we compare Rev. x. 1 -- 7, with Dan. xii. 6 -- 9, we shall plainly
perceive that of John and that of Daniel to be similar visions. Now, as the
sealed words which Daniel did not understand were not explained but by another
revelation in a new dispensation; so we have no reason to expect that the
sealed voices of the seven thunders will be explained but by another revelation
in a new dispensation. And as the former were explained by the opening of the
seven seals; so we have reason to expect that the latter will be explained by
the next revelation.

5. It will not be denied that every part of the Bible is given for the benefit
of the church militant in some age or other. Therefore it is highly reasonable
to expect that the whole of it will be understood before the final judgment.
But how is all this knowledge to be attained without extraordinary assistance?
What poor, dark apprehensions had the ancient Israelites of their own Bible,
till Christ explained it by another at his first coming! And how will both
these now be perfectly understood without the third volume at his second
coming? What a large and valuable portion of scripture is yet under a veil,
which the most elaborate, ingenious and learned commentaries have never taken
off! How will those prophecies, the solution of which depends on the knowledge
of some ancient hieroglyphics, be ever perfectly understood without miraculous
instruction? But if we suppose that the revived saints will remember the events
of their former life, as all acknowledge who believe the resurrection; it is
easy to see how this knowledge may be revived, and this part of scripture be
known as well as the rest. And it is not improbable that the history of all
preceding ages may be rectified and made sacred by this divine instruction, as
that of Moses was from the beginning to his own time.

Thus it is reasonable to suppose, that though the essentials of religion will
be always the same, there will yet be another revelation, and probably (as
human memory will then be finite) a record, distinct from the present with
respect to precept, prophecy and history. And without doubt it will be far more
explicit and glorious than the present revelation; more immediately and far
more extensively known, so that the feeble shall be as David, and the house of
David as God; and the nations of them who are saved will so walk in the light
of New Jerusalem, as they never did before.

The general events of our dispensation are predicted by the opening of seals
and the sounding of trumpets; (when a seal is opened, none but readers can
immediately understand the subject.) But the next prophetic revelation is
represented as being uttered by articulate thunder, which much more than a
trumpet will sound instruction far and wide. Multitudes will hear it at once; a
nation born in a day. Thunder is the voice of God, loud and solemn. It is the
God of Glory who thundereth. It is Christ who will teach the nations more
clearly and gloriously than ever before; though probably not without the
ministry of infallible saints. This instruction will be so clearly understood
as to harmonize the whole church militant; all will see eye to eye. How
illustriously the wisdom of God shines forth in suffering the church, now just
before the Millennium, to be afflicted with a great diversity of opinion,
schism and separation, notwithstanding the increase of knowledge, and the
greatest pains used for reconciliation by the wise, the pious and the
charitable: Presently the delightful contrast will appear, and a far greater
beauty than if such differences had never existed.
Truth published by thunder will make swift progress, and the knowledge of the
Lord will fill the earth as the waters cover the seas.

SECTION II. The Millennium rendered glorious by New Heavens and a New Earth.
WHEN the apostle Peter had finished his solemn description of the
conflagration, he comforts believers with the promise of new heavens and a new
earth. 2 Pet. iii. 13. 'Nevertheless we, according to his promise, look for new
heavens and a new earth wherein dwells righteousness.' Whatever spiritual
blessings these words, by having a double reference, may presignify, the
literal sense of them must not be excluded. That word of prophecy, which is
like silver seven times tried, is not only fulfilled in different periods, but
sometimes in different senses. 'The desert shall rejoice and blossom as the
rose.' Isa. xxxv. 4. 'I will give -- to thy seed -- the land of Canaan.' Genesis
xvii. 8. These and several other passages seem to have a literal as well as
spiritual fulfillment. The same may be observed of the first prophecy after the
apostasy respecting the enmity between the seed of the woman and the seed of
the serpent: It is now as clearly fulfilled in the literal as in the spiritual
sense. Therefore, if it were proved that the above promise of a new world has a
spiritual aspect, it would by no means follow that there will not be also a
literal fulfillment of it.

As God is one, so his works are one. A glorious uniformity of design is
conspicuous through the whole of them. It is a great beauty in the works of our
Creator, that, amidst all their variety, one species, of created existence
represents another, and one period of events represents another. Hence the much
in a little of the word of prophecy. Accordingly the present state of the
natural world resembles that of the moral. Now what great absurdity is there in
supposing that the works of the same God will in future time be similar to what
they have been in time past? that the future state of the moral world will be
represented by the future state of the natural? that as, by what has been
proved, there will be a great miraculous change for the better in the moral
world, so there will be the like in the natural? Why is the renovation of the
earth after its ruin any more incredible than the renovation of our own earth
after the ruin of our bodies? Why then may not the above promise mean as it
speaks; especially since it is a maxim with divines, that the literal sense
should always be preferred to the figurative, when it does not oppose the
analogy of faith.

It is proved that the former part of this chapter treats of a literal deluge
and a literal conflagration. And now when it treats of a new earth, must
another subject present itself to view all at once, or a most unnatural
transition from the literal to the figurative? Certainly not without some
better reason than the support of that hypothesis, which has already been shown
to be erroneous. "The general rule of interpretation is not to recede from the
literal sense unless there be a necessity from the subject matter. But where is
that necessity in this case? Cannot God make new heavens and earth as easily as
he made the old ones? Is his strength decayed? I be second rule is the use of
the same words in the context. Saint Peter had used the same phrase of heavens
and earth twice before in the same chap (...): The old heavens and earth, ver.
5; The present heavens and earth, verse ^: and now he uses it again, verse 13.
The new heavens and earth. Have we not then reason to suppose that he takes it
here in the same sense that he had done twice before, for real, material
heavens and earth? There is no mark set of a new lignification, nor why were
should alter the sense of the words. The very form of the words and the manner
of their dependence upon the context, lead us to a literal sense:
'Nevertheless,' says the apostle, ' we expect new heavens,' etc. Why
nevertheless? i. e. notwithstanding the dissolution of the present heavens and
earth. The apostle foresaw that what he had said might raise a doubt in their
minds whether all things would not be at an end; to obviate this he tells them,
notwithstanding that wonderful desolation that I have described, we do,
according to God's promise, expect new heavens and a new earth. You see then
that the new heavens and new earth are substituted in the place of those that
were destroyed. And would you substitute allegorical heavens and earth in the
place of material? what an equivocation would it be in the apostle, when the
doubt was about the material heavens and earth, to make an answer about the
allegorical?" -- Dr. Burne^.
The supposition that the new earth only means the abundant righteousness of
that day, is refuted by the very words of this promise, which plainly
distinguish the new earth from the righteousness which shall dwell in it. 'We
look for new heavens and a new earth wherein dwells righteousness.' So in
Isa. lxvi. 22, the new heavens and earth are clearly distinguished from the
church which shall flourish in that day: 'As the new heavens and the new earth,
which I will make, shall remain before me, so shall your seed and your name
remain.' And in Romans viii. 19, which by an emphatical prosopopoeia represents
the whole creation as waiting and groaning for this renovation, the same
distinction is manifest. 'And not only they, but we ourselves also, groan
within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, even the redemption of our body.'

These passages plead for the literal sense of this glorious prediction of the
new heavens and earth. And how agreeable is this construction to what is known
to be God's manner of working both in the natural and moral world. The most
salubrious air, the cheerfullest sun, the purest sky, are often the immediate
consequence of the most violent storms. The present beautiful creation rose
from chaos. And in the moral world the greatest good often succeeds the
greatest evil. 'In the place where it was said, Ye are not my people, there
shall they be called, The children of the living God.' So this part of the
creation which, is now subject to vanity and the curse, and reserved unto fire
against the day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men, it is not
unreasonable to suppose, will thenceforward be the subject of restitution and
the most glorious exhibitions of mercy. But, though the aerial heavens in that
time may become much more salutary and productive of longevity than ever before
over all the globe, on which account, as well as on account of the new state of
things in general, the whole globe may be said to be new; yet there is no
difficulty in the hypothesis that the next restitution will be only partial,
only the commencement of that which shall be complete at the final judgment.
The curse which afflicts the earth for man's sake, seems to have had two
periods of fulfillment; the first immediately after the apostasy; the second at
the deluge. For though Dr. Burnet's theory, as such, cannot agree with the
scripture, yet in this matter his reasoning is worthy of particular notice.

The new spiritual creation has two periods of accomplishment: The first, that
of regeneration; the second, that of perfection. And the human soul in the
intermediate time is the subject of the widest extremes. It has been proved
too, that the prophecies of Gog and Magog -- of the resurrection and
conflagration -- have yet two periods of accomplishment.

When all these things are considered, we are not without evidence that there
must be a second period to fulfill all the happiness predicted of the new
heavens and earth.

What this new earth will be, we know not any more than we know what our bodies
will be; but doubtless a glorified earth will be a suitable mansion for
glorified bodies, and consequently for that New Jerusalem which shall come down
from God out of heaven.

This new earth will be the land of Israel, the antitype of Canaan, and a most
glorious fulfillment of the promise to Abraham, 'that he should be heir of the
world through the righteousness of faith.' This will be the inheritance of the
meek, Matt. v. 5; and of those children who obey their parents in the Lord,
Ephesians. vi. 1 -- 3, and thereby become the true children of Abraham. The apostle,
to encourage the true obedience of children, instead of the type, presents to
their view the antitype; instead of saying, 'Thy days shall be long upon the
land,' he says, 'Honour thy father and thy mother, which is the first
commandment with promise, that it may be well with thee, and that thou may
live long on the earth.' Not the present earth: for here obedient children in
general live no longer than others; but on the new earth, of which Abraham's
spiritual children are heirs, and which is the antitype of the land given to
obedient children by the fifth commandment.

To this land of the spiritual Israel, it seems, Rachel's children will return,
those babes of Bethlehem, who were slain by the cruelty of Herod. The thirty
first chapter of Jeremiah contains a prophecy of the Millennium, or of the next
dispensation, as well as this; and in verse 15, 16, 17, we have these words --
'A voice was heard in Rama, lamentation and bitter weeping; Rachel weeping for
her children, refused to be comforted for her children, because they are not.
Thus says the Lord, Refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine eyes from tears:
for thy work shall be rewarded, and they shall come again from the land of the
enemy, and there is hope in thine end, says the Lord, that thy children shall
come again to their own borders.' The same pious parents in Bethlehem, whose
affliction is here predicted, are here exhorted to patience and resignation,
and are comforted too with the glorious promise that their children shall
return to their own borders, i. e. to the antitype of their own borders. They
shall come again from the land of the enemy, a land of which Babylon was a
resemblance, and which the scripture elsewhere calls the land of darkness and
the shadow of death: For death, we know, is the great enemy of the saints
through all ages, and the last enemy which shall be destroyed.

The New Testament prophecy, which is the greatest expositor of the Old, knows
of no other land of Israel below the third heaven but the new earth. This then
will be the inheritance, the heaven begun below, of the spiritual Israel,
whether they be Jews or Gentiles. On this part of the globe, where sin and
misery have abounded, holiness and happiness will much more abound. The vilest
of sinners once inhabited Canaan; but the Lord cast them out before the
children of Israel. And the city of the Jebusites became the city of David, and
the place which the Lord chose to put his name there.

SECTION III. Of the Salvation of the Jews, in the next Dispensation.
ANOTHER great event which will serve to constitute the glory of the
Millennium, is the salvation of the Jews. That they will yet embrace the
Christian faith is very manifest, not only from several passages in the Old
Testament, but from Romans xi. and 2 Cor iii. 16. By an eye of faith they will
first look on him whom they have pierced and mou and then be brought into the
land of Israel. The prophets represent their gracious return as the happy
consequence of their repentance and humiliation in their s tate of captivity
and dispersion, as appears from Levit. xxvi. 40 to 45. Jer. iii. 14. Ezekiel.
xxxvi. 37. and several other passages.

Though infidelity and all manner of wickedness will doubtless continue to
prevail among us to the end; yet, from what has been shown, we may expect that,
by remarkable revivals here and there, God will call in his elect at different
times, till at length the Jews will embrace the truth as it is in Jesus. And
when these natural branches shall be graffed in again, the wild olive branches
shall be broken off. As the Jews in general were given over to infidelity and
false religion when we were converted; so the Christians in general will be
given over to infidelity and false religion when the Jews shall be converted.
And yet their conversion will be as life from the dead to the greatest part of
mankind: For Christendom is but small part of the globe.
This appears not only by Chap II. Sect. 2 and 3; but by Romans xi. 18 -- 22
'Boast not against the branches; thou stand by faith: Be not high-minded,
but fear: For if God spared not the natural branches, take heed lest lie also
spare not thee. Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God! on them
which fell, severity; but toward thee, goodness, if thou continue in his
goodness; otherwise thou also shall be cut off.

The injurious treatment which the Jews have received from the Christians, and
from that church in particular to whom this epistle was directed, plainly
manifests how necessary this admonition was. The Gentile Christians in general
have not continued in that goodness of God which has so wonderfully
distinguished them from the Jews. They have been high-minded, and boasted
against the natural branches. Instead of pitying them, and using the best means
for removing their prejudices, we have despised them, and in many instances not
allowed them the commom privilege of citizens. They have been a reproach and a
proverb, a taunt and a curse among us; yea, we have plundered and persecuted
them from age to age. What then are we to expect but the dreadful
accomplishment of the above solemn threatening, that the greatest part of the
Christian world will in that day be given over to infidelity and false
religion, to hardness of heart and blindness of mind?

Hence also we may expect, that when the Jews shall become true believers, the
Christian Gentiles will become their enemies and furious persecutors; and as,
when the Gentiles first believed, some Jews united with them so, when the Jews
shall believe, some Christians will probably unite with them, and all shall be
in one sheepfold, constitute one Israel, and have fellowship in the same
sufferings.

Here will be the last persecution of our dispensation, Gog and Magog; the
battle of the great day of God Almighty. Vast multitudes of false, sensual and
infidel Christians, and perhaps Mahometans, will probably unite their efforts
to extirpate the truth from the earth, and destroy a people brought back from
the sword of Rome heathen, and Rome Christian, by the hand of Providence,
which, perhaps shall then have given civil and religious liberty to all that
part of the globe, where the Jews are chiefly dispersed. Against these sierce
persecutors God will plead with pestilence and blood; and at last Christ will
end the dispute by his own personal appearance. Then the fishes and fowls and
beasts, and 'every creeping thing which creeps upon the earth, and all the
men who are upon the face of the earth, shall shake at his presence,' while he
shall rain upon that wretched multitude an overflowing rain, great hailstones,
sire and brimstone. 'Lo! he comes in clouds, and every eye Many eyes at that
time, and every eye sooner or later.
shall see him, and they also which pierced him.' Before this they will see him
with an eye of faith and mourn; now probably they will see him with bodily eyes
and mourn, for their bodies will not be changed till after the resurrection.
Christ will first appear, then the dead shall rise, and then the living saints
will be changed. 1 Thessalonians. iv. 16, 17. 'The Lord himself shall descend from
heaven with a shout, and the dead in Christ shall rise first: Then we which are
alive on the earth shall be caught up together in the clouds.' In this manner
will the dead and living of the true Israel be gathered from the four winds and
be brought into their own land, that is, into the new earth, the glorious
antitype of ancient Canaan. And accordingly the dead, as well as the living,
have received a promise, that they shall return into the land of Israel. Isa.
xxxv. 10. 'The ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to Zion with songs,
and everlasting joy shail be upon their heads; they shall obtain joy and
gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.' But sorrow and sighing will
not flee away till the resurrection.

A like promise we have in Ezekiel. xxxvii. one design of which was particularly
to comfort those pious Jews, who, by reason of the Babylonish captivity and
that of Salmanezer, were in a state of despondency, and said, Our hope is lost,
our bones are dry, we are cut off for our parts; q. d. the captivity will
indeed return after seventy years; but as for us, we shall never live to
return. Our bones will be dead and dry long before that happy period. Ah! but
you shall return, says the Lord; 'Behold! O my people, I will open your
graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves, and bring you into the
land of Israel, That nothing may seem to fail which the Lord has promised, the
Jews may possibly before sunrise resettle their old land, and there suffer
great persecution from their enemies. When the Jews returned from Babylon, the
prophecies which predicted their return, were fulfilled; yet all agree that
their ultimate fulfillment was an object far more extensive and glorious.
However, there seems to be no prophecy of such a literal return in the New
Testament.
and ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have opened your graves, O my
people, and brought you up out of your graves. Then shall ye know that I the
Lord have spoken and performed it, says the Lord;' which strongly intimates,
that they should not know before the very important and glorious signification
of this prophecy.

That this is not a spiritual resurrection, as many have supposed, must be
evident by the following arguments.

1. It is allowed by Dr. Hopkins to be a good argument that the Millennium will
be literally a thousand years, that the prophecy repeats that number of years
several times. As well may it be argued that the resurrection now in view will
be literal, because it is several times declared that God will 'open their
graves and bring them up out of their graves.'

2. Regeneration in another part of scripture, though it is sometimes called a
resurrection, is no where expressed by opening the grave or coming up out of
the grave. Wherever any person or persons are spoken of as coming up or
brought up from the grave, a literal resurrection is always intended. When a
person is regenerated, he is said in scripture language to live or rise from
the dead; but never to come forth from the grave. Both kinds of resurrection
are mentioned by our Lord in the same discourse. John v. 25, 28, 29. This is
universally acknowledged; and see how he expresses himself in order to be
understood: 'Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming and now is,
when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall
live.' This is the spiritual resurrection. 'Marvel not at this; the hour is
coming in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and come
forth; they who have done good unto the resurrection of life, and they who have
done evil unto the resurrection of damnation.' Here Christ plainly means the
corporeal resurrection, and his manner of expression is just like that of the
prophet in the passage before us.

3. Though this prophecy refers to the whole spiritual Israel, it is evident
that one special design of it was to comfort those pious captives, who said,
Our hope is lost, we are cut off for our parts, and to convince them that their
hope was not lost, and that they were not wholly cut off for their parts. But
if only a spiritual resurrection is here intended, the prophecy leaves them as
it finds them, without any more hope, as to their own case, than they had
before. For the prophet only to tell these captives that there will be a great
reformation among mankind some time or other, was certainly not the most direct
method to convince them that their hope was not lost and that they were not cut
off for their parts. But if this prediction be literal, it speaks directly to
their case, and is full of consolation for those who were to die in that
grievous captivity.

4. This chapter is evidently parallel with the xxth. of Revelation. Both
chapters predict the resurrection of God's people. Both have a similar design.
Both are intended to give consolation to persons in a similar condition. The
former to comfort those who died in the captivity of Affyria and Babylon; the
latter to comfort those who died in mystical Babylon. And as, in the book of
Ezekiel, the prophecy of Gog and Magog is next in order to that of the
resurrection and David's reign over the land of Israel; so, in the book of
Revelation, the prophecy of Gog and Magog is next in order to, that of the
resurrection and Christ's reign over the new earth. These considerations afford
evidence that the prophet Ezekiel here foretells the very same resurrection as
that in the xxth. of Revelation. And as the latter has already been shown to be
literal in Chap. II. Sect. 4, it is certainly most rational to understand the
former in the same light. Ezekiel in the prophecy of Gog and Magog has in view
the type and antitype; but John only the antitype.


The prophet in the latter part of this chapter seems to foretell the perfect
union of God's people of Israel and Judah, and perhaps of Jews and Gentiles, as
their antitype; represented by two sticks, which became one in his hand, that
the glorious church, thus united, shall have David for their king, and the land
of Israel for their habitation; but here David is Christ, and consequently the
land of Israel must be the land of Christ, the new earth on which Christ will
reign with his saints a thousand years,

Thus it appears that, not the type, but the antitype; not the old Canaan in
its present or former state, but the New Canaan, far more excellent and
glorious, is reserved for the Jews, in common with other believers, when they
shall have embraced the true Messiah. That they should have no better
habitation than their ancient land through the Millennium, is too gross a
conception to entertian of gospel glory or that of the Millennium. The promise
in Genesis xv. 18, which gave to Abraham all the land from the river of Egypt to
the river Euphrates, was doubtless fulfilled in the days of Solomon. 2 Chronicles.
ix. 26.
If not, it is strange that we find no particular account of it in the New
Testament, and especially in the book of Revelation, where it might be so
naturally expected.

The same Old Testament prophecies which have been supposed to predict the
return of the Jews to their old land do as plainly predict the return of their
ancient ceremonial worship; the sanctuary, sacrifice, tabernacle, new moons,
appointed feasts, and David for their king. Therefore we have just as much
evidence from the Old Testament that the Jews will return to their ancient
economy, as that they will return to their ancient country to dwell there
through the Millennium, in the manner so commonly imagined. Some better thing
is doubtless provided for that poor, stupid, and punished people, who are still
beloved for the fathers' sakes. A better worship, a better country, and a far
more glorious accomplishment of the promise made to Abraham.

INFERENCES.

1. Hence it appears probable, that the true gospel church at the coming of
Christ will consist chiefly of Jews. Their conversion will afford another
important argument in favor of divine revelation; but the Christian infidels
will not regard it at all. The Bible will still be ridiculed, and the doctrine
of Christ's coming in particular. And many of those who shall believe it, will
consider it far distant, and place it beyond the Millennium. Though the
knowledge of scripture among the pious will be greatly increased, as well as
every other branch of knowledge in the world, still 'the wicked shall do
wickedly, and none of them shall understand; but the wise shall understand.'
The Jews shall understand, and shall look for Christ's coming: for unto them
who look for him shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation
They shall say, Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord. Agreeable to
that in Matt. xxiii. 39, 'Ye shall not see me henceforth till ye shall say,
Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.'

2. Hence, perhaps, we may find what is, intended by the fullness of the Jews
and fullness of the Gentiles, Romans xi. 12 and 25. The fullness of the Jews must
be the fullness of the elect among the Jews. This will readily be granted. And
the fullness of the Gentiles must in this verse signify the fullness of the elect
among our Christian and Mohammedan Gentiles, and not among the millennial
Gentiles, as some might imagine: For 'blindness in part,' say, Paul, 'is
happened to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in.' "It cannot
be denied but that some of Paul's expressions are like unto what is in Luke's
gospel, and why may not this allude to that in Luke xxi. 24? 'Jerusalem shall
be trodden down of the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled,'
i. e. until the times be fulfilled when the fourth monarchy shall come to its
ruin. See a like phrase Jer. xxvii. 7. When the four monarchies of the Gentiles
are finished, then ends the time of the Gentiles," -- Mather's Doctrine of the
Jews' Conv. Chap. 2.
But this blindness in part, it is allowed, will continue no longer than till
about the time when the Millennium shall commence, and consequently this
fullness of the Gentiles will take place about the same time; but surely the
fullness of all the nations on the globe will not take place till a thousand
years afterward. Our Lord predicted that Jerusalem should be trodden down of
the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. Luke xxi. 24. The
times of the Gentiles will be fulfilled 'when time shall be no longer;' that
is, when our Christian day of grace shall be finished, and consequently when
the fullness of our Gentiles shall come in, and not when the thousand years
shall be finished: For then Jerusalem would be trodden down of the Gentiles
through the thousand years, which all deny who either maintain or oppose the
millenarian doctrine.

Here then is another proof that the fullness of the Gentiles in the above
passage is the fullness of our Gentiles, who enjoy the present gospel
dispensation. The elect number of the Jews and of the Christian Gentiles will
of the ungodly will be consigned to ruin. And yet the fullness of the Jews will
be the riches of the Gentiles and life from the dead to the Gentiles. Because,
not only will the salvation of our elect Gentiles be then completed, but this
event will be followed by the conversion of all the Pagan Gentiles to a far
more glorious gospel than was ever enjoyed in any preceding age of the world.

3. How often should the conversion of the Jews be the subject of prayer! It is
our indispensable duty to pray for all men now living, if peradventure God will
give them repentance to the acknowledgment of the truth. Paul prayed for the
Jews even after they were rejected: 'My heart's desire,' he says, 'and prayer
to God for Israel is, that they may be saved.' But at the present time the
saints have peculiar encouragement to pray for their conversion. It is a
glorious even swiftly approaching. From what has been observed, it must precede
the coming of Christ, and may be expected within a few years. Before Christ's
coming they will say, 'Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord;' but
they will not say this before their conversion.

We now see the dawn of the Millennium; a day neither clear nor dark, and
delusion and wickedness will make it still darker. 'But it shall come to pass,
that at the evening time it shall be light; There was dawn of our dispensation
before sunrise; a day among the Jews neither clear nor dark, by John's ministry
and that of our Savior. With the Jews, by reason of infidelity and hypocrisy,
the day grew more and more dark; and when it was quite evening with them, such
a glorious light shone upon another people, as never was seen before. Then was
fulfilled that in Zech. xiv. 6, 7. The same production now begins to have a
secondary accomplishment: the dawn of the next dispensation visiting us before
the second appearance of the S^n of Righteousness.
with the Jews first and then with the Pagans. Therefore, since multitudes who
bear the name of Christians, must and will reject the power and purity of the
gospel, how joyfully, how thankfully should every true saint embrace the
encouragement in favor of the Jews which the promises afford, and improve it
by frequent and fervent prayer for their speedy reformation; that the veil may
be removed from their heart, while Moses is read before them; that they may
truly accept of the punishment of their iniquities, which divine justice has
inflicted upon them for so many ages, that so the true people of God, Jews and
Gentiles, may constitute one gospel church, and dwell together in the glorious
land of the spiritual Israel. But from hence it must not be inferred that we
should not pray for the Christian nations; the plan of this subject is entirely
consistent with very great reformations in the Christian world. And the present
Concert in Prayer affords encouragement that the Lord is about to pour out his
Spirit upon us, and that he will soon fill the whole earth with his glory. But
'by terrible things in righteousness will thou answer us, O God of our
salvation.'

SECTION. IV. The Third Dispensation a glorious Exhibition of Christ's Kingly
Character.
THE doctrine of Christ's personal reign with his saints on the earth is the
necessary inference from the preceding reasoning, especially that in Sect. 2
and 4, of Chap. II. All who maintain that Christ will appear personally when
the thousand years shall commence, and that the first resurrection will be
corporeal, freely allow and believe that Christ's personal reign will be the
happy consequence. It is acknowledged by all, that when Christ shall come to
the earth, he will continue here till the long day of judgment shall be
finished; and that the saints will be raised and continue here with him through
all that time: And while they continue here, they will certainly reign here, as
their triumphant song declares, Rev. v. 10. 'And have made us unto our God
kings and priests, and we shall reign on the earth.' Therefore the same
scriptures which prove that their resurrection shall take place, and that
Christ will personally appear when the Millennium shall commence, do
neccessarily prove their millennial reign.

But, since this doctrine is considered by many as very unreasonable, it is
necessary to take partitular notice of the arguments which are offered against
it. There are several in Dr. Hopkins's Treatise on the Millennium; the
consideration of which, how much soever that excellent performance is to be
esteemed, cannot be omitted: One is taken from Col. iii. 4, 'When Christ who,
is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory.'
"Appearing with Christ in glory," says the Doctor, "means appearing with him in
heaven, as that is the place of glory." System of Divinity, Vol. II. p. ^29 --
231


But the earth will be the place of glory, it may be answered, 'when the Son of
Man shall come in his glory,' and 'all the earth shall be filled with his
glory.' The Doctor himself says, that "when Christ shall come personally, he
will appear, and the saints with him, somewhere near the earth, and that here
they may continue to judge the world many thousand years." But how then is it
true, that when Christ shall appear, the saints shall appear with him in heaven?

To show how contrary it is to all reason that Christ will come personally on
the earth, the Doctor offers the following arguments:

1. "He is in the most convenient and agreeable situation to govern the world
and take care of his church." Treatise on the Millennium, p. 46 -- 50.


And he will be in the most convenient situation for these purposes after his
second coming, which situation the Doctor allows, will be somewhere near the
earth, and that for many thousand years.

2. "It does not appear agreeable to his station and office, as King and Head
over all things, for him to descend in the human nature and erect a throne on
earth, which, so far as can be conceived, would be no advantage to his person,
design, and work, but very much to the contrary."

And yet the Doctor says, that "Christ will descend and erect a throne
somewhere near the earth, and may judge mankind here many thousand years." And
Job says, 'I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the
latter day upon the earths.' Where then is the difficulty of supposing that one
of these many thousand years will be improved for judging the living? Why is it
"contrary to all reason," that all nations should enjoy a theocracy hereafter,
any more than that one nation should have enjoyed this kind of government
heretofore? And why will it be a greater disadvantage to Christ's person,
design or work, for him to be a glorious King on the earth for a thousand
years, than it was for him to have been a poor servant on the earth for thirty
years. Angels and the just made perfect, are now fully satisfied. that Christ
is infinitely just and righteous; but when he shall have governed a world of
nations for several ages without failing of perfect rectitude in a single
instance, how much more firmly will his character, as Judge, be established in
the view of all! How much more clearly and joyfully will the saints at last
behold his qualifications for that infinitely solemn business which shall then
follow, of judging the wicked and determining the final condition of the whole
human race! How will the happy myriads shout with loud voices, 'Worthy is the
Lamb who has reigned, to receive power and riches and wisdom and strength, and
to reward every man according to his works:' (for in righteousness has he
ruled the world) and justice and judgment are the habitation of his throne.

Hitherto God, in his manner of working, has ever proceeded from inferior to
superior displays of his character. How then can it be "contrary to all reason"
to imagine, that the inferior displays of his character, as Judge, will precede
the employment of that most solemn tribunal which can be conceived of in the
aniverse. When these things are considered, how will Christ's personal reign be
any disadvantage at all to his person, design or work? Some have considered the
first coming of Christ as a great disadvantage to his person, and of course
have denied that there was ever such an event; but the truth is, we are poorly
able to determine, till Christ has told us, what is most for the advantage of
his person, design or work.

3. "He is now in the best situation to be adored and worshipped by his church
on earth, though they now do not see him; yet believing and loving him, they
rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory. And it would not tend to
increase this faith, love and joy, to have him come from heaven and live in
some place on earth in his human nature; but the contrary: For but few,
compared with the whole inhabitants of the world, could have access to him or
see him more than they now do. And when the human nature is in heaven, all may
equally have access to him;" that is, spiritual access, and such access all may
equally have too when the human nature is upon earth. Christ's human nature has
been once on the earth already. And then all had equal access to his spiritual
presence, and some had peculiar access to his bodily presence, and such the
case may be hereafter. And though Christ is now, and always will be, "in the
best situation to be adored;" yet this best situation, the Doctor allows, will
not always be in heaven; but will yet be, for a long time, somewhere near the
earth. And though many saints, in that day, should not see him with bodily
eyes, it does not follow that they would enjoy a less degree of faith, love and
joy, than if he were to continue in heaven without their seeing him. His bodily
absence from their sight will not hinder their being far more happy under his
glorious government than they could be in this world without it.

If the tendency of Christ's personal presence is to render the saints on earth
lets holy and happy, certainly the apostles had reason to mourn, while the
bridegroom was with them. Strange, that the best society near, the best
instruction and the best government, should tend to make the saints less holy
and happy than if they were without them!

4. "It does not appear to be any advantage to the departed saints to come to
live a thousand years in this world before the general resurrection. So far as
can be conceived, it would be no addition, but a diminution to their happiness;
a degradation, which on no account can be desirable to the spirits of the just
now made perfect in heaven: they could not know or enjoy so much of the
prosperity and happiness of the church in the salvation of men, were they to
live in bodies on earth in that time. Such a change of place could be no
privilege or reward; but rather a calamity."

But why will such a change from heaven to the new earth be a greater calamity
at the commencement of the Millennium than it would be at the end of it, when,
according to the Doctor's opinion, the saints will begin to live somewhere near
the earth many thousand years? And how does it appear that they could not know
or enjoy so much of the prosperity of the church militant, were they to live in
bodies at that time? If they can enjoy the glory of God, as it shines among
bodily objects, better without bodies than with them, why cannot they enjoy the
glory of the third heaven or of the ultimate judgment better without bodies
than with them? And if they can, why need they ever rise from the dead at all?
What can such a transition be to them but everlasting calamity? Though it is
far better to be present with the Lord than to be absent in a body of sin and
death; yet the separation of soul and body, as President Edwards has observed,
is an unnatural state, and consequently far worse than the state of a glorified
body perfectly free from sin and misery.

The resurrection is frequently mentioned in scripture as a great enlargement
of human happiness. But why is it so, unless because the glory of God cannot be
discerned among bodily objects in the clearest manner without the assistance of
bodily organs? Now can we suppose that it will be a great calamity to the
patriarch Abraham, by the assistance of corporeal organs, to look east, by
west, north and south, and most clearly behold the promise that he should be
heir of the world, fulfilled, as it will then be, in such a spiritual,
extensive and glorious manner? Nothing more remote. The words of Stephen are
very remarkable; 'And he gave him none inheritance in it; no, not so much as to
set his ^^^t on; yet he promised that he would give it to him for a possession,
and to his seed.' If it were answered that this promise was to be fulfilled to
Abraham in his ^eed; we ask, why then was it so expressed to him and to his
s^ed? For if by him was meant his seed, it is only repeating the same thing; to
his s^ed and to his seed. Or if it be answered that this promi^^ was fulfilled.
Abraham in money, cattle, etc. but, with as much propriety may it not be said
to be fulfilled to the present Hebrews, who are rich in money to a proverb? Or
should any say it wa^ fulfilled to him in heaven; we again ask, Is that the
land in which he was a stranger? God promised a land to Abraham for a
possession, in which, to the day of his death he had none inheritance; no, not
so much as to set his ^oot on." -- Sp^^ling's (...), p. 178.
Jerusalem which is above, for want of bodily organs, cannot now so clearly
behold the glory of God among corporeal objects. Therefore, when the promises
revealed to them shall have complete and universal accomplishment in the world,
Jerusalem which is above, must come down, that their faith in these promises
may be changed into perfect vision and fruition.

It has been the earnest prayer of God's people in all ages, not only that the
exhibittion of mercy in the conversion of sinners may be universal; but also
that they may see it. Therefore, in answer to their prayers, God will give them
bodily organs in that day, that they may be under the best advantage to s^e the
good of his chosen, to rejoice in the gladness of his nation, and glory with
his inheritance.

Is it contrary to all reason, to suppose that the Millennium will be
introduced in such a manner that the excellency of it may most conspicuously
appear to be of God and not of man? The Mosaic economy was introduced by
miraculous exhibitions of the divine presence; and the Christian dispensation
by the miraculous presence of God in the flesh. Why then may not the next
dispensation be introduced by the miraculous presence of the same God in the
clouds?

The sun shall be confounded and the moon ashamed when the Lord shall reign in
Mount Zion before his ancients gloriously. That day will cast a veil on all
other days before it: there will be such an earthquake, such a revolution, as
has not been since men were upon the earth, 'so mighty an earthquake and so
great.' Surely it cannot be contrary to all reason to imagine that this most
extraordinary of all changes which the world ever saw, will not be introduced
merely by ordinary sinful instruments in the common course of Providence; but
in such a manner as to give an easy construction to that in Rev. xxi. 22.

The long cessation of miracles among the Jews before the first coming of
Christ, was no proof that no more would ever be seen. And the long cessation of
miracles among us, before his second coming, is no proof that the greatest
miracles are not at hand that ever surprised the world. That sort of men who
ridicule miracles never prevailed as they now do. Therefore will not a miracle,
"a revelation written in the skies," ere long be seasonable to convince them
that there may be such a thing as a miracle to their own destruction?

Therefore, for any thing which yet appears to the contrary, it is agreeable to
reason that Christ should quickly and personally appear and reign with the
faints on the earth. The Doctor says, that "this phrase, 'Blessed and holy is
he that has part in the first resurrection,' implies that he only is blessed
who has part in the first resurrection." But this cannot be granted. It is
certainly true that he was blessed who had part in that resurrection which took
place at the beginning of our dispensation; but it is as true that others who
had no part in it, were blessed and holy too. So, though they are blessed and
holy who have part in the first surrection, others may be blessed and holy as
well as they.


The happy New Jerusalem, it is reasonable to suppose, will be a society
entirely distinct fom the church militant, or 'the nations of them who are
saved,' who will not then walk in New Jerusalem, but only 'in the light of it.'
The citizens of New Jerusalem or church triumphant in that time may be capable
of appearing to the church militant or disappearing at pleasure, as Christ was
after his resurrection, and may he again after his second coming. The plan of
this subject does not require us to view the New Jerusalem state as a Mohammedan
paradise; though we cannot prove that persed saints will never staste of a
broiled fish or of an honeycomb. Luke xxiv. 42, 43.
In New jerusalem 'there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying,
neither shall there be any more pain.' But the nations of them who are saved
will be imperfect, and be in need of healing.

But how is this consistent, it may be asked, with Rev. xxii. 15? 'Without are
dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and whosoever loves and makes a lie.'

But New Jerusalem, it may be answered, is now in existence, and dogs, and
sorcerers, are without it now, as much as they will be in that future time; yet
the church militant are now without it too: And such will be their case in that
day. This passage declares not that only the wicked are without that city; but
the plain meaning of it is, that no finally impenitent sinner shall have a part
in the blessedness of that city, as no such one now shall ever go to heaven.

In opposing the doctrine of Christ's personal reign, Mr. Poole's continuators
have an objection like this: 'If Christ should live on earth through the
Millennium, the saints who shall die in that time will not go to Christ.' But
is not this a great mistake? They certainly will go to Christ when they die;
even if he should reign on the earth. Already Christ has lived upon earth more
than thirty years. And in that time the saints who died went to Christ: for the
Son of Man was then in heaven; and there too he will be through the thousand
years. 'This day shall thou be with me in paradise:' Glorious promise! But
Christ's bodily presence was not in paradise that day. And we have not the
least evidence that departed saints now enjoy Christ's bodily presence any more
than if this bodily presence was now on the earth: That sublime felicity is
doubtless reserved for the resurrection.

But it may be asked, How will the doctrine of Christ's personal reign agree
with his sitting on the right hand of God, and interceding for his people till
his enemies be made his footstool? But the answer is, When Christ shall appear
the second time, he will destroy Gog and Magog, as already has been shown. He
will destroy them, who destroy the earth. And the spared nations will
cheerfully submit unto him. In some part of that day, it seems, all will be
saints, perfect or imperfect. Then 'to the name of Jesus every knee shall bow,
and every tongue shall swear, of things in heaven and things in earth and
things under the earth;' that is, there will be cordial and universal
submission to Christ all round the globe. Then doubtless, yea and before, his
enemies will be made his footstool.

But if 'sitting on the right hand of God' means the same as 'sitting on the
right hand of power,' which probably no one will deny, then he will still sit
on the right hand of God when he shall appear in this world: For he tells the
Jews expressly, Matt. xxvi. 64, 'Hereafter ye shall see the Son of Man sitting
on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven.' And if he can
appear at God's right hand one hour in this world, then doubtless he can appear
in this exalted station a thousand years in the same world.

And as to his intercession, will not that work be finished at his second
coming, even if another dispensation should follow? Did Christ carry on the
work of intercession in the time of the prophetical dispensation? No. Is not
our dispensation peculiar for the exhibition of Christ's priestly character? Be
sure it is: 'The way into the holiest of all' is now made manifest, and Christ
now intercedes for his elect, and why not for all his elect of each
dispensation, of the future as well as the past? But suppose this work of
intercession should continue through the Millennium, why may it not continue
upon earth? Christ has once interceded for his people already on the earth.
John xvii. Why then may he not intercede for them on earth hereafter?

But on the whole, the greatest of all objections to this doctrine among the
faints seems to be that of the heart. The saints, in the exercise of grace, do
not love to live in this world again. They had rather be in heaven; and no
wonder; earth is a tiresome place, full of sin and sorrow. But a new earth with
Christ, and a heaven upon it, will not be tiresome, but ineffably delightful.
Heaven is not constituted by locality, but by perfect holiness and happiness.

There objections now considered, a few arguments directly proving this
doctrine shall close this part of the Section.

The prophet Zechariah declares, (chap. xiv. 5, 9) that, 'when the Lord his God
shall come with all the saints, the Lord shall be King over all the earth: In
that day there shall be one Lord and his name one.' Hitherto this world has had
many supreme rulers or lords; but in that day there shall be only one supreme
ruler: Abraham's seed shall possess the whole. 'There shall be one Lord and his
name one.' Then will be fulfilled that of the prophet Isaiah; 'He shall judge
among the nations and rebuke many people.' The terms judge and rebuke mean
something more than merely the effusions of the Spirit on mankind, and
something too besides ecclesiastical government, as appears from what follows:
'They shall beat their swords into ploughshares and their spears into
pruning hooks; nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall
they learn war any more.' The design of ecclesiastical government is the
support of the Christian character: The design of civil government is the
preservation of life, peace and property. It is the latter which is here
mentioned as the happy effect of Christ's judging among the nations and
rebuking many people. And, as if it was a thing difficult for men to believe,
we have the same almost verbatim, in Mic. iv. 3, 4.

Christ judging 'the living and the dead at his appearing and kingdom,' (2 Timothy
iv. 1) implies that he will erect a kingdom on earth when he shall appear. He
said to his disciples, when he had predicted the signs of his coming, 'When all
these thing begin to come to pass, know ye that the kingdom of God is nigh at
hand!' To show how the kingdom of God should appear, 'A certain nobleman,' he
says, 'went into a far country to receive for himself a kingdom and to return.'
This parable plainly alludes to the custom of those, who, in that day, had
pretonsions to the kingdom of Judea; for they traveled to Rome to have it
confirmed to them by the Emperor and Se^^^^* Arch^^^us, the son of Herod the
Great, did this; and our Savior seems to have had this very incident in view
when he formed this parable; (Luke xix. 12 -- 27) in which it is said, that
'his citizens h^ted him, and sent a message after him, saying, We will not have
this man to reign over us.' Exactly the cas^ of Arch^laus: for after his
departure for Italy, the Jews dispatched ambassadors to Rome to accuse him to
the Emperor; but notwithstanding all their interest and clamours, he received
his kingdom, and "at his return," says Mr. Harwood, "he punished his
advers^ries who would not have him to reign over them." How cl^^^ly this shows
that Christ will yet reign on the earth, and introduce this reign by coming to
take vengeance on those who ob^y not the gospel! But I hear an evasion; "This
parable refers to the personal coming of Christ at the end of the Millennium.
Then Christ will return and reign here long enough to judge and punish his
enemies, and then ascend to the third heaven." But when Arch^la^s had punished
his enemies, he did not go immediately back to Rome again: No, he tarried in
Judea, he tarried in his kingdom and ^ade it his home.


The time when the kingdoms of this world shall become the kingdoms of our
Lord, is expressly declared to be the time of the dead, that they should be
judged, and that God should give reward unto his servants, the prophets. And it
has been shown how we are to understand that in Isa. xxxv. 10, Dan. chap. vii.
and Rev. xx. which so plainly speak of the saints reviving and appearing with
the clouds, their reigning and Christ's reigning before them a thousand years,
in which 'the kingdom and dominion and greatness of the kingdom (not above, not
in the third heaven, but) under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people
of the saints of the Most High.'

Another argument is the third petition of the Lord's prayer; 'Thy will be done
on earth as it is in heaven.' If the world awe to have such a Millennium as is
commonly expected, God's will can never be done on earth as it is heaven. Would
Christ set his people to make a prayer which he knew never would be answered in
any age of the world? But if heaven should come down to the earth and reign
upon earth, we easily see how God's will may be done upon earth as it is in
heaven.

Thus it appears, that the crown of Christ will be as conspicuous in this world
as the cross once was, will put down all rule and all authority and power: And
then will be manifest, as never before, this glorious truth, 'The earth is the
Lord's and the fullness thereof, the world, and they who dwell therein.'

INFERENCES.

1. Hence we may expect that the church militant in the Millennium will have
much more knowledge of he heavenly life than the present dispensation affords.
We are now possessed of much more light respecting our future state than was
ever enjoyed under the first dispensation. Many prophets and wise men desired
to see the things which we see, but could not see them. They enjoyed some
degree of light respecting the future life of man, yet it was a light shining
in a dark place! They beheld the promises afar off; but now 'life and
immortality are brought (more clearly) to light by the gospel.' And so the next
dispensation will afford much more knowledge of life and immortality than the
present. The church triumphant on earth will be the house of David, the royal
reigning family. They will be as God, perfectly holy as God is, and free from
error: and before the feeble church militant they shall be as the angel of the
Lord to instruct and govern them, as already has been observed. Therefore
doubtless the church militant will then have such clear apprehensions of the
state of a glorified body, and perhaps of the separate state, as the present
dispensation never affords. They who shall walk in the light of New Jerusalem
will undoubtedly know better what that city is than we can know at present.

2. Observe the glorious contrast between the best government contrived by
human wisdom, and that which King Jesus shall contrive by his infinite wisdom.
Before his first personal coming to teach the way of salvation, great
opportunity was afforded to human wisdom in the ancient philosophers to exert
her utmost in teaching mankind the way to happiness: and hereby the
insufficiency of human wisdom and the excellency of divine wisdom were
presented to view in a much stronger light than if no such opportunity had
previously existed: to see first what man could do to illuminate and reform the
world. So now, in these last days, great opportunity is afforded to human
wisdom to do her best in the art of government, and to form the most excellent
constitutions, which perhaps ever existed, such as these in America, Mr.
Adams's Defense of the American Constitutions is worth, of a place in every
library, and to be read with attention and cando^^, by ever friend of libert,
and equality.
and those which will probably appear in Europe; to see whether it be in man
who walks to direct his steps; whether mere man is fit to govern the world;
whether poor, imperfect, miserable sinners are sufficiently qualified to keep
the world in order, and to administer justice impartially and perpetually every
where. And when these new governments shall be corrupted, perhaps more than any
former ones, and human insufficiency with respect to this affair, shall be
plainly exhibited; then Christ will take to himself his great power and reign.
Then shall the loftiness of man be humbled, and the haughtiness of man be bowed
down, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day. Happy nations! who are
to see the glorious difference between what is now called government (and for
the present to be highly respected as such) and that which shall be practiced
by infinite wisdom and benevolence! What love and joy will warm every breast,
sparkle in every eye, and flow through every land!

MISCELLANEOUS CONCLUSION.
THE subject of this Differtation, in what light soever the reader may view it,
is undeniably of great importance. The time here treated of is at hand; and the
present revolutions and concussion of nations loudly solicit our attention
thereto. The man of sin has become old; gray hairs are here and there upon him.
He cannot live long, and therefore it cannot be matter of indifference how we
are to understand those prophecies which predict the manner and circumstances
of his death. It cannot be matter of indifference or mere speculation whether
the Judge stands far off or before the door.

But important as the scheme is, if true, it must not be generally received in
these last days: For if such a belief should become general, there would be a
general expectation of Christ's coming. But it has been shown, that Christ will
come in a day when men in general look not for him, and in an hour that they
are not aware of. The opinion which has been so common ever since the fourth
century (an age remarkable for the prevalence of error) will doubtless continue
so to the end, that the scripture may be fulfilled.

If some things now advanced be true, a time of trouble for the church is
hastening; a bitter cup which she must drink at the hand of illuminated
sinners. The liberality of sentiment every where prevailing at this day, is no
evidence of the contrary at all. Transitions from one extreme to another among
mankind, are no strange events.

The next generation, it is highly probable, will be more corrupt than this,
both in principle and practice. And the hearts of all must be revealed sooner
or later; every sort of men must be known. We know what method was taken to
manifest the hearts of the liberal Jews; and Divine Wisdom will certainly find
some method hereafter, clearly to manifest that the greatest catholicism of an
unregenerate man, is entirely consistent with inveterate enmity against the
true religion. But in all this futur e trouble, the church will be supported
and comforted. They who know their God will be strong, and do exploits, and the
gates of hell shall not prevail against them. The conversion of the Jews will
afford matter of abundant joy to the precious, believing remnant of the
Gentiles. It will serve to strengthen their faith, and present to their view a
sweet prospect of their speedy and perfect deliverance from all the opposition
of earth and hell. Christ will take as much care of his people in that day as
he does now or ever did in any former age of the world.

To conclude. Many questions will doubtless rise in the reader's mind, which
this Dissertation has not resolved. Some objecttions may appear not
sufficiently answered, and some texts not clearly explained: But after all it
might not hence follow, that the whole scheme should be hastily rejected. It
should be carefully considered, whether the resolution of those questions be
necessary to the support of the scheme; and whether the unanswered objections
might not be answered. Errors here and there may-appear, while the system may
be true, and entirely consistent with reason and scripture. The doctrine of a
partial conflagration, will doubtless be the occasion of objections. The
conflagration will be sudden and unexpected: There will be no time for Lot to
flee to Zoar. Therefore through all that, which the scripture terms the whole
world, all the faints must be changed, that they may escape. But we should
carefully consider, that some prophecies which have the word all, and which
have an ^^pect to more than one of the three grand periods here treated of,
will not be completely fulfilled till the last of these periods. 'Behold the
day comes whith shall burn as an oven, and all -- they who do wickedly shall
be as stubble.' When the Jewish world was destroyed, many of the wicked were as
stubble. When the Christian world shall be destroyed, many more will be as
stubble; and at the last burning, all the wicked without exception will be as
stubble; and then too all the saints without exception will be raised and
changed. At the first of these three periods, Christ was personally present on
the earth; so he will be at the second, and at the third. The Old Testament
affor^^ ^reci^^^ ^^omises of the resurrection. 'I will ransom then from the
power of the grave; I will redeem them from death. O ^^^th, I will be thy
plague: O grave, I will be thy destruction!' Hos^^ xiii. ^4. See also Isa. xxv.
8; and xxvi. 19, etc. Yet these promises were only fulfilled in a measure at
the first period 'when many bodies of the faints which slept arose.'


If it be so, Infinite Mercy grant that it may appear so to believers, and
comfort those who love the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
in the church world without end. AMEN.

ERRATUM.
In the Discourse, page 20, line 5, for hearing read having.


