TELL TRUTH AND SHAME THE DEVIL: A COMEDY, IN TWO ACTS.

TELL TRUTH AND SHAME THE DEVIL: A COMEDY, IN TWO ACTS, AS PERFORMED BY THE OLD
AMERICAN COMPANY, NEW YORK, JANUARY, 1797.

NEW YORK: Printed by T. and J. SWORDS, No. 99 Pearl-street. 1797.

CHARACTERS.
SEMBLANCE, Mr. JOHNSON. WHITELY, Mr. TYLER. TOM HOLTON, Mr. JEFFERSON. SUSAN,
Mrs. HODGKINSON.
Those who are curious to know how far this Comedy is original, or how far
borrowed, will be satisfied by consulting a French dramatic proverb, of one
act, called JEROME POINTU.

WM. DUNLAP.

Tell Truth and shame the Devil: A COMEDY, IN TWO ACTS.
ACT FIRST.
Scene a Room in the House of SEMBLANCE.
Enter SEMBLANCE and WHITELY. SEMBLANCE. AND you positively go tomorrow: quit
town for ever.


WHITELY. This evening.


SEMBLANCE. Well, well; you will have it so.


WHITELY. Why, Mr. Semblance, the dissolution of our partnership, and my
consequent absence from your society, must be pleasing circumstances to you.


SEMBLANCE. Why, my dear Whitley, why should you say so?


WHITELY. Because I know so.


SEMBLANCE. Ah! there it is: if it was not for that cursed trick of telling all
you know, and speaking all you think, we should have gone along together over
the rough roads of life as smoothly as a pair of velvet shoes.


WHITELY. Sir, it is now five years since you, supposing me a fit instrument
for your purposes, relieved me and a suffering family from poverty, and gave me
a share in your business by way of securing my services.


SEMBLANCE. "Instrument," "purposes," "services!" -- and why, Sir, is not that
action to be ascribed to generosity? to benevolence? to humanity? to --


WHITELY. Because, I know you.


SEMBLANCE. Ah! there it is again.


WHITELY. That business with which you entrusted me, (certainly, in the present
situation of society, a business of the utmost importance) the care of
explaining and giving force to the laws of our country, I executed with anxious
attention --


SEMBLANCE. Pardon me there -- I cannot say that you were so attentive to
business as I expected -- You disappointed me very much in that particular.


WHITELY. How, Sir!


SEMBLANCE. Have not I known of your refusing large fees, and turning fat
clients from the office? --


WHITELY. When I knew their complaints groundless or their purposes knavish.


SEMBLANCE. What was that to you, Sir? -- you are not the judge. -- And did not
you lose one of our best customers, by defending the cause of a black whom he
held in slavery?


WHITELY. I did, Sir; and would have lost my life before I would desert the
cause of humanity. The profession of a lawyer may be exercised in the fullest
conformity to the rules of universal justice and expansive benevolence, as we
know by the examples of many around us: it is such as you who bring upon it the
vulgar sarcasms of the undiscriminating and thoughtless. For myself, soon
disgusted with your manner of living, and your manner of practice, I should
have thrown off the lucrative connection, but for the persuasions of a beloved
wife, who, having felt the rude and 'numbing grasp of poverty, anxiously sought
to guard our children from it. For her and them I labored -- that is past --
for she and they -- are -- dead -- (struggling to repress his feelings) --
Pshaw -- this is weakness.


SEMBLANCE. Yes, they are dead, Mr. Whitely; and I can sympathize with you. My
poor Beckky too -- I, too, have had my afflictions; I, too, have lost a wife;
torn from me, and from my daughter --


WHITELY. She was a loss -- but a loss had not virtue to feel. Tell not me of
your affliction: you rejoiced in her death; nor do I believe it ever gave you
pain, except, perhaps, a momentary pang, from the remembrance of your conduct
toward her.


SEMBLANCE. Ah! this is telling the truth again.


WHITELY. She was, indeed, a loss to her daughter. Poor girl! denied the
advantages of that wealth which you accumulate but to misuse, you keep her,
though now a woman, at an obscure country boarding-school, that her presence
may not check the secret indulgences of those sensual pleasures, in which you
seek for happiness.


SEMBLANCE. Really, Sir, this is -- curse him -- he quite bewilders the --
indeed, Sir, I am very far from being happy.


WHITELY. Happy! no: for happiness is only known to virtue.


SEMBLANCE. Ah! there it is again. And I am not virtuous?


WHITELY. Indeed you are not. Let not the truth offend you, for I will speak
from pure benevolence. Bred in the school of prejudice, your wishes all
centering in self, your life is wasted in the anxious pursuit of riches, for
the sole purpose of (...) vicious propensities, which (...) through habit, are
continually hurrying you into every species of meanness and dishonesty. --


SEMBLANCE. Dishonesty! -- Robert Semblance dishonest --


WHITELY. Hear me with patience; it is, perhaps, the last time we shall meet;
perhaps, the last effort I shall be enabled to make for your happiness.


SEMBLANCE. Happiness! -- destroy my reputation -- torture me with your damned
truth -- put me on the rack, and call it happiness!


WHITELY. He is supreme among the wretched, who dares not listen to sincerity.
You are a wretch, whose every moment of security depends upon the strength of
the cob-web veil woven by your own hypocrisy. You start from the eye of
inquiry. You tremble at the breath of truth. Detection, a phantom, painted by
your own fears, is for ever before your eyes. You redouble your arts of deceit,
and daily become more contemptible and more miserable.


SEMBLANCE. I know I am not happy. I never was happy. I don't believe I ever
shall be happy in this miserable world.


WHITELY. The being who has it in his power to do good to a fellow being, has
happiness within his reach, though he do the deed in hell, such as poets have
painted it. I will point out the road which will lead you to felicity. Quit
your business; fly the usual haunts of your vices; and thus weaken your evil
habits and give strength to your growing reason. --


SEMBLANCE. Growing reason! -- at sixty-three -- growing reason!


WHITELY. Yes -- your attention to me is a proof of your growing reason. Make
your daughter and young Holton your clerk happy, by their union and his
establishment in business.


SEMBLANCE. Why, you are mad! Damn me, but you are stark mad! Tom Holton --
wild as a bedlamite -- a young profligate -- why, he is worse than -- than
myself.


WHITELY. Ha, ha! no, pardon me there. Tom is wild -- is often enticed or
hurried into scenes of vicious dissipation; but he has no prejudices; no fixed
habits; his mind is not encumbered with one cloud which may intercept a single
ray of science. And what I love the dear lad for most, is, that during the five
years I have known him I do not believe that a falsehood has passed his lips.
And that is rather an extraordinary circumstance, considering his connection
with us, brother Semblance.


SEMBLANCE. If I had not known you I should have said it was impossible.


WHITELY. His present extravagances I can trace to his disrelish for the study
and practice of the law, as taught by you, his master and guardian; and the
very bad example you set him.


SEMBLANCE. No, no, no, pardon me there; for 'though you have a way of looking
through people, I am certain Tom must, and does, look upon me as a pattern of
regularity, prudence and morality. Don't he see me regularly at church -- that
is, he might if he had the grace to go there. Don't he see a model of economy
and frugality in my family?


WHITELY. He feels your frugality, and that drives him to the tavern to make up
for the deficiencies at home.


SEMBLANCE. Don't he see order and frugality in every thing I do?


WHITELY. Do not continue to deceive yourself -- I am pretty certain that Tom
knows you, for what you are -- a hypocrite. What should prevent him, or some of
his youthful companions, from finding out, that, though under the mask of order
you lock up your house and retire to your chamber at nine, a private door lets
you out at ten, to meet --


SEMBLANCE. For heaven's sake Mr. Whitely -- my dear friend -- do not let your
love of truth lead you to mention these things, even to myself. -- Oh dear! --
I believe I have been wrong -- I am a miserable old man! My dear partner! --


WHITELY. Be not alarmed. For although every particle of knowledge possessed by
me is due to the world, I have so far power over it, that I need not discharge
the debt until I see the moment when the greatest sum of good will be produced
by the payment. I shall never do any thing to injure you -- the contrary is my
wish. I will see you again before I go. Are you not a man, and shall I not wish
you happy? Think of what I have said.

[Exit.
SEMBLANCE. alone. "Think!" yes, you have a cursed way of making me think,
whether I will or no. He, now, is happy; yet enjoys none of the sweets of life
as I do. Heigh ho! He is younger than I am by ten years, has not a twentieth
part of my fortune, and yet he schools me as if I was a boy, and I stand like a
boy, trembling before him. I thought the private door had been unknown even to
him -- I Will not believe that Tom knows it. Whitely was up when I came in this
morning; the moon shone; might he not have seen me? Heigh ho! I cannot help
loving him, though I almost tremble at the sight of him. (Looks at his watch.)
Six o'clock -- I will see if his favorite Tom has opened my office yet -- it
will be somewhat extraordinary if he has, for half an hour ago he had not got
home. Out all night -- a profligate! give him my daughter! --

[Exit.
Scene the Office.
SUSAN is discovered dusting the chairs and desks. Tom enters on tiptoe,
looking around him. TOM. Susan, hist, hist, Susan.


SUSAN. Ah, is it you?


TOM. Is Mr. Semblance up?


SUSAN. Aye, long ago.


TOM. Has he asked for me?


SUSAN. Five or six times.


TOM. That Is bad.


SUSAN. He Is in a terrible taking about it.


TOM. He knows, then, that I was out all night.


SUSAN. To be sure he does.


TOM. Now, that is all your fault, Susan.


SUSAN. How, pray?


TOM. Why, I came to the door about three o'clock, and it was bolted; so that
my key was of no use. What devil put it into your stupid head to bolt the door?


SUSAN. I did not think of your being out.


TOM. When did you ever know me stay at home? Ah, Susan, there would be no
putting up with you, if you was not pretty. However, you threw me into the way
of fortune, my girl! for, knowing my companions had broke up, I took refuge at
a gaming-house; and finding a foolish young fellow there surrounded by
sharpers, I, from pure kindness, got him out of their hands and stripped him of
all his money -- See what treasures! -- I am as rich as Croesus.


SUSAN. Ah, you will find a way to get rid of it.


TOM. I have hit upon a scheme already.


SUSAN. What is it?


TOM. To return it to its right owner in such a manner as not to hurt his
feelings, and thus purchase the privilege of advising him never to engage in
such infernal business again. Hah! what think you of my scheme? Give me a kiss,
you hussy --


SUSAN. Fie, Sir!


TOM. One kiss, by the gods!

(Struggling.) Enter SEMBLANCE. They see him, and stand confused for some time.


SEMBLANCE. Very well, Sir; very pretty amusement before breakfast.


TOM. My old master, by the goddesses! I must brazen it out. You see, Sir, I am
taking the business of the office off your hands. Begin the duties of the day
betimes; hey, Sir?


SEMBLANCE. What are you doing here, Susan?


SUSAN. I, Sir; I, I, I, -- Mr. Holton --


TOM. Aye, Sir, we were brushing off the spiders' webs; hey, Susy?


SEMBLANCE. Well; we live and learn. But I should never have looked for a
spider's web over the lips of a pretty chambermaid.


SUSAN. Indeed, Sir, it was in spite of my very teeth --


SEMBLANCE. Yes, you seemed to threaten him hard -- you may retire, Susan, you
may retire.


SUSAN. Yes, Sir. ( Aside to Tom) O, you devil!

[Exit.
SEMBLANCE. Are not you ashamed, Sir?


TOM. Ashamed, Sir! why, what have I done?


SEMBLANCE. I admire the modesty of that question. "What have I done?" Where
have you come from, Sir?


TOM. Where have I come from?


SEMBLANCE. Yes, Sir; where have you come from at this time in the morning; and
where did you pass the night?


TOM. Among my friends -- no not -- absolutely friends --


SEMBLANCE. Among your friends!


TOM. Among my brethren, Sir: mankind are all brothers, you know, Sir. The fact
is, I came home late, and finding the door bolted, I would not knock, for fear
of disturbing you. Hey, Sir? considerate. For you might not have been long in
bed yourself, you know.


SEMBLANCE. (Alarmed.) Ahem!


TOM. So, Sir, I went off again, and joined -- my brethren, once more.


SEMBLANCE. Very well, Sir; and you may now go again and take up your abode
with the family.


TOM. Sir!


SEMBLANCE. You may go and pass the day where you passed the night.


TOM. Why, Sir you do not mean --


SEMBLANCE. I mean, Sir, to insist on your doing me the favor to pack up your
alls and leave my house immediately.


TOM. But, Sir --


SEMBLANCE. You understand me now, Sir, I trust. I speak clearly.


TOM. Very luminously, Sir. A brazen head could not have spoken more
oracularly. But, as I am young, Sir; as I am an orphan and your ward; as I have
need of experienced wisdom to counsel me, and upright virtue to be constantly
before my eyes for an example; I trust you will not, without weighty reasons,
turn me adrift upon life's stormy sea, without ballast or provisions, and in my
present shattered trim.

(Looking upon his disordered dress.)
SEMBLANCE. Reasons, Sir! well, you shall have them. First, it is my will: you
understand me, Sir. You would not stay in my house in spite of my teeth, as
well as kiss my servant in spite of here is? Secondly, you are a libertine.


TOM. O my dear guardy!


SEMBLANCE. An unprincipled libertine, whom good counsel and good example
cannot reclaim, and whose sins are outdone by nothing but his impudence! --


TOM. I am a miserable sinner, guardy; but what are the-faults you have,
principally, to reproach me with?


SEMBLANCE. Wine, gaming, women,


TOM. Wine! did you ever know me guilty of excess?


SEMBLANCE. Sir, a clerk ought to drink nothing but water. Do you ever see any
thing else at my table?


TOM. No, Sir; nor did you ever see me drink any thing else at your table. But,
when among my friends, would you have me refuse a glass or two, when offered by
the hand of hospitality? Who can make a crime of a trifling point of gaiety
like this?


SEMBLANCE. "Gaiety!" It is from gaiety, too, that you play cards, I suppose?


TOM. I play sometimes to please my friends, and sometimes from a weak wish to
stifle thought and drown the remembrance of my disagreeable situation in your
service, and your injurious treatment of your amiable daughter.


SEMBLANCE. So, so, he is going to take up the business of truth-telling too.


TOM. And when I do play, I make a point of playing well; for I never allow
myself to be outdone in any thing.


SEMBLANCE. And it is out of regard to my daughter, that you have a smile, bow,
nosegay, or sonnet, for every girl in the parish.


TOM. I do not know that it is a crime to admire beauty, or to cultivate a
talent for expressing my thoughts with elegance and truth.


SEMBLANCE. Truth in a sonnet! talent! admiration of beauty! Sir, Sir, you will
get more by engrossing one plea, than by all the sonnets that ever dribbled
from the brains of lovesick boys, or fame-sick ladies, since the time of
Petrarch and Laura. I admire your talents, Sir; I acknowledge your
superabundant merit; so, Sir, please to walk out of my house.


TOM. What, Sir, after having promised repeatedly that I should be your
successor in business!


SEMBLANCE. Strike that out from your memorandum-book, and put down this in its
stead; "I will never have for my successor a gentleman of spirit, who drinks
from innocent gaiety; games from his love to my daughter; and kisses all the
girls in the neighborhood in spite of their teeth, by way of cultivating his
talents."


TOM. But, Sir, remember that you have been young yourself.


SEMBLANCE. And what then, Sir?


TOM. When you have seen a fine woman --


SEMBLANCE. When I have seen a fine woman, I have said to myself, tomorrow
those cheeks will be wrinkled; those sparkling eyes extinguished; those lilies
and roses faded; and, certainly, this frail head shall not be able to turn mine.


TOM. Do you never play at cards, Sir?


SEMBLANCE. Never, Sir, never. What can be the pleasure of a gamester? Has his
soul one moment of calm or self-enjoyment? If he gains, his gain is always
below desire; if he loses, rage and despair take possession of his soul. The
feelings of humanity are banished from the gamester's heart; he thirsts for the
ruin of his nominal friend, who equally burns with desire to ruin him.


TOM. How impressive is truth, even from the lips of falsehood! Well, Sir, but
at least the table has its pleasures for you?


SEMBLANCE. Rather say its poisons. When I am tempted by good cheer, sparkling
wine, seducing society, I represent to myself the consequences of excess, an
aching head, disordered stomach, clouded reason, loss of time -- this saves me
-- I eat just enough to support my strength; my health is always equal; my
ideas always pure and luminous. But all this is so easy, Sir, that there is
even no merit in the practice.


TOM. I acknowledge, Sir, the truth of your observations; nor shall you find me
backward in the practice. You are now, Sir, old; you know me capable of
business; you know my pretensions to your daughter; give me her hand and put me
into your practice, and you shall see in my conduct a pattern to all husbands
and all attorneys.


SEMBLANCE. And this is your proposal?


TOM. Is it not reasonable, Sir?


SEMBLANCE. Modest, truly! Give up my business and marry you to my daughter! I
do admire you, Tom; I do, indeed. Give you my daughter, and give up my
business! Would not your modesty wish to employ me as a clerk in your office?


TOM. Ha, ha! -- no, thankee, guardy; I think I can do better in that respect.
I believe I should very soon discharge you.


SEMBLANCE. Why, you incorrigible, impudent -- But I will not be in a passion.
-- Sir, you have heard my intentions; will you do me the pleasure to get out of
my house directly?


TOM. This is your last word, then.


SEMBLANCE. Yes, Sir, it is my last word; do me the honor to let me see your
back.


TOM. Ha, ha, ha! Enough. We shall see -- we shall see.


SEMBLANCE. How, Sir! We shall see!


TOM. Yes, Ha, ha, ha! We shall see, Ha, ha, ha!

[Exit.
SEMBLANCE. What does he mean? "We shall see." Why, the unprincipled villain
will not expose me! "We shall see." -- Expose me! -- why, what can he say of
me? -- Oh dear -- I Am afraid -- Heigh ho! If I was not ashamed I would call him
back again. -- No, no -- the dog would so laugh at me -- I Am a wretched man.
Susy!

[Exit.
Scene the Street.
TOM comes out of SEMBLANCE's house; SUSAN following him. TOM. I will send some
porters for my clothes and books, which I know you will deliver in good order.
So, my good girl, good bye; take this bank bill -- you may receive it from me,
Susan, because you know me to be above taking advantage of the gratitude which
an innocent heart feels on receiving a favor. Why don't you take it? Is the
girl blind?


SUSAN. Yes, with crying. My tears blind me.


TOM. Take it for my sake.


(Puts it in her hand.) SUSAN. May I not give it to my mother, Sir?


TOM. To any body that wants it more than you do -- that is the golden rule,
Susan.


SUSAN. Then, I am afraid -- don't be angry -- but you may want it yourself
more than I do.


TOM. That Is a very impertinent thought of yours. To reduce a young fellow,
like me, full of health and animation, beneath the level of a whining spinster,
like you, deprived by education of your natural vigor, and by the laws of
society of your natural rights. Go in; wipe your eyes; be a good girl, and defy
the devil: I Am your friend.


SUSAN. Bless you, for a dear good soul!

[Exit sobbing.
TOM. Now for my scheme -- Mr. Whitely -- Shall I tell him?

Enter WHITELY.
WHITELY. Good morning, Mr. Holton.


TOM. (Pausing.) Have I offended you, Sir?


WHITELY. Offended me! surely no. Why the question?


TOM. You are used to call me Tom, Sir.


WHITELY. Was that it! I will still call you Tom -- my dear and amiable Tom.

(Affectionately.)
TOM. Then I am happy. To the man who enjoys self-approbation, there wants but
the concurring esteem of the wise and virtuous crown his felicity. Well, Sir, I
cannot but lament for my old master Semblance.


WHITELY. How so?


TOM. Why, Sir, he has turned me out of doors. That is a loss he might perhaps
survive, if you staid with him; but with neither you or I to keep him straight,
he must inevitably go to ruin.


WHITELY. Turned you out of doors!


TOM. He certainly has, Sir, and upon a charge of committing those individual
vices to which he is himself a slave: but I have a scheme in view, by which I
hope I shall unmask the hypocrite, and force him to be honest by a thorough
conviction that it is the only good policy.


WHITELY. But how is this revolution to be effected?


TOM. By a disguise, Sir, which --


WHITELY. Disguise! What, shall the preacher of sincerity put on disguise to
persuade hypocrisy to unmask herself? Shall the pupil of truth have recourse to
deceit to accomplish the purposes of virtue?


TOM. Forgive me, Sir -- the interest of my heart is at stake -- do not leave
town suddenly.


WHITELY. I will not until tomorrow.


TOM. Call at Mr. Semblance's two hours hence. You then shall know why I
deviate from what I know to be right. -- Will you come, Sir?


WHITELY. I will.


TOM. Till then, craft be my inmate.

[Exit.
WHITELY. And if thou do not curse thy companion, thou will be a singular
exception to that general rule, on which the moral universe depends.

[Exit.
END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT SECOND.
Scene SEMBLANCE'S Office -- table and chairs.
Enter SEMBLANCE. SEMBLANCE. MY daughter pretending to complain that I find her
genteel boarding and lodging at a country school. My ward, Tom, launching into
every vice, and undertaking to be a critic, politician, and reformer. Lord!
Lord! how times have changed since I was young! A young clerk then was
contented to give up pleasure to his master, and work his way to it, by regular
degrees, as the master had done before him; but, now, dam'me! they are like
Virgil's harpies -- they seize on every dish before us, and not only feast
themselves, but unfit the banquet for those that follow. Formerly a clerk would
sit all the week at his desk, and scarcely allow himself time for a walk on
Sunday: but, now they are men of spirit, wits, judges of authors, and critics
at the Theater; and we shall have a stripling of four-and-twenty tell you that
the basis of the English law is violence and injustice, and advise you to read
Godwin. I have no patience! -- Susan! -- I am not sorry Tom's out of her way --
Susan! --


Enter SUSAN, with a small account book. SUSAN. Sir!


SEMBLANCE. Is it thee, Susan? Come hither, child.


SUSAN. I was coming, Sir, to ask you to have the goodness to reckon up last
week's expenses.


SEMBLANCE. Certainly, Susan: give me the book.


SUSAN. There, Sir.

(Gives it.)
SEMBLANCE. Let me see, let me see, ( puts on his spectacles) it is eight days
since we settled.


SUSAN. Yes, Sir.


SEMBLANCE. I gave you three dollars.


SUSAN. They are down, Sir -- you put them down yourself.


SEMBLANCE. Aye, aye, right -- three dollars -- eight days -- and how much have
you left?


SUSAN. Three shillings and two penny bills.


SEMBLANCE. No more! How money goes! Give me the remainder. How money goes!


SUSAN. Every thing is so dear, Sir.


SEMBLANCE. Ah! you don't market well -- now, I warrant me, when the
market-women ask you a shilling for a thing, you offer them sixpence?


SUSAN. Well, Sir.


SEMBLANCE. I don't wonder your accounts run so high -- never offer more than a
fourth of what is demanded. When they ask a shilling, threepence is the mark.


SUSAN. Why, they would beat me, Sir.


SEMBLANCE. Well, so much the better -- then I sue for damages, and we might
support the family a year upon a good beating -- But come, let us see if thy
accounts are right.


SUSAN. O! I am sure of that, Sir.


SEMBLANCE. How so?


SUSAN. Mr. Holton reckoned them up for me.


SEMBLANCE. Ah, damn that fellow, he would be doing all the family business.
But he is gone! he is gone!


SUSAN. Sir!


SEMBLANCE. Susan, he was kissing thee this morning when I came in.


SUSAN. I could'n't help it, Sir.


SEMBLANCE. Are you sure, Susan?


SUSAN. Indeed, Sir!


SEMBLANCE. You did not take any pleasure in his rudeness!


SUSAN. Pleasure, indeed! to be pulled, and haul'd, and scratched!


SEMBLANCE. He, he -- I never do so, Susan?


SUSAN. Oh no, Sir!


SEMBLANCE. Good girl, good girl. -- Well, let us see -- (looks alternately at
the book and at her.) Good girl. Six and nine make fifteen -- three and carry
one -- Handsome hussy. One and two make three, and four are seven, and ten are
seventeen, and eight are twenty-five -- how pretty! -- Six and carry two -- two
and four -- so modest! -- are thirteen -- and -- I Am out -- naught and go one
-- charming shit! -- It Is all right, Susan, very right -- and there are four
dollars more. But be prudent, Susan.


SUSAN. I Am sure no one can say I am not prudent.


SEMBLANCE. Long be so, Susan. Beware of young men: There is neither faith,
truth, or honesty, in youth.


SUSAN. I Am sure I don't like them.


SEMBLANCE. You are sure, Susan?


SUSAN. Indeed, Sir! For my part I like old gentlemen best of all things,
except old women, my poor old mother and you, Sir.


SEMBLANCE. Hem, hem! -- But I Am not an old woman, Susan -- not an old woman
neither.


SUSAN. No, Sir; but I love you as well as if you was.


SEMBLANCE. Well, well, continue to love me, Susan, but not as an old woman; as
an elderly gentleman, but not as an old man neither. Never suffer any of the
servants in the neighborhood to take liberties with you.


SUSAN. Fie, Sir, how could you think of such a thing?


SEMBLANCE. Good girl. Give me thy hand, then, Susan. (Takes her hand.) Pretty
little taper puppets.


SUSAN. Lord, Sir, you make me laugh!


SEMBLANCE. Here, I have something for you -- here -- take this ring for my
sake, Susan.


SUSAN. O, Sir!


SEMBLANCE. It Is all gold, pure gold -- it was my poor dear dead wife's -- She
was a fine woman, Susan, and loved me like the apple of her eye: and if -- if
-- Susan -- if -- you could really love me --


SUSAN. Lord, Sir, don't make game of me!


SEMBLANCE. I Am in earnest, Susan; I love you, I adore you.


SUSAN. I Am a poor girl, and your servant, Sir,


SEMBLANCE. You are my queen, my goddess, my --

(He seizes her suddenly, and struggles to kiss her, which she opposes.) Enter
TOM as an English officer of the navy, in a sea dress, and very much disguised.
TOM. (Aside.) Just in the nick.


SEMBLANCE. Cruel, cruel Susan -- On my knees --

(Kneels.)
SUSAN. Fie, Sir, don't you see the gentleman?


TOM. Oh, don't let me interrupt you, grandfather.


SEMBLANCE. What Is that? -- who --

(Rises in confusion.)
TOM. A tight little tender and well rigged. Sweetheart, where is the old one?
Where Is the lawyer?


SUSAN. That Is my master, Sir.


TOM. The devil it is! kneeling at your feet!


SEMBLANCE. Why, truly, Sir -- I -- I -- I --


TOM. Never blush, old gentleman, that you should wish to kiss such a girl as
that. If she had wished to kiss you, there would have been somewhat to blush
at, on her part. I don't care if I take a buss myself.

(Advancing.)
SEMBLANCE. (Getting between them.) You may go, Susy.


TOM. So far well. I Am not known.

(Aside.)
SUSAN. Old fudge!

[Exit Susan.
SEMBLANCE. Will you do me the favor to let me know what has procured me the
honor of this visit?


TOM. Aye, old boy. You are lawyer Semblance?


SEMBLANCE. At your service.


TOM. As honest an attorney --


SEMBLANCE. I think I may boast --


TOM. As ever ruined one party, and left the other in jail, starving.


SEMBLANCE. You are an odd fish!


TOM. You are right, old one: if I understand you we are both rare preserves --
but I Am pickled and you are dried.


SEMBLANCE. You are an impudent fellow.


TOM. I want your assistance.


SEMBLANCE. I Will have nothing to do with you.


TOM. Yes you will. (Throwing a purse on the table) There Is twenty guineas to
begin with, for any expenses in the off-set.


SEMBLANCE. O, I did'n't understand you, Sir, -- a cause.


TOM. If that is not enough, I have five hundred of the same little gold-fish
rather than lose the wind.


SEMBLANCE. Sir, you may command me. What a pleasure it would be to practice,
Sir, if all clients had your mild, engaging manners and sweetness of speech.


TOM. Damn your palaver! give us none of your jaw, but bring too. ( Takes a
chair and sits down.)


SEMBLANCE. What a brute! -- Sir, the pleasure --


TOM. Cast out an anchor abaft: keep your how steady, and shut your
forecastle-hatchway. Why, damn me, you stand gaping as if I did'n't talk plain
English; sit down, and shut your mouth.


SEMBLANCE. (Sitting.) Give a lawyer twenty guineas and ask him to hold his
tongue -- not a new case either, now I think on it. I was only going to say,
that in general we found it no easy matter to draw the chink from our clients
-- I must humor this follow.


TOM. For my part I Would thank you to take all my money into your own keeping, and
manage it for me -- ha!


SEMBLANCE. I Will take that trouble off your hands with the greatest pleasure.
Your cause is of great importance no doubt.


TOM. It is.


SEMBLANCE. An estate depending.


TOM. More than any estate.


SEMBLANCE. Your life, mayhap?


TOM. What Is life to a fellow that lives on salt water, and is shot at for hire
at so much per month?


SEMBLANCE. What then?


TOM. My honor.


SEMBLANCE. (Aside.) He, he! -- the honor of a fellow that is shot at for so
much per month! (To him) Aye, aye, I understand; in a moment of weakness or
distraction -- it happens every day to very honest folks. But when they know
how to manage matters by aid of an honest lawyer, all goes well. Well, well,
explain -- let us know the fact.


TOM. Avast there -- It Is warm -- I am dry. What, are you deaf? Its my way to
talk with my glass in my hand.


SEMBLANCE. I must humor him. Susan! ( Calling.)


TOM. You keep good wine, I dare swear.


SEMBLANCE. Why, I have a corner in the cellar. -- Susy!


Enter SUSAN SUSAN. Did you call, Sir?


SEMBLANCE. Yes, child. Go down into the cellar, Susan, and on the right hand,
in the second closet -- this is the key -- in the second closet -- No, pies
on it, now I think on it I Will go myself -- You shall have some of the old sort,
captain -- I Will go myself.

[Exit Semblance.
TOM. Ah! Susan, Susan!


SUSAN. Lord a mercy! -- Do you know me, Sir?


TOM. Don't you know me, Susan?


SUSAN. Is, is, is it you, Mr. Holton? Well, I Will never believe my eyes or ears
again.


TOM. And I hardly know how to credit mine. After all my preaching to you to
find you playing at pull-cap with that old sheet of dried parchment, Semblance!


SUSAN. Indeed, Sir, I could'n't help it.


TOM. Aye, in spite of your (...) too!


SUSAN. He never attempted any such liberties before, or I should have quitted
his service; and as this was the first, so shall it be the last time that he
shall insult a poor and unprotected orphan.


TOM. (Rises) Ha! tears! I beg your pardon, Susan -- on my soul I do.


SUSAN. Oh Mr. Holton! I shall always love you, and only wish you could marry
Miss Nancy. But I Will not stay another night under the same roof with this
wicked old wretch, though I am alone and helpless in the world, and a mother
depending upon me.


TOM. Alone! it is false! Every honest heart is with you, and mine among the
foremost, my good girl.


SUSAN. He is coming.

(Tom sits down.)
Enter SEMBLANCE, with two bottles. SEMBLANCE. Here it is. A bottle apiece.
Right old stuff. What, are you here yet? Bring in glasses, Susan. Now, captain,
I Will draw a cork, and then --

(He uncorks the bottle.)
Enter SUSAN, with server and glasses -- she places them on the table.
SEMBLANCE. I am at home to nobody, Susan.


SUSAN. Had I not better say you are busy, Sir? the other's a lie, you know.


SEMBLANCE. O, it is understood that the master's engaged, when the servant says
he is not at home.


SUSAN. Then, Sir, there can be no harm in saying so. I am your servant, Sir;
but I am not bound to steal or to lie for you.

(She goes out again.)
SEMBLANCE. Truth again! Damn me but my family have been bit!


TOM. A girl of ten thousand! Come, old boy, she shall be our first toast.


SEMBLANCE. Well, well, she is a good girl.

(They fill their glasses.)
TOM. Here Is a young husband to her: and may she never be teased by the
importunities of an old fool!


SEMBLANCE. Ahem! -- Here Is a good husband to her!

(Drinks.)
TOM. A forfeit! a forfeit! ( Fills a bumper.) A bumper, old one, for altering
my toast. Come, damn me, no wry faces, for the Madeira is good. Say after me.
Here Is a young husband to Susan.


SEMBLANCE. Here Is a young husband to Susan.


TOM. And may she never be teazed --


SEMBLANCE. And may she never be teazed --


TOM. By the importunities of an old fool.


SEMBLANCE. By the importunities of a fool.


TOM. Old --


SEMBLANCE. Old --


TOM. Fool.


SEMBLANCE. Fool. There, it is down.


TOM. Now then to business. I am an Englishman, d'y'see, and my name's George
Grapple. I was born and bred to the sea; and have served on board man of war or
frigate from the time I knew a cabouse from a compass. I was appointed to the
command of the Pretty Betsey, of 26 guns, and ordered to cruize off your coast,
where I had not been two days, when I fell in with a French frigate of 34 guns,
whom I 'spied by daybreak bearing down upon us, with a crowd of canvass; we
bore up to meet her with merry hearts, preparing for action; and we were soon
at it, yard-arm and yardarm. All my masts were shot by the board, and I had
nothing left for it but grappling. I ordered it, and was answered by shouts;
when a volley of hand-granades set fire to my forecastle, and in a minute we
were all in flames. I got out my longboat to save my men, and the gallant
Frenchmen, as soon as they saw our distress, ceased firing, and came to our
assistance in their's. I saw my brave men safe from the fire; but for myself, I
remained on my quarter deck, with my eye fixed on the colors of my country,
resolved to go to the bottom with my own Pretty Betsey.


SEMBLANCE. What a devil! he is put me in a cold sweat.


TOM. In the mean time, a young French officer who had quitted his ship to come
to our succor, seeing my resolution, threw his pistols and cutlass into the
sea, and, leaping on board my vessel, advanced toward me through fire and
smoke, with a white handkerchief waving in his hand, beseeching me to save
myself. I had scarcely time to notice the young devil, when, seizing me in his
arms, he leaped with me into the sea, and, before we 'rose to the water's
surface again, my ship blew up and disappeared for ever. Here Is a health to the
young Sansculotte.


SEMBLANCE. With all my heart. (Drinks.) Truly, captain, that was a hotter
action than ever I was engaged in; though I have made many a defendant sweat.


TOM. Hotter, but not more destructive, old boy. Those who are born to be hung
are in no danger of drowning. Myself and the Frenchman pop'd up again among the
damnedest dashing and splashing of water that ever I saw, occasioned by the
ship's explosion. However, we both swam like Mother Carey's chickens, and were
soon safe on board the French frigate, who brought us today into your harbor,
and I am come in the same trim in which I fought my ship, to lay my complaints
before you. You see I did'n't fight in my fairweather suit.


SEMBLANCE. From which we may conclude that it was not the lace on your coat
which induced the young Frenchman to save you.


TOM. No, dam'me, he is a man. But to go on with my story. As good luck would
have it, I brought off with me my pocketbook well lined; and learning that my
deliverer was a mere volunteer, and of no fortune, I wanted to share with him:
but no, he will not take a guinea. From the time of our meeting we have never
parted. We love one another entirely. He is the best lad that ever stepped
between the stem and the stem of a vessel; and it is him I am determined to
prosecute.


SEMBLANCE. Excellent reasons truly!


TOM. The sea is my element. When I Am ashore I Am a mere lubber. Idleness, they
say, is the mother of all vices; and I have three cruel propensities.


SEMBLANCE. To what?


TOM. Wine, gaming, and women.


SEMBLANCE. O, dear Sir, these are your propensities?


TOM. I must confess it.


SEMBLANCE. Ha, ha, ha! They are, in a gentleman, marks of spirit, and will
recommend you to the friendship of the well-born and well-bred.


TOM. Indeed!


SEMBLANCE. For my part, I esteem your character both for spirit and taste. As
for wine -- here is to our better acquaintance.

(Fills and drinks.)
TOM. The old fellow warms. With all my heart, with all my heart! Yours is a
charming morality.


SEMBLANCE. The only crew philosophy, captain.


TOM. Do you practice as well as teach?


SEMBLANCE. Certainly; you would not have me say one thing and do another?


TOM. By no means. But what shall we say of beauty? it is at best but a
fleeting flower.


SEMBLANCE. And therefore we should hasten to gather it -- He, he! -- Love is
the soul of the universe, as the poet says.


TOM. But what excuse for wine, drinking, the table?


SEMBLANCE. Wine, captain! what pleasure so true? It heightens the joys of
youth; and when the winter of age chills every vein, it is the table alone that
thaws us.


TOM. Come, let us add fuel to the fire.


SEMBLANCE. Bravo!

(Drinks.)
TOM. But gaming --


SEMBLANCE. When not carried to excess, surely it is the most rational of all
amusements: it introduces or furnishes conversation to the most hum-drum and
gloomy assemblies.


TOM. Yet these are the propensities I would overcome.


SEMBLANCE. Retain them, captain; they are the solace of life. ( Sings.)
"We'll love, and we'll drink, and we'll rattle the box."

TOM. Bravo! But to return to my affair.


SEMBLANCE. Adso! we must not neglect business.


TOM. As I said, this Frenchman and myself were inseparable. Yesterday he
proposed a game at piquet; I accepted -- and now I come to my cause of
complaint -- I played with such success that I won five-and-twenty louis.


SEMBLANCE. A great cause of complaint truly! -- O ho! and he would not pay you?


TOM. We played, cash on the table. Well, Sir, in rising from the game, we
perceived a card under the table. I insisted, that, in consequence, the game
was false, and he had not lost. He maintained the contrary, and would not
receive the money again. We grow warm. I threw the money out at the cabin
windows, and he the cards. I could have fought him, but that he saved my life:
so there is no way to attack him but by law; and damn me but I Will throw away ten
thousand guineas but he shall take the five-and-twenty.


SEMBLANCE. And this is your cause?


TOM. Do you not find it just?


SEMBLANCE. Excellent!


TOM. And we shall force him to take the money?


SEMBLANCE. Put it in my hands, and it shall never trouble you more.


TOM. You mean what you say?


SEMBLANCE. (Drinks.) May this be my last glass of Madeira if I do not! Have
you witnesses?


TOM. NO.


SEMBLANCE. Never mind -- I Will find them.


TOM. That Is all settled. Do you ever play?


SEMBLANCE. Sometimes.


TOM. But rarely?


SEMBLANCE. O yes, whenever opportunity offers. It is necessary to us students.


TOM. Come, then; let us pass away an hour.


SEMBLANCE. Never in better time! I Am in tip-top spirits! And you are a capital
fellow. What game shall we have? Cribbage?


TOM. That Is so cursed long. Have you a pair of dice in the house?


SEMBLANCE. Aye, here in my back-gammon board.

(Fetches it.)
TOM. Then let us rattle.


SEMBLANCE. It Is music to me. Come, a hundred dollars on the throw.


TOM. Guineas, guineas!


SEMBLANCE. Guineas be it. (They throw.) Mine. Again?


TOM. Double, if you please?


SEMBLANCE. Certainly.

(Throw.)
TOM. Yours.


SEMBLANCE. That Is three hundred.


TOM. I Will throw for five hundred.


SEMBLANCE. A thousand, if you please.


TOM. Done. A thousand. (Throw.) Mine.


SEMBLANCE. I owe you seven hundred.


TOM. Double or quit?


SEMBLANCE. Another thousand!


TOM. Done. (Throw.) That makes one thousand seven hundred.


SEMBLANCE. (Sorrowfully.) Seventeen hundred guineas!!!


TOM. A trifle.


SEMBLANCE. For you, captain: but for me who only live by my attorney's
business --


TOM. Dam'me, I Will stake the seventeen hundred against your business. If you
lose, put me in your office: if you win, you owe me nothing.


SEMBLANCE. You joke, captain!


TOM. Will you accept the conditions?


SEMBLANCE. He! he! Yes.


TOM. Done. (They throw.) Huzza! damn me I Am an attorney!

(Jumps up.)
SEMBLANCE. Why -- captain --


TOM. Well, old boy?


SEMBLANCE. Will you not play more?


TOM. O no -- too much of a good thing, you know -- Besides, I Am in luck, and
should be sorry to ruin you.


SEMBLANCE. I am ruined by all the devils!


TOM. Tomorrow I will give you another chance. In the mean time put me in
possession of my post.


SEMBLANCE. Ha, ha! -- But you are joking, captain.


TOM. The devil a bit, old boy. But come, I Will make a proposal, They tell me
you have a daughter; give her to me for a wife, and settle me in business, and
I will give up my winnings.


SEMBLANCE. A sailor turn attorney!


TOM. Love does miracles -- As a proof, see before you an attorney turned
sailor.

(Discovers himself.)
SEMBLANCE. Confusion! Tom!


TOM. Even so, guardy. You have seen me in disguise; I have seen you, for once,
in your true colors.


SEMBLANCE. And the battle -- the hand-granades -- the French frigate, and the
Pretty Betsey?


TOM. Poetic fiction.


SEMBLANCE. By way of cultivating your talents! -- O, that I could be revenged
of the dog! -- I shall be exposed -- I Will deny all.


TOM. I have only had your confession, Sir, to what I knew before. Come, let us
bury all in oblivion; forgive my tricks, and give me my Nancy.


SEMBLANCE. You!


TOM. Yes, Sir; settle she in life, and give me your attorney's practice.


SEMBLANCE. Give my daughter and my business to a fellow that tells lies faster
than he can utter words! Why, Sir, you would bring dishonor on the profession.
Get out of my house!


TOM. You Will pay me my money.


SEMBLANCE. You're a sharper. You have no witnesses.


TOM. I can procure them, you know. Do me justice, or I Will expose you.


SEMBLANCE. Who Will believe you when I deny it! You are a rascal! Get out of my
house!


"Enter SUSAN. "SUSAN. O, Sir, here is Miss Nancy!


"SEMBLANCE. "Miss Nancy who? -- What?"


Enter WHITELY. WHITELY. My old partner, he not surprised at this intrusion.


SEMBLANCE. No, damn me, I intend never to be surprised again.


WHITELY. I was resolved, before I quitted the town and you for ever, to make
one great effort for your happiness: I sent a friend for your amiable daughter,
who now waits in the next room, while I prefer an earnest solicitation, that
you will restore her to her rights, and bestow her on a worthy man, whose
character, for sincerity and abhorrence of disguise, gives an earnest of every
virtue.


SEMBLANCE. And that abhorrer of disguise is --


WHITELY. Thomas Holton.


SEMBLANCE. A fellow that has told more lies in the last half hour than all the
attorneys in town in a month. I thank you, my good friend, from my soul, and
will be, for the future, a better father, and, I hope, a better man: but until
Mr. Holton and I have some further explanations, I beg leave to defer his
connection in my family. Thomas Holton, come into court!


TOM. Here! Convicted of duplicity. I feel, my worthy monitor, (to Whitely) the
justice of your observations when last I saw you, and acknowledge the justice
of Mr. Semblance's decision. Was I to moralize on the transactions of the day,
I should sum up all in the old adage, "Honesty is the best policy," and advise
all within hearing, in the words of Hotspur, to "tell truth and shame the devil
-- ever, while you live, guardy, tell the truth and shame the devil."


"SUSAN advances -- Curtain drops.

"EPILOGUE.
" SUSAN no more -- I seize the lively strain.
" Place mirth in view, and I Am myself again. --
" Tell truth and shame the devil! stupid calf!
" Tell truth and shame ourselves, more like by half.
" In every thing that is done some secret lurks;
" Life's spirit lies in turns, and shifts, and quirks --
" The world's a Theater, and life a play,
" With changing scenes and acts -- some people say:
" What a dull thing this play of life would prove,
" Without disguise or plot our mirth to move?
" Without inventions, counterplots and shamming,
" I believe it would meet a very hearty damning.
" We Are every one in habits of disguise,
" Should we unmask, it might create surprise:
" But yet I cannot believe it would be wise.
" Betty, Miss Tittup's maid, by Cupid wounded,
" But for invention's aid might be confounded:
" Taken by surprise, the sighing swain is thrust
" Close in the closet, Betty's wit his trust: --
" He coughs or sneezes -- " Betty, pray what is that?"
" I don't hear nothing, Madam -- Oh -- the cat!"
" Sure such a fib comes in sometimes quite pat.
" Your plain truth telling's quite a hum-drum thing,
" It Is difficulty gives the mind its spring,
" And falsehoods always difficulties bring.
" Truth telling suits with virtue and dull merit,
" But is at war with every thing like spirit --
" Spirit's the word -- my system I declare --
" Life as it goes and things just as they are!
" If you agree -- of course our play you will spare."
THE END.
The lines marked thus " were omitted in the representation.

ERRATA.
Page 5, 8th line from the bottom, for "Whitley" read "Whitely."

Page 10, 16th line from the top, for "frugality" read "regularity."

Page 29, 7th line from the bottom, for "too" read "to."

For sale at the Book-stores of H. Gain, T. Allen, T. and J. Swords, and J.
Fellows,
THE ARCHERS, OR MOUNTAINEERS OF SWITZERLAND; AN OPERA, IN THREE ACTS, As
performed by the Old American Company, in New York.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, A BRIEF HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF SWITZERLAND, From the
Dissolution of the Roman Empire to the final Establishment of the Helvetic
Confederacy, by the Battle of Sempach.


