AN ORATION.

AN ORATION, IN CELEBRATION OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE; DELIVERED AT
BELCHERSTOWN, JULY 4th 1797.

BY SAMUEL F. DICKINSON, A. B. STUDENT AT LAW, AMHERST.

"For the kingdom is the Lord's; and he is the Governor among the nations."

"Render, therefore, unto Caesar, the things which are Caesar's; and unto God,
the things which are God's."

PRINTED AT NORTHAMPTON, (MASSACHUSETTS) BY WILLIAM BUTLER. M, DCC, XC, VII.

ORATION. THE CONNECTION OF CIVIL GOVERNMENT WITH MANNERS AND TASTE.
EVERY thing, which respects the happiness of human society, is interesting.
The progress of reason and taste, the various changes in civil government,
considered in relation to this, are not more pleasing to the curious, than
important in the science of humanity. To inquire minutely into the causes,
which, from its institution, have continually varied the face of society, would
be a task too arduous to engage. These afford ample materials for historical
researches, and philosophic investigation. You will not expect the speaker of
the day to enter a field so large, or to invite your attention to so copious a
subject. It is my design to show the connection of civil government with
manners and taste. And here, the inexperience of youth, attended with a
debility of body, would ask the benevolence of my Fathers and Fellow-countrymen.

THERE is a fitness in all the economy of nature. It extends through the
different orders of creation, from the most exalted intelligence, down to the
meanest reptile that creeps in the dust. This is called, The fitness of things.
We discover it, not only in the laws of the material system, the growth of
vegitables, and the life of brutes; but, in the opperations of the human mind.
These are grounds for rational inquiry. Moral causes control all natural
effects. And their influence, in society, depends on principles as firmly
established, as the constitution of things. The laws, therefore, which regulate
the change in civil government and manners, are as fixed and as certain, as
those, which regulate the revolutions of nature.

WHEN we compare the rudeness of ancient times with the refinement of the
present age, a field is open for candid investigation. How one generation may
become wise, by the wisdom of a former, is easy to determine. But, how the
whole group of human beings should emerge from native ignorance, and rise to
elegance in taste, is a problem harder to solve. This, however, may be
generally ascribed, to the natural growth and improvement of the intellectual
powers; and, particularly, to the aids of civil government. This is the
guardian of human rights. Laws are grafted on the peculiar nature of those,
over whom they are exercised. Hence, according to the original constitution of
society, they are connected with manners and taste. This connection lays the
foundation of national happiness. This is the principle, which regulates
political law.

THE principles of government have an influence on manners and taste. The
spirit of its different forms gives a different complexion to the habits and
genius of a people. This is deduced from facts and the history of national
police. Simplicity of manners characterized the ages of the Patriarchs;
profusion and luxury, the reigns of the Babylonian and Persian kings. The
States of Greece were as distinguished, for their patriotic virtues, under
their Solon, Lycurgus and Aristides, as for their perfidy and vices, under the
successors of Alexander. The Roman soul, in the time of the Republic, was the
seat of greatness; under the Emperors, it was the sink of every passion, which
was mean or sordid. Let us consider the round of dissipation, in which the
subjects of a Turkish despot continually walk; the jealous cruelties of a
Venetian aristocrat, (...) the constant fidelity of a republican Swiss. Were it
needful, we might say, the virtues of American citizens would be strangers, in
the gaudy realms of eastern monarchs, or in the dominions of European kings.
Were it needful, we might say, the vices of those countries would be vagabonds,
in this free and independent commonwealth. But, modesty forbids.

GOVERNMENT, being connected with the constitutional taste and manners of a
people, improves with the progress of refinement. No nation ever commenced a
political existence, and expired, under the same constitution. Science and a
knowledge of things enlarge the mind, and direct its views to more noble
objects. Refinement and the Arts introduce a sentiment in taste, and a decorum
in manners, worthy the dignity of a rational soul. The passions and the powers
of imagination grow up to maturity, before the judgment and solid sense. Men
enter into the beauties of descriptive, before they reason justly, in the
connection of cause and effect. They are poets and orators, before they are
philosophers and politicians. The savage, though ignorant of the principles of
civil government, and the operations of nature, yet feels warmly the affections
of the heart, and the ties of blood. In a similar stage of civilization,
government partakes of the same feeble, though expressive powers. It rests,
solely, on the acts of native sympathy and persuasion -- its views terminate in
self-defence. Each individual assumes the prerogative of redressing his own
private wrongs -- the sword becomes the minister of justice, and the arbiter of
right.

LAWS, in their origin, like society, were rude and (...). Their seeds were
sown in the constitution of man. Warmed by the influence of the social sun,
they sprang-up. They have grown in every climate; and their branches have born
a fruit more salutary to human kind, than even the air which they breathe, or
the other elements on which they live.

THE original state of man was a state of universal strife and perpetual war.
Individuals were so many independent sovereignties, continually at variance
with each other. These interfering claims not only endangered the rights of
personal safety, but the progress of rational happiness. The natural reason of
mankind, therefore, pointed-out mutual associations, as their only safety; and
a common deposit of a certain share of their natural rights, as the proper mean
of securing the rest. These surrendered rights existed somewhere; they existed
in the body of the community, vested in some person or persons, as the bond and
seal of their union. This was the origin of delegated power. These were the
rude beginnings of that policy, which has so liberally conduced to the
happiness and respectability of society, and which now wears the name of civil
government. Hence, government comprizes those rights, which individuals of a
community have thrown into common stock, and vested in a political head. And as
it neglects the use of these, or assumes the exercise of more, in the same
ratio, does it verge toward effeminacy or usurpation. In what form, it first
existed, whether these rights were vested in the whole community, in a part, or
in one person alone, let the curious solve. It is sufficient to my present
design, to observe, that it now exists in as many forms, as there are nations
on the globe. For (...) I am to account.

WE need not distort the features of government, into the monstrous shapes of
monarchy, aristocracy and democracy, which are found, in their purity, scarcely
in nature, or among the societies of men. For myself, I know of no elementary
forms of government, other than those, which arise from the constitutional
taste and manners of nations. Power, being originally in the people, is
delegated by their consent; and it is the part of their united wisdom to
determine, by whom, and in what manner, it shall be exercised. Hence, forms of
government vary with taste. And this is as various, as the several stages in
the progress of civilization, or the countries inhabited by men. Our own
observation and the experience of mankind assure us, that civil policy has ever
found its interest, in conforming to the prevailing sentiments and disposition
of its constituents -- This is its nature, and this is according to the moral
fitness of things. The nations, which overspread Europe, in the fifth and sixth
centuries, were bent on military, and inveloped in scenes of war. Their civil
constitution, which was the famous feudal system, breathed the same warlike
spirit. In the ancient simplicity of times, we have examples of a whole tribe's
convening together with their leader, to consult on affairs of common
importance. In the same country, after the revolving of a few centuries and
their consequent improvements, we find the like powers residing in the king
alone. We next find them shared by the most eminent and distinguished in the
nation. They were next distributed to a third order, in the legislature. And,
we now find the same powers forming a constitution, justly admired by an
enlightened nation. Such have been the progressive effects of civilization and
taste.

THE jurisprudence of a refined people would appear as ridiculous, as
uninteligible, to the uncivilized. The savage, whose form of government is as
simple as his manner of life, reposes with confidence his rights, in the bosom
of his chief, or in the council of his fathers. He knows not the distinctions
in civil policy, neither does the simplicity of his society require them. But
civilization naturally gives birth to intriguing politicians, and the schemes
of ambition for dominion and fame. It was on this ground, that the several
branches in civil government were first introduced. To check the natural
progress of usurpation, and to circumscribe the designs of an aspiring mind, as
men grew in the habits of social life, it was found necessary to vest, in one
body, the right of making laws; and in another, the power of executing them.
The system of checks, therefore, becomes more necessary and complicated, in
proportion as society advances in refinement. Hence, we find those in a
republic, which are unknown in the cabinet of kings. To balance these checks
with delegated perogative; so as to preserve the rights of the people, and yet
to throw a suitable weight into the scale of government to give it energy and
force, is the grand secret of legislation.

LEST I should prejudice the philosophic mind, or lead its inquiries from the
line of truth, in justice to my subject, permit me here to remark; that the
different systems of jurisprudence, which the several nations of the world have
adopted, may, in part, be ascribed to physical causes, as well as to the reason
of things. The climate, and the natural qualities of the soil, produce a
surprising effect on the human constitution. These combined have introduced
that distinguished variety, in the descendents of Adam, which has led some to
doubt their common original. They have not only differently modified the coats
of the skin, and the organs of the body, but the texture of the mind. They have
not only clothed the African with a tawny garb, but obscured the brightness
of his intellect. They have not only grossly organized the bodily system of the
polar inhabitants, but constituted their minds of the grosser materials of
passive insensibility. And, they have not only endowed the inhabitants of the
temperate zones, with the nicer symetry of external form; but, with the richer
ornaments and elegance of the mind.

IN the warmer climates, the soil is either very barren, or very productive.
And such is the genius of its inhabitants. Vices are its spontaneous growth,
and passions are breathed in the warm diffusions of the air. Thus influenced by
native pathos, and a lively imagination, society is subject to frequent and
alarming changes. And this has been eminently the case with the southern parts
of Asia, a theater of the most astonishing revolutions, which the political
world has ever experienced. But, in the colder regions of the north, the whole
animal, as well as vegitable tribes wear a coaser stamp. Men are void of the
finer sensibilities, which intwine the nerves of social affection* -- Too
insensible to feel oppression -- too indolent to grasp at dominion, or to
aspire after the cultivations of taste, their manner of life is inoffensive;
and their rules of governing, though few, are seldom invaded. But to leave
extremes. In the temperate climates, in which we live, nature seems to have
combined her powers, to aggrandize the intellectual world, and to complete the
circle of rational enjoyment. Here she has planted her garden, adorned with the
richest fruits, and the finest flowers, which can either improve the taste, or
please the fancy, of intelligent beings. And here she has prepared a banquet
for reason.

SUCH is the philosophy of nature. These causes contribute, to produce a
variety, in the constitutional taste and manners of nations; and this variety
is the ground of that difference, in jurisprudence and civil government, which
they severally present.

FROM the same sourse, are the reasons, why similar actions have been esteemed
morally right, in one country, and morally wrong, in another. In Tartary, it is
considered a mark of filial piety and moral virtue in children, to expose their
parents grown (...) those, who feed on human flesh. Such are the effects of
climate or taste.

MORE thoroughly to investigate the connection of civil government with manners
and taste, and show their reciprocal influence; let us, for a moment, draw
aside the curtain, and view them struggling in those scenes of barbarism, which
claim the tears of humanity. On the demolition of the Roman empire, the
victorious tribes, like all conquering nations, not only dictated their
principles of civil policy, but sowed the seeds of their barbarous taste, in
the very vitals of their more civilized captives. These, in contempt of social
fitness, soon sprang up, and became more powerful than former habits of
propriety. The luminary of science, whose resplendence had been so conspicuous
in the meridian of ancient glory, declined below the mental horizon. Reason
fell asleep on the ruins of intellectual improvement, and every passion of an
uncultivated mind roved without restraint. We shall not, then, be surprised at
the phrenzy, which rendezvoused all Europe at Palestine; or alarmed at the
extravagance of bigoted opinion. In the tenth century, an opinion prevailed in
Europe, that the end of the world and the dissolution of all things were then
at hand. Their state of society favored superstitious imposition. A universal
panic seized all Christendom; led by pious zeal, under the command of an
Augustine Monk, they swarmed in millions to Asia, in order to redeem the holy
land, or Palistine, from the dominion of the Turks, or Infidels. This was
deemed a necessary preparation for that grand and awful event, the end of time.
Jurisprudence suffered equally with sentiment. Civil magistrates were vested
with powers, too feeble to enforce their laws -- too small to command respect.
It was not uncommon for Judge, while pronouncing judgment, to be challenged by
the offended party, to vindicate the justice of his sentence with the sword.
Perhaps the state of society was never more deplorable, than during the ninth,
tenth and eleventh centuries. Mankind had lost their original independence and
simplicity of manners; but had not yet acquired that sense of propriety, which
results from a just conception of things. Not comprehending the moral
government of nature, they were ready to suppose, the established order of
things might be reversed, to gratify some favorite prejudice or passion. Their
appeals to the decision of Heaven, by ordeal and by combat, and the sanction
given them, by judicial authority, at once show the bigotry of taste, and the
depression of civil law. By Ordeal, the accused was allowed to purge himself of
the crime and attest his innocence, by lifting red-hot iron with his naked
hand; or, by walking, blindfold and barefoot, over red-hot plates of iron,
placed at different distances, without receiving injury to his hand or feet.
Likewise, by plunging his uncovered arm into a chaldron of boiling water,
without scalding or injury. There were many other ways equally absurd and
preposterous.

By judicial combat, the parties disputing, or their representatives, came with
other weapons into a circle, on one side of which, to give solemnity to the
transactions, sat the Judges. The combatants usually began their conflict at
sunrising, and continued till sun-sitting, unless one were previous
vanquished. The right in dispute was adjudged to him, who overcame. And, this
was considered the decision of Heaven.




TOWARD the close of the eleventh century, society had arrived at its lowest
point of debasement. From this period, it presents a more pleasing prospect to
the friends of man. Reason, by degrees, threw off the mass, in which she had
been for centuries entombed, and began to put on some features of humanity.
Several causes contributed, jointly, to the revival of jurisprudence, and to
the improvement of taste. The establishment of communities, or cities
corporate, in Italy, led the way to these interesting events. The knowledge,
which the Italians had acquired, in navigation, introduced them to the notice
of the west, and to the commerce of the east. And, by their intercourse with
these nations, they had acquired some faint ideas of rational dignity and human
independence. These led them to persevere in obtaining charters of liberty for
their cities, or large towns, which charters soon made their way into Germany
and France. To these we owe the first ideas of political union and municipal
right. Next followed the return of science, and the institution of the learned
professions, which have rendered such essential services to the commonwealth of
manners. The passion for the adventures of chivalry was not more romantic in
its nature, than beneficial in its consequences to the progress of reason and
taste. It was moved by the powers of sympathy, and the feelings of the human
heart. It refined the points of honor and natural justice. It gave rise to
that delicacy in sentiment, and refinement in taste, toward the support of
which, an impartial friend to virtue would even dare to compliment the
sensibilities of the fair.

FROM these sources, government and manners acquired original virtues and
permanent force. -- These have enabled them to triumph over barbarous usage,
and to demonstrate to the political philosopher, that their progress depends on
their mutual aid. This has clothed nations and kingdoms with grandeur and
resplendence. It has made the children of nature citizens of refinement! We
have heard of its effects, and we have seen its influence, united with the
purity of our own country.

THE connection of civil government with manners and taste is the point, on
which the scale of national happiness turns. When this balance is destroyed,
either by the too bold strides of the one, or by the rapid progress or decline
of the other, convulsions ensue, and such convulsions as rend the political
soul. These have made tottering states and jaring empires! We have heard of the
dissolution of eastern monarchies; we have heard of the fall of Rome and our
own age has witnessed the commotions of Europe. These all proceeded from the
same cause. And whether an ally-nation has not pushed its civil government one
step farther than its social state allows, admits a rational doubt. Where the
principles of representation are too imperfectly understood, to be quietly
enjoyed, a popular constitution is generally attended with alarming innovations.

I NEED not spend time, to prove the equality of men, or the unalienable rights
of humanity. You, my countrymen, feel their reality. They are a sacred deposit
in the bosom of every American.

LET us, therefore, digress, for a moment, to consider the country in which we
live.

ENJOYING a happy temperature of climate, it possesses the bounties of nature,
with few of her inconveniences. A rich variety of soil invites the labors of
the husbandman; a salubrity of air, the inquiries of genius. Being unknown to
the other nations of the globe, till within three centuries past, it seems to
have been designedly removed, by the Author of creation, from the seat of
tyrants, in order to become the nursery of freemen.

HAVING been settled, not two centuries ago, by colonies from Europe chartered
by the king of Great Britain, who claimed the soil by right of discovery, it
enjoyed peace with the parent-country, during the first hundred and fifty
years. The years 'sixty four and 'sixty seven were destined to open the plot of
that grand drama, whose issue was the establishment of American independence,
and the downfall of British usurpation. Several acts of Parliament, among
which were the famous "stamped act," and an act imposing duties on tea, and
other articles of domestic use, justly alarmed the Americans. These, together
with the stationing of an army, at BOSTON, to enforce their unwarranted
exactions, were considered a signal to rally to the standard of arms, and to
seek an assylum under the banners of Liberty. Lexington became a scene of
blood; -- carnage and human gore spread their clotted garments, on
Bunkers'-hill! There groanings were heard, to the extremities of New Hampshire
and Georgia. The natural sympathy of the mind kindled in the American bosom a
universal glow of patriotism, which needed but the following aggressions of
Britain, to burst into conflagration. Provincial assemblies, and conventions of
the states, served to animate and confirm the united body. There is something
in reason, which commands the attention of rational beings! All seemed inspired
with that universal soul, which breathes its influence around creation. The
period had now arrived, which was to decide the fate of Americans.
Independence, or slavery, was the only alternative. In attempting to describe
the magnanimous anxieties of this eventful crisis, I should efface their
impression, from the memory of those who felt them. Suffice it to say, that, on
the fourth of July 'seventy-six, in defiance of the thunders of British
omnipotence, to the astonishment of an admiring world, and to the universal joy
of the American people, as by an ordinance from Heaven, Congress declared these
United States "FREE AND INDEPENDENT!"

THIS is the day, fellow-citizens, which we celebrate. Let us remember it, with
grateful hearts, to that Being, who said; "Let there be light, and there was
light." Let us cherish the invigorating flame, which then burned in the bosom
of our fathers and patriots, and hand it glowing to posterity. This is the day,
which calls forth the sublime feelings of independence, and the congenial flow
of American souls. We do not celebrate the romance of departed heroes, but the
achievements of our fathers. We do not celebrate the feasts of heathen Gods,
but the anniversary of reason. We do not commemorate the building of thrones,
or the coronation of kings; but, we commemorate the nativity of a nation, that
memorable day, on which three million people were born to freedom! Let us
remember, we are no longer subjects of ghastly tyranny; but the citizens of an
unalianable commonwealth!

HERE let us pause. A declaration of rights was not all. They were to be
obtained, by bloody conflict and manly exertion. I will not attempt to paint
the horrors, which, at this omenous moment, stood on every side the American
cause. It is sufficient to say, that the same undaunted fortitude and greatness
of soul, which dwelt with the patriots of 'seventy-five, still found a welcome
residence with the heroes of 'seventy-six, and 'seventy-seven. In view of
independence, property and even life was deemed too mean a sacrafice to
purchase so glorious a prize. I might mention the bloody tragedy of
Bunkers'-hill, the bold invasion of Canada, the surrender of Burgoyne, the
battle of Brandy-wine, and the capture of Cornwallis. But these are fresh, in
the memory of you all. These, with other equally distinguished events, ushered
in the full and quiet possession of American independence!

WHILE we repeat our thanks to the actors, in these scenes of tragic distress,
can we, fellow freemen, partakers of the same human nature, repress our tears
of sympathy for those, who poured out their bleeding lives, to save our common
country? Where are our fathers and brethren, who fell at Bunkers'-hill? Where
are WARREN and MONTGOMERY? Cold and bloody on the field of death! Let us intomb
them, in the lasting memory of our country; let us spread over them the laurels
of everblooming gratitude; and may the glorious cause, in which they fell, be
an eternal monument to their fame!

AFTER the peace of 'eighty two, on the change introduced into the federal
economy, new ground was opened, for the exercise of American talents. To adjust
the interests of the several states, and to originate a constitution, which
should embrace the manners and genius of so extensive a people, required
stretch of wisdom in the cabinet, equal to their former prowess in the field.
These, however, guided by the same principle of fitness, and the influence of
Heaven, they were enabled happily to effect. A constitution, which guaranteed
to the people equal rights and epual privileges, and yet preserved a suitable
dignity in government, was a phenomenon in the political world, as well as the
ornament of an enlightened people. Its opperation has evinced the justness of
its principles. By a steady adherence to these, United America has become
proverbial for prosperity, so far as she is known on the habitable globe. Her
civil and commercial interests have increased, beyond the most sanguine
computations. -- Her arts and sciences have flourished, without a precedent.
Her foreign relations have become equally respectable. Since the establishment
of her independence, she has entered into treaties of mutual advantage, with
all the considerable powers of Europe, not to mention those with the states of
Barbary, and the western savages. Herself the garden of nature, she has become
preeminent among the nations of the world. We may truly say, "he has not
dealt so with any nation." Here, the Genius of civil and religious liberty
first found an assylum. And here this celestial fugitive enjoys a most sacred
retreat, embosomed in the arts and the virtues of peace.

THOUGH misunderstandings with France now agitate the public mind; yet, relying
on the Arbiter of nations, we may, at least, hope, and even expect, an
honorable accommodation, by the wisdom and integrity of our federal government.
We have a man at helm, who has grown gray, in the services of his country, and
in the applauses of his countrymen. Nevertheless, should farther aggressions
require decision, it belongs to us, Americans, who have faught for our rights,
to exclude from the rank of citizen, him, who will not defend his country
against these lawless invaders.

IT is of importance, that we adhere firmly to the principles of federal union,
and to the spirit of our constitution. These are the palladium of our
liberties. Free elections are the life of a representative government. When
these are corrupted, then is the constitution subverted. And these are
corrupted, when electioneering newspapers become the oracles of popular truth;
when grovelling candidates stoop to the detestable arts of bribery, duplicity
and solicitation; and, when men in public trust sacrifice candid opinion, on
the alter of popular caprice. When this, I say, is the case, public virtue has
only a name. But, may this never be the case with these United States! May it
never be said, they once were free, they once were independent! May they
possess themselves, and brand with infamy the wretch, who would dare to seduce
them from religious purity and moral justice. May they continue, in reality, as
well as in name, United America, till the kingdoms of the world shall be lost,
in the kingdom of the Ancient of days!

WE have seen aspirers after tyranic dominion, and friends to faction, in the
very bowels of our union. We have seen Catalines in miniature, and despots in
infancy. But, let not such think to shake the principles of our constitution.
They are as firm, as the foundations of the earth, or the pillars of Heaven!
Let national virtue, therefore, be our watchman, on the walls of this American
Jerusalem. This shall secure us against the insinuations of European intrigue.
And, let our days of public election be as sacred to the investigation of truth
and patriotism, as sabbaths to the worship of God! Let us set these, a seal on
our liberties, and show to the world; "that a nation can be governed, and yet
be free."

I SHOULD do violence to original virtue, and to my own feelings, should I
pass, in silence, the man, who has been our shield in war, our council in
peace, GEORGE WASHINGTON, the illustrious patron of his country. The calm
serenities of a pure unclouded mind shall still attend him, through the shadowy
vale of declining age. The plaudits of an admiring world (...) ever remain, a
diadem to his memory, in the crown of hoary justice. The choir of guardian
seraphs, who have protected him, through the perils of life, shall pitch their
tents, in calm repose, around his venerable head, and softly tune their harps,
to breathe his praise.

WHILE we congratulate, with a cordial embrace, our brethren returning from the
slavery of ALGIERS, we can not, fellow-freemen, forget that distinguished
friend of man, the MARQUIS FAYETTE. Though envious kings may confine him, with
bolts and with bars; yet, his love of liberty shall be known and revered, so
far as the empire of freedom extends. His virtues, too luxuriant to flourish in
European soil, shall vegitate even in a dungeon. They shall be nourished by the
Genius of kindred souls! Remember, he fought for the fourth of July; and let us
not pass the solemnities of this joyful day, without visiting his chains with a
sympathy of affection.

WHILE we dwell on the superlativly happy condition of United America, it is
but just to feel for the miseries of the eastern continent. The true spirit of
freedom and the noble sentiments of independence have just made their way, into
two quarters of the globe. The other quarters are not yet prepared to entertain
these celestial guests. Europe is still struggling with right; Asia is the seat
of despots, and Africa, the commonwealth of tyrants.

BUT, from the present eventful period, may we not indulge the hope, that the
field of blood may soon be converted into the garden of peace; and the whole
rational family partake, with us, the blessings of the fourth of July. May we
not pursue the pleasing analagy of events, to that auspicious day, when the
connection of civil government, with manners and taste, shall be complete, in
the happiness of nations; and when a universal jubilee, to the rights and
liberties of men, shall be proclaimed and enjoyed, throughout the confederated
world. Then shall "the morning stars," again, "sing together, and all the sons
of men shout for joy."

FINIS.

