FREE-MASONRY.

UNPARALLELED SUFFERINGS OF JOHN COUSTOS, WHO NINE TIMES UNDERWENT The most
Cruel Tortures ever invented by Man, AND Sentenced to the Galley Four Years, By
command of the INQUISITORS at LISBON, IN ORDER TO EXTORT FROM HIM THE SECRETS
OF FREE-MASONRY; FROM WHENCE He was released by the gracious Interposition of
his late Majesty, KING GEORGE II.

TO THIS EDITION IS ADDED, A SELECTION OF MASONIC SONGS, AND A COMPLETE LIST OF
LODGES, FOREIGN and DOMESTIC.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY JACOB S. MOTT, FOR CHARLES SMITH, NO. 51, MAIDEN-LANE. --
1797 --

To the R. W. ROBERT R. LIVINGSTON, Esquire CHANCELLOR, GRAND MASTER, AND R. W.
JACOB MORTON, DEPUTY GRAND MASTER OF THE ANCIENT AND HONORABLE FRATERNITY OF
FREE AND ACCEPTED MASONS OF THE STATE of NEW YORK, THIS WORK IS RESPECTFULLY
INSCRIBED BY CHARLES SMITH.

PREFACE.
IN presenting the following work of COUSTOS'S Sufferings to the public, it may
be remarked that few publications have received so extensive a patronage from
the fraternity as the present, and none held in more estimation, as is fully
evinced by the respectable list of subscribers annexed to the English copy,
prefaced with a dedication to his Royal Highness the duke of Cumberland, the
then Grand Master. This proving the character and merit of the narrative, has
induced the publisher to presume it will be equally acceptable to the craft on
this side the Atlantic, particularly as masonry flourishes in this country in a
manner hitherto unequalled in the history of cur noble order. A work of this
nature well authenticated must be considered as a valuable tract -- which for
the honor of humanity it is firmly hoped, the like scenes will again be never
repeated.

An original attempt to arrange in order the different domestic lodges, will
appear obviously difficult to effect with accuracy; but so far as the subject
has admitted, no attention has been withheld. The editor here begs leave to
present his acknowledgments to John Abrams Esquire Grand secretary for New York,
for his very polite assistance in the accomplishment of this part of the work.
Foreign lodges are enumerated from the latest masons calender that could be
procured.

The songs, it is presumed, will prove an acceptable pocket companion to our
meetings, and if they have a tendency in promoting recreating pleasure, the
wishes of the editor will be amply gratified.

INTRODUCTION.
I CAN justly affirm, that it was not vanity that induced me to publish the
following accurate and faithful relation of my sufferings in the Inquisition of
Lisbon. A strong desire to justify myself with regard to the false accusations
brought by that tribunal against me; as well as against the brotherhood of
Free-Masons, of which I have the honor to be a member, were the chief motives
for my taking up the pen. To this I will add, that I was very willing the whole
world should receive all the lights and informations I was capable of giving
it, concerning the shocking injustice, and the horrid cruelties exercised in
the pretended holy office. Persons who live in countries where this tribunal is
had in abomination, will, from the perusal of the following sheets, have fresh
cause to bless providence, for not fixing their abode among the Spaniards, the
Portugueze, or the Italians.

Such of my readers as may happen to go and reside in countries where this
barbarous tribunal is established, will here find very salutary instructions
for their conduct; and, consequently, be less liable to fall into the hands of
the unrelenting Inquisitors.

Those who, spite of all the precautions taken by them, may yet have the sad
misfortune to become their innocent victims, will here be taught to avoid the
snares laid, in order to aggravate the charge brought against them. These
snares ought the more to be guarded against, as they are but too often spread
by the Inquisitors, merely to give a specious air of justice and equity to
their iniquitous prosecutions.

For this reason, I shall first give an impartial relation of my own
prosecution and sufferings, on account of my being a Free-Mason. I shall add,
for the satisfaction of the curious, a succinct history of the pretended holy
office; its origin; its establishment in France, Italy, Spain and Portugal; the
manner how it grasped, by insensible degrees, the supreme authority now
exercised by it, not only against those considered by it as heretics, but even
against Roman Catholics; how prisoners are proceeded against; the tortures
inflicted on them, in order to extort a confession: the execution of persons
sentenced to die; with an accurate description of the Auto da Fe, or gaol
delivery, as we may term it; together with the sufferings of many persons who
fell victims to this tribunal. I likewise will add a plan of the house of the
Inquisition at Lisbon, in which I was confined sixteen months, and whence I was
removed to the galley, as it is called, in that city. I will describe this
Portugueze galley; and the manner how prisoners are lodged and treated in both
those places.

I shall conclude with a comparison between the methods employed by the
primitive church, in order to suppress heresy, and convert heretics; and those
now made use of by the Inquisitors (under the cloak of religion)
indiscriminately toward all mankind, for the same purpose, as they pretend. I
shall relate what I myself was eyewitness of; and will annex the remarks of
many ill-fated Roman Catholics, who, as well as myself, were the innocent
victims to this dreadful tribunal.

I shall think it a happiness, -- if the relation which I now offer should be
found of use to the public; and shall consider it as a still greater, in case
it may help to open the eyes of those, who, hurried on by an indiscreet, or
rather blind zeal, think it a meritorious work, in the sight of heaven, to
persecute all persons whose religious principles differ from theirs.

In order to give the reader all the proof possible, in the nature of the
thing, that I have really undergone the tortures mentioned in the following
account of my sufferings, I showed the marks still remaining on my arms and
legs, to Dr. Hoadly, Mr. Hawkins, and Mr. Carry, surgeons: and I think myself
particularly obliged to these gentlemen, for the leave they have given me to
assure the public, they were quite satisfied that the marks must have been the
effect of very great violence; and that, in their situation, they correspond
exactly to the description of the torture.

THE HISTORY OF THE SUFFERINGS OF JOHN COUSTOS, IN THE INQUISITION AT LISBON.
I AM a native of Berne in Switzerland, and a lapidary by profession. In 1716,
my father came, with his whole family, to London; and as he proposed to settle
in England, he got himself naturalized there.

After living twenty-two years in that city, I went, at the solicitation of a
friend, to Paris, in order to work in the galleries of the Louvre. Five years
after I left this capital, and removed to Lisbon, in hopes of finding an
opportunity of going to Brasil, where I flattered myself that I should make my
fortune. But the king of Portugal, whom I addressed in order to obtain
permission for this purpose, being informed of my profession, and the skill I
might have in diamonds, etc. his majesty, by the advice of his council, refused
my petition, upon the supposition that it would be no way^ proper to send a
foreigner, who was a lapidary, into a country abounding with immense treasures,
whose value the government endeavors, by all means possible, to conceal, even
from the inhabitants.

Whilst I was waiting for an answer from court, to my petition, I got
acquainted with several substantial jewellers, and other persons of credit, in
Lisbon; who made me the kindest and most generous offers, in case I would
reside among them, which I accepted, after having lost all hopes of going to
Brasil. I now was settled in the above mentioned city, equally to the
satisfaction of my friends, my employers, and myself; having a prospect of
gaining wherewithal, not only to support my family with decency, but also to
lay up a competency for old age, could I but have escaped the cruel hands of
the Inquisitors.

I must observe, by the way, that the Inquisitor have usurped so formidable a
power in Spain and Portugal, that the monarchs of those kingdoms are no more,
if I may be allowed the expression, than as their chief subjects. Those tyrants
do not scruple to encroach so far on the privilege of kings, as to stop, by
their own authority at the post office, the letters of all whom they take it
into their heads to suspect. In this manner I myself was served, a year before
the Inquisitors had ordered me to be seized; the design of which, I suppose,
was to see, whether among the letters of my correspondents, some mention would
not be made of Free-Masonry; I passing for one of the most zealous members of
that art, which they resolved to persecute, upon pretense that enormous crimes
were committed by its professors. However, though the Inquisitors did not find,
by one of my intercepted letters, that Free-Masonry either struck at the Romish
religion, or tended to disturb the government; still they were not satisfied,
but resolved to set every engine at work, in order to discover the mysteries
and secrets of Masonry. For this purpose, they concluded that it would be
proper to seize one of the chief Free-Masons in Lisbon; and accordingly I was
pitched upon, as being the master of a lodge; they likewise-cast their eye on
(...) warden, an intimate friend of mine, Mr. Alexander James Mouton, a diamond
cutter, born in Paris, and a Romanist. He had been settled six years, before
his seizure, at Lisbon, in which city he was a housekeeper; and where his
integrity, skill, and behavior were such, as gained him the approbation of all
to whom he was known.

The reader is to be informed, that our lodges, in Lisbon, were not kept at
taverns, etc. but alternately at the private houses of chosen friends. In these
we used to dine together, and practice the secrets of Free-Masonry.

As we did not know that our art was forbid in Portugal, we were soon
discovered by the barbarous zeal of a lady, who declared, at confession, that
we were Free-Masons; that is, in her opinion, monsters in nature, who
perpetrated the most shocking crimes. This discovery immediately put the
vigilant officers of the Inquisition upon the scent after us: on which occasion
my friend Mr. Mouton fell the first victim, he being seized in manner following.

A jeweller and goldsmith, who was a familiar of the holy office, sent a
friend, (a Free-Mason also) to Mr. Mouton; upon pretense that he wanted to
speak with him, about mending a diamond weighing four carrats. They agreed upon
the price; but as this was merely an artifice, in order for our familiar to
know the person of the said Mouton, he put him off for two days; upon pretense
that he must first enquire of the owner of the diamond, whether he approved of
the price settled between them.

I happened to be at that time with Mr. Mouton; a circumstance which gave the
highest joy to the jeweller; finding that he had got a sight, at one and the
same time, of the very two Free-Masons whom the Inquisitors were determined to
seize.

At our taking leave, he desired us to come together, at the time appointed, to
which we both agreed. The jeweller then made his report to the Inquisitors, who
ordered him to seize us, when we should return about the diamond in question.

Two days being elapsed, and my business not permitting me to accompany Mr.
Mouton, he went alone to the jeweller, to fetch the diamond, which was computed
to be worth an hundred moidores. The first question the jeweller asked, after
the usual compliments, was, "Where is your friend Coustos?" -- As this jeweller
had before shown me some precious stones, which he pretended I should go to
work upon, Mr. Mouton, imagining he was desirous of putting them instantly into
my hands, replied: That I was upon 'Change; and that, if he thought proper, he
would go and fetch me. However, as this familiar, and five subaltern officers
of the Inquisition, who were along with him, were afraid of losing half their
prey; they inveigled Mr. Mouton into the back shop, upon pretense of asking his
opinion concerning certain rough diamonds. After several signs and words had
passed between them, the oldest of the company rising up, said, he had
something particular to communicate to Mr. Mouton; upon which he took him
behind the curtain; when, enquiring his name and surname, he told him that he
was his prisoner, in the king's name.

Being sensible that he had not committed any crime for which he could incur
his Portugueze majesty's displeasure, he gave up his sword the moment it was
demanded of him. Immediately several trusty officers of the Inquisition, called
familiars, fell upon him to prevent his escaping; they then commanded him not
to make the least noise, and began to search him. This being done, and finding
he had no weapons, they asked whether he was desirous of knowing in whose name
he had been seized? Mr. Mouton answered in the affirmative: We seize you (said
they) in the name of the Inquisition; and, in its name, we forbid you to speak,
or murmur ever so little. Saying these words, a door at the bottom of the
jeweller's shop, and which looked into a narrow byelane, being opened; the
prisoner, accompanied by a commissary of the holy office, was thrown into a
small chaise, where he was so closely shut up, (it being noon day,) that no one
could see him. This precaution was used to prevent his friends from getting the
least information concerning his imprisonment; and consequently from using
their endeavors to procure his liberty.

Being come to the prison of the Inquisition, they threw him into a dungeon,
and there left him alone; without indulging him the satisfaction they had
promised, which was, to let him speak, immediately upon his arrival, to the
president of the holy office; to know from him, the reason of his detainer. On
the contrary, they were so cruel to Mr. Mouton's reputation, as to spread a
report he was gone off with the diamond abovementioned. But how greatly were
every one of his friends surprised and shocked at this slander! As we all
entertained the highest idea of his probity, none of us would give credit to
this vile report; whence we unanimously agreed, after duly weighing this
matter, to go in a body to the jeweller, who was the owner of the diamond, and
offer him the full payment of it; firmly persuaded, that nothing but the most
fatal and unexpected accident could have made him disappear thus suddenly,
without giving some of his friends notice of it. However, the jeweller refused
our offer in the politest manner; assuring us at the same time, that the owner
of the diamond was so wealthy a man, that the loss of it would be but a trisle
to him.

But as truth frequently breaks through all the veils with which falsehood
endeavors to cloud her; this generosity in persons to whom we were, in a great
measure, strangers, made us suspect some iniquitous, dark act. Our conjecture
appeared but too well grounded, from the severe persecution that was
immediately raised against the Free-Masons; I myself being seized four days
after.

I perhaps should have escaped their merciless paws, had I not been betrayed,
in the most barbarous manner, by a Portugueze friend of mine, as I falsely
supposed him to be; and whom the holy office had ordered to watch me narrowly.
This man seeing me in a coffee-house, the 5th of March, 1742-3, between nine
and ten at night; went and gave notice thereof to nine officers of the
Inquisition, who were lying in wait for me, with a chaise, near that place.

I was in the utmost confusion, when, at my going out of the coffee-house with
two friends, the above officers seized me only. Their pretense for this was,
that I had passed my word for the diamond which Mr. Mouton had run away with:
that I must certainly be his accomplice, since I had engaged my friends to
offer to pay for the diamond; all which (added they) I must have done in no
other view than to conceal my villainy. It was to no purpose that I alleged a
thousand things in my own justification. Immediately the wretches took away my
sword; hand-cuffed me; forced me into a chaise drawn by two mules; and in this
condition I was hurried away to the prison of the Inquisition.

But, spite of these severities, and their commanding me not to open my lips, I
yet called aloud to one of my friends (Mr. Richard) who had been at the
coffee-house with me, and was a Free-Mason; conjuring him to give notice to all
the rest of our brethren and friends, of my being seized by command of the holy
office, in order that they might avoid the misfortune which had befallen me, by
going voluntarily to the Inquisitors, and accusing themselves.

I must take notice, that the Inquisitors very seldom cause a person to be
seized in broad day light, except they are almost sure that he will make no
noise nor resistance. This is a circumstance they observe very strictly, as is
evident from the manner in which they took Mr. Mouton. Farther, they frequently
make use of the king's name and authority on these occasions, to seize and
disarm the pretended criminal, who is afraid to disobey the orders he hears
pronounced. But as darkness befriends deeds of villainy, the Inquisitors, for
this reason, usually cause their victims to be secured in the night.

The Portugueze, and many foreigners, are so apprehensive of the sinister
accidents which often happen at Lisbon in the nightime, especially to a
person who ventures out alone, that few are found in the streets of this city
at a late hour.

I imagined myself so secure in the company of my friends, that I should not
have been afraid of resisting the officers in question, had the former lent me
their assistance. But unhappily for me, they were struck with such a sudden
panic, that every one of them fled; leaving me to the mercy of nine wretches,
who fell upon me in an instant.

They then forced me to the prison of the Inquisition, where I was delivered up
to one of the officers of this pretended holy place. This officer presently
calling four subalterns, or guards, these took me to an apartment, till such
time as notice should be given to the president of my being catched in their
snare.

A little after, the abovementioned officer coming again, bid the guards
search me; and take away all the gold, silver, papers, knives, scissors,
buckles, etc. I might have about me. They then led me to a lonely dungeon,
expressly forbidding me to speak loud, or knock at the walls; but that, in case
I wanted any thing, to beat against the door, with a padlock, that hung on the
outward door; and which I could reach, by thrusting my arm through the iron
grates. It was then that, struck with all the horrors of a place of which I had
heard and read such baleful descriptions, I plunged at once into the blackest
melancholy; especially when I reflected on the dire consequences with which my
confinement might very possibly be attended.

I passed a whole day and two nights in these terrors, which are the more
difficult to describe, as they were heightened at every little interval, by the
complaints, the dismal cries, and hollow groans (echoing through this dreadful
mansion) of several other prisoners, my neighbors; and which the solemn
silence of the night made infinitely more shocking. It was now that time seemed
to have lost all motion, and these threescore hours appeared to me like so many
years.

However, afterward calling to mind, that grief would only aggravate my
calamity, I endeavored to arm my soul with patience; and habituate myself, as
well as I could, to woe. Accordingly I roused my spirits; and banishing for a
few moments, these dreadfully mournful ideas, I began to reflect seriously, on
the methods how to extricate myself from this labyrinth of horrors. My
consciousness that I had not committed any crime which could justly merit
death, would now and then soften my pang^; but immediately after, dreadful
thoughts o^^^-spread my mind, when I imagined to myself the crying injustice of
which the tribunal that was to judge me, is accused. I considered that, being a
protestant, I should inevitably feel, in its utmost rigours, all that rage and
barbarous zeal could infuse in the breast of monks; who cruelly gloried, in
committing to the flames, great numbers of ill-fated victims, whose only crime
was their differing from them in religious opinions; or rathe^ ^ho where
obnoxious to those tigers, merely because they thought ^orthily of human
nature; and had, in the utmost detestation, these Romish barbarities, which are
not to be paralleled in any other religion.

These apprehensions, together with the reflections which reason suggested to
me, viz. that it would be highly incumbent on me to calm the tumult of my
spirits, in order, to prevent my falling into the snares which my judges would
not fail to spread round me; either by giving them an opportunity of
pronouncing me guilty, or by forcing me to apostatize from the religion in
which I was born; these things, I say, worked so strongly on my mind, that,
from this moment, I devoted my whole thoughts to the means of my justification.
This I made so fami^^ar to myself, that I was persuaded neither the partiality
of my judges, nor the dreadful ideas I had entertained of their cruelty, could
intimidate me, when I should be brought before them; which I accordingly was,
in a few days, after having been shaved, and had my hair cut by their order.

I now was led, bare-headed, to the president and four Inquisitors, ^^^^o, upon
my co^ing in, bid me kneel down, lay my right hand on the bible; and swear, in
the presence of Almighty God, that I would speak truly with regard to all the
questions they should ask me. These questions were; my Christian and sirnames;
those of my parents; the place of my birth, my profession, religion, and how
long I had resided in Lisbon. This being done, they addressed me as follows: --
Son, you have offended and spoke injuriously of the holy office, as we know
from very good hands; for which reason we exhort you to make a confession of,
and to accuse yourself of the several crimes you may have committed, from the
time you was capable of judging between good and evil, to the present moment.
In doing this, you will excite the compassion of this tribunal, which is ever
merciful and kind to those who speak the truth.

It was ^hen they thought proper to inform me, that the diamond mentioned in
the former pages, was only a pretense they had employed, in order to get an
opportunity of seizing me. I now besought them, To let me know the true cause
of my imprisonment; that, having been born and educated in the protestant
religion, I had been taught, from my infancy, not to confess myself to men, but
to God, who, as he only can see into the inmost recesses of the human heart,
knows the sincerity or insincerity of the sinner's repentance, who confessed to
him; and being his creator, it was he only could absolve him.

The reader will naturally suppose, that they were no ways satisfied with my
answer; -- They declaring, that it would be indispensably necessary for me to
confess myself, what religion soever I might be of; otherwise, that a
confession would be forced from me, by the expedients the holy office employed
for that purpose.

To this I replied, That I had never spoke in my life against the Romish
religion; that I had behaved in such a manner, ever since my living at Lisbon,
that I could not be justly accused of saying or doing any thing contrary to the
laws of the kingdom, either as to spirituals or temporals; that I had also
imagined the holy office took cognizance of none but those persons who were
guilty of sacrilege, blasphemy, and such like crimes, whose delight is to
depreciate and ridicule the mysteries received in the Romish church, but of
which I was no ways guilty. -- They then remanded me back to my dungeon, after
exhorting me to examine my conscience.

Three days after, they sent for me, to interrogate me a second time. The first
question they asked was; Whether I had carefully looked into my conscience,
pursuant to their injunction.' I replied, That after carefully reviewing all
the past transactions of my life, I did not remember my having said or done any
thing that could justly give offense to the holy office; that from my most
tender youth, my parents, who had been forced to quit France for their
religion; and who knew, by sad experience, how highly it concerns every one
that values his ease, never to converse on religious subjects, in certain
countries; that my parents, (I say) had advised me never to engage in disputes
of this kind, since they usually embittered the minds of the contending
parties, rather than reconciled them; farther, that I belonged to a society,
composed of persons of different religions; one of the laws of which society
expressly forbid its members ever to dispute on those subjects upon a
considerable penalty. As the Inquisitors confounded the word society with that
of religion; I assured them, that this society could be considered as a
religious one, no otherwise than as it obliged its several members to live
together in charity and brotherly love, how widely soever they might differ in
religious principles. They then enquired, how this society was called? -- I
replied, -- That if they had ordered me to be seized, because I was one of its
members, I would readily tell them its name; I thinking myself not a little
honored in belonging to a society, which boasted several Christian kings,
princes, and persons of the highest quality among its members; and that I had
been frequently in company with some of the latter, as one of their brethren.

Then one of the Inquisitors asked me, Whether the name of this society was a
secret? I answered, that it was not; that I could tell it them in French or
English, but was not able to translate it into Portugueze. Then all of them
fixing, on a sudden, their eyes attentively on me, repeated, alternately, the
words Free-Mason, or Franc-Macon. From this instant I was firmly persuaded,
that I had been imprisoned solely on account of Masonry.

They afterward asked, What were the constitutions of this society. I then set
before them, as well as I could, the ancient traditions relating to this noble
art, of which (I told them) James VI. king of Scotland, The constitutions of
the Free-Masons, etc. for the use of the lodges, by Dr. Anderson, page 38,
London, 17^3. Some other passages here, are taken from the ^ame work.
had declared himself the protector, and encouraged his subjects to enter among
the Free-Masons: that it appeared, from authentic manuscripts, that the kings
of Scotland had so great a regard for this honorable society, on account of
the strong proofs its members had ever given of their fidelity and attachment;
that those monarchs established the custom among the brethren, of saying,
whenever they drank, God preserve the king and the brotherhood: that this
example was soon followed by the Scotch nobility and the clergy, who had so
high an esteem for the brotherhood, that most of them entered into the society.

That it appeared from other traditions, that the kings of Scotland had
frequently been grand masters of the Free-Masons; and that, when the kings were
not such, the society were empowered to elect, as grand master, one of the
nobles of the country, who had a pension from the sovereign; and received, at
his election, a gift from every Free-Mason in Scotland.

I likewise told them; That queen Elizabeth, ascending the throne of England,
at a time that the kingdom was greatly divided by factions and clashing
interests; and taking umbrage at the various assemblies of great numbers of her
subjects, as not knowing the designs of those meetings; she resolved to
suppress the assemblies of the Free-Masons; however, that, before her Majesty
proceeded to this extremity, she commanded some of her subjects to enter into
this society, among whom was the archbishop of Canterbury, primate of her
kingdom: that these, obeying the queen's orders, gave her so very advantageous
a character, of the fidelity of the Free-Masons, as removed, at once, all her
majesty's suspicions and political fears: so that the society have, ever since
that time, enjoyed in Great Britain, and the places subject to it, all the
liberty they could wish for, and which they have never once abused.

They afterward enquired, What was the tendency of this society? -- I replied:
Every Free-Mason is obliged, at his admission, to take an oath, on the holy
gospel, that he will be faithful to the king; and never enter into any plot or
conspiracy against his sacred person, or against the country where he resides:
and that he will pay obedience to the magistrates appointed by the monarch.

I next declared, That charity was the foundation, and the soul, as it were, of
the society; as it linked together the several individuals of it, by the tie of
fraternal love; and made it an indispensable duty to assist, in the most
charitable manner, without distinction of religion, all such necessitous
persons as were found true objects of compassion. -- It was then they called me
liar; declaring, that it was impossible this society should profess the
practice of such good maxims, and yet be so very jealous of its secrets as to
exclude women from it. The judicious reader will perceive, at once, the
weakness of this inference, which perhaps would be found but too true, were it
applied to the inviolable secrecy observed by this pretended holy office, in
all its actions.

They presently gave orders for my being conveyed into another deep dungeon;
the design of which, I suppose, was to terrify me completely; and here I
continued seven weeks. It will be naturally supposed, that I now was
overwhelmed with grief. I will confess, that I then gave myself up entirely for
lost; and had no resource left but in the Almighty, whose aid I implored
continually with the utmost fervency.

During my stay in this miserable dungeon, I was taken three times before the
Inquisitors. The first thing they made me do was, to swear on the bible, that I
would not reveal the secrets of the Inquisition; but declare the truth with
regard to all such questions as they should put to me: they added, That it was
their firm opinion that Masonry could not be founded on such good principles as
I, in my former interrogatories, had affirmed; and that, if this society of
Free-Masons was so virtuous as I pretended, there was no occasion of their
concealing, so very industriously, the secrets of it.

I told them, That as secrecy One of the principal parts that makes a man be
deemed wife, is his intelligent strength and ability to cover and conceal such
honest secrets as are committed to him, as well as his own serious affairs. And
whoever will peruse sacred and profane history, shall find a great number of
virtuous attempts (in peace and war) that never reached their designed ends,
through defect of secret concealment; and yet, besides such unhappy prevention,
infinite evils have thereby ensued. But before all other examples, let us
consider that which excels all the rest derived even from God himself. Who so
especially preserves his own secrets to himself, never letting any man know
what should happen on the morrow; nor could the wise men in ages past, divine
what should befall us in this age: whereby we may readily discern that God
himself is well pleased with secrecy. And although (for man's good) the Lord
has been pleased to reveal some things, yet it is impossible at any time to
change or alter his determination, in regard whereof the reverend wise men of
ancient times, evermore affected to perform their intentions secretly. The
Athenians had a statue of brass, which they bowed to; the figure was made
without a tongue, to declare secrecy thereby.

The servants of Plancus are much commended, because no torment could make them
confess the secret which their master entrusted them with.

Likewise the servant of Cato the orator was cruelly tormented, but nothing
could make him reveal the secrets of his master.

Aristothe was demanded what thing appeared most difficult to him; he answered,
to be secret and silent.

To this purpose St. Ambrose, in his offices, placed among the principal
foundations of virtue, the patient gift of silence.

The wise king Solomon says in his proverbs, that a king ought not to drink
wine, because drunkenness is an enemy to secrecy; and, in his opinion, he is
not worthy to reign that cannot keep his own secrets; he furthermore says, that
he which discovers secrets is a traitor, and he which conceals them is a
faithful brother: he likewise says, that he that refraineth his tongue, keeps
his soul.

Therefore I am of opinion, that if secrecy and silence be duly considered,
they will be found most necessary to qualify a man for any business of
importance: if this be granted, I am confident that no man will dare to dispute
that Free-Masons are superior to all other men, in concealing their secrets,
from time immemorial; which the power of gold, that often has betrayed kings
and princes, and sometimes overturned whole empires, nor the most cruel
punishments could never extort the secret (even) from the weakest member of the
whole fraternity.


naturally excited curiosity, this prompted great numbers, of persons to enter
into this society; that all the moneys given by members, at their admission
therein, were employed in works of charity: that by the secrets which the
several members practiced, a true Mason instantly knew whether a stranger, who
would introduce himself into a lodge, was really a Free-Mason; that, was it not
for such precautions, this society would form confused assemblies of all sorts
of people, who, as they were not obliged to pay obedience to the orders of the
master of the lodge, it consequently would be impossible to keep them within
the bounds of that decorum and good manners, which are exactly observed, upon
certain penalties, by all Free-Masons.

That the reason why women were excluded this society, was, to take away all
occasion for calumny and reproach, which would have been unavoidable, had they
been admitted into it. Farther, that since women had, in general, been always
considered as not very well qualified to keep a secret; the founders of the
society of Free-Masons, by their exclusion of the other sex, thereby gave a
signal proof of their prudence and wisdom.

They then insisted upon my revealing to them the secrets of this art. -- The
oath (says I) taken by me at my admission, never to divulge them directly or
indirectly, will not permit me to do it: conscience forbids me; and I therefore
hope your lordships are too equitable to use compulsion.' They declared, 'That
my oath was as nothing in their presence, and that they would absolve me from
it. -- Your lordships (continued I) are very gracious; but as I am firmly
persuaded, that it is not in the power of any being upon earth to free me from
my oath, I am firmly determined never to violate it. This was more than enough
to make them remand me back to my dungeon, where, a few days after, I fell sick.

A physician was then sent, who finding me exceedingly ill, made a report
thereof to the Inquisitors. These, upon their being informed of it, immediately
gave orders for my being removed from this frightful dungeon, into another,
which admitted some glimmerings of day light. They appointed, at the same time,
another prisoner to look after me during my sickness, which, very happily, was
not of long continuance.

Being recovered, I was again taken before the Inquisitors, who asked me
several new questions with regard to the secrets of Masonry; and whether, since
my abode in Lisbon, I had received any Portugueze into the society?' -- I
replied, 'that I had not: that it was true, indeed, that Don Emanuel de Sousa,
Lord of Calliaris, and captain of the German Guards, hearing that the person
was at Lisbon, who had made the Duke de Villeroy a Free-Mason by order of the
French king Lewis XV. Don Emanuel had desired Mr. de Chavigny, at that time
minister of France at the Portugueze court, to enquire for me: but that, upon
my being told that the king of Portugal would not permit any of his subjects to
be Free-Masons, I had desired two of the brethren to wait on Mr. de Calliaris
abovementioned, and acquaint him with my fears; and to assure him, at the same
time, that, in case he could obtain the king's leave, I was ready to receive
him into the brotherhood; I being resolved not to do any thing which might draw
upon me the indignation of his Portugueze majesty: that Mr. de Calliaris having
a very strong desire to enter into our society, declared, that there was
nothing in what I had observed with regard to his majesty's prohibition; it
being (added this nobleman) unworthy of the regal dignity, to concern itself
with such trifles. However, being certain that I spoke from very good
authority; and knowing that Mr. de Calliaris was a nobleman of great economy:
I found no other expedient, to disengage myself from him, than by asking fifty
moidores for his reception; a demand which, I was persuaded, would soon lessen,
or rather suppress at once, the violent desire he might have to enter into the
society of Free-Masons.

To this one of the Inquisitors said: -- That it was not only true that his
Portugueze majesty had forbid any of his subjects to be made Free-Masons; but
that there had been fixed up, five years before, upon the doors of all the
churches in Lisbon, an order from his holiness, strictly enjoining the
Portugueze in general, not to enter into this society; and even excommunicated
all such as were then, or should afterward become members of it. -- Here I
besought them to consider, that if I had committed any offense in practicing
Masonry at Lisbon, it was merely through ignorance; I having resided but two
years in Portugal: that, farther, the circumstance just now mentioned by them,
entirely destroyed the charge brought against me, viz. of my being the person
who had introduced Free-Masonry in Portugal. -- They answered, that as I was
one of the most zealous partisans of this society, I could not but have heard,
during my abode in Lisbon, the orders issued by the holy father.' I silenced
them by 'the comparison I made between myself and a traveller, (a foreigner)
who, going to their capital city, and spying two roads leading to it, one of
which was expressly forbid (upon pain of the severest punishment) to strangers,
though without any indication or tokens being set up for this purpose; that
this stranger, I say, should thereby strike accidentally, merely through
ignorance, into the forbidden road.

They afterward charged me with drawing away Roman Catholics, of other
nations, residing in Lisbon. I represented to them, that Roman Catholics must
sooner be informed of the pope's injunction than I, who was a protestant: that
I was firmly of opinion, that the severe orders issued by the Roman pontiff,
had not a little prompted many to enter among the Free-Masons: that a man, who
was looked upon as a heretic, was no ways qualified to win over persons who
considered him as such: that a Free-Mason, who professed the Romish religion,
was, I presumed, the only man fit to seduce and draw away others of the same
persuasion with himself; to get into their confidence; and remove successfully
such scruples as might arise in their minds, both with regard to the injurious
reports spread concerning Masonry, and to the pope's excommunication; of which
a vile heretic entertained an idea far different from that of the Romanists. --
They then sent me back to my dungeon.

Being again ordered to be brought before the Inquisitors, they insisted upon
my letting them into the secrets of Masonry; threatening me, in case I did not
comply. -- I persisted, as before, in refusing to break my oath; and besought
them, either to write, or give orders for writing, to his Portugueze majesty's
ministers both at London and Paris; to know from them, whether any thing was
ever done in the assemblies of the Free-Masons, repugnant to decency and
morality; to the dictates of the Romish faith; or to the obedience which every
good Christian owes to the injunctions of the monarch in whose dominions he
lives. I observed farther, that the king of France, who is the eldest son of
the church, and despotic in his dominions, would not have bid his favorite
enter into a society proscribed by mother church; had he not been firmly
persuaded that nothing was transacted in their meetings, contrary to the state,
to religion, and to the church. I afterward referred them to Mr. Dogood, an
Englishman, who was born a Roman Catholic and a Free-Mason. -- This gentleman
had traveled with, and was greatly beloved by Don Pedro Antonio, the king's
favorite; and who (I observed farther) having settled a lodge in Lisbon
fifteen years before, could acquaint them, in case he thought proper, with the
nature and secrets of Masonry. -- The Inquisitors commanded me to be taken back
to my dismal abode.

Appearing again before them, they did not once mention the secrets of Masonry;
but took notice that I, in one of my examinations, had said, that it was a duty
incumbent on Free-Masons to assist the needy; upon which they asked, whether I
had ever relieved a poor object? -- I named to them a lying-in woman, a
Romanist, who being reduced to the extremes of misery, and hearing that the
Free-Masons were very liberal of their alms, she addressed herself to me, and I
gave her a moidore. I added, that the convent of the Franciscans having been
burnt down, the fathers made a gathering; and I gave them, upon the exchange,
three quarters of a moidore. I declared farther, that a poor Roman Catholic,
who had a large family, and could get no work; being in the utmost distress,
had been recommended to me, by some Free-Masons; with a request that we would
make a purse, among ourselves, in order to set him up again, and thereby enable
him to support his family: that accordingly we raised among seven of us who
were Free-Masons, ten moidores; which money I myself put into his hands.

They then asked me, whether I had given my own money in alms?' I replied, that
these arose from the forfeits of such Free-Masons as had not attended properly
the meetings of the brotherhood.' What are the faults (said they) committed by
your Brother-Masons, which occasion their being fined? Those who take the name
of God in vain, pay the quarter of a moidore; such as utter any other oath, or
pronounce obscene words, forseit a new crusade; A new crusade is 2 s. 6 d.
sterling.
all who are turbulent, or refuse to obey the orders of the master of the
lodge, are likewise fined. They remanded me back to my dungeon, having first
enquired the name and habitation of the several persons hinted at a little
higher; on which occasion I assured them, that the last mentioned was not a
Free-Mason; and that the Brethren assisted, indiscriminately, all sorts of
people, provided they were real objects of charity.

I naturally concluded, from the behavior of the Inquisitors, at my being
brought before them four days after, that they had enquired into the truth of
the several particulars related before. They now did not say a word concerning
Masonry, but began to work with different engines.

They then employed all the powers of their rhetoric to prove, that it became
me to consider my imprisonment, by order of the holy office, as an effect of
the goodness of God; who (added they) intended to bring me to a serious way of
thinking; and, by this means, lead me into the paths of truth, in order that I
might labor efficaciously at the salvation of my soul. That I ought to know
that Jesus Christ had said to St. Peter; Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I
will build my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it; St.
Matthew.
whence it was my duty to obey the injunctions of his holiness, he being St.
Peter's successor. -- I replied with spirit and resolution, that I did not
acknowledge the Roman pontiff, either as successor to St. Peter, or as
infallible: that I relied entirely, with regard to doctrine, on the Holy
scriptures, these being the sole guide of our faith: I besought them to let me
enjoy, undisturbed, the privileges allowed the English in Portugal: that I was
resolved to live and die in the communion of the church of England: and that
therefore all the pains they might take to make a convert of me, would be
ineffectual.

Notwithstanding the repeated declarations made by me, that I would never
change my religion, the Inquisitors were as urgent as ever. Encouraged by the
apostasy of one of my Brother-Masons, they flattered themselves with the hopes
of prevailing on me to imitate him; and, for this purpose, offered to send some
English friars to me, who (they said) would instruct me; and so fully open my
eyes, that I should have a distinct view of my wretched condition, which (they
declared) was the more deplorable, as I was now wholly insensible of its danger.

Finding me still immovable, and that there was no possibility of their making
the least impression on me; the indulgence which they seemed to show at the
beginning of my examination, was suddenly changed to fury; they venting the
most injurious expressions; calling me heretic, and saying that I was damned.
Here I could not forbear replying, that I was no heretic; but would prove, on
the contrary, that they themselves were in an error. and now, raising their
voice; take care (cried they, with a tone of authority) what you say.' 'I
advance nothing, (replied I) but what I am able to prove. Do you believe
(continues I) that the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, as found in the New
Testament are true? -- They answered in the affirmative. But what inference
(said they) do you draw from thence?' 'Be so good (adds I) as to let me have a
bible, and I will inform you concerning this. I then laid before them the
passage where our Savior says thus: Search the scriptures, for in them ye
think ye have eternal life, and they are they which testify of me St. John's
gospel. v. 39.
. Likewise the following: We also have a more sure word of prophesy; whereunto
ye do well that you take heed *; and yet (says I) both the pope and your
lordships forbid the perusal of them; and thereby act in direct opposition to
the 2 Epist. St. Peter, i. 19.
express command of the Savior of the world.' To this the Inquisitors replied,
that I ought to call to mind, 'that our Savior says to St. Peter, (and in his
name, to all the popes his successors) I will give unto thee the keys of the
kingdom of heaven; and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in
heaven; and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven St.
Matthew, xvi. 19.
. 'That none but a heretic, like myself, would dare to dispute the authority
and infallibility of the pope, who is Christ's vicar here below: that the
reason of not allowing the perusal of this book was, to to prevent the common
people from explaining the obscure passages contained therein, contrary to
their true sense; as was daily the practice of schismatics and heretics like
myself. I shall omit the other controversial points that afterward occurred,
all which I answered to the best of my slender abilities.

One thing I can assure my reader is, that the Inquisitors were not able to
alter, in any manner, the firm resolution I had taken, to live and die a
protestant: on the contrary, I can affirm, that their remonstrances, and even
menaces, served only to strengthen my resistance; and furnish me abundant
proofs to refute, with vigor, all the arguments offered by them.

I acknowledge, that I owe this wholly to the divine goodness, which graciously
condescended to support me under these violent trials, and enabled me to
persevere to the end; for this I return unfeigned thanks to the Almighty; and
hope to give, during the remainder of my life, convincing testimonies of the
strong impression which those trials made on my mind, by devoting myself
sincerely to the duties of religion.

I was ordered back, by the Inquisitors, to my dismal abode; after they had
declared to me, that if I turned Roman Catholic, it would be of great advantage
to my cause; otherwise that I perhaps might repent of my obstinacy when it was
too late. I replied, in a respectful manner, that I could not accept of their
offers.

A few days after, I was again brought before the president of the holy office,
who said, that the proctor would read, in presence of the court, the heads of
the indictment or charge brought against me. The Inquisitors now offered me a
counselor, in case I desired one, to plead my cause.

Being sensible that the person whom they would send me for this purpose, was
himself an Inquisitor, I chose rather to make my own defense, in the best
manner I could. I therefore desired that leave might be granted me to deliver
my defense in writing; but this they refused, saying, that the holy office did
not allow prisoners the use of pen, ink, and paper. I then begged they would
permit me to dictate my justification, in their presence, to any person whom
they should appoint; which favor was granted to me.

The heads of the charge or indictment brought against me, were; ' That I had
infringed the pope's orders, by my belonging to the sect of the Free-Masons;
this sect being a horrid compound of sacrilege, sodomy, and many other
abominable crimes: of which the inviolable secrecy observed therein, and the
exclusion of women, were but too manifest indications: a circumstance that gave
the highest offense to the whole kingdom: and the said Coustos having refused
to discover, to the Inquisitors, the true tendency ^^^d design of the meetings
of Free-Masons: and persisting, on the contrary, in asserting, that
Free-Masonry was good in itself: wherefore the proctor of the Inquisition
requires, that the said prisoner may be prosecuted with the utmost rigor; and,
for this purpose, desires the court would exert its whole authority, and even
proceed to tortures, to extort from him a confession, viz. that the several
articles of which he stands accused, are true.

The Inquisitors then gave me the above heads, ordering me to sign them, which
I absolutely refused. They thereupon commanded me to be taken back to my
dungeon, without permitting me to say a single word in my justification.

I now had but too much leisure to reflect on their menaces; and to cast about
for answers to the several articles concerning Masonry, whereof I stood
accused; all which articles I remembered but too well.

Six weeks after, I appeared in presence of two Inquisitors, and the person
whom they had appointed to take down my defense; which was little more than a
recapitulation of what I before had asserted with regard to Masonry.

Your prisoner (says I to them) is deep^^ afflicted, and touched to the soul,
to find himself accused (by the ignorance or malice of his enemies) in an
infernal charge or indictment, before the lords of the holy office, for having
practiced the art of Free-Masonry, which has been, and is still, revered, not
only by a considerable number of persons of the highest quality in Christendom;
but likewise by several sovereign princes and crowned heads, who, so far from
disdaining to become members of this society, submitted, engaged, and obliged
themselves, at their admission, to observe religiously, the constitutions of
this noble art; noble, not only on account of the almost infinite number of
illustrious personages who profess it; but still more so, from the sentiments
of humanity with which it equally inspires the rich and poor, the nobleman and
artificer, the prince and subject: for these, when met together, are upon a
level as to rank; are all brethren, and conspicuous only from their superiority
in virtue: in fine, this art is noble, from the charity which the society of
Free-Masons professedly exercises; and from the fraternal love with which it
strongly binds and cements together the several individuals who compose it,
without any distinction as to religion or birth.

Your prisoner thinks is very hard, to find himself thus become ^^e victim of
this tribunal, merely because he belongs to so venerable a society. The rank
and exalted dignity of many, who have been and still are, members thereof,
should be considered as faithful and speaking witnesses, now pleading in his
defense, as well as in that of the brotherhood, so unjustly accused.

Farther; could any one suppose, without showing the greatest rashness, or
being guilty of the highest injustice; that Christian princes, who are Christ's
vicegerents upon earth, would not only tolerate, in their dominions, a sect
that should favor the abominable crimes of which this tribunal accuses it; but
even be accomplices therein, by their entering into the society in question.

What I have said above, should be more than sufficient to convince your
lordships, that you are quite misinformed as to Masonry; and oblige you to stop
all prosecution against me. However, I will here add some remarks, in order to
corroborate my former assertions; and destroy the bad impressions that may have
been made on your lordships minds concerning Free-Masonry.

The very strict enquiry made into the past life and conduct of all persons
that desire to be received among the Brotherhood; and who are never admitted,
except the strongest and most indisputable testimonies are given, of their
having lived irreproachably; are farther indications, that this society is no
ways guilty of the crimes with which it is charged by your tribunal; the utmost
precautions being taken, to expel from this society, not only wicked wretches,
but even disorderly persons.

The works of charity, which the Brotherhood think it incumbent on themselves
to exercise, toward such as are real objects of compassion, and whereof I have
given your lordships some few instances; show likewise, that it is morally
impossible for a society, so execrable as you have described that of the
Free-Masons to be, to practice a^^^tue so generally neglected; and so opposite
to the love of riches, at this time the predominant vice, the root of all evil.

Besides, wicked wretches set all laws at defiance; despise kings, and the
magistrates established by them for the due administration of justice.
Abandoned men, such as those hinted at here, foment insurrections and
rebellions; whereas Free-Masons pay an awful regard to the prince in whose
dominions they live; yield implicit obedience to his laws; and revere, in the
magistrates, the sacred person of the king, by whom they were nominated;
rooting up, to the utmost of their power, every seed of sedition and rebellion:
and being ready, at all times, to venture their lives, for the security both of
the prince, and of his government.

Wicked wretches, when got together, not only take perpetually the name of God
in vain; but blaspheme and deny him: whereas the Free-Masons punish very
severely, not only swearers, but likewise such as utter obscene words: and
expel from their society, all persons hardened in those vices.

Wicked wretches contemn religions of every kind; turn them into ridicule; and
speak in terms unworthy of the deity worshipped in them. But the Free-Masons,
on the contrary, observing a respectful silence on this occasion, never quarrel
with the religious principles of any person; but live together in fraternal
love, which a difference in opinion can no ways lessen. -- I closed my defense
with the four lines following, composed by a Free-Mason.

Through trackless paths each Brother strays,
And naught sinister can entice:
Now temples, we, to Virtue raise:
Now dungeons sink, fit place for Vice.
To which I added (in my own mind) But here, the contrary is found;
Injustice reigns, and killing dread:
In rankling chains bright Virtue's bound;
And Vice, with triumph, lifts its head.


Such, my lords, (continued I) are our true and genuine secrets. I now wait,
with all possible resignation, for whatever you shall think proper to decree;
but still hope, from your equity and justice, that you will not pass sentence
upon me, as though I was guilty of the crimes mentioned in the indictment; upon
the vain pretense, that inviolable secrecy can be observed in such things only
as are of a criminal nature.

I was remanded back to my usual scene of woe, without being able to guess what
impression my defense might have made on my judges. A few days after I was
brought before his eminence Cardinal da Cunha, Inquisitor and director general
of all the Inquisitions dependent on the Portugueze monarchy.

The president, directing himself to me, declared, that the holy tribunal was
assembled, purposely to hear and determine my cause: that I therefore should
examine my own m^nd; and see whether I had no other arguments to offer in my
justification.' -- I replied, 'that I had none; but relied wholly on their
rectitude and equity, Having spoke these words, they sent me back to my sad
abode, and judged me among themselves.

Some time after, the president sent for me again; when being brought before
him, he ordered a paper, containing part of my sentence, to be read. I thereby
was doomed to suffer the tortures employed by the holy office, for refusing to
tell the truth, (as they falsely affirmed;) for my not discovering the secrets
of Masonry, with the true tendency and purpose of the meetings of the Brethren.

I hereupon was instantly conveyed to the torture-room, built in form of a
square tower, where no light appeared, but what two candles gave: and to
prevent the dreadful cries and shocking groans of the unhappy victims from
reaching the ears of the other prisoners, the doors are lined with a sort of
quilt.

The reader will naturally suppose that I must be seized with horror, when, at
my entering this infernal place, I saw myself, on a sudden, surrounded by six
wretches, who, after preparing the tortures, stripped me naked, (all to linen
drawers); when, laying me on my back, they began to lay hold of every part of
my body. First, they put round my neck an iron collar, which was fastened to
the scaffold; they then fixed a ring to each foo^; and this being done, they
stretched my ^^mbs with all their might. They next wound two ropes round each
arm, and two round each thigh, which ropes passed under the scaffold, through
holes made for that purpose and were all drawn tight, at the same time, by four
men, upon a signal made for this purpose.

The reader will believe that my pains must be intolerable, when I solemnly
declare, that these ropes, which were of the size of one's little finger,
pierced through my flesh quite to the bone; making the blood gush out at the
eight different places that were thus bound. As I persisted in refusing to
discover any more than what has been seen in the interrogatories above; the
ropes were thus drawn together four different times. At my side stood a
physician and a surgeon, who often felt my temples, to judge of the danger I
might be in; by which means my tortures were suspended, at intervals, that I
might have an opportunity of recovering myself a little.

Whilst I was thus suffering they were so barbarously unjust as to declare,
that, were I to die under the torture, I should be guilty, by my obstinacy, of
self-murder. In fine, the last time the ropes were drawn tight, I grew so
exceedingly weak, occasioned by the bloods circulation being stopped, and the
pains I endured, that I fainted quite away; insomuch that I was carried back to
my dungeon, without my once perceiving it.

These barbarians finding that the tortures above described could not extort
any farther discovery from me; but that, the more they made me suffer, the more
fervently I addressed my supplications, for patience, to heaven; they were so
inhuman, six weeks after, as to expose me to another kind of torture, more
grievous, if possible, than the former. They made me stretch my arms in such a
manner, that the palms of my hands were turned outward; when, by the help of a
rope that fastened them together at the wrist, and which they turned by an
engine; they drew them gently nearer to one another behind, in such a manner
that the back of each hand touched, and stood exactly parallel one to the
other; whereby both my shoulders were dislocated, and a considerable quantity
of blood issued from my mouth. This torture was repeated thrice; after which I
was again taken to my dungeon, and put into the hands of physicians and
surgeons, who, in setting my bones, put me to exquisite pain.

Two months after, being a little recovered, I was again conveyed to the
torture room; and there made to undergo another kind of punishment twice. The
reader may judge of its horror, from the following description thereof.

The torturers turned twice round my body a thick iron chain, which, crossing
upon my stomach, terminated afterward at my wrists. They next set my back
against a thick board, at each extremity whereof was a pulley, through which
there run a rope, that catched the ends of the chains at my wrists. The
tormentors then stretching these ropes, by means of a roller, pressed or
bruised my stomach, in proportion as the ropes were drawn tighter. They
tortured me on this occasion, to such a degree, that my wrists and shoulders
were put out of joint.

The surgeons, however, set them presently after; but the barbarians not having
yet satiated their cruelty, made me undergo this torture a second time, which I
did with fresh pains, though with equal constancy and resolution (...) I then
was remanded back to my dungeon, attended by the surgeons who dressed my
bruises; and here I continued till their Auto da Fe, or gaol delivery.

The reader may judge, from the (...) description, of the dreadful anguish I
must have labored under, the nine different times they put me to the torture.
Most of my limbs were put out of joint, and bruised in such a manner, that I
was unable, during some weeks, to lift my hand to my mouth; my body being
vastly swelled, by the inflammations caused by the frequent dislocations. I
have but too much reason to fear, that I shall feel the sad effects of this
cruelty so long as I live; I being seized from time to time with thrilling
pains, with which I never was afflicted, till I had the misfortune to fall into
the merciless and bloody hands of the Inquisitors.

The day of the Auto da Fe being come, I was made to walk in the procession,
with the other victims of this tribunal. Being come to St. Dominic's church, my
sentence was read, by which, I was condemned to the galley (as it is termed
during four, years.

Four days after this procession, I was conveyed to this galley; and joined, on
the morrow, in the painful occupations o^ my follow slaves. However, the
^^b^r^^ had of speaking (...) my friends, after ha^^^ been deprived of even the
sight of them, during my tedious, wretched abode in the prison of the
Inquisition; the open air I now breathed; with the satisfaction I felt in being
freed from the dreadful apprehensions which always overspread my mind, whenever
I reflected on the uncertainty of my fate; these circumstances united, made me
find the toils of the galley much more supportable.

As I had suffered greatly in my body, by the tortures inflicted on me in the
prison of the Inquisition, of which the reader has seen a very imperfect,
though faithful narrative, in the foregoing sheets; I was quite unfit to go
about the painful labor that was immediately allotted me, viz. the carrying
water (an hundred pounds weight) to the prisons of the city. But the fears I
was under, of being exposed to the inhumanity of the guards or overseers who
accompany the galley slaves, caused me to exert myself so far beyond my
strength, that, twelve days after, I fell grievously sick. I then was sent to
the Infirmary, where I continued two months. During my abode in this place, I
was often visited by the Irish friars belonging to the convent of Corpo Santo,
who offered to get my release, provided I would turn Roman Catholic. I assured
them, that all their endeavors would be fruitless; I expecting my enlargement
from the Almighty alone, who, if He, in his profound wisdom thought proper,
would point out other expedients for my obtaining it, than my becoming an
apostate.

Being unable, after this, to go through the toils to which I had been
sentenced, I was excused, by my amply rewarding the overseers. It was now that
I had full leisure, to reflect seriously on the means of obtaining my liberty;
and, for this purpose, desired a friend to write to my brother-in-law, Mr.
Barbu, to inform him of my deplorable state; and to entreat him, humbly to
address the Earl of Harrington, in my favor; my brother-in-law having the
honor to live in his lordship's family. This nobleman, whose humanity and
generosity have been the theme of infinitely abler pens than mine, was so good
as to declare, that he would endeavor to procure my freedom. Accordingly, his
lordship spoke to his grace the duke of Newcastle, one of the principal
secretaries of state; in order to supplicate 'for leave, from our Sovereign,
that his minister at Lisbon might demand me, as a subject of Great Britain.

His Majesty, ever attentive to the felicity of his subjects, and desirous of
relieving them in all their misfortunes, was so gracious as to interpose in my
favor. Accordingly his commands being dispatched to Mr. Compton, the British
minister at Lisbon, that gentleman demanded my liberty of the king of Portugal,
in his Britannic majesty's name; which accordingly I obtained the latter end of
October, 1744. The person who came and freed me from the galley, by order of
the Inquisitors, took me before them. The president then told me, that Cardinal
da Cunha had given orders for my being released. At the same time, he bid me
return to the holy office in three or four days.

I could perceive, during this interval, that I was followed by the spies of
the Inquisition, who kept a watchful eye over my behavior, and the places I
frequented I waited upon our envoy, as likewise upon our consul, whom I
informed of the commands which had been laid upon me at the Inquisition; and
those gentlemen advised me to obey them. They cautioned me, however, to take a
friend with me, in order to give them notice in case I should be seized again.
I accordingly returned to the Inquisitors five days after, when the president
declared; that the tribunal would not permit me to continue any longer in
Portugal; and therefore that I must name the city and kingdom whither I
intended to retire.' -- ' As my family, (replied I) is now in London, I design
to go thither as soon as possible. They then bid me embark in the first ship
that should sail for England; adding, that the instant I had found one, I must
inform them of the day and hour I intended to go on board, together with the
captain's name, and that of his ship.

A report prevailed some days after, that one of the persons seized by the
Inquisition for Free-Masonry, and who obtained his liberty by turning Roman
Catholic, had been so indiscreet as to divulge the cruelties exercised in this
tribunal.

I now imagined that prudence required me to secure myself from a second
persecution. As there was, at this time, no English ship in the port of Lisbon,
I waited upon Mr. Vantil, the resident of Her and besought him to speak to the
Dutch admiral to admit me on board his fleet. The resident, touched with my
calamities, hinted my request to the admiral, who generously complied with it.
I then went, together with a friend, and informed the Inquisitor, that I
designed to embark for England, in the Damietta, commanded by vice admiral
Cornelius Sereiver, who was to sail in a few days. Upon the Inquisitor's
enquiring the exact time when I intended to go on board; I replied, at nine
o'clock the next morning. He then bid me come to him precisely at that hour;
adding, that he would send some officers of the Inquisition to see me on
shipboard.

These orders giving me great uneasiness, I waited upon the several gentlemen
above mentioned; when telling them the injunctions laid upon me, they advised
me to act very cautiously on this occasion. I therefore thought it would be
safest for me to go on board immediately, without giving any notice of it to
the Inquisitors. We lay at anchor, after this, near three weeks before Lisbon.

The Inquisitor no sooner found that I failed coming to him at the time
appointed, in order to be conducted to the ship, than he sent out about thirty
spies. Nine of these coming to enquire after me, at the house where I used to
lodge, searched it from top to bottom; examining every trunk, chest of drawers
and closet. But their endeavors to find me being fruitless, some officers of
the Inquisition getting into a boat, rowed several times round the three Dutch
men of war lying at anchor: These officers imagined, that if I was on board,
and consequently in a place of security, I should not be afraid of showing
myself; a circumstance that would have put an end to their search, which cost
them some pains and expense. As I did not gratify their curiosity, and we
weighed anchor a few days after, I know not whether they continued it.

Their search was so open, both at the house where I lodged, as well as at
other places, that I was soon informed of it; at which I should have been
delighted, had not my joy been damped by the apprehensions I was under, left my
dear friend, Mr. Mouton, the companion of my sufferings and tortures, merely on
account of Free-Masonry, should likewise fall a victim to their barbarity.
Speaking concerning him to the admiral, he, with the utmost humanity, gave me
leave to send for him on board. He coming accordingly next day, was received,
with great satisfaction, by the whole ship's company, especially by myself, I
having a peculiar esteem for him, which I shall ever entertain.

We set sail two days after. We had occasion to observe, during our whole
voyage, the true pleasure which a generous mind feels, in doing a h^mane
action, and in protecting the unhappy. This was particularly conspicuous in the
admiral, he ordering the utmost care to be taken of us, all the time we were on
board his ship; he sometimes condescending to admit us to his table, when he
would talk to us with the utmost familiarity. This distinction won us the
civility of every person in the ship, which continued till our arrival at
Portsmouth, where we landed; without having been put to a farthing expense
during the whole voyage.

All these favors, so generously bestowed by the admiral, call aloud for the
strongest acknowledgments of gratitude.

To conclude, I arrived in London the 15th of December 1744, after a long and
dangerous voyage.

I here return thanks, with all the powers of my soul, to the Almighty, for his
having so visibly protected me from that infernal band of friars, who employed
the various tortures mentioned in the former pages, in order to force me to
apostatize from my holy religion.

I return our sovereign King George II. (the instrument under heaven for
procuring me my liberty) the most dutiful and most respectful thanks, for his
so graciously condescending to interpose in favor of an ill-fated galley
slave. I shall retain, so long as I have breath, the deepest sensations of
affection and loyalty for his sacred person; and will be ever ready to expose
my life, for his majesty and his most august family.

ORIGIN OF THE INQUISITION, AND Its ESTABLISHMENT in various Countries.
THE Roman pontiffs employed every expedient, and set every engine at work
(among which none has served their purpose better than religion) in order to
increase their authority. Pretending to be the successors of St. Peter, they
ascribed to themselves characteristics of holiness superior even to that of the
apostles; and were so extravagant as even to boast their being infallible.
Monarchs, infatuated with this pretended sanctity of the popes, whom they
considered as deities upon earth, and dispensers of celestial blessings; strove
to rival one another in bestowing territories, etc. upon these pontiffs, in
hopes of obtaining their favor; adding such extensive privileges, that these
pontiffs became, at last, the arbiters of crowned heads, who did not discover,
till it was too late, that they themselves were become slaves to the papal
authority.

Some of these princes being oppressed with the weight of their chains, and
desirous of throwing them off, resisted the will of the holy father, and
thereupon were declared heretics, and excommunicated. Nor did these popes stop
here; for, if these kings persisted in their obstinacy, they were dethroned,
and their dominions given to others, who readily offered to pay the obedience
claimed by the sea of Rome.

The emperors, jealous to see the Roman pontiffs, and their adherents, extend
their authority so far beyond its just limits; did all that lay in their power
to restrain and reduce it within narrower bounds. About the middle of the XIth.
century, there broke out violent contests between them, which raged above fifty
years.

The emperors and popes being thus exasperated against each other, no longer
acted in concert, in order to suppress heresy; so that these commotions gave
occasion to the starting up of several new heresiarchs. Hitherto the latter had
opposed only the mysteries; but now, leaving the mysteries, they attacked
morality and discipline, and especially the papal authority. This was more than
sufficient to open the eyes of the court of Rome, with regard to the danger
which threatened it, in case a speedy remedy should not be found, in order to
check these heretics, before the contagion was become general; under favor of
the disputes subsisting between the emperor and the pope.

But as these heretics, or rather enemies of the pontifical authority of Rome,
were exceedingly numerous; not to mention their being supported, clandestinely,
by kings; the popes were forced, at first, to wink at, and even tolerate those
heretics, till such time as an opportunity might offer, for suppressing, or
rather rooting them out. For this reason, the Roman pontiffs now contented
themselves with writing often to the princes, magistrates and bishops;
exhorting them to exert their utmost endeavors, in order to extirpate the
enemies of the sea of Rome. However, princes and magistrates took little pains
to check them; whether it were that they did not care to sacrifice a set of
people who were of so much use to them, in order for restraining the papal
authority, and increasing their own; or, whether they did not think them so
criminal as the popes pretended; or whether politics, which often vary
according to times and interests, caused them to consider these heretics as
persons whom it was incumbent on them to tolerate, for their own advantage.

The bishops, either through indolence, or because they were not strong enough
to oppose the stream, were equally unsuccessful, whereby heretics became so
powerful, that, at length, they were able to make head against the sea of Rome.

The Arnaldists, So called from Arnaldus of Brescia, an heretic in the twelfth
century. He inveighed against the temporalities of the church; and even against
baptism and the Lord's supper. This heresiarch, after exciting many troubles in
Brescia and Rome, was hanged in the latter city, anno 1155, and his ashes
thrown into the Tiber. The followers of Anthony Arnauld (the Jansenists) were
also named Arnaldists.
who were among these, reduced the popes to the greatest distresses; they
forcing them, more than once, to quit Rome, and to seek an asylum elsewhere, in
order to secure themselves from their fury.

The Waldenses and Albigenses, (people of France) rising up after them, were no
less enemies to the authority usurped by the Roman pontiff, nor less zealous in
attacking it: and the protection indulged those people by Raymond Count de
Toulouse, and by Counts de Foix and de Comminges, caused them to be still more
enterprising and more formidable.

Pope Innocent III. a man of great spirit, and fortunate in his enterprises,
formed a design of promulgating a crusade The crusades were military
expeditions, established against the infidels, and first preached by Peter the
hermit. Though the glory of God was the pretended motive for them; yet many
were merely out of venal views, and others through fear of being reproached
with cowardice. Such as designed to enlist among the crusaders, distinguished
themselves, from other people, by wearing crosses of different colors, on
their clothes, according to their nation: the crosses of the English being
white; of the French, red; of the Germans, black. etc. Eight crusades were
undertaken for the conquest of the Holy Land; the first anno 1095, in the
council of Clermont; and the ^ast, under St. Lewis of France, anno 1268. The
Cistercians first formed the plan of these crusades. A history, in French, of
the crusade against the Albigenses, was published at Roan, in 1703. About the
middle of the 12th century, a crusade of Saxons was established against the
heathens of the north. -- Religion was as much a fashion, in these dark times,
as clothes, etc.
against them, which had been of such vast service to his predecessors, in
order for increasing their authority; however, he thought it necessary, before
he carried things to extremities, to have recourse to gentle methods. For this
purpose, he sent into Languedoc, missionaries, at whose head were Dominic, a
native of Old Castle, who had lately founded an order of friars, called from
his name; together with the blessed Peter of Chateauneuf (as he is termed by
the Romanists) who was butchered at Toulouse, anno 1200. And now the pope,
resolving to employ temporal weapons against them, published a crusade, whereby
indulgences were granted to all such as should take up arms, or furnish moneys,
etc. for assisting this enterprise against the Mahommedans; for thus he called
those people, to inflame still more the crusaders against them. This Innocent
having been a famous lawyer, he, by a quirk, pronounced these heretics to be
Mahommedans, viz. because ^oth were enemies to the church.
The papal arms being successful Raymund submitted himself (about the year
1209) and gave, as a pledge of his word, seven of the chief towers in Provence
and Languedoc. On this occasion several cities were taken, and the most
shocking cruelties practiced; numberless multitudes of the inhabitants being
put to the sword, without distinction of age or sex. Counts de Foix, de
Comminges, and de Beziers, afterward followed the example of Raymund. Count
Simon de Montfort, general of the church, signalized himself but too much at
the head of these crusaders.

The origin of the Inquisition is thus related, by Fleury, in his
ecclesiastical history. In 1198, Innocent III. sent into the southern provinces
of France, two Cistercian monks, Reinier and Gui, to convert the Manichees,
with which those parts swarmed; to excommunicate the obstinate; and to command
the lords to consiscate the possessions of the excommunicated; to banish them,
and punish them with severity: impowering, at the same time, Reinier to force
the lords likewise; to excommunicate them, and put their lands under
sequestration. -- These commissioners, thus sent against the heretics, were
afterward called Inquisitors. The Jesuits of Trevoux observe, that the council
of Narbonne, held in 1235, and that of Beziers in 1246, gave the Dominicans
(Inquisitors) in the provinces of Arles, of Aix, of Embrum, and Vienne, a rule
or ordinance, consisting of thirty-seven articles; and these were the basis of
the procedures which have been observed, since that time, in the tribunals of
the Inquisition.

Some imagine, that they find the origin of the Inquisition, in a constitution
made by pope Lucius, in the council of Verona, anno 1184; because that he
commands bishops to examine personally, or by commissioners, people suspected,
of heresy; distinguishes the various degrees of persons suspected, convicted,
penitent, or relapsed, for all whom different punishments are enacted; and
that, after the church has employed, against criminals, spiritual weapons, it
delivers them over to the secular arm, in order for corporeal punishments to be
inflicted on them; experience having shown, (says my Romish author) that
several Christians, and particularly the new heretics of this age, little
regarded ecclesiastical censures, and despised these spiritual punishments.
What blessed times were these, when ignorance, superstition, and tyranny swayed
the earth!

Dawn of the INQUISITION in FRANCE, with the farther contests between the
Emperor and Popes.
THIS open war against the Albigenses and Waldenses, was followed by the
establishment of the Inquisition, which completed the destruction of the
unhappy people in question. It had been founded, a little before, by pope
Innocent III. under the direction of Dominic, upon whom the title of saint was
bestowed.

This pope, reflecting that, what open force soever might be exerted against
them, still vast numbers would carry on their worship in private, thought it
necessary to establish a standing and perpetual remedy; that is, a tribunal
composed of men, whose sole occupation should be the searching after, and
punishing heretics. This tribunal was named, 'The Inquisition,' and Dominic was
the first Inquisitor.

Dominic having been sent, as was observed, to Toulouse, to convert the
heretics, took up his residence at the house of a nobleman of this city,
infected with heresy. However, our missionary found means to bring him back to
the church; after which the nobleman devoted his house, with his family, to St.
Dominic and his order. The tribunal of the Inquisition was established in this
place, which is still called, 'The house of the Inquisition.'

It may hence be concluded, that Dominic was the first Inquisitor, and Toulouse
the first city where the Inquisition was settled. Some say that this was in
1208, and others in 1212, or 1215; but whichsoever may be the true era, is of
no great consequence.

These Inquisitors had, at first no particular tribunal, their function being
only to enquire or search after heretics (whence the former received their
name;) to examine into their number, strength and riches; which being done,
they made a report thereof to the bishops, who, as yet, were the only persons
authorized to take cognizance of spiritual matters. On these occasions, the
Inquisitors used to urge the prelates to excommunicate and punish all heretics
who should be impeached.

Pope Innocent being wholly dissatisfied with the indolence of the bishops, and
their officials (judges) whose zeal he thought much too lukewarm against
heretics; imagined that he perceived, in the Dominican and Franciscan friars,
whose orders were but lately founded, all the qualities requisite for directing
this new establishment. The monks of those orders were fired with an implicit
and boundless zeal for the court of Rome, and wholly devoted to its interests.
They had full leisure to pursue that glorious work, as this would be their only
business. They were descended from the dregs of the people; and had no kindred,
as it were, or any other tie which might check the rigours of this tribunal;
they were severe and inflexible; the solitude and austere life professed by
them, and of which they seemed already tired; the meanness of their dress and
monasteries, so widely different from their present state; and especially the
humility and mendicant life to which they, perhaps, had too heedlessly devoted
themselves; these things, I say, rendered them exceedingly fit for the office
in question, which, (in the opinion of the pontiffs) would soften the asperity
of their vows, and sooth their ambition, some seeds whereof were still left in
their minds. The Roman pope having thus made sure of a set of people, so firmly
devoted to his service, and so admirably well qualified to exercise an
employment, whose chief characteristics are extreme severity and cruelty;
sought for every opportunity to increase their authority, by appointing them a
particular tribunal, where they were to sit, hear, and pronounce sentence
against heresies and heretics, as judges delegated by him, and representing his
person.

This pope first enlarged their authority, by empowering them to bestow
indulgences, to publish crusades, and to excite nations and princes to join the
crusaders, and march forth in order to extirpate heresy.

In 1244, the emperor Frederic II. increased their power much more, by
publishing four edicts in Pavia. He therein declared himself protector of the
Inquisitors; decreed, that the clergy should take cognizance of heresy, and the
lay judges prosecute heretics, after that the former had heard them. He
likewise enacted, that all obstinate heretics should be burnt; and such as
repented, imprisoned for life. The reason why Frederic testified so much zeal
for the Christian religion was, in order to destroy the report which the popes,
with whom he had been engaged in violent contests, spread, throughout all the
courts of Christendom, viz. that he intended to renounce the Christian
religion, and turn Mahomedan. This, very probably, induced him to exert himself
with greater severity against the heretics, than any of his predecessors; he
being the first emperor who sentenced to death all heretics without distinction.

Here follows what other authors say, concerning the rise of the Inquisition in
France. Du Cange tells us, that the Inquisitors were established in this
country about the year 1229, against the Waldenses, by the council of Toulouse;
which Inquisitors were chosen from among the Dominicans; and some were
appointed under Francis I. against the Lutherans; and established, by a bull of
pope Clement VII. in 1225. Though the tribunal of the Inquisition was never
settled in France, after the same manner as in Spain and Italy, yet Inquisitors
were delegated to France, during many years, by the pope; to preserve the
purity of doctrine, and keep the people obedient to the church. Twelve years
after the death of St. Dominic, pope Gregory IX. named two friars of the same
order, anno 1233, to exercise the like functions; and this apostolical
commission was perpetuated, not only in the convent of Toulouse, but extended
to several other convents in the kingdom. One of the commissioners, nominated
in the cause of the Templars, was the Inquisitor general in France. We find by
l'histoire de la Pucelle d'Orleans [the maid of Orleans] that, anno 1430, John
Magistri, vicegerent [substitute] of John Goverant, Inquisitor of the faith,
was one of her judges; that 35 years after, John Br^hal (who was an Inquisitor)
and some prelates, deputed by pope Calixtus, declared her innocent. It does not
appear that there were, from this time till the reign of Francis I. any
Inquisitors (of this sort) in France; whether it were that the popes did not
think them necessary, in an age when errors were in a great measure rooted up;
or that the then reigning princes, being more jealous of the regal authority
than their predecessors, would not suffer any infringement (as this seemed to
be) of the liberties of the Gallican church. See father Bouhours' life of St.
Ignatius, Book II. This author observes farther, that, under Francis I. Matthew
Ori, was raised, by pope Clement VII. to the employment of Inquisitor, on
occasion of the heresies of Germany. -- There are now no footsteps of the
Inquisition left in France, c^cept in Toulouse, where there is an Inquisitor, a
Dominican; but then his authority relates only to the examining of books
concerning doctrine.

The Inquisition would have been introduced into this kingdom under Francis II.
had not the excellent Mighel de l'Hospital, chancellor of France, strongly
opposed that design. When the passing the edict of the Inquisition of Spain
came before Chancellor de l'Hospital; as he knew that the members of the privy
council and the parliaments had consented to it, he drew up another edict, in
which he tempered matters so happily, and gave such excellent reasons for this,
that even the Guises, though strong advocates for the tribunal in question,
approved his opinion; and even brought over the Spanish ministry to the same
way of thinking, notwithstanding that these were very desirous that France
should be modelled and governed as Spain was. This was done in May, 1560, in
the town of Romorantin. La Planche, Histoire de Francois II. p. 36.


INQUISITION of ROME.
THE Inquisition of Rome is composed of twelve cardinals, and some other
officers. The pope presides personally in this assembly. The Inquisition is the
chief tribunal of Rome. The congregation of the Inquisition was first
established in 1545. The above cardinals assume to themselves the title of
Inquisitors general throughout the Christian world; but they have no
jurisdiction in France, and some other Romish countries. They are empowered to
deprive or remove all inferior Inquisitors, at least those of Italy.

Popes, Innocent, Alexander, Urban, Clement, and the seven pontiffs their
successors, exerted their utmost endeavors, but to no purpose, to prevail with
the Venetians to follow the example of the other states of Italy in this
particular.

The conduct of the Inquisitors, were circumstances which strongly induced the
republic of Venice to refuse admission to that tribunal in its territories. The
only topic of discourse, in all places, was the disorders and seditions caused
by the sermons, as well as the imprudent behavior of the Inquisitors: for
these zealots would, upon any caprice, publish crusades against the heretics;
when the crusaders in question, who had been drawn together on a sudden,
instead of assisting the cause of religion, only revenged themselves of their
enemies; and seized the possessions of a numberless multitude of innocent
persons, upon the false pretense of their being heretics. Milan and Parma were
very near ruined by the seditions raised in them on these occasions; and
nothing was heard, all over Italy, but bitter complaints against the
Inquisition and the Inquisitors. The senate of Venice, who understood their
interest as well as any body of men in the world, took advantage of the
disorders abovementioned, to justify their constant refusal of this tribunal.

However, pope Nicholas IV. being no ways disheartened at all the fruitless
attempts made by his predecessors, renewed them; when the senate perceiving
that they, in case they persisted in their refusal, would, at last, be forced
to admit an Inquisition dependant on that of Rome: they established one by
their own authority, composed of both ecclesiastical and lay judges. This
Inquisition has its own laws, which differ from those of the tribunals of this
kind settled in Italy, and is far less rigorous. The utmost precautions were
taken by those who established this Inquisition, to prevent such disorders as
had broke out in all other places where it had been admitted.

The senate having thus taken the resolution to admit the Inquisition, an act
or instrument for that purpose, was drawn up the 4th of Aug. 1289, in the most
authentic manner, and sent to the pope. Though the pontiff was not pleased with
the modifications introduced by the senate, he nevertheless expressed, in
outward show, his approbation of the instrument presented to him; and ratified
it by a bull dated the 28th of August abovementioned; in hopes that the
Venetians might afterward be prevailed upon to comply with the desires of the
court of Rome, which, however, they have not yet done. On the contrary, this
sage republic, so far from repealing the old laws, establishes new ones,
whenever it is apprehensive that the court of Rome intends to lessen its
authority, by enlarging that of the Inquisition. How glorious it is for this
republic, to see, in its territories, the tribunal of the Inquisition, subject
to the ordinances and laws which the senate formerly prescribed, and still
prescribe to it; at a time that this tribunal governs and commands; in the most
despotic manner, in all the other states where it was received without
restriction; and is now become the most formidable, the most dreadful, and most
cruel tribunal in the universe; insomuch that even kings themselves are not
secure from its prosecutions, at least from its resentment!

With regard to the kingdom of Naples, the Inquisition has never been received
there. This was owing, at first, to the almost perpetual dissentions which
reigned between the Neapolitan kings and the Roman pontiffs. From the time that
the Spanish monarchs have possessed that kingdom, how great a harmony soever
might subsist between them and the court of Rome, yet things have always
continued on the same foot, and this from a singular circumstance, viz. that
the popes themselves opposed it; and for this reason, because the kings of
Spain insisted perpetually, that the Neapolitan Inquisitors ought to be
dependant on the Inquisitor General of Spain, and not on the general
Inquisition of Rome, as the popes asserted. This the latter would never consent
to; and from this argument, that as the kingdom of Naples held, of the sea of
Rome. and not of Spain; the Inquisition should consequently hold likewise of
the pope. But as these two courts were never able to agree about this matter,
the Neapolitan bishops have always enjoyed the privilege of judging heretics.
However the pope may, in certain cases, depute commissaries to Naples, to judge
of heretical matters; but this happens seldom or never. In 1544, Don Pedro, of.
Toledo, viceroy of Naples under the emperor Charles V. endeavored to settle
the Inquisition in that kingdom; but the people mutinying his design was
defeated.

The INQUISITION established in SPAIN.
THOUGH the Inquisition had been strongly opposed in France and Germany, it yet
gained footing in Spain; the kings of Arragon admitting it into the several
states dependant on their crown. Endeavors were used, but to no purpose, to
force it into the western parts of Europe; the people opposing it with the
utmost vigor, whereby it lost a considerable part of its power in the kingdom
of Arragon; till Ferdinand, king of that country, and Isabella of Castile,
uniting under one monarchy, by their marriage, almost all the Spanish
dominions; restored the tribunal in question to its pristine authority in
Arragon, and afterward in all Spain, which was not properly brought under the
yoke of the Inquisition, till about the year 1484.

The court of Rome was indebted for this to John de Torquemada, a Dominican.
This friar, who was confessor to Isabella, had made her promise, before she
came to the throne, that, in case she should be raised to it, she would use all
possible methods to extirpate heretics and infidels. As she afterward was
queen, and brought the kingdom of Castile, by way of dower, to Ferdinand; they
finding themselves exceedingly powerful, resolved to conquer the kingdom of
Granada, and to drive back the Moors into Barbary. The Moors were accordingly
subdued; and all the territories possessed by them in Spain seized, so that
prodigious multitudes of them were forced to return into Africa. Nevertheless,
great numbers still continued in Spain; a circumstance owing to their having
possessions or wives in this country, or their being settled in traffic there.

As Ferdinand and Isabella considered that, in case they should banish these
Moors from Spain, they thereby would depopulate the countries conquered by
them; their majesty's consented that they, as well as the Jews, should continue
in it, provided they would turn Christians; upon which those people, finding
that all resistance would be vain, embraced the Christian religion, in outward
appearance.

But now Torquemada assuring the queen, that this dissimulation would be of
infinite prejudice both to the church and state, was urgent with her to perform
the promise she had made him, viz. of prosecuting the infidels and heretics as
soon as she should be seated on the throne. He enforced his entreaties with all
the arguments which false politics and false religion could suggest;
concluding, that the best expedient would be, to introduce and settle the
Inquisition under the authority of their majesty's. In a word, the queen, after
many solicitations, promised to use her utmost endeavors to get the kings
consent; which she afterward obtaining, their majesty's demanded and procured,
from pope Sixtus IV. anno 1478, bulls Bulls are properly letters, with a leaden
seal, issued out of the chancery of Rome; and answer to the letters patent,
edicts, etc. published by order of temporal princes. When these bulls are by
way of grant or favor, the leaden seal is dependant from silken strings; but
if it relates to some judicial or executory act, the seal hangs by a hempen
cord.
for the purposes abovementioned.

Torquemada had been of such important service to the sea of Rome, that it was
natural he should be rewarded by it; the pope raising him to the purple. He
afterward was appointed by Ferdinand and Isabella, Inquisitor General of the
whole monarchy of Spain; and he discharged the functions of his employment, so
much to their expectation, that he prosecuted, in 14 years, above 100,000
persons, 6000 of whom were sentenced to the flames.

Matters were afterward carried to such a height, by the barbarous zeal of
princes, that Philip II. king of Spain, established the Inquisition even on
board of ships of war. This bigoted monarch, would, doubtless, have introduced
it into the skies, had it been in his power. In 1571, he fitted out a fleet
called the Invincible, commanded by Don John of Austria; and, as it had been
found necessary to employ sailors of all nations, Philip fearing, that a
mixture of religions would corrupt the Romish faith, consulted pope Pius V. on
this occasion; when the pontiff sent one of the Inquisitors of Spain, who had
been appointed by the Inquisitor General of that monarchy, as Inquisitor of the
fleet; with power to preside in the several tribunals; and solemnize Auto da
Fes in all places they might put into. -- The first Auto da Fe was held in the
city of Messina, where various punishments were inflicted on many persons.

This tribunal was introduced into Sicily and Sardinia, at the time that those
islands were subject to the crown of Spain.

The Inquisition established in Portugal.
THE account of the manner in which the Inquisition was brought into Portugal,
seems a little fabulous; however, we shall give it in few words.

This tribunal is said to have been introduced by the artifice of John Peers de
Saavedra, a native of Corduba, or Jaen, in Spain. We are told that he, having
found the secret to counterfeit apostolical letters, amassed, by that means,
about thirty thousand ducats, which were employed by him in order to bring the
Inquisition into Portugal, and that in manner following. He assumed the
character of Cardinal Legate from the sea of Rome; when forming his household,
of one hundred and fifty domestics, he was received, in the abovementioned
quality, at Seville, and very homo^eably lodged in the archiepiscopal palace.
Advancing after this, toward the frontiers of Portugal, he dispatched one of
his secretaries to the king, to acquaint him with his arrival; and to present
him with fictitious letters from the emperor, the king of Spain, the pope, and
several other princes both ecclesiastical and secular; who all entreated his
majesty to savor the legate's pious designs. The king, overjoyed at this
legation, sent a lord of his court to compliment him, and attend him to the
royal palace, where he resided about three months. The mock legate having
succeeded in his designs, by laying the foundation of the Inquisition, took
leave of his majesty; and departed, greatly satisfied with his achievement:
but, unluckily for himself, he was discovered on the confines of Castile, and
known to have been formerly a domestic of a Portugueze nobleman. He was then
seized, and sentenced ten years to the galleys, where he continued a very long
time, till, at last, he was released from thence anno 1556, by a brief from
pope Paul IV. This pontiff, who used to call the Inquisition, the grand spring
of the papacy, wanted to see him.

We are told, that the Inquisition of Portugal, was copied from that of Spain,
and introduced in the former, anno 1535. But Mr. de la Neuville, in his history
of Portugal, tom. I. page 59, declares, that the Inquisition was introduced
there anno 1557, under John III. and settled in the cities of Lisbon, Coimbra
and Evora.

The Inquisition has subsisted ever since in Portugal, and is the most severe,
the most rigid, and cruel of any in the world.

The tribunal in question rose, afterward, with the Spanish and Portugueze
names; and shared, as it were, in their acquisitions: for those two nations,
making boundless conquests in both the Indies, established the Inquisition, in
the several countries won by their arms, after the same methods, and under the
same regulations, as in their dominions in Europe.

Attempts made to introduce the Inquisition into England.
ENDEAVORS were used to introduce the Inquisition here, under the reign of
queen Mary, sister to queen Elizabeth. The justices of peace (says bishop
Burnet) were now every where so slack in the prosecution of heretics, that it
seemed necessary to find out other tools. So the courts of Inquisition were
thought on. These were set up first in France against the Albigenses, and
afterward in Spain, for discovering the. Moors; and were now turned upon the
heretics. Their power was uncontrollable; they seized on any thing they
pleased, upon such informations, or presumptions as lay before them. They
managed their processes in secret, and put their prisoners to such sorts of
torture, as they thought fit for extorting confessions or discoveries from
them. At this time [in 1557] both the pope and king Philip, though they differed
in other things, agreed in this, that they were the only sure means for
extirpating heresy. So, as a step to the setting them up, a commission was
given to Bonner, and twenty more, the greatest part lay men, to search all over
England for all suspected of heresy, that did not hear mass, go in processions,
or take holy bread or holy water: they were authorized, three being a quorum,
to proceed either by presentiments, or other politic ways: they were to deliver
all they discovered to their ordinaries; and were to use all such means as they
could invent; which was left to their discretions and consciences, for
executing their commission. Many other commissions, subaltern to theirs, were
issued out for several counties and dioceses. This was looked on as such an
advance toward an Inquisition, that all concluded it would follow ere long.
The burnings were carried on vigorously in some places, and but coldly in most
parts; for the dislike of them grew to be almost universal. Abridgement of the
history of the church of England, book III. page 312. London 1682, 8vo.
How greatly are we indebted to such of our generous ancestors, as under the
immortal queen Elizabeth, rescued us, at the hazard of their lives and
fortunes, from that diabolical yoke, the Inquisition. And hence, what
Englishman but must read, with the utmost detestation, the following words,
spoke by a recorder of London, at the trial of the celebrated quakers, William
Penn and William Mead. An answer to the seditious and scandalous pamphlet,
entitled, the trial of W. Penn and W. Mead, page 3. London, 1670, 4to.
Till now I never understood the reason of the policy and prudence of the
Spaniards, in suffering the Inquisition among them. And certainly it will never
be well with us, till something like the Spanish Inquisition be in England.
Nothing sure can be more horrid than these words! which must throw eternal
infamy round the name of this recorder (Sir John Hovel.) The Britons, it is to
be hoped, will never fall so low, as to let the Inquisition take footing among
them.

-- The baleful dregs
Of these late ages, the inglorious draught
Of servitude and folly have not yet,
Blessed be the eternal ruler of the world,
Defiled to such a depth of sordid shame
The native honors of the human soul,
Nor so effaced the image of its sire.
Pleasures of the Imagination, b. II. We find (by bishop Burnet) that previous
to the persecution under queen Mary, hinted at above, there were consultations
concerning the methods to proceed against heretics. Cardinal Pool had been
suspected to bear some favor to them formerly, but he took great care to avoid
all occasions of being any more blamed for this: and indeed he lived in that
distrust of all the English, that he opened his thoughts to very few, for his
chief confidents were two Italians who came over with him, Priuli and Ormaneto.
Secretary Cecil, who in matters of religion complied with the present time, was
observed to have more of his favor than any Englishman had. Pool was an enemy
to all severe proceedings; he thought churchmen should have the tenderness of a
father, and the care of a shepherd; and ought to reduce, but not devour the
stray sheep. He had observed, that cruelty rather inslamed than cured that
distemper. He thought the better and surer way, was to begin with an effectual
reformation of the manners of the clergy, since it was the scandal given by
their ill conduct and ignorance, that was the chief cause of the growth of
heresy; so he concluded, that if a primitive discipline should be revived, the
nation would, by degrees, lay down their prejudices, and might, in time, be
gained by gentle methods. Gardener, on the other hand, being of an abject and
cruel temper himself, thought the strict execution of the laws against the
Lollards, was that to which they ought chiefly to trust. If the preachers were
made public examples, he concluded the people would be easily reclaimed; for he
pretended, that it was visible, if king Henry had executed the act of the six
articles vigorously, all would have submitted. He confessed a reformation of
the clergy was a good thing, but all times would not bear it. -- If they should
proceed severely against scandalous churchmen, the heretics would take
advantage from that, to defame the church the more, and raise a clamoun against
all clergymen. The queen was for joining both these councils together; and
intended to proceed, at the same time, both against scandalous churchmen and
heretics. Burnet, ubi supra, 269, 270, 271.
In the course of the persecutions, endeavors were used, by the different
parties, to urge the queen to continue them, and to dissuade her from these
barbarities. At this time (says bishop Burnet) a petition was printed beyond
sea, by which the reformers addressed themselves to the queen; they set before
her the danger of her being carried by a blind zeal, to destroy the members of
Christ, as St. Paul had done before his conversion. They remembered her of
Cranmer's interposing to preserve her life in her father's time. They cited
many passages out of the books of Gardener, Bonner and Tonstall, by which she
might see that they were not acted [actuated] by true principles of conscience,
but were turned as their fears or interest led them. They showed her how
contrary persecution was to the spirit of the gospel; that Christians tolerated
Jews; and that the Turks, notwithstanding the barbarity of their tempers, and
the cruelty of their religion, yet tolerated Christians. They remembered her,
that the first law for burning in England, was made by Henry IV. as a reward to
the bishops, who had helped him to depose Richard II. and so to mount the
throne. They represented to her, that God had trusted her with the sword, which
she ought to employ for the protection of her people, and was not to abandon
them to the cruelty of such wolves. The petition also turned to the nobility,
and the rest of the nation; and the danger of a Spanish yoke, and a bloody
Inquisition were set before them. -- Upon this the popish authors writ several
books in justification of these proceedings. They observed, that the Jews were
commanded to put blasphemers to death; and said the heretics blasphemed the
body of Christ, and called it only a piece of bread. It became Christians to be
more zealous for the true religion, than heathens were for the false. St.
Peter, by a divine power, struck Ananias and Sapphira dead. Christ, in the
parable, said, Compel them to enter in. St. Paul said, I would they were out
off that trouble you, St. Austin was once against all severities in such cases,
but changed his mind, when he saw the good effect which some banishments and
fines had on the Donatists. That on which they insisted most, was, the burning
of the anabaptists in king Edward's time. So they were now fortified in their
cruel intentions; and resolved to spare none, of what age, sex or condition
soever they might be. Idem. P. 276, 277.
The reader of good sense, of what religion soever, will see at once the
weakness of the arguments on the popish side, compared with those of the
protestants; and yet the former, (so horrid was this ministry) prevailed.

The Inquisition has not enlarged its jurisdiction since the attempts made to
force it into the Netherlands. Such countries as had admitted this tribunal
before, are still subject to it; and those which had refused it, have been so
happy as to keep it out; so that it is now confined to a great part of Italy,
and the dominions subject to the crowns of Spain and Portugal; yet its power
extends over a larger extent of ground than all Europe; and, in the several
places where it is established, the sad marks thereof are but too apparent.

Come! by whatever sacred name disguised,
OPPRESSION, come! and in thy works rejoice!
See Nature's richest plains to putrid fens
Turned by thy rage. From their unchearful bounds
See razed the enlivening village, farm, and seat.
First rural toil, by thy rapacious hand
Robbed of his poor reward, resigned the plow;
And now he dares not turn the noxious glebe.
It Is thine entire. The lonely swain himself,
Who roves at large along the grassy downs
His ftocks to pasture, thine abhorrent flies.
Far as the sickening eye can sweep around
It Is all one desert, desolate and gray,
Grazed by the sullen buffalo alone;
And where the rank unventilated growth
Of rotting ages taints the passing gale.
Beneath the baleful blast the city pines,
Or sinks enfeebled, or infected burns.
Beneath it mourns the solitary road,
Rolled in rude mazes over the abandoned waste,
While ancient ways, ingulph'd are seen no more.
Such thy dire plaints, thou self destroyer! Foe To human kind.
THOMSON'S LIBERTY, part I. A DISTINCT ACCOUNT OF THE INQUISITION, AND Of the
several things appertaining to it.
THERE are, in the dominions of the king of Portugal, four Inquisitions, viz.
at Lisbon, Coimbra, Evora and Goa, in the East Indies. The jurisdiction of the
last mentioned extends over all the countries possessed by his Portugueze
majesty on the other side of the Cape of Good Hope.

Besides these four Inquisitions, there is a supreme council held in Lisbon, to
which all the other Portugueze Inquisitions are subordinate. This tribunal
consists of an Inquisitor General, who is appointed by the king, and confirmed
by the pope. He is empowered to nominate the Inquisitors in all the countries
dependant on the crown of Portugal. Under him are five counselors, a fiscal
proctor, Proctor is well known to be much the same, in ecclesiastical courts,
as an attorney is in lay ones. His business is to see that the church
discipline be maintained: and to bring to punishment the disobedient. Fiscal
signifies properly what belongs to the exchequer, or king's treasury; here it
is said to employ a proctor, who, for the sake of, and in the name of the
public, is to prosecute delinquents with regard to matters ecclesiastical. The
author of the Relation of the Inquisition of Goa, p. 89, and seq. Paris, 1688,
12mo. writes as follows concerning the officers of the Inquisition.

There are at Goa two Inquisitors: the first called Inquisitor mor [I suppose
this should be mayor] or the great Inquisitor, is always a secular priest; and
the second a Dominican friar. There likewise are officers called depudatos.
These are numerous, and of all religious orders. They assist at the judgment of
prisoners, and the drawing up of their prosecutions; but never come to the
tribunal, unless sent for by the Inquisitors. There are other officers styled
Calificadores, who examine such propositions as are looked upon to be contrary
to the purity of doctrine. These do not assist at the judgments, they only
making their report with regard to actions committed. There also is a proctor,
an attorney, and advocates or counselors for such prisoners as may desire
them. However, these counselors are rather their betrayers than defenders;
their chief endeavors being only to draw their secrets out of them. Besides,
though there were no reason to suspect their fidelity, yet their favor would
be of little benefit to the prisoners; these counselors being never allowed to
speak to them, except before the judges, or some persons deputed by the latter,
in order to be present at these conferences.

There are other officers of the Inquisition, called familiars, who are, as it
were, the sergeants or bailiffs of this tribunal. Persons of all conditions,
not excepting dukes and princes, glory in being familiars. These are employed
in seizing persons impeached; and the usual rule is, to send a familiar of the
same rank or condition with the person who is to be seized. These officers have
no salary, they thinking it honor sufficient to serve so holy a tribunal. They
wear a medal, on which the arms of the Inquisition is engraved. They go alone
to seize a prisoner; and, when such a one is told that the Inquisitors have
sent for him, he is obliged to follow the familiar instantly; for, were he to
make the least resistance, every one would assist the above officer.

There likewise are secretaries, apparitors called meirinhos, an alcayde or
jailer; and guards or attendants to look after the prisoners, carry them food
and other things necessary


a secretary of the king's bed chamber, two secretaries of the council, an
alcayde or jailer, a receiver, two reporters, two qualificators, and a great
number of subaltern officers.

This supreme council has an unlimited authority over all the Inquisitors of
Portugal; they not being permitted to solemnize an Auto da Fe without its
permission. This is the only tribunal of the Inquisition, from which there is
no appeal. It may enact new laws at pleasure. It determines all suits or
contests arising between the Inquisitors. It punishes the ministers and
officers of the Inquisition. All appeals are made to it. In fine, the authority
of this tribunal is so great, that there is scarce any one but trembles at its
bare name; and even the king himself does not dare to oppose it.

We observed that, besides the supreme council, there are four other tribunals
of the Inquisition. Each of them is composed of three Inquisitors or judges, a
fiscal proctor, two secretaries, a judge, a receiver, and a secretary of
confiscated possessions, assessors, counselors, an executor, physicians and
surgeons, a jailer, a messenger, door-keepers, familiars, and visitors.

There are, in the Romish church, two sorts of judges in matters of faith. The
first are so by virtue of the employment with which they are invested; such is
the pope and the bishops, who, immediately after their consecration, are
supposed to receive, from heaven, a right and an absolute jurisdiction over
heretics.

The second sort of judges, are those delegated by the pope, who sets himself
up as supreme judge in matters of faith; and gives the judges in question an
entire jurisdiction over all heretics and apostates. These are called
apostolical Inquisitors.

This employment is of such eminence, that those who are raised to it have the
fame title with bishops: and Clement IV. to do them the greater honor, and
enlarge their power, freed them from the jurisdiction of the bishops where they
reside; making them dependant only on the General Inquisitor of the kingdom.
They likewise may publish edicts against heretics; heighten their punishment;
excommunicate, or take off the excommunication from such as have incurred it,
except these are dying.

The Inquisitors may seize a heretic, though he should have sled for refuge
into a church; which the bishop must not oppose, on any pretense whatsoever; a
circumstance that gives the Inquisitors greater power than is enjoyed by the
kings of the countries where the Inquisition is established.

No prelate, or legate from the sea of Rome, can pronounce sentence of
excommunication, suspension or interdict, against the Inquisitors and their
secretaries, without an express order from the pope; to prevent, as is
pretended, the affairs of religion from being injured, and heretics from going
unpunished.

The Inquisitors may forbid the secular judges to prosecute any person, even in
a prosecution carried on, at first, by their order.

Any person who shall kill, or employ another to kill, abuse or beat an
Inquisitor and official of the Inquisition, shall be delivered over to the
secular arm, in order to be severely punished.

Pope Urban IV. granted them likewise the privilege of absolving one another,
and their assistants, with regard to any faults committed by them, arising from
human frailty; and for which they may have incurred the sentence of
excommunication. They, farther, may grant an indulgence of twenty or forty
days, (as they may think proper) to persons whom they shall think penitent.

They are empowered to absolve all friars, companions, and notaries of the
Inquisition, from the penance which may have been enjoined them during three
years; provided such had endeavored sincerely, and personally aided and
insisted in the prosecution of heretics, and of all who favor, defend or
conceal them. And if any of the persons in question should die in the pursuit
of so pious (as it is strangely termed) a work, the Inquisitors may give them
full absolution, after such persons shall have made a confession of all their
sins.

To these privileges we shall add such as relate more immediately to the
prosecution of persons impeached. All affairs relating to the pretended holy
office, are managed by the Inquisitors, who, by virtue of the denunciations,
informations, and accusations, brought against all sorts of persons; issue
their orders for citing, seizing, imprisoning, and laying in irons, those who
are accused.

Run, with your nose to earth:
Run, blood hound, run; and scent out royal murder.
You second rogue, but equal to the first,
Plunder, fly, hang: nay, take your tackling with you,
For these shall hold them fast: (hang, hang the slaves)
To the mid region in the sun.
Plunder, begone, vipers, asps and adders.
Dryden's Tragedy of the duke of Guise, Act III. scene I. The Inquisitors
receive the confessions and depositions of those persons, and appoint the
various tortures, in order for extorting from them whatever they desire should
be confessed. In fine, they condemn definitively, all who have the sad fate to
be their prisoners, without anyappeal whatsoever. The Inquisitors may, for
their own ease, appoint persons to assist as judges, in their names, in case of
sickness or absence; and these are allowed much the same prerogatives with
those who established them; and can be removed by none but the Inquisitors by
whom they were nominated. They likewise may appoint more assistants or
commissaries, proportionably to the cities or towns in the provinces dependant
on this tribunal. -- There must be one commissary at least, in every town.

The second officer of the Inquisition is the fiscal proctor. This man, upon
informations made against persons, receives the depositions of the witnesses;
and addresses the Inquisitors, in order for their being seized and imprisoned.
In a word, he is their accuser, and pleads against them, after their being
taken up. The secretaries keep an exact register of the prisoners from the time
of their commitment; of the principle articles of the indictment; with the
names of the witnesses who swore against them. In a word, they write down the
proceedings in all causes, and the defense made by the prisoner. They likewise
register all the orders given by the executor, and other officers of the
tribunal in question. All writings must be carefully locked up, to prevent
their being perused by any persons except those acquainted with the secrets of
the Inquisition. The judge of the goods and chattels confiscated, is judge
between the fisc or exchequer, and private persons, in all causes relating to
the effects of prisoners.

The receiver is to take exact care of the confiscated possessions; must sell
them, and apply the moneys pursuant to the orders given him. He likewise must
be present, when the executor, and the other officers, sequester the
possessions of prisoners; which is not done without an express command from the
Inquisitor. The secretary of the sequestrations, takes ^n exact inventory of
all the effects belonging to the prisoners sound in their possession; or in the
hands of other persons, who, should they alienate the least part of them, would
be exposed to the utmost rigours of this tribunal. All the effects and
possessions belonging to the prisoners, are lodged with the receiver of the
sequestrations; together with an exact inventory, signed by the executor, who,
as well as the secretary, has a copy thereof.

The duties of the executor, is to execute the orders of the Inquisitors, and
particularly to take criminals, and go in pursuit of them, if they are at a
distance; to look carefully after them, when in their hands; and even to fetter
them, etc. in order to convey them, with the greates security, to the prisons
of the Inquisition.

The familiars are the bailiffs or catchpoles of the Inquisition. Though this
is a most ignominious employment in all other criminal courts, it yet is looked
upon as so honorable in the Inquisition, that every nobleman in Portugal is a
familiar of this tribunal. It is not surprising, that persons of the highest
quality should be solicitous for this post, since the pope has granted, to
these familiars, the like plenary indulgencies as the council of Lateran gave
to such persons as should go to the succor of the holy land against the
infidels. They are the satellites of the Inquisitors; they attending on them
and defending them if necessary, against the insults of heretics. They
accompany the executo, whenever he goes to seize criminals; and must obey all
orders given them by the chief officers of the Inquisition. Several privileges
are allowed them, especially the carrying arms; but they are ordered to use
those with discretion.

Assessors and counselors are persons skilled in the canon and civil law. The
Inquisitors consult them in all difficult points, but follow their opinions no
farther than they think proper. They commonly make use of those persons to give
the greater weight to their sentences, by the specious precautions they take;
but in no other view than to impose on mankind.

The visitor is a person appointed by the Inquisitor General, to inspect all
the towns, cities and provinces where commissaries are established. They must
inform him of the care which these commissaries take in searching after
heretics; and make a report thereof, in order that he, with his council, may
use such measures as may be thought fitting: the visitor must pay the most
exact obedience to the instructions of the Inquisitor: he is forbid to lodge at
the houses of those over whose conduct he is to have an eye; to receive the
least present from them, or any one sent in their name. The number of these
visitors is always in proportion to that of the towns, and the extent of the
provinces where the Inquisition is established.

The several officers of this tribunal must make oath, before the Inquisitors,
to discharge faithfully the duties of their employment; not to divulge the most
minute particular relating to the Inquisition of its prisons, on any pretense
whatsoever, upon pain of being turned out, and punished with the utmost
severity. The Inquisitors admit of no excuse on these occasions; secrecy being
the soul, as it were, and the mighty support of this tribunal.

Besides these several officers of the Inquisition, the popes have likewise
commanded, by their bulls, magistrates in general, to give all the assistance
in their power, not only to the Inquisitors; but likewise to their various
subaltern officers, who may stand in need thereof, in the exercise of their
employments, upon pain of their being subject to ecclesiastical punishments.

The Inquisitors being, as was observed, judges delegated by the pope, for
enquiring into matters of faith, and for extirpating heresy; they, upon this
specious pretense, are empowered to prosecute all sorts of friars, of what rank
or condition soever, either in their own names, by the supreme council of the
kingdom, or by the pope. It Is so much the interest of the Roman pontiff to
support the Inquisitors, that he exerts his whole authority for this purpose;
some examples whereof will be given hereafter.

In sine, they may prosecute indiscriminately, any layman infected with heresy,
not excepting princes or kings. However, the Inquisitors, to secure themselves
from any ill consequences which might attend their attacking persons in such
exalted stations, consult the pope on these occasions, and proceed as he may
direct. This precaution is not used out of respect to persons of high eminence
and crowned heads; but, for fear lest a severe treatment should exasperate
them, and cause them to oppose the Inquisition in places where it is poor, and
not powerfully established. No persons would be exempt from the prosecutions of
this tribunal, how great soever his privileges might otherwise be, should he
presume to speak contemptuously of this tribunal; this being an infinitely
worse crime than the most pernicious heresy.

Having thus mentioned the privileges, etc. of the Inquisition, let us now
specify the

Cases or Circumstances which subject a person to this tribunal.
THE first is heresy. -- Under the name of heretics are comprehended all
persons who have spoke, writ, taught or practiced any tenets contrary to the
scriptures, to the articles of the creed; and, especially, to the traditions of
the church of Rome. Likewise such as have denied the catholic faith, by going
over to some other religion; or who, though they do not quit the Romish
communion, praise the customs and ceremonies of other churches; practice some
of them; or believe that persons may be saved in all religions, provided they
profess them with sincerity.

They likewise consider as heretics, all who disapprove any ceremonies, usages,
or customs received, not only by the church, but even by the Inquisition.

All who think, How can other persons know their thoughts?
say, or teach any thing contrary to the opinion received at Rome, with regard
to the pope's supreme, unlimited authority, and his superiority over general
councils; as likewise such as speak, teach or write any thing contrary to the
papal decisions, on what occasion soever, are looked upon as heretics.

A suspicion of heresy, which is the second case, is still more extensive; for
to incur such suspicion, it is enough that a person only starts some
proposition which may offend the hearers; or does not impeach those who advance
any such. That person is likewise suspected of heresy, who contemns, insults or
mutilates any images. Likewise all those who read books condemned by the
Inquisition, or who lend them to others.

That person also incurs a suspicion of heresy, who deviates from the ordinary
customs relating to religion, practiced by the Romanists; such as letting a
year pass, without going to confession and communion; the eating meat on fish
days; or neglecting to go to mass at the times enjoined by the church.

Those also are suspected of heresy, who, being in holy orders, repeat such
sacraments as should not be repeated; endeavor to enter into the marriage
state; or marry two or more wives.

In sine, such incur a suspicion of heresy, as go but once, to the sermons of
heretics, or to any other of their public exercises. Likewise those who neglect
to appear before the Inquisitors, when summoned; or procure absolution, the
same year they were excommunicated. Also, the contracting a friendship with
heretics; the lodging such; the making them presents, or even visiting them;
especially the preventing their being imprisoned in the Inquisition; the
furnishing them with opportunities of escaping, though induced thereto by the
strongest ties of blood, of gratitude or pity. This article is carried to such
lengths by the Inquisitors, that persons are not only forbid to save heretics,
but are obliged to discover them, though a father, brother, husband, or wife;
and this upon pain of excommunication; of incurring a suspicion of heresy; and
of being obnoxious to the rigours of the tribunal in question, as fautors or
abettors of heresy. How unnatural, how cruel is such an injunction! These
constitute the third case, subject to the judgment of the Inquisition. Under
the name of fautors, are comprehended all who favor, defend, or give advice or
assistance, of what kind soever, to those whom the Inquisitors have begun to
prosecute.

Those likewise become obnoxious, who, knowing persons to be heretics, or to
have escaped out of the prisons of the Inquisition; or who, upon their being
cited to appear, refuse to obey the summons; conceal, or give them advice or
assistance in order for their escaping; likewise such as molest, by threats or
otherwise, the agents of this tribunal in the execution of their office; or
who, though they do not obstruct it themselves, aid or abet such as oppose them.

Under the name of sautors of heresy, are also included those who speak,
without permission, to the prisoners; or who write to them, either to give them
advice, or merely to comfort them. Such as prevail upon, by money or otherwise,
witnesses to be silent, or to favor the prisoners in their depositions; or who
conceal, burn, or get possession in what manner soever, of papers which may be
of use in convicting persons accused.

The fourth case subject to the judgment of the Inquisition, includes
magicians, wizards, soothsayers, and such like, of whom there are supposed to
be (very idly sure) more in Italy than in any other country, the Italian women
being strangely curious and credulous. We shall not specify the various
accusations brought on those occasions; they consisting of ridiculous
superstitions, arising from a heated imagination and blind credulity, rather
than from a depraved will and a corrupt heart. We will only observe, that,
among the several cases subject to the Inquisition, none sill its prisons with
a greater number of women of all conditions.

Blasphemy, (the fifth case) though very common, and one of the greatest
crimes, yet the Inquisitors do not take cognizance of it, except it contains
some heresy. We shall forbear giving instance thereof here, it being much
better for ^nkind, that such things should be buried in oblivion.

Though neither Jews, Mahomedans, or such like, are subject to the Inquisition,
in many things, they yet are obnoxious to it, in all the cases abovementioned;
those crimes not being tolerated in Jews and Mahomedans, etc. more than in
Christian. Farther, the abovementioned become subject to the Inquisition, if
they assert, write, or publish any particulars contrary to the Romish
communion. Thus, for instance, should a Jew or Mahomedan deny the trinity, or a
providence, he would be punished as an heretic; as also, was he to hinder a
person professing any of those religions from turning Christian; or convert a
Romanist to theirs, or favor such a design.

Jews are not allowed to vend, publish, or even keep the Talmud; or any book,
which speaks contemptuously of the Christian religion, or is prohibited by the
Inquisition.

In fine; Jews are not permitted to have Christian nurses, or to do any thing
in contempt of the Romish religion. The Inquisitors take cognizance of all such
cases; and punishes offenders in them with the utmost severity; so that the
dread of this obliges those unhappy people to become converts to popery.
However, such a conversion does not make them better men. These are always
distinguished by the title of new Christians, a name which is so much detested,
that the old Christians can seldom be prevailed upon to marry among the new,
though the families of the latter had been Christians from their great
grandfathers. The utter abhorrence in which these new converts are held, makes
them unite more closely one with the other, in order to perform mutual
services, which they could not expect from the old Christians: but this very
union is commonly the source of their misfortunes. To illustrate this, I need
but observe that, if a new Christian, who is sincerely such, happens to
contract a very strict intimacy with other new Christians, this alone would be
sufficient to make him suspected of practicing Jewish ceremonies with them, in
secret. In consequence of this suspicion, such person is seized by order of the
holy office; and accused, by the deposition of some person, of being a Jew.
Being conscious of his innocence, he slatters himself that nothing will be
easier for him than to prove it publicly; whence he makes no difficulty to
comply with the custom established by the Inquisitors, viz. of giving in
immediately a complete inventory of all his effects, etc. upon the firm
persuasion that they will be restored to him, the instant he shall have
justified himself. But he is mistaken; for, presently after he has given in
such inventory, the Inquisitors seize his effects, and sell them publicly by
auction. The bare accusation pronounces him guilty; and he has no other way to
escape the flames, than by making a confession, conformably to the articles of
the indictment. As his accuser, the witnesses, and himself, are not brought
face to face, his innocence is of no service. His riches prove his ruin, those
being certainly seized; and his life would inevitably fall a sacrifice, should
he not acknowledge himself a relapsed Jew, though he had always been a zealous
Romanist.

The sixth and last case subject to the judgment of the Inquisition, is of
those who resist its officers, or any way oppose its jurisdiction. As one of
the chief maxims of this tribunal is to strike terror, and to awe such as are
subject to it; it punishes with the utmost severity all who offend its agents
and officers. On these occasions, the slightest fault is considered as a
heinous crime. Neither birth, employment, dignity or rank, can protect. To
threaten ever so little the lowest officer belonging to the Inquisition, its
informers, or witnesses, would be punished with the extremelt rigor.

Such are the cases which subject a person to the Inquisition; and there are
four ways, by which such a one usually, becomes so. First, by common fame,
which declares him to be guilty of one or more of the crimes specified above:
secondly, by the deposition of witnesses, who impeach him: thirdly, by his
being informed against by the spies of the Inquisition, who are dispersed every
where: lastly, by the confession of the prisoner, who accuses himself, in hopes
of being treated with greater humanity, than if he had been informed against by
others.

We shall now proceed to the manner of prosecuting a person impeached; and
this, sometimes, upon the slightest suspicion. First, he is summoned, three
several times, to appear before the Inquisitors; when, if through fear or
contempt, he should neglect to do this, he would be excommunicated, and
sentenced, provisionally, to pay a considerable fine; after which, should he be
seized, a more severe sentence would inevitably be passed upon him.

The safest course therefore, for a person impeached, is, to obey the first
summons. The longer he delays on this occasion, the more criminal he makes
himself, in the eye of the Inquisitors, though he should really be innocent. To
disobey the command of the Inquisitors, is ever considered by them as a crime.
They always look upon delays to be certain indications of guilt, as showing a
dread to appear before the judges. When, therefore, a person is reduced to this
sad extremity, nothing can secure him from the most rigorous punishment, but a
voluntary and perpetual exile: nothing is forgot by the Inquisitors; time
cannot obliterate any crime; and prescription is a thing unknown to them.

It frequently happens, that the Inquisitors, either from their considering the
crime of which a person stands impeached, as enormous, and that they have
sufficient evidence against him: or from their apprehending that he may escape;
immediately issue their orders, without first sending a summons, for his being
seized, in any place whatsoever. When this is the case, no asylum or privilege
can stop, a single moment, the prosecution, nor abate its rigours. The
Inquisitors give an order, under their own hands, to the executor, who takes a
sufficient number of familiars along with him, to prevent a rescue.

Words could scarce describe the calamity of a man under these circumstances.
He, perhaps, is seized, when in company with his friends, and surrounded by his
family; a father by his son's side; a son by that of his father, and a wife in
company with her husband. No person is allowed to make the least resistance, or
even to speak a single word in favor of the prisoner; who is not indulged a
moment's respite to settle his most important affairs.

Hence the reader may judge, of the continual apprehensions with which persons,
inhabiting countries where the Inquisition is established, must necessarily be
filled; since, in order to secure themselves from it, one friend is obliged to
sacrifice another; sons their parents; parents their children; husbands their
wives, and wives their husbands, by accusing them to the pretended holy office.
How horrid a source have we here of perfidy and inhumanity! What kind of
community must that be, whence gratitude, love, and a mutual forbearance with
regard to human frailties, are banished! What must that tribunal be, which
obliges parents, not only to erase from their minds the remembrance of their
own children; to extinguish all the sensations of tenderness and affection,
which nature inspires for them; but even to extend their inhumanitiy so far, as
to force them to become their accusers, and consequently the cause of the
cruelties inflicted on them.

What idea ought we to form to ourselves of a tribunal, which obliges children,
not only to stifle every soft impulse of gratitude, love and respect due to
those who gave them birth; but even forces them, upon the most rigorous
penalties, to be spies over their parents; and to discover to the merciless
Inquisitors, the crimes, the errors, and even the little lapses to which human
frailty so often urges: in a word, a tribunal which will not permit relations,
when imprisoned in its horrid dungeons, to give each other the succors, or to
perform the duties which religion enjoins. What disorder and confusion must
such a conduct give rise to, in a tenderly-loving family! An expression,
innocent in itself, and perhaps but too true, shall, from an indiscreet zeal,
or a panic fear, give infinite uneasiness to a family; shall ruin it entirely;
and, at last, cause one or more of its members to be the innocent, sad victims
of the most barbarous of all tribunals.

What distractions must necessarily break out, in a family where the husband
and wife are at variance, and the children loose and wicked! Will such children
scruple to sacrifice a father who endeavors to restrain them by his
exhortations. by reproaches or paternal corrections? Alas, no! these will
plunder his house, to support themselves in their extravagance and riot; and
afterward deliver up their unhappy parent to all the horrors of a tribunal,
whose proceedings are founded on the blackest injustice.

A riotous husband, or a loose wife, have likewise an easy opportunity, by
means of the prosecutions in question, to rid themselves of any one who is a
check to their vices, by delivering up him or her to the rigours of the
Inquisition. Every detestable expedient, such as false oaths and testimonies,
are employed, with impunity, to sacrifice an innocent person. Very justly,
therefore, might an ingenious French author, a Romanist, write thus (speaking
of the various courts in Lima:)

The most formidable of all the tribunals is that of the Inquisition, whose
bare name strikes terror universally. -- I. Because the informer is admitted as
a witness. II. As the persons impeached never know those who inform against
them. III. As the witnesses are never confronted. -- Hence innocent people are
daily seized, whose only crime is, that certain persons are bent upon their
destruction. Relation du voyage de la Mer. de Sud, par Mr. Frezier, p. 201.
Paris, 1732, 410.


When a person is once imprisoned by the Inquisitors, his treatment is still
more cruel. He is thoroughly searched, to discover, if possible, any books or
papers which may serve to convict him; or some instrument he may employ to put
an end to his life, in order to escape the torture, etc. Of this there are but
too many sad examples; and some prisoners have been so rash, as to dash their
brains out against the wall, upon their being unprovided with scissars, a
knife, a rope, and such like.

After a prisoner has been carefully searched; and that his money, papers,
buckles, rings, etc. have been taken from him, he is conveyed to a dungeon, the
bare sight of which must fill him with horror. Torn from his family and his
friends, who are not allowed access to, or even to send him one consolatory
letter; or to take the least step in his favor, in order to prove his
innocence; he sees himself instantly abandoned to his inflexible judges, to his
melancholy, to his despair; and even often to his most inveterate enemies,
quite uncertain of his fate. Innocence, on such an occasion, is as a weak reed,
nothing being easier than to ruin an innocent person.

Being come to prison, the Inquisitor, attended by the officers of this mock
holy tribunal, goes to the prisoner's abode; and there causes an exact
inventory to be taken of all his papers, effects, and of every thing found in
his house. They frequently seize all the prisoners other possessions; at least
the greatest part of them, to pay themselves the fine to which he may be
sentenced; for very few escape out of the Inquisition without being half
ruined, unless they happen to be very wealthy indeed.

The house of the Inquisition in Lishon. is a very spacious edifice. There are
four courts, each about forty foot square, round which are galleries (in the
dormitory form) two stories high. In these galleries are the cells or prisons,
being about three hundred. Those on the ground-floor are alloted for the vilest
of criminals (as they are termed;) and are so many frightful dungeons, all of
freestone, arched over, and very gloomy. The cells on the first floor are
filled with less guilty persons; and women are commonly lodged in those of the
second story. These several galleries are hid from view, both within and
without, by a wall above fifty feet high; and built a few feet distance from
the cells, which darkens them exceedingly. The house in question is of so great
an extent, and contains so vast a variety of turnings, that I am persuaded a
prisoner could scarce find his way out, unless he was well acquainted with its
windings; so that this horridly spacious prison may be compared to Daedalus's
labyrinth.

Here rooms within themselves encircled lie,
With various windings to deceive the eye.
.............
Such is the work, so intricate the place,
That scarce the workmen all its turns could trace;
And Daedalus was puzzled how to find
The secret ways of what himself designed.
OVID'S Metamorp. b. VIII. translated by Dr. CROXALI. The apartments of the
chief Inquisitor, which likewise are very large, make part of this house. The
entrance to it is through a coach gate, These are very common in France, and
are made to give an air of grandeur to an house, and to serve as a passage sot
coaches to enter the court or yard of it. As low persons are fond of imitating
those in high-life, we often see, in Paris, a coach door to the house of an
in^ignisicant trade man.
which leads to a large court or yard, round which are several spacious
apartments, where the king and his court commonly stand, to view the procession
of the prisoners the day of the Auto da Fe.

The furniture of these miserable dungeons is, a straw bed, a blanket, sheets,
and sometimes a mattress. The prisoner has likewise a frame of wood about six
feet long, and three or four wide. This he lays on the ground, and spreads his
bed upon it. He also has a great earthen pot to ease nature in; an earthen pan
for washing himself; two pitchers, one for clean and the other for foul water;
a plate, and a little vessel with oil to light his lamp. He is not, however,
allowed any books, not even those of devotion.

With regard to provisions, the Inquisitors allow every prisoner a testoon,
[seven pence halfpenny English money] per day for his subsistence. The jailer,
accompanied by two other officers, visits, at the end of every month, all the
prisoners, to enquire of them how they would have their monthly allowance laid
out. The prisoner usually expends nine testoons for part of his provisions;
that is, for a porringer of broth, and half a pound of boiled beef daily; eight
testoons for bread, four for cheese, two for fruit, four for brandy, and the
rest for oranges, lemons, sugar and washing. The gaoler's secretary, who
accompanies him, takes an exact account of what particulars every prisoner
requests to be provided with during the month; which orders are punctually
observed; the person who is appointed to furnish the prisoners on these
occasions being punished in case he infringes them. Such as have a great
appetite, or desire wine, (as foreigners particularly do) petition for an
audience, in order to set forth their wants; and these are usually supplied,
provided such indulgence does not foment intemperance, or is too expensive. I
myself addressed the Inquisitors for this purpose, and my request was granted.

It is only on such occasions, or in sickness, that the Inquisitors show some
little humanity. These excepted, nothing is found in them, but severity and
barbarity. They are quite inflexible; for when once a person has the misfortune
to be their prisoner, he is not only forbid all correspondence with his family
and friends, (as was observed before) but even to make the least noise, to
complain, sigh, address heaven aloud, to sings psalms or hymns. -- These are
capital crimes, for which the guards or attendants of the Inquisition, who are
ever walking up and down the passages, first reprove him severely; but if he
happens to make any noise a second time, they open his cell, beat him severely;
and this, not only to punish the prisoner himself, but likewise to intimidate
others, who, by reason of the horrid silence which reigns, and the proximity of
the cells, hear the blows and cries of the wretched victim. I shall here give
an instance of this barbarity, attested by several persons. A prisoner having a
violent cough, one of the guards came and ordered him not to make a noise; he
replied, that it was not in his power to forbear; when his cough increasing, he
was commanded, a second time, to be silent; but this being impossible, they
stripped the poor creature naked, and beat him so unmercifully, that his cough
grew worse; and the blows being again repeated, he died soon after.

By this silence which the guards or keepers force prisoners to keep, they not
only deny them every little consolation, but prevent such as are neighbors
from making the least acquaintance; for, the instant this should be found, they
would be removed to other cells.

They never lodge two prisoners in the same cell; to prevent, (as the
Inquisitors pretend) their consulting together, in order to suppress or conceal
the truth, or to baffle the interrogatories; but the chief motive for keeping
those unhappy persons apart, is to extort from them, by the dread solitude of
their confinement, a confession of whatever the Inquisitors may require from
them.

However, on some occasions, two prisoners are l^dged together in the same
cell; as, for instance, when a husband and wife are imprisoned for the like
crime; and that there is no room to suspect, that one of them will prevent the
other from freely confessing the several articles of which he or she may stand
indicted. When a prisoner is sick, a companion is given him, in order to assist
him as he is told. Likewise, when the Inquisitors have not been able to prevail
with a prisoner to plead guilty, and that there are no, proofs sufficient to
convict him; they then send him a companion, who has been taught his lesson
beforehand, by the officers of the Inquisition; and this companion artfully
glides into the confidence of the prisoner; wins his friendship; and inveighs
strongly against the Inquisitors; accuses them of injustice, cruelty and
barbarity; and, insensibly, causes the unhappy victim to join his reproaches,
against the Inquisitors and the Inquisition. This is a black and unpardonable
crime; and should the prisoner fall inadvertently into this trap, he would be
inevitably undone; for then his companion immediately desires to be admitted to
audience; appears as a witness against him; and is no longer his fellow
prisoner.

A day or two after a prisoner is brought into his cell, his hair is cut off,
and his bead shaved. On these occasions no distinction is made in age, sex, or
birth. He then is ordered to tell his name, his profession; and to make a
discovery of whatever he is worth in the world. To induce him to do this the
more readily, the Inquisitor promises, that, if he be really innocent, the
several things disclosed by him will be carefully restored; but that, should
any effects, etc. concealed by him, be afterward found, they all will be
consiscated, though he may be cleared. As most of the Portugueze are so weak,
as to be firmly per^u^^^d of the sanctity and integrity of this tribunal. they
do not scruple to discover even such things as they might most easily conceal;
from a firm belief that every particular will be restored to them, the moment
their innocence shall be proved. However, these hapless persons are imposed
upon; for those who have the sad fortune to fall into the merciless hands of
the iniquitous judges, are instantly bereaved of all their possessions. In case
they plead their innocence with regard to the crimes of which they stand
accused, and yet should be convicted by the witnesses who swore against them,
they then would be sentenced as guilty, and their whole possessions
confiscated. If prisoners, in order to escape the torture, and in hopes of
being sooner set at liberty, own the crime or crimes of which they are
impeached, they then are pronounced guilty by their own confession; and the
public, in general, think their effects, etc. justly confiscated. If such
prisoners come forth as repentant criminals, who had accused themselves
voluntarily, they yet dare not plead their innocence; since they thereby would
run the hazard of being imprisoned again, and sentenced, not only as
hypocritical penitents; but likewise as wretches who accuse the Inquisitors of
injustice; so that, what course soever these persons might take, they would
certainly lose all such possessions belonging to them, as the Inquisitors had
seized.

Sometimes a prisoner passes several months in his cell, without hearing a
single word of his being brought to trial; without his knowing the crime of
which he stands impeached, or a single witness who swore against him. At last
the jailer tells him, as of his own accord, that it will be proper for him to
sue to be admitted to audience. He then is conducted, for the first time,
bare-headed to the judges; an under jailer walking first, himself next, and
lastly the jailer. Being come to one of the doors of the Inquisition, the first
mentioned knocks thrice; upon which the door is opened by one of the attendants
on, or porter of the Inquisition. The prisoner, etc. are then commanded to stay
in this antichamber, until the porter has knocked three times at the door of
the great hall of the Inquisition. This is done in order to give the
Inquisitors time to prepare for, and to receive the prisoner; that is, for him
to dismiss all persons to whom he may be giving audience; thereby to prevent
the prisoners from seeing, or being seen, by them.

Every thing being ready, pursuant to the orders given for that purpose, the
judge who presides in the great hall, answers by a little bell; upon which the
porter of the hall in question opens the door. The prisoner then enters,
guarded by the two officers beforementioned; when these, advancing toward the
table, give the prisoner a stool; after which they retire, bending the knee.

Then the president bids the prisoner kneel; ordering him at the same time, to
lay his right hand on a book, which is shut. He then addresses these words to
him: will you promise to conceal the secrets of the holy office, and to speak
the truth? -- The prisoner answering in the affirmative, the president commands
him to sit down; and afterward asks him a great variety of questions with
regard to all such crimes, as may be committed, cognizable by the Inquisition.

The secretary writes down very accurately, the several interrogatories and
answers; which being done, he rings the little bell, when the prisoner is
conveyed back to his cell, in the same manner as he had been brought from it;
but not till after he has been exhorted, to recollect all the sins he may have
committed, ever since his being come to years of discretion.

By my sufferings and examination the reader will see how prisoners are
examined, and the methods made use of to make them accuse themselves, etc.

The Inquisitors do not confine their power merely to the living, or to those
who die in their prisons. They even prosecute such as died many years before
their being indicted; cause their bodies to be dug up, and burn their bones in
the Auto da Fe. The Inquisitors likewise confiscate their possessions, of which
they do not scruple to dispossess their heirs, not excepting even their
children. It is certain that nothing can be casier than to condemn bones, as
these are unable to defend themselves; but such proceedings will not be
wondered at, when the reader is assured, that such of the living as become
victims to the Inquisitors, are not better heard in their own justification
than if they were really dead.

Among the several instances of prosecuting dead bodies in England, are the
following. Ezovius, An. 1556. 36. E. Thuan. Hist. Conc. Trid. L. 5.
When Cardinal Pool went, after the accession of Queen Mary, to the university
of Cambridge, to restore all things there to their former state; a prosecution
with regard to the taking up the dead bodies of Bucer and Fagius was commenced.
The dead persons were accordingly cited by two edicts, and various witnesses
brought against them. When no one would undertake their defense, they were
condemned for contumacy; [ridiculous cruelty!] and on the same day sentence was
pronounced before the whole university; by which their bodies were ordered to
be dug up, and delivered to the queen's officers. An order was afterward sent,
from her majesty, for inflicting the punishment. In fine, Feb. 6, the bodies
were dug up; when a large stake being fixed in the ground, in the marketplace,
the bodies were tied to it. After this the chests or coffins, with the bodies
in them, were set up; being fastened on both sides, and bound to the post with
a long iron chain. The pile being fired, a great number of protestant books
were thrown into it, and these were soon consumed. Not long after, Brooks,
bishop of Gloucester, gave the like treatment (...) Oxford, to the corpse of
Catharine, wife of Peter Martyr, who dying a few years before, had been buried
in Christ-Church, near the remains of St. Fridis-wide, who was greatly
venerated in that college: for the above Catharine being convicted, of imbibing
her husband's heresy, she was condemned; her dead body was dug up, carried upon
men's shoulders, and cast upon a dunghill. However, in queen Elizabeth's reign,
her corpse, by order of archbishop Parker, and other commissioners, was taken
from the dunghill, and buried in its former place.

After judgment has passed on all the prisoners, a mock religious ceremony is
performed; when they all walk in dismal procession to St. Dominick's church,
and there hear their articles of impeachment read, together with the sentences.

The ceremony of the Auto da Fe, or act of faith.
HERE follows a succinct description of one solemnized at Madrid, in 1682.

The officers of the Inquisition, preceded by trumpets, kettle-drums, and their
banner, marched. May 30, 1682, in cavalcade to the palace of the great square;
where they declared, by proclamation, that on the 30th of June, the sentences
of the prisoners condemned to the flames, and to other punishments, would be
put in execution. There had not been a spectacle of this kind, in Madrid,
during forty years before, for which reason it was expected, by the
inhabitants, with as much impatience as though it had been the merriest
holiday. The 30th of June being come, numberless multitudes of people appeared,
as splendidly dressed as for a royal wedding. In the great square was raised a
high scaffold: into this square, from seven in the morning, till nine at night,
came criminals of both sexes; all the Inquisitions in the kingdom having sent
their prisoners to Madrid. The prosecutions and sentences were read aloud.
There were twenty Jews, men and women, and one Renegado Mahommedan, who were
all burnt. Fifty Jews and Jewesses having never been imprisoned before, and
repenting of their crimes, were sentenced to a long imprisonment, and to wear a
yellow scapulary. Ten more, indicted for bigamy, witchcraft, and other crimes,
were sentenced to be whipped, and afterward sent to the galleys; these wore
large paste-board caps on their heads, with inscriptions on them; having
halters about their necks and torches in their hands.

The whole court was present: the king, the queen, the ambassadors, courtiers,
and numberless multitudes of people. -- The Inquisitor's chair was placed in a
sort of tribunal, far above that of the king. The unhappy victims were executed
so near to the place where the king stood, tha^ he could hear their groans; the
scaffold on which they stood, touching his balcony. The nobles of Spain, acted
here the same part as the sheriffs officers in England. Those noblemen led such
criminals as were to be burnt; and held them when they were fast bound with
thick cords; the rest of the criminals being conducted by the familiars, or
common servants of the Inquisition. Several friars, both learned and ignorant,
argued with great vehemence, to convince these unhappy creatures of the truth
of the Christian religion. Some of those criminals (Jews) were perfectly well
skilled in their religion: and made the most surprising replies, and that
without the least emotion. Among them was a maiden of exquisite beauty, and but
seventeen years of age; who being on the same side with the queen, addressed
her, in hopes of obtaining her pardon, as follows; Great queen! will not your
royal presence be of some service to me in my miserable condition? have regard
to my youth; and consider that I profess a religion which I imbibed from my
infancy. The queen turned away her eyes, and though she seemed greatly to pity
her distress, yet she did not dare to speak a word in her behalf.

Now mass began, in the midst of which the priest came from the altar, and
seated himself in a chair prepared for that purpose. The chief Inquisitor
descended from the amphitheatre, dressed in his cope, and having a mitre on his
head; when, after bowing to the altar, he advanced toward the king's balcony;
went up to it by the stairs, at the end of the scaffold; attended by some
officers of the Inquisition, carrying the cross and the gospels; with a book
containing the oath by which the kings of Spain oblige themselves to protect
the catholic faith; to extirpate heretics; and to support, with all their
power, the prosecutions of the Inquisition.

The king standing up, bareheaded, having, on one side, the constable of
Castile, who held the royal sword lifted, swore to maintain the oath, which was
read by a counselor of the royal council. His majesty continued his posture
till the Inquisitor returned to his place; when a secretary of the Inquisition
mounted a sort of pulpit, and read the like oath, administering it to the
counselors and the whole assembly. Mass began about twelve, and did not end
till nine at night, because of the sentences of the several criminals: they
being all read, aloud, one after another. The intrepidity with which those
hapless prisoners suffered death was very astonishing. Some threw themselves
into the fire; others burnt their hands, and afterward their feet, thrusting
them into the flames, and holding them therein with so much resolution, that
many were sorry such heroic souls were not enlightened by the gospel. I myself
(says the author) did not go to see the executions, for besides its being
midnight, and at a considerable distance from my abode. I was so deeply struck
with the sight of them in the day time, that it put me very much out of order.
The king could not be absent from this horri^ spectacle, as it was a religious
one; he being obliged to give a sanction, by ^^s presence, to all acts of the
In^^^^on. However, this extreme severity (...) not contribute to the conversion
(...) Jews, it not making the le^^^^ (...) on them. -- There are gre^^ (...) of
these in Madrid, who are (...) to be such, and yet enjoy posts in the (...)
^^^y, (...) l^ve unmolested. When they are very rich, the government only
terrifies them, in order to make them pay a large ransom for their lives,
whereby considerable funds are raised: th^se persons, provided they have but
money, secure themselves from the flames, though they merit them no less than
the poorest wretch. M^^^^es de la Cour d'Erpagne. Part 2, p. 50. and seq. ^^^e
1691, second edition, 12mo.
Thus far this author, who was a Romanist. If so many of these exclaim against
the Inquisition, what moderation can be expected from a protestant.

The learned Doctor Geddes, vol. I. page 447, and seq. of his tracts, thus
describes an Auto da Fe in Lisbon, of which he himself was a spectator. -- The
prisoners are no sooner in the hands of the civil magistrate, than they are
loaded with chains, before the eyes of the Inquisitors; and being carried first
to the secular gaol, are, within an hour or two, brought from thence before the
Lord Chief Justice, who, without knowing any thing of their particular crimes,
or of the evidence that was given in against them, asks them, one by one, in
what religion they intend to die? If they answer that they will die in the
communion of the church of Rome, they are condemned by him, to be carried
forthwith to the place of (...), and there to be first strangled and afterward
burnt to ashes: -- But if they say, they will die in the protestant, or in any
other faith that is contrary to the romish, they then are sentenced by hm to be
carried fortwith to the place of execution, and there to be burnt alive.

At the place of execution, which at Lisbon is the Ribera, there are so many
stakes set up, as there are prisoners to be burnt, with a good quantity of dry
furze about them. The stakes of the professed, as the Inquisitors call them,
may be about four yards high; and have a small board, whereon the prisoner is
to be seated, within half a yard of the top. The negative and relapsed being
first strangled and burnt; the professed go up a ladder, betwixt the two
Jesuits, who attended them all day: and, when they are come even with the
forementioned board, they turn about to the people, and the Jesuits spend near
a quarter of an hour, in exhorting the professed to be reconciled to the church
of Rome; which, if they refuse to be, the Jesuits come down, and the
executioner ascends; and having turned the professed off the ladder upon the
seat, and chained their bodies close to the stake, he leaves them; and the
Jesuits go up to them a second time, to renew their exhortation to them; and at
parting tell them, that they leave them to the devil, who is standing at their
elbow to receive their souls, and carry them with him into the flames of
hell-sire, so soon as they are out of their bodies. Upon this a great shout is
raised; and as soon as the Jesuits are got off the ladder, the cry is; let the
dogs beards be made; which is done by thrusting flaming furzes fastened to a
long pole, against their faces. And this inhumanity is commonly continued until
their faces are burnt to a coal; and is always accompanied with such loud
acclamations of joy, as are not to be heard upon any other occasion; a bull
feast, or a farce, being dull entertainments, to the using a professed heretic
thus inhumanely.

The professed beards being thus made, or trimmed, as they call it in jollity;
fire is set to the furze, which is at the bottom of the stake, and above which
the professed are chained so high, that the top of the slame seldom reaches
higher than the seat they sit on; and if there happens to be a wind, to which
that place is much exposed, it seldom reaches so high as their knees. So that
if there is a calm, the professed are commonly dead in about half an hour after
the furze is set on sire; but if the weather is windy, they are not, after
that, dead in an hour and half, or two hours; and so are really roasted and not
burnt to death. But though, out of hell, there cannot possibly be a more
lamentable spectacle than this, being joined with the sufferers (so long as
they are able to speak) cries, viz. Miserecordia por amor de Dios, "Mercy for
the love of God;" yet it is beheld by people of both sexes, and all ages, with
such transports of joy and satisfaction, as are not, on any other occasion to
be met with. -- Thus far Doctor Geddes, who observes, p. 450, (a very
remarkable circumstance,) That this inhuman joy is not the effect of natural
cruelty, but arises from the spirit of their religion; a proof of which is,
that all public malefactors, except heretics, are no where more tenderly
lamented than by the Portugueze; and even when there is nothing in the manner
of their deaths that appear inhuman or cruel.

The Solemnization of the Auto da Fe in which JOHN COUSTOS had the ill fate to
walk.
A FORTNIGHT before the solemnization of this Auto da Fe, notice was given in
all the churches, that it would be celebrated on Sunday the 21st June 1744. At
the same time, all who intended to be spectators thereof, were exhorted not to
ridicule the prisoners, but rather pray to God for their conversion. On
Saturday the 20th of the month abovementioned, we were all ordered to get
ready by next morning; and, at the same time, a band was given to each of us,
and old black clothes to such as had none.

Those accused of Judaism, and who, through fear of the torture, confessed
their being such, were distinguished by large scapularies called san benidos.
This is a piece of yellow stuff, about two else long; and in the middle of
which a hole is made, to put the head through: on it were sowed stripes of red
stuff, and this falls behind and before, in form of a St. Andrew's cross. Those
who are condemned for sorcery, magic, and such like, wear the same kind of
scapulary described above. They are distinguished only by wearing a pasteboard
cap, about a foot and half high, on which devils and flames are painted; and,
at the bottom, the word WIZARD is writ in large characters.

I must observe, that all such persons as are not sentenced to die, carry a
lighted yellow wax taper in their hands. I was the only person to whom one was
not given, on account of my being an obstinate protestant.

The relapsed Jews, and such heretical Roman Catholies, as are sentenced to die
for refusing to confess the crimes whereof they are accused, are dressed in
gray samaras, much shorter than the fan benidos abovementioned. The face of
the person who wears it, is copied (before and behind) from the life, standing
on sirebrands; with flames curling upwards, and devils round it, at the bottom
of the samara, their names and surnames are writ.

Blasphemers are dressed as above, and distinguished only by a gag in their
months.

The pr^^on^^ being thus habited, the procession opened with the Dominican
Friars, preceded by the banner of their order. Afterward came the banner and
crucifix of the Inquisition, which was followed by the criminals, each whereof
walked between two familiars, who were to be answerable, for them, and bring
back to prison, such as were not to be executed, after the procession was ended.

The accompanying prisoners on these dismal occasions is thought so great an
honor, that such as attend, to execution, these unhappy victims, and even lean
upon them, are always the first noblemen in the kingdom; who are so proud of
acting in this character, that they would not resign that honor for any other
that should be offered them, so cruelly blind is their zeal.

Next came the jewish converts, followed by such as were indicted for
witchcraft and magic, and had confessed their crimes.

The procession closed with the unhappy wretches who were sentenced to the
flames.

The march then began, when the whole procession walked round the court of the
chief Inquisitor's palace, in presence of the king, the royal family, and the
whole court, who were come thither for this purpose. The prisoners being all
gone through the court just mentioned, proceeded along one of the sides of
Rocio Square; and went down Odreyros-Street; when, returning by
Escudeyros-Street, and up another side of Rocio-Square, they came, at last, to
St. Dominick's church, which was hung, from top to bottom, with red and yellow
tapestry.

Before the high altar was built an amphitheatre, with a pretty considerable
number of steps, in order to seat all the prisoners and their attendant
familiars. Opposite was raised another greater altar, after the romish fashion,
on which was placed a crucifix surrounded with several lighted tapers, and mass
books. To the right of this was a pulpit, and to the left, a gallery,
magnificently adorned, for the king, the royal family, the great men of the
kingdom, and the foreign ministers, to sit in. To the right of this gallery
was, a long one, for the Inquisitors; and between these two galleries, a room,
whither the Inquisitors retire to hear the confessions of those who, terrified
at the horrors of impending death, may be prompted to confess what they had
before persisted in denying; they sometimes gladly snatching this last moment
allowed them to escape a cruel exit.

Every person being thus seated in the church, the preacher ascended the
pulpit, whence he made a panegyric on the Inquisition; exhorted such prisoners
as were not sentenced to die, to make good use of the clemency indulged them,
by sincerely renouncing that instant, the heresies, and crimes of which they
stood convicted. Then directing himself to the prisoners who were to be burnt,
he exhorted them to make a good use of the little time left them by making a
sincere confession of their crimes, and thereby avoiding a cruel death.

During the sermon, the prisoners have some refreshments; the open air having a
very strong effect on most, and the length of the march fatiguing them greatly.
On this occasion dry fruits are given them, and as much water as they can drink.

The preacher being come from the pulpit, some priests belonging to the
Inquisition ascend it successively, to read the trial of each prisoner, who was
standing all the time holding a lighted taper. Each prisoner, after hearing it
returned to his place. This lasted till ten at night.

The trials of all the prisoners not sentenced to die, being read, the
president of the Inquisition, dressed in his sacerdotal vestments, appeared with
a book in his hand; after which five or six priests, in surplices, tapped, with
a sort of wands, the heads and shoulders of the prisoners in question: saying
certain prayers used in the Romish church, when the excommunication is taken
off.

Then another priest went up into the pulpit, to read the trials of the
ill-fated persons sentenced to the flames; after which these sad victims were
delivered up to the secular power, whose officers take them to the Relacaon, A
senate house, or court of judicature.
whither the king comes. Thus the Inquisition, to conceal their cruelties,
calls in the secular arm, which condemns the prisoners to die; or rather
ratifies the sentence past by the Inquisitors. This lasted till six in the
morning.

At last these miserable creatures, accompanied by the familiars and priests,
were conducted under the guard of a detachment of foot, to Campo da Laa, or the
Woolheld. Here they were fastened, with chains, to posts, and seated on pitch
barrels. Afterward the king appeared, in a sorry coach, at which were ropes
instead of harnesses. He then ordered the friars to exhort each of the victims
in question, to die in the Romish faith, upon pain of being burnt alive; but to
declare, that such as complied with the exhortation of the priest, should be
strangled before they were committed to the flames. His majesty staid till all
the prisoners were executed.

In this Auto da Fe, were burnt the following persons: 1. Father Joseph de
Seguira, a priest, convicted of various heresies, and obstinate. 2. Theresa
Carvalla, a widow, found guilty of different heresies, and confessing them. 3.
Francis Dias Cabaco, a scrivener, convicted of heresy, and obstinate. 4.
Charles Joseph, a barber, convicted of heresy, and obstinate. 5. Gabriel
Roderiguez Bicudo, a shoemaker, who, after publicly abjuring judaism in a
former Auto da Fe; and being taken up a second time for committing a like
crime, was convicted, and proved obstinate. 6. Pedro de Rates Henequim, living
on his estate, condemned for invening, writing, following and defending the
doctrines of heretics; for turning heresiarch with execrable blasphemies;
convicted, false, dissembling, consident, varying and impenitent. 7. Josepha
Maria, spinster, daughter of Gabriel Roderiguez Bicudo, abjuring in the same
manner as her father, (above) and convicted a second time; false, dissembling,
and impenitent. 8. Mecia da Costa, a widow, reconciled in a former Auto da Fe
for the crime of witchcraft, and living apart from the catholic says; making
a contract with the devil, whom she worshipped as God; convicted, denying,
obstinate and relapsed.


The instant the sad victims abovementioned were delivered up to the secular
arm, all the rest of the prisoners wereded back, with the like ceremony, about
ten at night, from St. Dominick's church to the Inquisition. Being arrived
there, we were carried through several galleries, till we came to the abode
allotted us. Here were several chambers, the doors of which were open; when
each of us chose that which he liked best. There then were given to each a
straw bed, a blanket, and sheets which had been laid in. Most of these things
were far from clean, there not having been an Auto da Fe for two years before.
The women were lodged a story above us.

Being thus settled, to the best of our power, we thought ourselves the
happiest persons upon the earth, though we had little to boast of. However, we
were now together, and breathed the fresh air; we enjoyed the light of the sky,
and had a view of a garden: in a word, we knew that we should not be put to
death; all which circumstances proved a great consolation. The alcayde or
jailer, and his brother-keeeper brought each of us a loaf, a cake, and water
sufficient for the whole company; permitting us, at the same time, to divert
ourselves, provided we did not make a noise. This was the first time we had
supped, in the Inquisition, with any satisfaction. Having been greatly fatigued
by the ceremony described in the foregoing pages, I slept very soundly.

I am to observe that, from the time of our returning from the procession, we
were supported at the expense of the Cardinal-Inquisitor, and not at that of
the mock holy office. We were soon sensible of this change of masters, not only
by the advantages described above; but also by the permission allowed us, of
sending to our relations and friends, for such provisions as we might want, if
we did not like those given us; or had not enough to satisfy our appetites. It
would be the highest ingratitude in me not to mention the very essential
favors which I myself, as well as the three brethren, my fellow prisoners,
received from the Free-Masons at Lisbon. These could not be eas^^^ till they
had obtained leave to visit us, which gave us inexpressible joy; and their
bounty proved of the most signal advantage to us. We imagined at first, that
the reason why the cardinal ordered us to be consined, during some days, in
this part of the prison, was to accustom us, by insensible degrees, to the open
air; and to dispel the dreadful melancholy which had so long oppressed us.
However, the true cause of it was, that each of us might be the more easily
conveyed to the place to which he was doomed by his sentence; to put into our
hands a bill of the expenses the Inquisitors had been at; and to give the
various officers the instructions necessary, for conveying us afterward to the
several places appointed by the Inquisitors.

During the course of the week in question, some of the prisoners were
banished: such as had more husbands or wives than one were whipped through the
streets of Lisbon, and others sent to the galley, among whom I was.

The GALLEY.
THE Portugueze Galley is a prison standing by the river side, and consists of
two very spacious rooms built one over the other. That on the ground floor is
the apartment of the slaves, and the other is for the sick, and the officers of
this prison; it being the receptacle, not only of such as are condemned by the
Inquisitors, but likewise by the lay judges. Among these prisoners are Turks
and Moors, taken on board the corsair vessels; together with fugitive slaves,
and bad or villainous servants, whom their masters send to this galley, as a
chastisement.

These several prisoners, of what quality soever, are employed in tolls equally
low and grievous. Some work in the dock yards; they carrying timber to the
carpenters, unloading the ships, and providing water and provisions for
victualling such as are outward bound. -- They likewise carry water to the
prisons in Lisbon; and to the king's gardens, in order for refreshing them; in
a word, they are obliged to submit to any labors, how ignominious and painful
soever, for the service of his Portugueze majesty, or of the officers who
command over them. These slaves are treated with the greatest severity and
cruelty, except they find means to bribe their overseers to gentleness, by
giving them, at intervals, a little money.

In this Galley, all the slaves are fastened two and two, by one foot only,
with a chain eight foot long. At their girdle is an iron hook, by which they
shorten or lengthen their chain, to make the weight of it less troublesome.
Their heads and beards are shaved once a month. They wear coarse blue clothes,
caps and coats; and have a great coat, made of coarse serge of the same color,
which serves them as a cloak in the day time, and a coverlet at night. They lie
in a sort of frame of boards raised a little from the ground over which a mat
is spread.

To every Galley slave is given, each day, a pound and a half of very dry,
black biscuit; with six pounds of salt meat every month, and a bushel of pease,
lentils or beans, which they are allowed to sell; in order to purchase better
provisions, if they can afford it.

They are led early every morning, a sew festivals excepted, whithersoever
their drudgery may be wanted. They then toil incessantly till eleven, when they
leave work, in order to eat and rest themselves till one; after which they
again renew their miserable labors, and these they carry on till night, when
they are conducted back to the Galley. Such is the life which these unhappy
wretches lead daily.

When any of them fall sick, they are removed to the other great room, where
proper care is taken of them by the physicians, surgeons, etc. It is incumbent
on me to do justice to them in this particular. The sick are here treated with
all imaginable care and humanity. Those whose stomachs are too weak to digest
strong aliments, have good broth, on which occasion chickens are not spared.
But it is far otherwise with regard to punishments: their taskmasters
exercising great cruelty toward all such as commit a fault: those unhappy
slaves, being laid on their bellies, are fastened to a ladder; when two men
whip alternately their bare posteriors with a bull's pizzle, or a thick pitched
rope. The sufferers often receive two or three hundred lashes in this manner,
whereby their skin is not only flead, but pieces of flesh are torn away: so
that the surgeons are obliged to make deep incisions, in order to prevent a
mortification; which frequently prevents their working during a long time.
These wounds often become ulcerous, and many are disabled for life. In short,
the barbarities exercised by this tribunal are so great, and so various, that
Oldham might justly put the following words into the mouth of Ignatius Loyola:
Let the Inquisition rage, fresh cruelties
Make the dire engines groan with tortured cries:
Let Campo Flori every day be strewn
With the warm ashes of the Lutheran brood:
Repeat again Bohemian slaughter over;
And Pie'mont valleys drown with floating gore:
Swister than murdering angels when they fly
On errands of avenging destiny.
Fiercer than storms let loose, with eager haste
Lay cities, countries, realms, whole nature waste.
Sack, ravish, burn, destroy, slay, massacre,
Till the same grave their lives and names inter.
SATYR III. (against the Jesuits.)

EXAMPLES OF THE INJUSTICE and CRUELTY OF THE INQUISITION.
THE pretended zeal of the Inquisitors, for preserving religion in all its
purity, is merely a cloak to hide their boundless ambition, their insatiable
thirst of riches, and their vindictive spirit.

The emperor Frederic, mentioned in the foregoing pages, who first invested the
Inquisitors with great privileges, was the first who made the most cruel abuse
of them. All who opposed his will were deemed heretics, and judged and burnt as
such. He committed to the flames, upon the false pretense of heresy, so great a
number of Romanists, that pope Gregory could not forbear representing to him in
the most serious terms; that it became him to extirpate heretics only, and not
the true sons of the church.

The monarch in question did not foresee that the court of Rome might turn
those very weapons against him which he had employed so unjustly against a
multitude of Christians. This emperor was afterward sensible of his error, but
too late; for he himself was in 1239 impeached as a heretic; and being judged,
was excommunicated as such; and his subjects freed from the allegiance they had
sworn to him; though his heresy was no more, than his having opposed the
unlimited power which the popes pretended to exercise over all Christians, not
excepting even crowned heads.

Elezine, lord of Padua, whose heresy was only too great attachment to the
emperor Frederic, was likewise excommunicated, and Inquisitors appointed to
prosecute him for this pretended crime. Accordingly he was summoned to appear
in Rome, whither he sent persons of reputation to declare his innocence. --
However, these were not allowed to be heard, the pope insisting that he should
appear in person; and, upon his refusing to obey this order, the Roman pontiff
sent the bishop of Treviso to inform Elezine, that he would render himself
obnoxious to all the punishments inflicted on heretics, in case he refused to
appear personally in Rome, sometime in August 1251; and further, that if he did
not submit to all the pope's injunctions, he would be declared infamous and a
heretic; himself and his possessions seized, and a crusade sent against him and
his adherents. In fine, sentence was passed against this lord in 1254, whereby
he was pronounced a heretic, and all his possessions confiscated in favor of
his brother Albert.

About the same time, Count de Tou^ouse fell a victim to the cruel power of the
Roman pontiffs and their wicked agents. His dominions were sacked by crusaders,
whom the pope had sent out against him. In fine, this Count, though a zealous
Romanist, could find no other way to extricate himself, than by making a
submission, too mean and severe for a prince, whose only crime was his strong
attachment to Frederic, then at variance with the court of Rome; and his not
persecuting his own subjects, who were accused, by that court, of heresy.

The Spanish Inquisitors cited Jane, daughter of the emperor Charles V. to
appear before their tribunal; in order to be examined concerning another
person, with regard to some articles of faith, which the Inquisitors declared
were heretical. The emperor himself stood in such awe of the Inquisition, that
he commanded his daughter, in case she thought the person accused ever so
little guilty, not to delay her information, in order to avoid the sentence of
excommunication, levelled not only against other persons, but even against
himself. The princess, in compliance with this command, immediately gave in her
deposition to Valdes, archbishop of Seville, then Inquisitor-General.

The Inquisition of Arragon proceeded to still greater lengths; it having the
insolence to prosecute Don Carlos, eldest son to Don John II. king of Arragon.
Cabrera hist, de Don Juan.


The Inquisition of Castile distinguished itself in a manner equally daring and
horrid; this tribunal attempted to prosecute the memory of the emperor Charles
V. and to sentence his will to the flames, as heretical; together with all
those persons who had had the greatest share in this monarch's friendship.

Here follows a succinct account of this incident, as related by Thaunus,
d'Aubigne, and le Laboureur.

This emperor's retreat had given rise to various reports. One of these was,
that he had contracted, by his almost continual correspondence with the
protestants of Germany, an inclination for their opinions; and yet the sole
motive of his withdrawing to a solitude, was, that he might have an opportunity
of ending his days in exercises of piety conformable to his secret disposition.
It was likewise affirmed, that his ill treatment of several of those brave
protestant princes, whom he had subdued by force of arms, extorted from him
such an admiration of their constancy in ill fortune, as made him almost blush
for his conquests: and raised in him, by insensible degrees, an esteem for
their religion.

A circumstance which added to the probability of these reports, was, his
making choice of persons suspected of heresy to be the companions of his
retreat, and the directors of his conscience. Doctor Caculla was his preacher;
and his confessors-were the archbishop of Toledo, and especially Constantine
Pontius, bishop of Drossin. This report was strengthened by the great number of
passages, writ with the emperor's own hand, on the walls of his cell at St.
Justus' where he died; these agreeing pretty nearly with the tenets of the
protestants, on justification and grace.

But a circumstance which confirmed this opinion still more, was, his will not
being drawn up after the manner of the Roman Catholics; I mean that no pious
legacies were read therein, nor any moneys bequeathed for saying masses, which
gave offense to the Inquisitors. However, they did not dare to speak openly on
this occasion, till they should first know the sentiments of Philip II. and
whether he would not be offended at the prosecution in question; but this
prince, on his ascending the throne, sigualized himself by persecuting all
those who had shook off the papal yoke; so that the Inquisitors, in imitation
of him, first prosecuted the archbishop of Toledo, primate of Spain, afterward
Caculla, and last of all Constantine Pontius.

As the king permitted them to be imprisoned, this was considered as an
undoubted proof of his zeal for the Romish religion: but the most judicious
were struck with horror, when they saw the emperor's confessor, in whose arms
he died, delivered up, by his own son, to a most ignominious and cruel
punishment.

The Inquisitors could not forbear showing, that they were prompted to this
horrid act, by no other views than those of interest; since, in the trials of
the three persons abovementioned, they charged them with being concerned in
drawing up the emperor's will; and sentenced both it, and them, to the flames.

Philip, who hitherto had beheld with the utmost indifference, the conduct of
the Inquisitors, now roused as from a lethargy; when reflecting on the bad
things the world would say of him, in case he did not stop a prosecution so
injurious to the memory of his royal father, and which might likewise be
attended with fatal consequences, he endeavored, secretly, to stop the
prosecution; but employed, at the same time, gentle expedients, for fear of
angering the Inquisitors.

Don Carlos, only son to king Philip, being a prince of great vivacity; and
entertaining the utmost veneration for his grandfather's memory, was highly
offended at this insult put upon it. Not knowing all the extent of the power of
this horrid tribunal, he inveighed against it; and, after blarning his father's
weakness, spoke publicly of this design of the Inquisitors, as a shocking and
unheard of attempt. -- He even went so far, as to threaten to extirpate, one
day or other, the Inquisition, and all its agents, for this abominable outrage.
But this generous prince paid dear for these passionate expressions; the
Inquisitors being determined to sacrifice him to their vengeance, and hasten
his end.

However, this dispute between the king and the Inquisition was afterward
adjusted. Caculla was burnt alive, with the effigy of Constantine Pontius, who
died in prison some days before. The archbishop of Toledo appealed to Rome; and
extricated himself by money and friends. After this, no farther mention was
made of the emperor's will.

Though this reconciliation might pacify the prince of Spain, the Inquisitors
were far from being appeased; it being one of their chief maxims, never to
forgive. In this view, they raised so great a spirit of discontent among the
common people, that the king was forced to remove Don Carlos from court;
together with Don John his brother, and the prince of Parma, his nephew, who
had shared in Don Carlos's just resentment against the Inquisitors.

This cruel tribunal had not yet satiated its revenge. Some years after it
imputed to this young prince, as a crime, the compassion he had extended to the
inhabitants of the Netherlands, who were treated barbarously. They declared,
that as all the people in question were heretics, the prince must necessarily
be one, since he set up for their defender. In fine, they gained so strange an
ascendant over the king's mind, that he, inspired by a most unnatural spirit of
bigotry, and being afraid of quarrelling with the Inquisitors: sentenced his
son to die. The only indulgence the latter met with on this occasion, was to
have the species of death left to his choice. The ill-fated prince, Roman-like,
had recourse to the hot bath; when opening the veins of his arms and legs, he
died gradually. Thus did this excellent young prince fall a martyr to the
merciless Inquisitors.

The year 1580 furnishes us with another very remarkable instance, of the
assuming spirit of this pretended holy tribunal.

Cardinal Charles Borromeo, archbishop of Milan, who afterward was canonized,
going his visitation of certain places, in his diocese, subordinate to him as
to spirituals, and to the Swiss cantons as to temporals; thought it necessary
to make some regulations for the good of these churches.

The Swiss took umbrage at this conduct; when, without addressing the
archbishop, they sent an ambassador to the governor of Milan, entreating him
not to let the prelate continue his visitation in the places subject to them;
and to assure him, that in case of refusal, they would employ force; which must
break the harmony it so highly concerned his sovereign, the king of Spain to
preserve.

The ambassador being arrived in Milan, lodged at a rich merchant's house of
his acquaintance. The Inquisitor was no sooner informed of this, than,
disregarding the law of nations, and the fatal consequences with which so great
an outrage might be attended; he went, with all his officers, to the
embassador's abode; when causing him to be shackled in his presence, he hurried
him away to the prison of the Inquisition. Though all persons were struck with
horror, at such an insult offered to a state in the person of its ambassador,
yet no one dared to make the least opposition. The merchant was the only person
who interested himself in his favor; for he, waiting upon the governor of
Milan, told him the cruel usage the ambassador had met with. The governor sent
for the Inquisitor, and obliged him to release the ambassador that instant;
which being done, he paid him all imaginable honors, and complied with his
several demands. Thus the Swiss were informed of their embassador's release,
almost at the same time with the news of his imprisonment, otherwise they would
have seized the cardinal, and used him exactly as the Inquisitors had treated
their ambassador. The governor afterward informed the archbishop, by a letter,
that the interest of his catholic majesty required absolutely, that he should
discontinue his visitations; which being done, things were quiet.

The instances here given, prove sufficiently, that if the Inquisitors had kept
within the bound^ which the popes pretended to set to them, in establishing
their tribunal; (I mean the rooting up of heresy,) and had not concerned
themselves with politics; they would not have behaved so insolently toward
monarchs, etc. Let us now see some other examples of their treatment of persons
distinguished by their birth and employments.

Mark Antonio de Dominis was of a most illustrious Venetian family. He first
entered among the Jesuits; was afterward bishop of Segni, and at last
archbishop of Spalatro and primate of Dalmatia. He was thought the best skilled
of any man of the age, in every branch of literature; especially in divinity
and history, both sacred and profane. This prelate was consulted as an oracle,
on every subject, and gave the highest satisfaction to all querists. Imbibing
protestant principles, he defended them with the utmost vigor, in his
Republica Ecclesiastica; and at the same time, wrote with greater vehemence
against the pope and the court of Rome than its most inveterate enemies had
ever done.

The passionate desire the prelate had to print this work in his lifetime, and
the little probability there was of his being able to stay in Italy after its
publication, made him retire to Germany; whence he afterward went to England,
whither he was invited by James I. king of Great Britain. Mark Antonio met with
a gracious reception from this theological monarch; he giving him an honorable
support; and doing all that lay in his power, to engage him to renounce the
errors of the church of Rome.

On the other hand the pope, whether he was unwilling to leave a man of so
exalted a character, in the hands of the enemies to the Romish church; or
rather, as it afterward appeared, had resolved to be revenged of, and make a
public example of him; set every engine at work, to induce him to return to his
native country. At last, Don Diego Sarmiento da Cunna, the Spanish ambassador
at the British court, made Mark Antonio such splendid offers, that he was
prevailed upon to return to Italy.

This unhappy prelate then forgot the maxims he had so frequently inculcated in
his works, viz. That no person can offend the court of Rome with impunity, and
that it never pardons an injury: for Mark Antonio, spite of the strong
exhortations of his friends in England, who were for ever representing to him
the dangers to which he would inevitably expose himself, set out for Rome,
where he was no sooner arrived than he found his mistake too late. The pontiff
did not keep one of the promises made to Mark Antonio, but obliged him to
abjure publicly the pretended heresies advanced in his books. He was now left,
seemingly, at liberty; but was ever followed by spies, who, at last, falsely
swore that he carried on a secret correspondence with England. Immediately the
Inquisitors seized this great man; but carrying on his prosecution with their
usual dilatoriness, he died in prison, either through grief for the wrong steps
taken by him; or through fear of the shameful and cruel punishment which he was
sensible awaited him.

Alph^nso Nobre, born in Vilia Viziosa, and descended from one of the most
ancient and illustrious families of that city, many of whom had filled those
posts, which, in Portugal, are bestowed on none but noble persons; and all
whose ancestors could not be reproached with the least tincture of judaism; was
seized and carried to the prisons of the Inquisition of Coimbra, upon the
informatio^ of persons who swore that he was not a Christian. Some time after,
his only son and daughter were seized and confined in the same prison. These
children, who were very young, impeached their father; whether excited thereto
by evil counselors, or that the tortures had extorted the impeachment from
them. At last the unhappy father was sentenced to be burnt alive, on the
depositions of his children. The day of the Auto da Fe being come, the son drew
near to his parent, to crave forgiveness and his blessing, but the ill-fated
father replied; I pardon you both, though you are the sole cause or my
ignominious and cruel death; as to my blessing, I cannot give it you; for he is
not my son, who makes a pretended confession of untruths; and who, ha^ing been
a Roman catholic, shamefully denies his Savior, by declaring himself a Jew. --
Go, adds he, unnatural son! I beseech heaven to pardon you! Being come, at
last, to the stake, he discovered such great courage and resolution; made such
pathetic discourses, and addressed himself with so much fervor to the
Almighty, as filled all his hearers with admiration, and caused them to look
upon his judges with horror.

In the same Auto da Fe were likewise burnt Donna Beatrix Carvalho, of a noble
family of Elvas, and wife to Jacomo de Mello; she being sentenced to die for
judaism, on the oaths of her children. There is no doubt but that, had the
Inquisitors acted with sincerity and equity, and with a real intention to find
out the truth, they might have discovered the innocence of the lady in
question; as well as that of the above Signior Nobre, by comparing the
confessions which each of their children had made separately, with the
depositions of the witnesses. A wide difference would certainly have been
found, on this occasion, in the facts and circumstances. Truth admits of no
variation; and is ever the same, in the mouths of those who follow its
dictates. Thus, by confronting them, new lights must have been struck out; but
then the doing this would not have brought on the confiscation of the
possessions of the two victims in question, the swallowing up of which was the
sole view of the Inquisitors.

Here follows another instance of the brutal injustice of the Inquisitors:
Joseph Pereira Meneses, captain general of his Portugueze majesty's sleets in
India, was ordered by the governor of Goa to sail, with his fleet, to the
succor of the city of Diu, then besieged by the Arabs. Proceeding (...) his
voyage, he was detained hy contrary winds, at Bacaim; whereby the Arabs had an
opportunity of plundering Diu, and of coming back laden with rich spoils,
before the arrival of the succors brought by Pereira Meneses. This commander
being returned to Goa, was immediately seized by order of Antonio de Mello de
Castro, governor of that place, and a sworn enemy to Pereira. His prosecution
was then ordered, when he was accused of loitering at Bacaim, purposely to
avoid engaging the enemy; and thus to have caused, by his neglect and
cowardice, the ruin and plunder of Diu. However, as governors are not permitted
to put commanders to death, without first obtaining an express order from the
court of Portugal; Antonio de Mello could not take away his enemy's life; for
which reason he pronounced such a sentence upon him, as was more intolerable
than death itself to a man of honor. Pereira, pursuant to the judgment passed
upon him, was led by the common executioner through the streets, with a halter
about his neck, and a distaff at his side. A herald walking before, cried
aloud, That this punishment was inflicted on him by the king, for being a
coward and traitor. Pereira was then carried back to prison, where a familiar
of the Inquisition came and demanded him. This fresh step surprised every one,
who knew that he could not justly be accused of judaism, as he was of an
ancient Christian family, and had always behaved with honor. -- The day of the
Auto da Fe was therefore expected with impatience by the people, in order that
his crime might be made known to them: but how great was their surprise, when
the prisoner did not come forth in the procession.

Pereira had long been engaged in a quarrel with a gentleman, once his intimate
friend, and who was seemingly reconciled to him before this misfortune. This
false friend, harboring a secret resolution to revenge himself whenever an
opportunity should offer, thought this imprisonment of Pereira the most
favorable for his purpose, that could have happened. He now suborned five of
Pereira's domestics, who accused their master to the Inquisitors, of sodomy;
making oath that they had seen him perpetrate that abominable crime with one of
his pages, who thereupon was seized. The latter, having less courage than his
master; and dreading a cruel death, in case he should not do all he was
commanded; and finding no other way to save his life than by pleading guilty,
charged himself with a crime of which he was entirely innocent; and thus
became, pursuant to the practice of the Inquisitors, a fresh witness against
his master. The servant, by this confession, saved his own life, and was
banished to Mozambique in Africa.

In the mean time, as Pereira persisted in declaring himself innocent, he was
condemned to be burnt alive; and would have been committed to the flames, had
not his continual protestations of his innocence; or rather a secret esteem
which the Inquisitors ever entertained for him, made them suspend his
execution; in order to try whether they might not, in time, prevail with him to
make a confession; or find opportunities to clear up the affair. For this
reason he was ordered to remain in prison till next Auto da Fe.

During this interval, the Inquisitors examined the prisoner and his witnesses
several times; when interrogating the latter separately, whether the moon shone
the night in which, pursuant to their oath, their master committed the
detestable crime in question, they varied in their answers. Being now put to
the torture, they denied all they before had swore against their master. The
accusers were then seized, and Joseph Pereira being declared innocent, came out
of prison next Auto da Fe, stripped of all his possessions and quite ruined.
His chief accuser was banished during nine years to Africa, and the witnesses
were sentenced to the Galley for five years.

The abovementioned example shows, that the Inquisitors make heresy a
pretense, merely to seize upon the wealth of the innocent; and that this
tribunal gives a wicked man the sinest opportunity possible, to satiate his
vengeance. -- The spirit which animates the Inquisitors established in the East
Indies, must really be horrid, since even the Jesuits themselves, thus speak of
them, in their universal Latin and French Dictionary, printed at Trevoux. The
Inquisition (say these most righteous fathers) is vastly severe in India. It Is
true, indeed, that seven witnesses are required to swear against a man, in
order for his being condemned; but then the depositions of a slave, or of a
child are admitted. The prisoner must accuse himself, and he never sees, nor is
confronted, with those who swear against him. A person who happens to let drop
the least word against the church; or does not speak, with sufficient reverence
of the Inquisition, shall be impeached. -- The standard or banner of the
Inquisition is of red silk, in which a cross is painted; having an olive bough
on one side; and on the other a sword, with these words of the Psalmist round
it: "Arise, Lord, and judge thy cause." What a solemn mockery have we here of
scripture, and how detestable a use is made of a supplication of the Psalmist!
-- Is this religion? Does this spirit descend from above? Surely no; but seems
dictated rather by the black chiefs of Milton's infernal council.

The following instance proves, that the Inquisitors will condemn an innocent
person rather than permit any of their accusations to be disproved.

A major in a Portugueze regiment was charged with professing judaism
privately, and hurried away to the prison of the Inquisition in Lisbon. Being
descended of a family distinguished by the name of new Christians, this proved
a great prejudice against him. He then was asked, several times, the cause of
his seizure, though he himself was an utter stranger to it. After he was kept
in prison two years, the Inquisitors told him, that he was accused and duly
convicted, of being a relapsed Jew, which he utterly denied; protesting that he
had been always a true and faithful Christian. In a word, they could not
prevail with him, either by threats or promises, to plead guilty to any one
article of which he stood impeached: he declaring resolutely to his judges,
that he would die with innocence, rather than preserve his life by an action,
which must cover him with eternal infamy.

Duke d'Aveyro, then Inquisitor-General, who was desirous of saving this
officer, being one day upon his visitation, strongly exhorted him to embrace
the opportunity he had of extricating himself; but the prisoner continuing
inflexible, the Inquisitor was fired, and spoke thus to him: "Do thou imagine
that we'll have "the lie on this occasion?" The Inquisitor then withdrew,
leaving the prisoner to his reflections on what he had heard. Surely these
words employed a meaning inconsistent with the character of an upright judge,
and strongly spoke the iniquitous spirit of this tribunal.

To conclude, the Auto da Fe approaching, our victim was condemned to the
flames, and a confessor sent to him. Terrified at this horrid death, he, though
entirely innocent, declared himself guilty of the crime laid to his charge. His
possessions were then consiscated; after which he was made to walk in the
procession, in the habit of one relapsed; and lastly, was sentenced to the
Galleys for five years.

William Lithgow, a Scotchman, had ever retained a strong inclination for
travel. To gratify it, he first went to Malaga, and there agreed with the
captain of a French ship, to carry him to Alexandria. Before this ship set
sail, an English fleet, fitted out against the Algerines, came and cast anchor
before Malaga, the 7th of October, 1620; which threw the whole city into the
utmost consternation; these ships being supposed to belong to Mahommedans.
However, next morning, they found their mistake; when the governor seeing the
British cross in the flags, went on board the ship of the Admiral, Sir Robert
Mansel, who received him with the greatest politeness; so that at his return,
he removed the fears of the inhabitants, and made them lay down their arms. On
the morrow, several of the crew came on shore; and being Lithgow's particular
friends, spent some days in viewing the curiosities of the city, and in
otherwise diverting themselves; and then inviting him on board, they presented
him to the admiral, from whom he met with all imaginable civility. They kept
Lithgow on board next day after which he returned to Malaga, and the fleet set
sail.

As Lithgow was returning to his quarters through bye streets, in order to
carry all his things on board the French ship, which was to sail that night for
Alexandria; he was seized by nine catchpoles, or officers, who took him before
the governor, to whom he complained of the violence which had been done him.
The governor answered only by a nod; and bid certain persons, with the town
secretary, to go and examine him. This was to be transacted with all possible
secrecy, to prevent the English merchants, residing in Malaga, from bearing of
his arrest.

The council assembling, he was examined, and being suspected to be an English
spy, they did all that lay in their power to make some discovery to that
purpose, but in vain. They afterward asked the names of the captains of the
fleet; whether Lithgow, before his leaving England, did not know of the fitting
out of this fleet? Why he refused the offer which the English admiral made of
taking him on board his ship? In a word, they affirmed that he was a spy; and
that he had been nine months in Malaga, in no other view than to give
intelligence, to the English court, of the time when the Spanish fleet was
expected from India. They then observed, that his intimacy with the officers,
and a great many more of his countrymen on board this fleet, who had showed him
the highest civilities, were strong indications of his guilt.

As Lithgow found it impossible to erase these bad impressions, he entreated
them to send for a bag, containing his letters and other papers; the perusal of
which, he declared, would prove his innocence. The bag being accordingly
brought, and the contents of it examined, they were found to consist chiefly of
passports, and testimonials from several persons of quality; a circumstance
which, instead of lessening their suspicions, served only to heighten them.
Presently a subaltern officer came into the room to search him, and took eleven
ducats out of his pocket. Stripping him afterward to his shirt, they found in
the waistband of his breeches, the value of 548 ducats, in gold. Lithgow
putting on his clothes again, was conducted to a secure place, and from thence
removed to an horrid dungeon, where he was allowed neither bed nor bedding; and
only an ounce and half of musty bread, and a pint of water daily.

As he would confess nothing, he was put to the torture three days after. The
wretches had the inhumanity to make him undergo, in the space of five hours,
fifty different sorts of torture; after which he was remanded back to prison,
where two eggs were given him, and a little hot wine, just to keep him alive.

On this occasion he received from a Turk, favors which he could not have
hoped from persons who style themselves Christians. This Turk administered to
him all the consolation possible, and wept to see the cruelties exercised on
Lithgow. He then informed him, that certain English priests belonging to a
seminary, together with a Scotch cooper, had been sometime employed by the
governor's order, in translating into Spanish, all his books, and the
observations made by him in his travels. The Turk added, that it was publicly
reported, that he was a most notorious heretic. It was then, Lithgow naturally
supposed, that every engine would be set at work, in order to ruin him.

Two days after, the governor, with the Inquisitor and two Jesuits, came to
Lithgow in prison; when after asking him several questions, and strongly urging
him to change his religion, they declared, that, having first seized him as a
spy, they had discovered, by the translation of his papers, that he ridiculed
the blessed lady of Loretto; and spoke very irreverently of his holiness,
Christ's vicegerent upon earth: that informations had been lodged against him
before the Inquisitors; that he should be allowed eight days to return to the
pale of the church; during which the Inquisitor himself, and other priests,
would give him all the instructions necessary, to extricate him from his
miserable state. They visited him again several times, but without success. In
fine, the eighth day being come, he was sentenced to undergo eleven different
tortures; when, in case he survived them, he was to be carried to Granada, and
burnt there, after easter holidays. The same evening he was put to the torture,
and bore it with great resolution, though the utmost cruelty was practiced on
this occasion. He then was remanded to his dungeon, where some Turkish slaves
brought him, secretly, refreshments, which he was too weak to take. One of
these slaves, though educated in the Mahommedan religion from his infancy, was
so strongly affected with the deplorable condition to which Lithgow was
reduced, that he fell sick for several days. However, a Moorish female slave
amply compensated for the kind Turk's absence; she being allowed more liberty
in the prison. This female slave brought Lithgow, daily, provisions, with a
little wine; and this courtesy continued six weeks.

To conclude, at the time that Lithgow expected, every instant, to die in the
most cruel torments, he was released by a very unexpected accident. A Spaniard
of distinction being at supper with the governor, the latter informed him of
every thing that had happened to Lithgow, since his imprisonment. As he had
described, minutely, the various tortures he underwent, a young Flemish
servant, who used to wait on the Spanish gentleman at table, moved to
compassion at the sad relation of the barbarity exercised on Lithgow, and his
being sentenced to the flames; fell into into such agonies, that he could not
sleep the whole night. Getting up next morning by day break, he went, unknown
to any one, to an English factor; and informed him of the conversation which
had passed between the governor and his master. The servant being gone, the
Englishman sent for the other six factors, his countrymen, residing in Malaga;
when, consulting together, they resolved to write to Madrid, to Sir -- Aston,
the English ambassador; who presenting a memorial to the Spanish king and
council, Lithgow was released and put on board Sir Robert Mansel's fleet, then
lying at anchor before Malaga. The poor victim was so vastly weak, that they
were forced to carry him, upon blankets. The admiral afterward demanded
Lithgow's books, papers, money, etc. but no other answer was returned him than
mere compliments. See Lithgow's Travels; and Limbroch's History of the
Inquisition, translated by the Rev. Mr. Samuel Chandler, vol. II. page 223.
London, 1731, 4to.


Gonsalvius gives us an example, which shows that vice is not the object of the
Inquisitors hatred. -- A poor inhabitant of Seville, who supported his family
by his daily labor, had the mortification to have his wife kept forcibly from
him by a priest, which yet was winked at by the Inquisition, and every other
tribunal. As this man was one day discoursing concerning purgatory, with some
of his acquaintance, he spoke in such terms, as though he intended only to
disburden his mind: As to myself, (says he) I have my purgatory in this world,
by my wife's being thus withheld from me by the priest. These words being told
to the ecclesiastic, he impeached the husband to the Inquisition, as having
advanced some errors relating to the doctrine of purgatory. Hereupon the
Inquisitors, without once reproaching the priest for his crime, seized the
husband. The latter then was imprisoned two years; and, after walking in the
procession at the first Auto da Fe, and being sentenced to wear, during three
years, the san benito, in a private prison; at the expiration of that term, he
was ordered, either to be continued in prison, or to be released, as the
Inquisitors should see fitting. These carried their cruelties to such lengths,
as to confiscate, to the use of their tribunal, the little that this unhappy
creature had in the world, and permitted the priest to still enjoy his wife;
the holy lecher being passionately fond of her.

The various instances given above, all of them compiled from authors of
approved veracity, sufficiently show, that the Inquisition is the most
iniquitous, and most inhuman tribunal on earth.

COPY OF THE POPE's BULL, Published against the FREE-MASONS, and taken notice
of in page 35.
THE court of Rome, instigated by the impositions of evil-minded persons,
poured out its bulls and decrees against the Masons, whereby they were
condemned in a more severe and tyrannical manner, (the peculiar characteristic
of the Inquisition,) than they had ever yet undergone in any nation, and that
without the least foundation for such proceedings, his holiness being utterly
ignorant of what was so zealously to be interdicted. The words of the said bull
will best depicture the impure fountain they sprang from.

The condemnation of the society or conventicles De Liberi Muratori, or of the
Free-Masons, under the penalty of ipso facto excommunication, the absolution
from which is reserved to the Pope alone, except at the point of death.
Clement Bishop, servant of the servants of God, to all the faithful of Christ,
health, and apostolical benediction.
PLACED (unworthy as we are) by the disposal of the Divine clemeney, in the
eminent watchtower of the apostleship, we are ever solicitously intent,
agreeable to the trust of the pastoral providence reposed in us, by obstructing
the passages of error and vice, to preserve more especially the integrity of
orthodox religion, and to repel, in these difficult times, all dangers of
trouble from the whole catholic world.

It has come to our knowledge, even from public report, that certain societies,
companies, meetings, assemblies, clubs, or conventicles, commonly called De
Liberi Muratori, or Free-Masons, or by whatsoever other name the same in
different languages are distinguished, spread far and wide, and are every day
increasing; in which persons, of whatever religion or sect, contented with a
kind of an affected show of natural honesty, confederate together in a close
and inscrutable bond, according to laws and orders agreed upon between them;
which likewise, with private ceremonies, they enjoin and bind themselves, as
well by strict oath taken on the bible, as by the imprecation of heavy
punishments, to preserve with inviolable secrecy.

We therefore revolving in our mind the great mischiefs which generally accrue
from this kind of societies or conventicles, not only to the temporal
tranquillity of the state, but to the spiritual health of souls: and that
therefore they are neither consistent with civil nor canonical sanctions; since
we are taught by the divine word to watch, like a faithful servant, night and
day, lest this sort of men break as thieves into the house, and like foxes
endeavor to root up the vineyard; lest they should prevert the hearts of the
simple, and privily shoot at the innocent: that we might stop up the broad way,
which from thence would be laid open for the perpetration of their wickedness
with impunity, and for other just and reasonable causes to us known, have by
the advice of some of our venerable brethren of the Roman church, the
cardinals, and of our own mere motion, and from our certain knowledge and
mature deliberation, by the plenitude of the apostolical power, appointed and
decreed to be condemned, and prohibited, and by this our present ever-valid
constitution, we do condemn and prohibit the same societies, companies,
meetings, assemblies, clubs or conventicles, De Liberi Muratori, or
Free-Masons, or by whatever other name they are distinguished.

Wherefore all and singular the faithful in Christ, of whatever state, decree,
condition, order, dignity, and pre-eminence, whether laity or clergy, as well
seculars as regulars, worthy all of express mention and enumeration, we
strictly, and in virtue of holy obedience, command that no one, under any
pretext or color, dare or presume the aforesaid societies De Liberi Muratori
or Free-Masons, or by whatever other manner distinguished, to enter into,
promote, favor, admit, or conceal in his or their houses, or elsewhere, or be
admitted members of, or be present with the same, or be any wise aiding and
assisting toward their meetings in any place; or to administer any thing to
them, or in any manner publicly or privately, directly or ind^^ectly, by
themselves or others, afford them counsel, help, or favor; or advise, induce,
provoke, or persuade others to be admitted into, joined, or be present with
this kind of societies, or in any manner aid and promote them: but that they
ought by all means to abstain from the said societies, companies, meetings,
assemblies, clubs, or conventicles, under the penalty of all that act contrary
thereto incurring excommunication ipso facto, without any other declaration;
from which no one can obtain the benefit of absolution from any other but us,
or the Roman pontiff for the time being, except at the point of death.

We will moreover and command, That as well bishops and superior prelates, and
other ordinaries of particular places, as the Inquisitors of heretical pravity
universally deputed, of what state, degree, condition, order, dignity, or
pre-eminence so-ever, proceed and inquire, and restrain and coerce the same, as
vehemently suspected of heresy, with condign punishment: for to them and each
of them, we hereby give and impart free power of proceeding, inquiring against,
and of coercing and restraining with condign punishments, the fame
transgressors, and of calling in, if it shall be necessary, the help of the
secular arm: and we will that printed copies of these presents, signed by some
notary public, and confirmed by the seal of some person of ecclesiastical
dignity, shall be of the same authority as original letters would be, if they
were shown and exhibited. Let no one therefore infringe, or by rash attempt
contradict this page of our declaration, damnation, command, prohibition, and
interdict: but if any one shall presume to attempt this, let him know that he
will incur the indignation of Almighty God, and of the blessed apostles Peter
and Paul.

Dated from Rome at St. Mary's the greater, in the year of the incarnation of
our Lord 1738, the fourth of the calends of May, (28th of April, N. S.) in the
8th of our Pontificate. A. Card. Vice-Datary. C. Amatus, Vice-Secretary. Visa
de Curia N. Antonellus.

The place of the leaden seal. I. B. Eugenius,
Pegistered in the secretary of the briefs office, etc. In the abovementioned
day, month, and year, the said condemnation was fixed up and published at the
gates of the palace of the sacred office of the prince of the apostles, and in
other usual and accustomed places of the city, by me Peter Romolatius, cursuor
of the most holy Inquisition.



A CHOICE COLLECTION OF MASONIC SONGS.
INVOCATION TO MASONRY.
BY THOMAS DERMODY.
THOU fairest type, of excellence divine,
Whose social links, the race of man combine,
Whose awful mandates, coward vice control,
And breathe, through nature, one enlightened soul;
From thy mild sway, benignant virtues rise,
Pour on the heart, and emulate the skies;
From thy sage voice sublime instruction springs,
While knowledge waves her many colored wings,
And star-eye'd truth and conscience, holy rest,
Enthrone true feeling in the glowing breast.
Then deign, the labor of thy sons, to guide,
Over each full line, in nervous sense preside,
Adorn each verse, each manly thought inflame,
And what we gain from GENIUS give to FAME.
THE ESSENCE OF MASONRY.
NOT the fictions of Greece, not the dreams of old Rome,
Shall with visions mislead, or with meteors consume;
No Pegasus' wings my short soarings misguide,
Nor raptures false lull me on Helicon's side;
All clouds now dissolve, from the east beams the day,
Truth rises in glory and wakens the lay;
The eagle-ey'd muse sees the light from the grove,
With a song to Free-masons of friendship and love.
Inspired by the theme the divinity flies,
And throned on a rainbow before her arise,
Past, present, and future, in splendid array,
In masonic succession their treasures display;
She views murdered merit by ruffian-hand fall,
And the grave gives its dead up at fellowships call,
While the craft by their badges their innocence prove,
And the song of free-masons is friendship and love.
From those ages remote see the muse spreads her way,
To join in the glory the present display;
In freedom and friendship she sees the true band
With virtue and splendor illumine the land;
Religion's pure beams break the vapors of night,
And from darkness mysterious the word gives the light,
While lodges below, as the choirs from above,
Join the song of free-masons in friendship and love,
That the future might keep what the present bestows,
In rapture prophetic the cherub arose;
As he sung through the skies angels echoed the sound,
And the winds bore the notes to the regions around.
His sentiments then let our song still retain.
'Twas that masons may ever true luster maintain,
And 'till time be no more our strict union should prove,
That the end of free-masonry's friendship and love.
MASONIC VERSES.
LET history boast how Rome conquered foreign nations,
How she ^iumph'd over the Gauls, Carthaginians and Grecians;
Of far more noble triumphs we masons sure can boast,
For we triumph over discord, and all his impious host.
While Pitites and Foxites about the French are warning,
Stun the senate of Great Britain with their politics and jarring;
We masons unconcerned their disputes and bustle view,
Yet none to their country so loyal or so true.
No more let superstition our order rashly blame,
Because we don't to the would our my stie rites proclaim,
For some secrets I Will reveal, judge by them of all the rest,
Which forever shall lie hid in a masons faithful breast.
Good will for all mankind we profess without reserve,
The rigid rules of justice strictly bound to observe;
By adverse fortune pressed, give aid to one another,
And glory in the name and the title of a brother.
Should fate c'en force a mason to seek a foreign land,
Free-masonry receives him with a parent's bounteous hand;
Caressed by all her sons he forgets his former woe,
And thanks kind heaven that fixed such an order here below.
No friendship on this earth with our friendship can compare,
It Is true, disinterested, it is constant and sincere;
From our meetings all disputes and contentions we remove,
For the motto of a mason is -- Unity and Love.
Our principles are tolerant, religion's never our theme,
Both protestant and catholic to us are all the fame;
We respect an honest man let his sect be what it will,
And this precept of our saint "love each other" we fulfill.
TUNE -- IN INFANCY.
HAIL, masonry, thou sacred art
Of origin divine!
Kind partner of each social heart,
And favorite of the nine!
By thee we are taught, our acts to square,
To measure life's short span;
And each infirmity to bear
That Is incident to man.
Chorus. By thee, etc.
Though envy's tongue should blast thy fame,
And ignorance may sneer,
Yet still thy ancient honored name
Is to each brother dear:
Then strike the blow, to charge prepare
In this we all agree,
May freedom be each mason's care,
And every mason free.
Chorus. Then strike the blow, etc.
COMPOSED BY BROTHER ANCELL.
I.
WHAT joys do the craft on each mason bestow,
(Such rapturous pleasures as Cowan never know)
All equally share the delightful repast,
Which time cannot change but eternal will last.
CHORUS.
Hark away! hark away! hark away is the word!
To the lodge let us repair;
Where echo! where echo! where harmony echoes,
And b^nishes care.
II.
Behold as the sun in the cast does arise,
Our master the workmen and birelings employs;
The west and the south their assistance impart,
TO embellish the fabric and strengthen the art.
III.
With level and rule we our business prepare,
We work by the compass, and act on the square;
No murmurs are heard, and no discords are known,
Tranquillity reigns, and ambition has flown.
IV.
Let the world make a scoff, we their sneering despise,
Since they know not how much we free-masonry prize;
In brotherly love let the time social pass,
And mirth and festivity garnish each glass.
V.
Then charge, my dear brethren, a bumper all round,
To the brim fill each glass, let no daylight be found;
Here Is a health to all masons who honors the name,
By walking upright, and observing the fame.
CHORUS.
Hark away! hark away! hark away is the word!
Let us sing and rejoice;
Whilst echo! sweet echo! whilst echo of masonry
Sounds from each voice.
SONG.
I.
SINCE we are met, let us merry be
CHORUS.
Tol, lol, lol.
And be happy as wer'e free; Tol.
In social chat together share, Tol,
All the moments we can spare. Tol,
II.
Hand in hand we ever live,
Enjoying what the world cannot give;
Observing the sublime degree
That made us happy -- made us free.
III.
Charge your glasses give a toast,
Though Cowans sneer we'll this boast,
That we are joined in unity,
Ever happy -- ever free.
SONG.
A MASON's life's the life for me,
With joy we meet each other,
We pass our time with mirth and glee,
And hall each friendly brother:
In lodge no party feuds are seen,
But careful we in this agree,
To banish care or spleen.
The master's call, we one and all,
With pleasure soon obey;
With heart and hand we ready stand,
Our duty still to pay.
But when the glass goes round,
Then mirth and glee abound,
We'er all happy to a man;
We laugh a little, we drink a little,
We work a little, we play a little,
CHORUS.
We laugh, etc.
We sing a little, are merry a little,
And swig the flowing can,
And swig etc.
See in the east the master stands,
The wardens south and west, fir,
Both ready to obey command,
Find work or give us rest, fir,
The signal given, we all prepare,
With one accord obey the word,
To work by rule or square:
Or if they please, the ladder raise,
Or plumb the level line.
Thus we employ our time with joy,
Attending every sign;
But when the glass goes round,
Then mirth and glee abound,
We'er all happy to a man;
We laugh a little, and drink a little,
We work a little, and play a little,
We sing a little; are merry a little,
And swig the flowing can.
The Almighty said, "let there be light:"
Effulgent rays appearing,
Dispelled the gloom, the glory bright
To this new world was cheering:
But unto masonry alone,
Another light, so clear and bright,
In mystic rays then shone;
From east to west it spread so fast,
And faith and hope unfurled,
And brought us thee, sweet charity,
Thou darling of the world.
Then while the toast goes round,
Let mirth and glee abound,
Let Us be happy to a man;
We'll laugh a little, and drink a little,
We'll work a little, and play a little,
We'll sing a little, be merry a little,
And swig the flowing can.
THE DEPUTY GRAND MASTER's SONG.
I.
ON, on, my dear brethren, pursue your great lecture,
Refine on the precepts of old architecture
High honor to masons the craft daily brings
To those brothers of princes and fellows of kings.
II.
We drove the rude Vandals and Goths off the stage,
Reviving the art of Augustus' famed age;
And Vespasian destroyed the vast temple in vain
Since so many now rise, where our principles reign.
III.
The noble five orders composed with such art,
Will amaze the fixed eye, and engage the whole heart;
Proportion's sweet harmony gracing the whole,
Gives our work like the glorious creation, a soul.
IV.
Then master and brethren, preserve your great name,
This lodge so majestic will purchase your fame;
Revered it shall stand, till all nature expire,
And its glories never fade till the world is on sire.
V.
See, see, behold what rewards all our toil,
Invigorates genius, and bids labor smile;
To our noble grand master let bumpers be crowned
To all masons a bumper, so let it go round.
VI.
Again my loved brethren, again let it pass:
Our ancient firm union cements with the glass;
And all the contention among masons shall be,
Who better can work, or who better agree.
THE GRAND WARDEN's SONG.
BY BROTHER OATS.
I.
LET masonry be now my theme,
Throughout the globe to spread its fame,
And celebrate each worthy brother's name:
Your praise shall to the skies resound,
In lasting happiness abound,
And with sweet union all your noble deeds be crowned.
And with sweet union, etc.
CHORUS.
Sing then my muse, masonic glory,
Your names are so revered in story
That all the admiring world do now adore ye!
II.
Let harmony divine inspire
Your souls with love and generous sire,
To copy well wise Solomon your sire:
Knowledge sublime shall fill each heart,
Geometry its rules impart;
While wisdom, strength and beauty, crown the glorious art.
While wisdom, etc.
CHORUS. -- Sing then, my muse, etc.
III. (ALL CHARGED.)
Let our grandmaster's health go round,
In swelling cups all cares be drowned,
And hearts united through the craft be found.
May everlasting scenes of joy
His peaceful hours of bliss employ,
Which time's all-conq'ring hand shall never, shall
never destroy.
Which time's all conquering hand, etc.
CHORUS. -- Sing then my muse, etc.
IV.
My brethren, thus all cares resign,
Let all hearts glow with thoughts divine,
And venerate our founder's awful shrine.
Our annual tribute thus we'll pay,
That late posterity shall say
We Have crowned with joy this glorious happy, happy day.
all sing. CHORUS.
Sing then, my muse, masonic glory,
Your names are so revered in story,
That all the admiring world do now adore ye!
THE MASTER's SONG.
I.
WE sing of mason's ancient fame!
Lo eighty thousand craftsmen rise,
Under their masters of great name,
More than three thousand just and wise;
Employed by Solomon the sire,
And general master mason too,
As Hiram was in stately Tire,
Like Salem built by masons true.
II.
The royal art was then divine,
The craftsmen counseled from above,
The temple was the grand design,
The wondering world did all approve;
Ingenious men from every place,
Came to survey the glorious pile;
And when returned began to trace
And imitate its lofty style.
III.
At length the Grecians came to know
Geometry and learned the art,
Pythagoras was raised to show,
And glorious Euclid to impart.
The great Archimedes appeared,
And Carthaginian masters bright;
Till Roman citizens uprear'd
The art with wisdom and delight.
IV.
But when proud Asia had been quelled,
And Greece an Egypt overcome,
In architecture they excelled,
And brought the learning all to Rome:
Where rise Vitruvius, warden prime
Of architects, the art improved
In great Augustus' peaceful time,
When arts and artists were beloved.
V.
They brought their knowledge from the east,
And as they made the nations yield
Diffused it through the north and west,
And taught the world the art to build.
Witness their citadels and towers,
Where policy and safety join,
Their temples, palaces, and bowers,
That spoke the mason's grand design.
VI.
Thus mighty eastern kings, and some
Of Abraham's race, and monarchs good,
Of Egypt, Syria, Greece and Rome,
True architecture understood.
No wonder then if masons join
To celebrate those mason-kings
With solemn note and flowing wine,
Whilst every brother jointly sings.
CHORUS.
Who can unfold the royal art,
Or show its secrets in a song,
They Are safely kept in masons' heart,
And to the ancient lodge belong.
THE WARDEN's SONG.
FROM henceforth ever sing
The craftsman and the king;
With poetry and music sweet
Resound their harmony complete:
And with geometry in skilful hand,
Due homage pay,
Without delay,
To our grand master, royal Cumberland!
He rules the freeborn sons of art
By love and friendship, hand and heart.
CHORUS.
Who can rehearse the praise
In soft poetic lays,
Or solid prose, of masons true,
Whose art transcends the common view?
Their secrets never to strangers yet exposed,
Preserved shall be
By masons free,
And only to the ancient lodge disclosed;
Because secured in masons heart,
By brethren of the royal art.
THE TREASURER'S SONG.
1.
GRANT me, kind heaven, what I request;
In masonry let me be blessed;
Direct me to that happy place
Where friendship smiles in every face:
Where freedom and sweet innocence
Enlarge the mind, and cheer the sense.
II.
Where sceptered reason from her throne
Surveys the lodge, and makes us one;
And harmony's delightful sway
Forever sheds ambrosial day;
Where we blessed Eden's pleasure taste,
Whilst balmy joys are our repast.
III.
Our lodge the social virtues grace,
And wisdom's rules we fondly trace;
Whole nature open to our view,
Points out the path we should pursue.
Let us subsist in lasting peace,
And may our happiness increase.
IV.
No prying eye can view us here;
No fool or knave disturb our cheer;
Our well formed laws set mankind free,
And give relief to misery:
The poor oppressed with woe and grief,
Gain from masonic hands relief.
THE SECRETARY's SONG.
I.
YE brethren of the ancient craft,
Ye favorite sons of fame:
Let bumpers cheerfully be quaff'd
To each good mason's name.
Happy, long happy, may he be,
Who loves and honors masonry.
With a fa, la, la, etc.
II.
In vain would D'Anvers with his wit,
Our slow resentment raise;
What he and all mankind have writ,
But celebrates our praise;
His wit his only truth imparts,
That masons have firm faithful hearts.
With a fa, la, la, etc.
III.
Ye virtuous fair, for beauty famed
Your slaves we wish to be;
Let none for charms like yours be named
That loves not masonry;
This maxim D'Anvers proves full well,
That masons never kiss and tell.
With a fa, la, la, etc.
IV.
Free masons! no offenses give,
Let fame your worth declare;
Within your compass wisely live,
And act upon the square;
May peace and friendship ever abound,
And every mason's health go round.
With a fa, la, la, etc.
THE FELLOW CRAFTS SONG.
I.
HALL masonry! thou craft divine!
Glory of earth! from heaven revealed!
Which does with jewels precious shine,
From all but masons eyes concealed:
Thy praises due who can rehearse,
In nervous prose or flowing verse?
II.
As men from brutes distinguished are,
A mason other men excels;
For what is in knowledge choice and rare,
But in his breast securely dwells?
His silent breast and faithful heart
Preserve the secrets of the art.
III.
From scorching heat and piercing cold,
From beasts whose roar the forest rends,
From the assaults of warriors bold,
The masons art mankind defends:
Be to this art due honor paid,
From which mankind receives such aid.
IV.
Ensigns of state that feed our pride,
Distinctions troublesome and vain,
By masons true are laid aside,
Arts freeborn sons such toys disdain:
Ennobled by the name they bear,
Distinguished by the badge they wear.
V.
Sweet fellowship from envy free,
Friendly converse of brotherhood,
The lodges lasting cement be,
Which has for ages firmly stood:
A lodge thus built for ages past
Has lasted and shall ever last.
VI.
Then let us celebrate the praise
Of all who have enriched the art,
Let gratitude our voices raise,
And each true brother bear a part:
Let cheerful strains their fame resound,
And living mason's healths go round.
THE ENTERED APPRENTICE's SONG:
I.
COME, let us prepare,
We brothers that are,
Assembled on merry occasion,
To drink laugh, and sing;
Be he beggar or king,
Here Is a health to an accepted mason.
(ALL CHARGED.)
II.
The world is in pain
Our secrets to gain,
And still let them wonder and gaze on;
Till they are shown the light,
They Will never know the right
Word or sign of an accepted mason.
III.
It Is this and it is that,
They cannot tell what,
Why so many great men of the nation,
Should aprons put on,
To make themselves one
With a free and an accepted mason.
IV.
Great kings, dukes and lords
Have laid by their swords,
Our mystery to put a good grace on;
And never been ashamed
To hear themselves named
With a free and an accepted mason.
V.
Antiquity's pride
We have on our side,
To keep us upright in our station;
There Is naught but what is good
To be understood,
By a free and an accepted mason.
VI.
We Are true and sincere,
And just to the fair
Who will trust us on any occasion:
No mortal can more
The ladies adore,
Than a free and an accepted mason.
VII.
Then join hand in hand
By each brother firm stand,
Let Us be merry, and put a bright face on;
What mortal can boast
So noble a toast
As a free and an accepted mason?
CHORUS.
No mortal can boast
So noble a toast
As a free and an accepted mason.
CALL TO REFRESHMENT.
BY BROTHER STANFIELD.
Tune: -- Contented I am, etc.

GRAVE business being closed, and a call from the fouth,
The bowl of refreshment we drain:
Yet even over our wine we reject servile sloth,
And our rites midst our glasses retain.
My brave boys, etc.
The absent we claim though dispersed round the ball,
The silent and secret our friends,
And one honored guest, at our magical call,
From the grave of concealment ascends.
Immortal the strain, and thrice awful the hand,
That our rites and libations controuls
Like the sons of Olympus, midst thunders we stand,
And with mysteries ennoble our bowls.
What a circle appears, when the border entwines --
How grapple the links to each soul!
It Is the zodiac of friendship embellished with signs,
And illum'd by the star in the pole.
Thu^ cemented by laws, unseen and unknown,
The universe hangs out its frame:
And, thus secretly bound, shall our structure be shown,
Till creation shall be but a name.
SONG.
BY A MEMBER OF NO. 13, LIMERICK.
Addressed to the crast, or entering a lodge.

Tune: -- 'See the conquering here come^^^

BEHOLD you dome uprear'd on high,
Framed by an architect divine,
Whose lofty pillars reach the sky.
Where wisdom, strength, and beauty join:
To form a building, which shall stand
In spite of time's destroying hand.
In it let us to work repair,
While solemn silence reigns around,
Be secrecy each mason's care,
Lest babblers tread on hallowed ground:
While we practice the mystic art,
T'improve the mind and cheer the heart.
Our noble order ever shall brave
Oppressions scourge and envy's sting;
Shall seed the hungry, free the slave,
And make the widow's heart to sing:
To no persuasion ever confined,
It deals its blessing to mankind.
THE ROYAL ARCH.
A new masonic song
BY J. F. STANFIELD.
WHEN orient wisdom beamed screne,
And pillar'd st^^^gth arose --
When beauty tinged the glowing scene,
And faith her mansion chose --
Exulting bands the fabric viewed,
Mysterious powers adored:
And high the triple union stood,
That gave the mystic word.
Pale envy withered at the sight,
And frowning over the pile,
Called murder up from realms of night,
To blast the glorious toil.
With ruffian outrage joined in woe,
They form the league abhorred;
And wounded science felt the blow
That crushed the mystic word.
Concealment from sequestered cave
On sable pinions flew;
And over the sacrilegious grave,
Her veil impervious threw.
The associate band in solemn state,
The awful loss deplored:
And wisdom mourned the ruthless fate,
That whelmed the mystic word.
At length through time's expanded sphere,
Fair science speeds her way;
And warmed by truth's refulgence clear,
Reflects the kindred ray. --
A second fabric's towering height,
Proclaims the sign restored;
From whole foundation brought to light,
Is drawn the mystic word.
To depths obscure, the favored trine,
A dreary course engage --
Till through the arch, the ray divine,
Illum's the sacred page!
From the wide wonders of the blaze,
Our ancient signs restored;
The royal arch alone displays,
The long lost mystic word.
MASONIC SONG.
BY BROTHER BURTON,
For St. John's day, Midsum

I SING of mason's glory,
Renowned through history's pages;
Whose mystic light, resplendent bright
Will shine to latest ages!
Still in amaze,
The world may gaze,
And pore upon our mystery;
They Will never define,
The word nor sign,
Of the freeborn sons of masonry.
We boast each generous virtue,
By which our nature's mended;
The enquiring mind in us will find,
The man and Christian blended!
Hail heaven born art,
That fills the heart
With faith divine, and charity,
We bless the hour,
That gave us power,
To view the light of masonry.
Behold the seat of wisdom,
Adorned by matchless beauty;
See strength supports, our temples courts,
Whilst steady to our duty,
With hearts sincere,
My brethren dear,
We celebrate our patron's day
Whilst friendship's bands
Unite our hands,
In peace, in love, and harmony!
CHORUS, three times.
SONG.
HAIL, masonry divine;
Glory of ages, shine,
Long may thou reign:
Wherever thy longes stand,
May they have great command,
And always grace the land;
Thou art divine!
Great fabrics still arise,
And grace the azure skies,
Vast are thy schemes:
Thy noble orders are
Matchless beyond compare;
No art with thee can share,
Thou art divine!
Hi^am the architect,
Did all the craft direct
How they should build;
Sol'mon great Israel's king,
Did mighty blessings bring,
And left us room to sing,
Hail royal art!
SONG.
I.
ON you who masonry despise,
This counsel I bestow;
Don't ridicule, if you are wise,
A secret you don't know:
Yourselves you banter, but not it;
You show your spleen, but not your wit;
With a fa, la, la, etc.
II.
Inspiring virtue by our rules,
And in ourselves secure;
We have compassion for those fools,
Who think our acts impure:
We know from ignorance proceeds,
Such mean opinion of our deeds:
With a fa, la, la, etc.
III.
If union and sincerity,
Have a pretense to please;
We brothers of free-masonry,
Lay, justly, claim to these;
To state disputes we never give birth;
Our motto, friendship is and mirth;
With a fa, la, la, etc.
SONG.
I.
BY masons art, the aspiring domes,
In stately columns shall arise;
All climates are their native homes,
Their well-judg'd actions reach the skies;
Heroes and kings revere their name,
While poets sing their lasting fame.
II.
Great, noble, generous, good and brave,
Are titles they most justly claim;
Their deeds shall live beyond the grave,
Which those unborn shall loud proclaim;
Time shall their generous acts enrol,
while love and friendship charm the soul.
SONG.
I.
GOD bless the royal band,
Who grace this happy land
With valiant knights:
May the united three
Of the blessed trinity
Cement the unity
Of all great light.
II.
Twelve once were highly loved
But one a Judas proved,
Put out his fire:
May Simon haunt all fools
Who vary from our rules,
May the heads of such tools
Rest high on spires.
III.
Against Turks and Jews we fight,
And in religion's right
We'll breathe our last;
Poor pilgrims begging we
Will our Jerusalem see,
All steps, sir knights, have ye
Gloriously passed.
IV.
Entered, past, raised and arch'^,
And then like princes marched
Through rugged ways;
At length great lights we saw,
And poor old Simon too,
Also the word and law,
Glory and praise.
V.
God in his rainbow gave
Colors which now we have.
Black, red and blue;
These colors emblems are
Of royal love most rare,
We are in soul sincere,
Just, good and true.
VI.
Sir knights clasp hand in hand,
None but knights Templars stand
In circle round;
May we all live in love,
And every comfort prove,
May manna from above
Fall on this ground.
SONG.
I.
WE have no idle prating,
Of either whig or tory;
But each agrees,
To live at ease,
And sing or tell a story.
CHORUS.
Fill to him,
To the brim,
Let it round the table roll;
The divine,
Tells you wine,
Cheers the body and the soul.
II.
We Are always men of pleasure,
Despising pride and party;
While knaves and fools
Prescribe us rules,
We are sincere and hearty.
CHORUS -- Fill to him, etc.
III.
If an accepted mason
Should talk of high or low church;
We'll set him down
A shallow crown,
And understand him no church.
CHORUS -- Fill to him, etc.
IV.
The world is all in darkness,
About us they conjecture;
But little think,
A song and drink,
Succeed the mason's lecture.
CHORUS. -- Fill to him, etc.
V.
The landlord bring a hogshead,
And in the corner place it,
Till it rebound,
With hollow sound,
Each mason here will face it.
CHORUS. -- Fill to him, etc.
SONG.
Tune -- The entered apprentice.

I.
COME, are you prepared,
Your scaffold well reared?
Bring mortar and temper it purely,
It Is all safe I hope,
Well braced with each rope,
Your ledgers and putlocks securely.
II.
Then next your bricks bring,
It is, time to begin,
For the sun with its rays is adorning;
The day's fair and clear,
No rain you need fear,
It Is a charming and lovely fine morning.
III.
Pray where are your tools,
Your line and plumb-rules,
Each man to his work let him stand, boys;
Work solid and sure
Upright and secure,
And your building be sure will be strong, boys.
IV.
Pray make no mistake,
But true your joints break,
And take care that you follow your leaders;
Work, rake, back, and tueth,
And make your work smooth,
And be sure that you fill up your headers.
SONG.
Tune -- On, on, my dear brethren.

I.
THE curious vulgar could never devise,
What social free masons so highly do prize;
No human conjecture no study in schools,
Such fruitless attempts are the actions of fools.
II.
Sublime are our maxims our plan from above,
Old as the creation cemented with love;
To promote all the virtues adorning man's life,
Subduing our passions preventing all strife.
III.
Pursue, my dear brethren, embrace with great care,
A system adapted our actions to square;
Whose origin clearly appears divine,
Observe how its precepts to virtue incline.
IV.
The secrets of nature king Solomon knew,
The names of all trees in the forest that grew;
Architecture his study, free-masons sole guide,
Thus finished his temple, antiquity's pride.
V.
True ancient free-masons our arts did conceal,
Their hearts were sincere and not prone to reveal;
Here Is the widow's son's memory, that mighty great sage,
Who skilfully handled plumb, level, and gage.
VI.
Toast next our grand-master of noble repute,
No brother presuming his laws to dispute;
No discord, no faction, our lodge shall divide,
Here truth, love, and friendship must always abide.
SONG.
I.
AS I at Wheeler's lodge one night,
Kept Bacchus company;
For Bacchus is a mason bright,
And of all lodges free.
II.
Said I great Bacchus is a-dry,
Pray give the god some wine,
Jove in a fury did reply,
October's as divine.
III.
It makes us masons more complete,
Adds to our fancy wings;
Makes us as happy and as great
As mighty lords and kings.
SONG.
Tune -- The merry ton'd horn.

I.
SING to the honors of those,
Who baseness and error oppose,
Who from sages and magi of old.
Have got secrets which none can unfold.
Whilst through life's swift career,
With mirth and good cheer,
We Are ^evealing,
And levelling
The monarch, till he
Says our joys far transcend
What on thrones do attend,
And thinks it a glory like us to be free.
II.
The wisest of kings paved the way,
And his precepts we keep to this day;
The most glorious of temples gave name,
Though no prince did arise,
So great and so wise;
Yet in falling,
Our calling,
Still bore high applause,
And though darkness over run
The face of the sun
We diamond-like, blazed to illuminate the cause.
To him that first the work began, etc.
SONG.
Tune -- Young Damon once the happy Swain.

I.
A MASON's daughter fair and young,
The pride of all the virgin throng,
Th^s to her lover said;
Though Damon, I vour flame approve,
Your actions praise, your person love,
Yet still I Will live a maid.
II.
None shall unite my virgin zone,
But one to whom the secret's known,
Of famed, free-masonry;
In which the great and good combine,
To raise with generous design,
Man to felicity.
III.
The lodge excludes the fop and fool,
The plodding knave and party tool,
That liberty would sell;
The noble, faithful and the brave,
No golden charms can ever deceive,
In slavery to dwell.
IV.
This said, he bowed and went away,
Applied, was made, without delay,
Returned to her again;
The fair one granted his request,
Connubial joys their days have blessed,
And may they ever remain.
To masons and to masons bairns,
And those that lie in masons arms.
COMPOSED BY MR. JAMES BISSET, Stewart of St. Alban's lodge, Birmingham.
THE corner stone, this day we have
By solemn dedication,
Of Stratford lodge -- most firmly laid
On our most grand foundation.
Great Shakespeare's name the pile shall boast,
A name so much renowned, sir,
With flowing bumpers let this toast
Then cheerfully go round, fir.
CHORUS.
May this new lodge for ever stand
To grace masonic story;
The wonder of this happy land,
And raise old Shakespeare's glory.
The mystic arts of masonry,
From east to west extending,
From pole to pole expands apace --
A gift of heaven's own sending.
Blessed light divine, sent from above,
To cheer the discontented,
To make mankind unite in love,
Like masons thus contented.
CHORUS. -- Blessed light, etc.
Great honors have been paid before,
But Shakespeare's name to blazon,
Or give him fame -- none can do more
Than say -- He was a Mason!
Upon the square he firmly stood,
Such lovely structures reared, sir,
That never before, nor since the flood,
Have buildings such appeared sir.
CHORUS. -- Upon the square, etc.
All nature's secrets he explored,
With wonder struck -- she viewed him;
She 'never saw his like before,'
And all her works she showed him.
The child of fancy, even in youth,
In knowledge he surpassed her,
None ever could compare,
But Hiram our grand master.
CHORUS.
May Shakespeare's lodge for ever stand
To grace masonic story,
The wonders of this happy land,
Old Stratford's boast and glory.
SONG.
Tune -- Mulberry Tree.

YE sons of fair science, impatient to learn,
What Is meant by a mason you here may discern;
He strengthens the weak, he gives light to the blind,
And the naked he clothes -- is a friend to mankind.
All shall yield to masonry,
Bend to thee,
Blessed masonry;
Matchless was he who found thee,
And thou, like him, immortal shall be.
He walks on the level of honor and truth,
And spurns the wild passions of folly and youth;
The compass and square all his frailties reprove,
And his ultimate object is brotherly love.
The temple of knowledge he nobly does raise,
Supported by wisdom, and knowledge its base;
When reared and adorned, strength beauty unite,
And he views the fair structure with conscious delight.
With fortitude blessed, he is a stranger to fears,
And governed by prudence, he cautiously steers;
Till temperance shows him the port of content,
And justice unasked gives the sign of consent.
Inspired by his feelings, he bounty imparts,
For charity ranges at large in our hearts;
And an indigent brother relieved from his woes
Feels a pleasure inferior to him who bestows.
Thus a mason I Have drawn, and exposed to your view,
And truth must acknowledge the figure is true;
Then members become, let us be brothers and friends,
There Is a secret remaining will make you amends.
SONG.
Tune -- Attic Fire.

ARISE, and blow thy trumpet, Fame!
Free-masonry aloud proclaim,
To realms and worlds unknown:
Tell them of mighty David's son,
The wise, the m^tchless Solomon,
Prized far above his throne.
The solemn temple's cloud-capt towers,
The aspiring domes are works of ours,
By us those piles were raised:
Then bid mankind with songs advance,
And through the ethereal vast expanse,
Let masonry be praised.
We help the poor in time of need,
The naked cloathe, the hungry feed,
It Is our foundation stone:
We build upon the noblest plan
For friendship rivets man to man
And makes us all one.
Chorus three times. Still louder, Fame! thy trumpet blow;
Let all the distant regions know
Free-masonry is this:
Almighty wisdom gave it birth,
And heaven has fixed it here on earth,
A type of future bliss!
SONG.
Tune -- In infancy, etc.

LET masonry from pole to pole
Her sacred laws expand,
Far as mighty waters roll,
To wash remotest land,
That virtue has not left mankind,
Her social maxims prove;
For stamped upon the mason's mind,
Are unity and love.
Ascending to her native sky,
Let masonry increase;
A glorious pillar raised on high,
Integrity its base:
Peace adds to olive boughs, entwined,
An emblematic dove;
As stamped upon the mason's mind,
Are unity and love.
SONG.
LET drunkards boast the powers of wine,
And reel from side to side;
Let lovers kneel at beauty's shrine,
The sport of female pride:
Be ours the more exalted part,
To celebrate the mason's art,
And spread its praises wide.
To dens and thickets dark and rude,
For shelter beasts repair;
With sticks and straws the feathered brood,
Suspend their nests in air:
And man untaught as wild as these,
Binds up sad huts with boughs of trees
And feeds on wretched fare.
But science dawning in his mind,
The quarry he explores,
Industry and the arts combined,
Improved all nature's stores:
Thus walls were built and houses reared,
No storms or tempest's now are feared,
Within his well-fram'd doors.
When stately palaces arise,
When columns grace the hall,
When towers and spires salute the skies,
We owe to masons all:
Nor buildings only do they give,
But teach men how within to live,
And yield to reason's call.
All party quarrels they detest,
For virtue and the arts,
Lodged in each true free-mason's breast,
Unite and rule their hearts:
By these while mason's square their minds,
The state no better subjects finds
None act more upright parts.
When Bucks and Albions are forgot,
Free-masons will remain;
Mushrooms each day, spring up and rot,
While oaks stretch over the plain:
Let others quarrel, rant, and roar;
Their noisy revels when no more,
Still masonry shall reign.
Our leathern aprons may compare
With garters red and blue;
Princes and kings our brothers are;
While they our rules pursue:
Then drink success and health to all
The craft around this earthly ball,
May brethren still prove true.
SONG.
WHEN earth's foundation first was laid,
By the almighty artist's hand,
'Twas then our perfect, our perfect laws were made,
Established by his strict command:
CHORUS.
Hail mysterious, hail, glorious masonry!
That makes us ever great and free.
In vain mankind, for shelter sought,
In vain, from place to place did roam,
Until from heaven, from heaven he was taught
To plan, to build, and fix his home:
Hail, mysterious, etc.
Ill^strious hence, we date our art
Our works in beauteous piles appear;
Which shall to endless, to endless time impart,
How worthy and how great we are:
Hail, mysterious, etc.
Nor we less famed for every tie,
By which the human thought is bound;
Love, truth, and friendship, and friendship socially,
John all our hearts and hands around:
Hail, mysterious, etc.
Our actions still by virtue blessed,
And to our precepts ever true;
The world admiring, admiring shall request
To learn and our bright paths pursue:
Hail, mysterious, etc.
SONG.
I.
COME, come, my brethren dear,
Now we are assembled here,
Exalt your voices clear,
With harmony;
Here none shall be admitted in,
Were he a lord, a duke or king,
He Is counted but an empty thing,
Except he is free.
CHORUS.
Let every man take glass in hand,
Drink bumpers to our master grand
As long as he can sit or stand
With decency.
II.
By our arts we prove
Emblems of truth and love,
Types given from above,
To those that are free;
There Is never a king that fills a throne,
Will ever be ashamed to own,
Those secrets to the world unknown,
But such as we.
CHORUS: -- Let every man, etc.
III.
Now ladies try your arts,
To gain us men of parts,
Who best can please your hearts,
Because we are free;
Take us, try us and you will find
We Are true, loving, just and kind,
And taught to please a lady's mind,
By masonry.
CHORUS: -- Let every man, etc.
SONG.
Tune -- Jerry Fitzgerald.

I.
KING Solomon, that wise projector,
In masonry took great delight,
And Hiram that great architector,
Whose actions shall ever shine bright:
From the heart of a true honest mason,
There Is none can the secret remove;
Our maxims are justice morality,
Friendship and brotherly-love.
Fa, la, la, etc.
II.
We meet like true friends on the square,
And part on a level that is fair;
Alike we respect king and beggar,
Provided they are just and sincere:
We scorn an ungenerous action,
None can with free-masons compare:
We love for to live within compass,
By rules that are honest and fair.
Fa, la, la, etc.
III.
Success to all accepted masons,
There Is none can their honor pull down;
For ever since the glorious creation,
These brave men were held in renown;
When Adam was king of all nations,
He formed a plan with all speed;
And soon made a sweet habitation
For him and his companion Eve.
Fa, la, la, etc.
IV.
We exclude all talkative fellows,
That will babble and prate past their wit,
They never shall come into our secret,
For they are neither worthy nor fit:
But the persons who are well recommended,
And we find them honest and true;
When our lodge is well ty'ld, we'll prepare 'em,
And like masons our work we'll pursue.
Fa, la, la, etc.
V.
There are some foolish people reject us,
For which they are highly to blame;
They cannot show any objection
Or reason for doing the same:
The art's a divine inspiration,
As all honest men will declare;
So here is to all true hearted brothers,
That live within compass and square.
To all those that live within compass and square.
SONG.
I.
TO the science that virtue and art do maintain,
Let the muse pay her tribute in soft gilding strain;
Those mystic perfections to fond to display,
As far as allowed to poetical lay;
Each profession and class of mankind must agree,
That masons alone are the men who are free,
The men who are free, etc.
II.
Their origin they with great honors can trace,
From the ions of religion and singular grace;
Great Hiram and Solomon, virtue to prove,
Made this the grand secret of friendship and love;
Each profession and class of mankind must agree,
That masons, of all men, are certainly free,
Are certainly free, etc.
III.
The smart and the beau, the coquet and the prude,
The dull and the comic, the heavy and rude,
In vain may enquire, then fret and despise
An art that is still secret against all they devise;
Each profession and class of mankind must agree,
That masons though secret, are loyal and free,
Are loyal and free, etc.
IV.
Commit it to thousands of different mind,
And this golden precept you will certainly find,
Nor interest nor terror can make them reveal,
Without just admittance, what they should conceal;
Each profession and class of mankind must agree,
That masons alone are both secret and free,
Both secret and free, etc.
V.
Fair virtue and friendship, religion and love,
The cement of this noble science still prove;
'Ti^ the lock and the key of the most godly rules,
And not to be trusted to knaves or to fools;
Each profession and class of mankind must agree,
That ancient free-masons are steady and free,
Are steady and free, etc.
VI.
The Israelits distinguished their friends from their foes,
By signs and by characters, then why should those
Of vice and unbelief, be permitted to pry
Into secrets that masons alone should descry?
Each profession and class of mankind must agree,
That masons, of all men, are secret and free,
Are secret and free, etc.
VII.
The dunce he imagines, that science and art
Depend on some compact or magical part;
Thus men are so stupid, to think that the cause
Of our constitution's against divine laws;
Each profession and class of mankind must agree,
That masons are jovial, religious and free,
Religious and free, etc.
VIII.
Push about the brisk bowl, and let it circling pass,
Let each chosen brother lay hold on a glass,
And drink to the heart that will always conceal,
And the tongue that our secrets will never reveal;
Each profession and class of mankind must agree,
That the sons of old Hiram are certainly free,
Are certainly free. etc.
To the innocent and faithful crafts, etc.
SONG.
I.
COME, boys, let us more liquor get,
Since jovially, we are all met
Since jovially, etc.
Here none will disagree;
Let Us drink and sing, and all combine,
In songs to praise that art divine,
In songs, etc.
That Is called free-masonry.
II.
True knowledge seated in the head,
Instructs us masons how to tread,
Instructs us, etc.
The paths we ought to go;
By which we ever friends create,
Drown care and strife and all debate,
Drown care, etc.
Count none but fools our foe.
III.
Here sorrow knows not how to weep,
And watchful grief is lulled asleep,
And watchful, etc.
In our lodge we know no care;
Join hand in hand before we part,
Each brother takes his glass with heart,
Each brother, etc.
And toasts some charming fair.
IV.
Hear me, ye gods, and whilst I live,
Good masons and good liquor give,
Good masons, etc.
Then always happy me;
Likewise a gentle she I crave,
Until I Am summoned to my grave,
But when I Am summoned to my grave,
Adieu my lodge and she,
To each charming fair and faithful she,
That loves the craft of masonry.
SONG.
Tune -- Fairy Elves.

I.
COME follow, follow me,
Ye jovial masons free;
Come follow all the rules,
By Solomon that mason king,
Who honor to the craft did bring,
II.
He Is justly called the wise,
His fame does reach the skies;
He stood upon the square,
And did the temple ^ear,
With true level, plumb and gage,
He proved the wonder of the age.
III.
The mighty mason lords,
Stood firmly to their words,
They l^d it in esteem,
For which they are wise men deemed;
Why should not their example prove,
Our present craft to live in love.
IV.
The royal art and word,
Are kept upon record;
In upright hearts and pure,
While sun and moon endure;
Not written but indented on
The heart of every arch-mason.
V.
And as for Hiram's art,
We need not to impart;
The scripture plainly shows,
From whence his knowledge flows;
His genius was so much refined,
His peer he has not left behind.
VI.
Then let not any one
Forget the widow's son,
But toast his memory,
In glasses charged full high;
And when our proper time is come,
Like brethren part and so go home.
To him that did the temple rear, etc.
SONG.
I.
GUARDIAN genius of our art divine,
Unto thy faithful sons appear;
Cease now over ruins of the east to pine,
And smile in blooming beauties here.
II.
Egypt, Syria, and proud Babylon,
No more thy blissful presence claim;
In England fix thy ever during throne,
Where myriads do confess thy name.
III.
The sciences from eastern regions brought,
Which after shown in Greece and Rome,
Are here in several stately lodges taught,
To which remotest brethren come.
IV.
Behold what strength our rising domes uprears,
Till mixing with the azure skies;
Behold what beauty through the whole appears,
So wifely built they must surprise.
V.
Nor are we only to these arts confined,
Nor we the paths of virtue trace:
By us man's rugged nature is refined,
And polished into love and peace.
To the increase of perpetual friendship,
And peace amongst the ancient craft.
SONG.
Tune -- God save the King.

LET Masons' fame resound
Through all the nations round,
From pole to pole:
See what felicity,
Harmless simplicity,
Like electricity,
Runs through the whole.
Such sweet variety
Never had society
Ever before:
Faith, hope, and charity,
Love and sincerity,
Without temerity,
Charm more and more.
When in the lodge we are met,
And in due order set,
Happy are we:
Our works are glorious,
Deeds meritorious,
Never censorious,
But great and free.
When Folly's sons arise,
Masonry to despise,
Scorn all their spite;
Laugh at their ignorance,
Pity their want of sense,
Never let them give offense,
Firmer unite.
Masons have long been free,
And may they ever be
Great as of yore:
For many ages past,
Masonry has stood fast,
And may its glory last,
Till time's no more.
SONG.
Tune -- Greedy Midas.

I.
WITH harmony and flowing wine,
My brethren all come with me join;
To celebrate this happy day,
And to our master homage pay.
II.
Hail! happy, happy, sacred place,
Where friendship smiles in every face;
And royal art! does fill the-chair,
Adorned with his noble square.
III.
Next sing, my muse, our wardens prais^,
With chorus loud in tuneful lays;
Oh! may these columns never decay,
Until the world dissolves away.
IV.
My brethren all come join with me,
To sing the praise of masonry;
The noble, faithful, and the brave,
Whore arts shall live beyond the grave.
V.
Let envy hide her shameful face,
Before us ancient sons of peace;
Whore golden precepts still remain,
Free from envy, pride or stain.
To Salem's sons, etc.
LIST OF FOREIGN LODGES, WITH THEIR NUMBER.
THE Steward's Lodge, (constituted 1735) Freemasons Tavern, Great Queen ^^reet,
London, 3d W. from October to May, Public Nights, 3d W. in March and December.

Time immemorial.
1 Lodge of Antiquity, Free-mason's Tavern, Great Queen street, London,
(formerly the Goose and Gridiron, St. Paul's churchyard) 1st and 3d W. 2
Somerset house Lodge, Free-masons Tavern, London, 2d, and 4th M.
1721.
3 Lodge of Friendship, Thatched-house Tavern, St. James street, London. 4
British Lodge, Nag's head, Carnaby square, London, 1st, and 3d, Tu. 5
Westminster and Key-stone Lodge, Horn-tav. Palace-yard, London, ^st M.
1722.
6 Lodge of Fortitude, King's-arms tavern, Old Compton-street, London, 1st and
3d W. 7 L. of St. Mary-la-bonne, Cavendish-square Coffee-house, London, 3d M. 8
Ionic Lodge, Kings arms, Brook street, Grosvenor square, London, 3d. W. 9
Dundee-arms L. their private Room, Red-Lionstreet, Wapping, London, 2d and 4th
Th.
1723.
10 Kentish Lodge of Antiquity, Sun-Tavern Chatham, 1st and 3d M. 11 King's
Arms, Wandsworth, Surry. 12 Lodge of Emulation, Paul's-head Tavern,
Cateaton-street, London, 3d M. 13 Fraternal Lodge, Greyhound-tavern, Stock well
street, Greenwich, 4th Tu. 14 Globe Lodge, White-hart-tavern, Holborn, London,
1st Th. 15 Jacob's ladder, New-London-Tavern, Cheapside, London.
1724.
16 White Swan, St. Peter's, Norwich, 1st W. 17 Lodge of Antiquity, Three Tuns,
Portsmouth. 18 Castle L. of Harmony, Horn, Doct. Com. London, 1st and 3d M.
Win. 1st M. Sum. 19 L. of Philanthropy, Black Lion, Stockton upon Tees, Durham,
1st and 3d F.
1725.
20 Globe, Fleet Street, London, 1st and 3d M. 21 Old King's-arms Lodge,
Free-masons Tavern, London, 1st and 3d Tu.
1727.
22 St. Alban's Lodge, Thomas's Tavern, Doverstreet, Picadilly, London, 1st M.
1728.
23 Lodge of Attention, Free-masons Tavern, London, 2d and 4th Th.
1729.
24 St. John's Lodge, at Gibraltar, 1st Tu.
1730.
25 Castle Lodge, White Swan, Mansel-street, Goodman's fields, London 1st Th.
26 The Cornerstone L. Thatched-house Tav. St. James's street, London, 2d M. 27
Britannic Lodge, Star and Garter, Pall Mall, London. 28 Well-disposed Lodge, at
the Cock, Waltham Abbey, 1st Sat. 29 Lodge of Fortitude, Hamburgh arms, East
Smithfield, 2d W.
1731.
30 Sociable Lodge, Horn-tavern, Doctors Commons, 4th M. 31 Medina L. Vine,
West Cowes, S. 1st and 3d Th. W. Th. near full moon. 32 King's arms,
Marybone-street, Picadilly, London, 2d and 4th Tu. 33 Anchor and hope,
Bolton-le-Moor, Lancashire, Th. on or after full moon. 34 Sarum Lodge, a
private room, George court, High Street, Salisbury, 1st and 3d W. 35 St. John's
Lodge, Half Moon, Fore-street, Exeter, 2d and last F.
1733.
36 Royal Cumberland Lodge, Bear-inn, Bath, 1st and 3d F. 37 Lodge of Relief,
Swan, Bury, Lancashire, next Th. to every full moon. 38 St. Paul's Lodge,
Skakespeare tavern, Birmingham, 1st and 3d F. 40 Valenciennes, French Flanders.
1734.
41 Strong Man, East Smithfield, late the Ship, at the Hermitage, 1st T.
1735.
42 Swan, Wolverhamton, 1st and 3d Th. 43 Union Lodge of Freedom and Ease,
Coal-hole, Fountain-court, 'Strand, 2d Tu. 44 Lodge of Industry, Rose and
Crown, Swalwell, Durham, 1st M. and 3d S. 47 Angel, Colchester, 2d and 4th Tu.
1736.
48 King's Head, Norwich, last Th. 50 Constitutional Lodge, Old Crown and
Cushion, Lambeth-Marsh, 4th M. 51 Howard Lodge of Brotherly Love, Arundel,
Sussex, 1st and 3d M.
1737.
52 Parham Lodge, Parham, in Antigua. 53 City Lodge, Ship-tavern,
Leaden-hall-street, London, 2d and 4th Th. 54 Lodge of Felicity, Queen's-arms
Tavern, St. James's-street, London, 2d W. 55 Vacation Lodge, Star and Garter,
Paddington, 4th W. 56 Lodge of Affability, Castle Inn, New Brentford, 1st and
3d W.
1738.
57 Royal Navy Lodge, near Wapping Old-stairs, 1st and 3d W. 58 Royal Chester
Lodge, Feathers-Inn, Bridge-street, Chester. 59 Baker's Lodge, St. John's,
Antigua. 60 Lodge of Peace and Harmony, London-stone Tavern, Cannon-street,
London, 2 M. 61 Union Cross, Halifax, Yorkshire, 2d and 4th W. 62 The Great
Lodge, St. John's, Antigua, 2d and 4th W. 63 Lodge of Fortitude, White Horse,
Hanging Ditch, Manchester, 2d M.
1739.
64 Mother Lodge, at Kingston, Jamacia, No. 1, 1st and 3d Sat. 65 Mother Lodge,
Scotch Arms, at St. Christopher's, Basseterre, 1st Th. 66 Lodge of Sincerity,
Joiners and Felt-makers Arms, Joiner-street, Southwalk, 3 Tu. 67 Lodge of Peace
and Plenty, Red Lion, Horsleyd-Lane, 2d Th. Master's Lodge 5th Th. 68
Grenadiers Lodge, Cleveland-arms, Great Quebec-street, Portman sq. London, 2d
W.
1740.
69 Lodge of Prudence and Peter, Half-Moon-street, Picadilly, 4th Th. The
Master's Lodge, 5th Th. 70 Star in the East, at Calcutta, 1st Lodge of Bengal.
71 St. Michael's Lodge in Barbados.
1742.
72 Lodge of Unity, Porcupine, Great Newport-street, London, 1st Th. 73 Old
Road, St. Christopher's. 74 The Union, Frankfort, in Germany, 2d and 4th Th.
1747.
77 Lodge at St. Eustatius.
1748.
78 Maid's Head, Norwich, 3d Tu. 79 Prince-George Lodge, Plymouth, 1st and 3d
M.
1749.
80 Red Cow, St. Giles's Norwich, 1st Tu. 82 No. 1, Halifax, in Nova Scotia.
1751.
86 Unicorn, St. Mary's Norwich, 2d and 4th W. 87 Lodge of Love and Honor,
Royal Standard, Falmouth, 2d and last Th. 88 Star Tavern upon the Quay, Great
Yarmouth, Norfolk, last W. 89 Lodge of Freedom, Pope's Head, West-street,
Gravesend, 1st and 3d Th.
1752.
91 St. John's Lodge, Bridge-town, Barbados, 4th M. 92 George Lodge, Rose and
Crown, Downing-street, Westminster, 3 Tu. 93 The Stewards Lodge, at
Free-masons' Hall, Madras (revived 1786). 94 St. Peter's Lodge, Barbados, 1st
and 3d Sat.
1753.
95 Old Cumberland Lodge, Red Lion, Old Cavendish-street, Oxford-street,
London, 2d Tu. 96 Foundation Lodge, Free-mason's tavern, Great Queen Street,
London, 2d W. 97 United Lodge of Prudence, Horse Grenadier, near N.
Audley-street, Oxford-street, London, 1st Th. 98 Lily-tavern, Guernsey. 99
Fountain, Brigg's-lane, Norwich, 1st and 3d W. 100 Evangelist's Lodge, at
Monse^ra^t. 101 Legs of Mann, at Prescott, Lancashire, W. next before the full
Moon.
1754.
103 Druid's Lodge of Love and Liberality, London Inn, Redruth, Cornwall, 1st
and 3d Tu. 104 Rose and Crown, Crown-street, Westminster, 2d Tu. 105 Castle and
Lion, St. Peter's Mancroft, Norwich, 1st and 3 M. 106 Scientific Lodge, Eagle
and Child, Cambridge, 2d M. 107 St. Michael's Lodge, City of Scerwin, in the
Duchy of Mecklenburg. 108 St. James's Lodge, Blue Posts, Berwick-street, Soho,
London, 2d Th. 109 No. 2, at St. Eustatius. 110 Lodge des Amiss Reunis, King's
arms, Lower Brook-street. London, 3d M. 111 Lodge of Unanimity, Bull's Head,
Manchester, 1st and 3d Tu.
1755.
112 In the 8th or King's own Regiment of Foot, London, 1st and 3d Tu. 113
Gloucester Lodge, Jacob's Well, Barbican, London, 3d W. 115 Sea Captain Lodge,
Greenhalgh's Coffee-house, Liverpool, every other Th. 117 Lodge of Regularity,
Thatched-house tavern, St. James's-street, London, 4th Wed. 118 Lodge of
Freedom and Ease, Three Jolly Butchers, Old-street-road, London, 4th Wed. 120
Wounded Heart, Norwich, 2d and 4th Tu. 121 Phoenix Lodge, Sunderland, Durham,
1st and 3d W. Genesis 1st W. Master. 122 Grand Lodge, Frederick, at Hanover. 123
Plume of Feathers, Chester, 1st M.
1756.
124 St. David's Lodge, King's Arms-Coffee-house, Brook-street, London, 4th R.
127 Lodge of St. George, Island St. au Croix, in the West Indies. 128
Burlington Lodge, Coach and Horses, Burlington-street, London, 3d Th.
1757.
129 Sea Captain's Lodge, King's Head, High Street, Sunderland, 2d and 4th Th.
131 Shakespeare, Covent Garden, London, 3d Th. 132 St. Mary's Lodge, St. Mary's
Island, Jamaica. 133 White Horse, St. Peter's Mancroft, Norwich, 2d Wed. 134
Lodge of Cordiality, Golden-cross, Chairingcross, London, 1st Wed. 137 Lodge of
Unity, King's Arms, Plymouth, 2d and 4th M. and first Tu. Masters Lodge. 138
Beaufort Lodge, Shakespeare, Princess-street, Bristol, 1st and 3d Tu. 139 Lodge
at Bombay, in the East Indies.
1759.
140 Marine Lodge of Fortitude, Stone-house, near Plymouth, 1st and 3d Tu. 141
The Sun, or Newton-Abbot, Devonshire, 2d Tues.
1760.
142 London Lodge, London Coffee-house, Ludgatehill, 1st and 3d Tu.
1761.
143 Lodge of Industry and Perseverance, at Calcutta, 2d Lodge of Bengal. 144
Restoration Lodge, private Room, at Priestgate, Darlington, last Sat. 145 Union
Lodge, at Crow-lane, in Bermuda, 1st Wed.
1762.
146 St. George's Lodge, Globe Inn, Exeter, 2d and 4th Th. 147 British Union
Lodge, Golden Lion, Ipswich, Suffolk, 1st Tu. 148 Royal Frederick, at
Rotterdam. 149 Royal Lancashire Lodge, at the Hole in the Wall, Colne, in
Lancashire, 1st Th. 150 St. Alban's Lodge, Shakespeare Tavern, Birmingham, 1st
and 3d Tu. 151 Merchant's Lodge, at Quebec. 152 St. Andrew's Lodge, at Quebec.
153 St. Patrick's Lodge, at Quebec. 154 St. Peter's Lodge at Montreal. 155
Select Lodge, at Quebec. 156 In the 52d Regt. of Foot, at Quebec. 157 Royal
Navy Lodge, Three King's Inn, Dea, 1st M. 159 Rodge of Inhabitants, at
Gibraltar. 160 Palladian Lodge, Bowling-Green, Hereford, 1st Tu. 161 Door to
Eternity, at Heldesham, in Germany.
1763.
162 Union Lodge, White Lion, Nottingham 3d Tu. 164 Lodge of Regularity, St.
John's Hall, Black River, Musquito Shore, 1st and 3d Tu. 165 Old Black Bull, at
Richmond, Yorkshire, 1st M. 166 Marquis-of-Granby, Lodge, private Room, old
Elvit, Durham, 1st Tu. 167 Lodge of Amity, St. George's Quay, Bay of Honduras,
1st and 3d Tu. 168 Thorn, at Burnley, in Lancashire, Sat. nearest full Moon.
169 Union Lodge, Angel and Crown, Crispinstreet, Spitalfields, 3d Th. 170 Royal
Mecklenburg Lodge, White Lion Inn, Croydon, Surrey, 1st and 3d Tu.
1764.
171 Royal Lodge, Thatched-house Tavern, St. James's-street, London, 1st F. 172
La Sagesse, St. Andrew, at the Grenadoes. 173 White Lion, at Kendal, in
Westmoreland, 1st W. 174 St. Nicholas Lodge, the Swan, Harwich. 175 White Heart,
Ringwood, Hants. 176 Lodge of Harmony, Red Lion, Feversham, 2d and 4th W. 177
Salutation, Topsham, Devonshire, 2d and 4th W. 178 Lodge of Constitutional
Attachment, Mitre, Tooley-street, London, 1st Th. 179 Philharmonic Lodge, at
the Red Lion Inn, Isle of Ely, Cambridgeshire, 1st M. 180 Caledonian Lodge,
Half Moon Tavern, Grace Church Street, London, 1st M. 181 Lodge of Perpetual
Friendship, Lamb Inn, Bridgewater, Somerset, 1st and 3d M.
1765.
182 Lodge St. John Evan. Two Blue Posts, Charlotte-street, Russel-p.
Rathbone-p. London, 2d W. 183 British Social Lodge, White Bear,
Old-street-square, London, 3d Tu. 184 Tuscan Lodge, King's-head Tavern,
Holborn, 3d Th. 185 Operative Masons, Cannon, Portland Road, Marybone, 1st Tu.
Mast. L. 5th Tu. 186 Gothic Lodge, Foot-Guards Suttling-Horse, Whitehall,
London, 4th M. 187 Old Antelope Inn, Pool, in Dotsetshire, 1st and 3d W. 188
Corinthian Lodge, Cook and Bottle, Upper Brook-street, Grosvenor-square,
London, 3d W. 189 Tontine, Sheffield, in Yorkshire, 2d F. 190 At Allost, in
Flanders. 191 St. George's Lodge, White Lion, near Berner-street,
Oxford-street, London, 1st M. 192 Black Horse, Tombland, Norwich, last F. 193
R. Edwin Lodge, Angel, Bury-St. Edmunds, M. on or preceding full Moon. 194 St.
Luke's Lodge, Don Saltero's Coffee-house, Chelsea, 1st Tu. 196 Lodge of Perfect
Friendship, White Heart Inn and Tav. Bath, 2d and 4th Tu. 197 At St. Hilary, in
Jersey. 198 Swan, at Warrington, in Lancashire, last M. 199 Lodge of Perfect
Unanimity, at Madras, No. 1, Coast of Coromandel (revived 1^86). 200 Lodge No.
1 Bencoolen. 201 Tortola and Beef Island, 1st and 3d Wed.
1766
202 Lodge of Unanimity, Black Bull Inn, Wake-field Yorkshire. 203 King's-arms
Punch house, Shad Thames, 1st M. 204 English Lodge at Bourdeaux (have met since
the Year 1732). 205 Bedford Lodge, Freemason's Tavern, Great Queen Street,
London, 1st W. 206 Patriotic Lodge, Greyhound, Croydon, Surry, Th. after every
full Moon. 207 Star Lodge, Coach and Horses Inn, Northgate-street, Chester, 3d
Thursday. 208 St. Nicholas' Lodge, private Room, Newcastle-upon-Tyne. 209 Sion
Lodge, private Room, North Shields, Northumberland, 2d Tu. 210 Lodge of True
Friendship, Seven Stars, Bromley, Middlesex, 1st Tu.
1767.
211 Angel, Upper-Ground, Christ Church, Southwark, 3d Tu. 212 Lodge of
Integrity, Bull's Head Inn, Manchester, 1st M. 213 Union Lodge, Rising Sun,
Castle Ditch, Bristol. 214 At Grenoble, in France. 215 Lodge of Morality,
King's Head, Old Compton street, Soho, London, 2d Th. 216 Three Lions,
Marborough, in Hessia. 217 Lodge of Honor and Generosity, Buffalo Tavern,
Bloomsbury, 3d Th. 218 Lodge of Union, Three Jolly Hatters, Bermondley street,
London, 3d W. 219 Royal York of Friendship at Berlin, Middle Mark of
Brandenburgh. 220 British Union, Rotterdam. 221 St. John's Lodge, Long Room,
Hampstead, 1st Th. 222 Three Pillars, Rotterdam. 224 Lodge of Amity, White
Horse, Preston Lane, London, 1st and 3d Th. in Winter, 1st Th. in Summer. 225
Lodge of Amity, private Room, Canton, in China. 226 All souls Lodge, Tiverton,
in Devonshire. 227 Lodge Friendship, Angel, Illford, Essex, Mon. nearest full
Moon, Mich. to Lady Day.
1768.
228 Lodge of Concord, White Lion, High Street, Bloomibury, 3d Tu. 229 Mona
Lodge, King's Head, at Holyhead, Anglesca, N. Wales, every 3d F. 230 La
Victoire, City of Rotterdam, in Holland. 231 Lodge of Sincerity, Jama^ca House,
Bermondsey, 2d Tu. Master's L. 5th M. 232 Caveac Lodge, Angel, Hammersmith, 1st
Tu. 233 In the 24th Regiment of Foot. 234 Constant Union, the City of Ghent, in
Flanders. 235 Godolphin Lodge, St. Mary's Island, Scilly. 236 Manchester Lodge,
Nott's Coffee House, Butcher Row, Temple bar, London, 1st W. 237 Lodge of
Perfect Union, in his Sicilian Majesty's Reg. of Foot, Naples. 238 L'Esperance,
Thatched House Tavern, St. James's street, London. 239 Queen Charlotte's Lodge,
Coachmaker's Arms, Hosier Lane, W. Smithfield, London, 2d Th.
1769.
240 Sun Lodge, in the City of Flushing in the Province of Zealand. 241 Lodge
of Hope, Crown, Stourbridge, Worcestershire. 242 Lodge of Unity, K. Henry's
Head, Red Lion street Whitechapel, 4th M. 243 Royal George Lodge, at Newton
Abbot. 244 Beaufort Lodge, at Swansea. 245 Well chosen Lodge, at Naples. 246
Lodge of Virtue, White Lion, Market place, Bath, 1st and 3d M. 247 Inflexible
Lodge, White Heart, Mitcham, Surrey, W. nearest full M. 248 Lodge of
Hospitality, Bush Tavern, Corn street, Bristol, 2d and 4th W. 249 St. Peter's
Lodge, King's Head, Walworth, 3d M. 250 No. 1, at Sweden. 251 No. 2, at ditto.
252 No. 3, at ditto. 253 Golden Lion, at Neston, Cheshire, 1st Friday. 254
Lodge of Sincerity, at the Peace and Fame, Plymouth Dock, 2d and 4th Monday.
255 Lodge of St. John, Fleece Tavern, Manchester, last M.
1770.
256 Lodge of Perfect Harmony, at Mons, in the Austrian Netherlands. 257 Lodge
of Friendship, Bunch of Grapes, Limehouse Hole, 2d and 4th Wed. 258 Lodge of
Prosperity, Globe Tavern, St. Savior's Church Yard, Southwark 2d W. 259 St.
Charles de la Concord, in the City of Brunswick. 260 Lodge of Fortitude and
Perseverance, Fox, Epsom, Thursday nearest full Moon. 261 White Ha^t, Christ
Church, Hants. 262 Lodge of Concord, private Room, Barnard Castle, Durham, 1 st
Th.
1771.
263 Jerusalem Lodge, Crown Tavern, Clerkenwell-green, London, 1 st and 3d W.
Mast. L. 5th W. 264 Lodge of Industry, Ben Johnson's Head, Shoelane, London, 2d
Thurs. 265 Lodge of Perfect Union, at Leghorn. 266 Lodge of Sincere Brotherly
Love, at ditto. 267 Lodge of Perfect Union, at St. Petersburgh. 268 Lodge of
Friendship, Prince George, Forestreet, Plymouth Dock, 1 st and 3d Wed. l. F.
Mast. L. 269 Junior Lodge, Kingston, No. 2, in Jamaica. 270 Harmony Lodge,
Kingston, No. 3, in ditto. 271 St. James's Lodge, Montego Bay, No. 4, in ditto.
272 Union Lodge, St. James's Parish, No. 5, in ditto. 273 Lodge of Harmony,
Blue Bell, Carlisle, Cumberland, 3d Wed.
1772.
274 Rising Sun Lodge, at Fort Marlborough in the E. Indies. 275 Lodge of
Vigilance, Island of Grenada. 276 Lodge of Discretion, ditto. 277 Torbay Lodge,
Crown and Anchor, at Paignton, in Devon. 278 Union Lodge, at St. Eustatius, in
the West Indies. 279 Lodge of Candor, at Strasbourg. 280 Lodge of Friendship,
Shipwright's Arms, Deptford Green, 2d Thurs. 281 Lodge at Speight's Town, in
Barbados. 282 Lodge of Concord, at Antigua. 283 Lodge of the Three Grand
Principles, King's Head Tavern, Islington. 284 Royal Edmund Lodge, at Bury St.
Edmunds, Wed. preceding, or on full Moon. 285 Union Lodge, at Venice. 286 Lodge
of Verona. 287 Lodge of Liberty, Half Moon, West Smithfield, 1 st Th. 288 Lodge
of Unanimity, at Calcutta, 3d Lodge of Bengal.
1773.
289 Lodge at Detroit, in Canada. 290 Apollo Lodge, at York. 291 Lodge of
Jehosaphat, Rummer Tavern, Bristol, 1 st and 3d Wed. 292 Anchor and Hope,
Calcutta, 6th Lodge of Bengal. 293 Lodge of Humility with Fortitude, Calcutta,
5th Lodge of Bengal. 295 Lodge of Union, private Room, Hillgate, Town of
Gateshead, Dorham. 298 Lodge Frederick, at Cassel, in Germany. 299 Lodge of
Good Friends, at Rousseau, in Dominica.
1774.
300 Lodge of Liberty and Sincerity, Crown Inn, Bridgewater, Somerset, 2d and
4th Mond. 301 Lodge of Prudence, Boot and Shoe, Leigh, in Lancashire, Wed. next
full moon. 303 Lodge of the Nine Muses, No 1 at Petersburgh, in Russia. 304
Lodge of the muse Urania, No 2, ditto. 305 Lodge of Bellona, No. 3, ditto. 306
Lodge of Mars, No. 4, at Yassy, ditto. 307 Lodge of the Muse Clio, No 5, at
Moscow, ditto. 308 St. Bede's Lodge, Private room, Morpeth, Northumberland, 2d
and 4th Mon. 309 Lodge of Harmony, at Guernsey.
1775.
310 Durnovarian Lodge, Royal Oak, Dorchester, Dorset. 311 Helvetic Union
Lodge, Ship, Leadenhall street, London. 312 Sun and Sector, Workington, in
Cumberland, 1 st M. 313 St. Jean de Nouvelle Esperance, in Turin. 314 True and
faithful Lodge, White Bear, West Malling, in Kent, last Monday. 316 Lodge of
true Friendship, with the 3d Brigade, 4th Lodge of Bengal. 317 Green Island
Lodge, at Green Island, No. 8 in Jamaica. 318 Lodge of Lucca, Parish of
Hanover, No 9, in Jamaica. 319 Union Lodge, at Savannah la Mar, No 11, ditto.
320 Union Lodge, at Detroit, in Canada.
1776.
321 St. Andrew's Lodge, Robin Hood, Charles-street, St. James's, London, 4th
M. 322 Royal York Lodge of Perseverance, Coldstream Reg. of Guards, London, 1
st F. 323 Lodge of Concord, at the Guildhall, Southampton, 1 st F. Sum. 1 st
and 3d F. Winter. 324 Royal Oak Lodge, at the Royal Oak Rippon, Yorkshite, last
Sat. Sum. 2d and last Sat. Winter. 325 Lodge of honor, Bell, York street,
Westminster, 1 st Tues. 326 Industrious Lodge, at the King's Head
Inn-Canterbury, 1 st and 3d Thurs. 328 King of Prussia, Penrith, in Cumberland,
2d W. 329 Lodge of United Friendship, Falcon tavern, Grave^end, 2d and 4th Th.
1777.
330 Lodge of the Nine Muses, Thatched-house Tavern, St. James's, Street,
London, 3d Mon. 331 Union Lodge, Golden Lion, Thursday Market, York, 1 st and
3d M. 332 Social Lodge, White Heart, Bocking, Essex, Mon. on or preceding full
M. 333 Gnoll Lodge, Ship and Castle, Neath, Glamorganshire, 1 st and 3d Tu. 334
Lodge in the Island of Nevis. 335 In the 6th, or Inniskilling Regiment of
Dragoons, London. 336 Impregnable Lodge, New Rose Inn, Sandwich, 1 st and 3d
Tu.
1778.
337 Lodge at Messina, in Sicily.
1779.
338 Northumberland Lodge, Private Room, Alnwick, Northumberland, 2d Monday.
339 Lodge of Independence, Vine Tavern, Broad street, Ratcliff, 3d Tu. 340
Pilgrim Lodge, Free-masons Tavern, Great Queen street, London, last W. 341
Lodge of Fortitude, Bell Inn, Maidstone, Kent, Th. nearest full Moon.
1780.
342 Lodge of St. George, in the first Regiment of Dragoon Guards, London, 1 st
and 3d Th. 343 St. Hild's Lodge, private room, S. Shields, Durham, 2d and 4th
W. 344 Merchant's Lodge, Star and Garter Tavern, Liverpool, 1 st and 3d Th. 345
Lodge at Libeau, in Courland. 346 Lodge at Naples. 347 St. Michael's Lodge,
private room, Alnwick, Northumberland, 1 st and 3d Monday. 348 St. George's
Lodge, Town Hall, Duncaster, 2d W.
1781.
349 Alfred Lodge, Wetherby, Yorkshire. 350 Lodge of Rural Friendship, Bedford
Coffee-House, Covent Garden, London. 351 Rodney Lodge, Kingston upon Hull, 1 st
and 3d Th. Win. 1 st Th. Sum. 352 Lodge Friendship, private Room, Dartmouth,
Devonshire, 1 st 3d and last Th. 353 Lodge of Moral Reformation, Be Hive,
Flaggon Row, Deptford, 2d Monday. 354 La Loggia della Verita, Naples. 355
Hitam's Lodge, Sugar Loaf, Great St. Helen's, St. Mary Axe, last M.
1782.
356 St. George's E. York Militia Lodge, in East Riding Regiment of York
Militia. 357 Lodge of Science, Parade Coffee-House, Salisbury, 1 st F. Winter.
358 Old British and Ligurian I odge, Genoa. 359 Mount Sinai Lodge, St. John's,
Antigua. 360 Lodge of True Love and Unity, Brixham, Deven, 1 st and 3d W. 361
Lodge of Peace, Joy, and Brotherly Love, Penryn, Cornwall.
1783.
362 Mariner's Lodge, New Dock, Liverpool, 1 st and 3d Thurs. 363 Minerva
Lodge, Hull, Yorkshire. 364 Lodge of good Intention, in North, or 2d Regiment
of Devon Militia, London, 1 st and 3d W. 365 Loyal Lodge, Globe Inn,
Barnstable, 1 st and 3d Thurs. 366 Apollo Lodge, Parade Coffee house,
Salisbury, 2d and 4th W.
1784.
367 Lodge at Placentia, Newfoundland. 368 Homesdale Lodge of Freedom and
Friendship, Bell, Ryegate, Surrey. 369 Harmonic Lodge, Bush Inn, Dudley,
Worcestershire, 2d and 4th Th. 371 Lodge of Truth, Cricketers, Richmond Green,
2d and 4th Th. 372 Raby Lodge, Raby Castle, Staindrop, Durham, 2d Tu.
1785.
373 Royal Gloucester Lodge, Bell Inn, Gloucester. 374 Lodge of Concord, Old
King's arms, Plymouth Dock. 375 La Parfaite Amity, at Avignon, Languedoc. 376
St. John's Lodge, at Michilimakinac, Canada. 377 Barry Lodge, in the 34th
Regiment, London. 378 Rainsford Lodge, in the 44th Regiment, London. 379 Tyrian
Lodge, at the George Inn, Derby. 381 Harbor Grace, Newfoundland. 382 Trinity
Lodge, Golden Lion, Coventry. 383 Lodge of Unanimity, Private Room, Sadler
street, Wells, Somersetshire, 1 st and 3d Th. 384 Lodge of Harmony, Private
Room, Hampton Court, occasional. 385 Lodge of St. George, White Heart, New
Windsor, Berks. 386 Thanet Lodge, Parade Hotel, Margate, 2d and 4th W. 387
Lodge of Good Intent, Ship Tavern, Leadenhall street, London, 2d W. 388 White
Lion, Whitchurch, Shropshire, Thurs. previous to the full Moon. 389 Lodge of
Perfect Friendship, King's Head, King street, Ipswich, 3d W. 390 Lodge of
Unions, Spread Eagle, Pratt street, Lambeth, 1 st Mond.
1786.
391 Lodge of Independence, Castle and Falcon, Watergate street, Chester. 392
Lodge of Benevolence, Antelope Inn, Sherborn, Dorset, 1 st and 3d Th. 393 St.
Margaret's Lodge, Rose and Crown, Dart-mouth street, Westminster. 394 Lodge of
Friendship and Sincerity, Red Lion Inn, Shaftesbury, Dorset, 1 st and last Th.
395 Phoenix Lodge, Private Room, Portsmouth, occasional. 396 Lodge of the Black
Bear, in the city of Hanover, (have met since 1774). 397 St. John's Lodge,
Golden Cross, Broomsgrove, Worcestershire, 2d and 4th Mond. 398 Carnatic
Military Lodge, at Vellore, No. 2, Coast of Coromandel. 399 At Futty Ghur,
Bengal. 400 Hiram's Lodge, at Gibraltar. 401 Lodge of Goodwill, private Room,
Braintree, Essex. 402 Lodge of Sincerity, at the Buck and Vine, Wigan,
Lancashire. 403 Lodge of Harmony, at the Golden Lion, Ormskirk, Lancashire. 404
Snowden Lodge, at the sportsman, Carnarvon, N. Wales.
1787.
405 Lodge of St. Charles's, at Hildburgshausen. 406 St. Matthew's Lodge,
Barton upon Humber. 407 Amphibious Lodge, at the Marine Barracks, Stonehouse,
near Plymouth. 408 Newtonian Lodge, Elephant and Castle, Knaresborough, 4th M.
409 Royal Navy Lodge, Seahorse Tavern, Gosport, Monday after full M. 410 Lodge
of Trade and Navigation, New Eagle and Child, Northwich, Cheshire, 1 st W. 411
Lodge of Unity, Three Crowns Inn, Litchfield, 1 st and 3d M. 412 Prince of
Wales's Lodge, Star and Garter, Pall Mall, London. 413 Lodge Astrea, at Riga,
with permission to assemble in the Duchy of Courland. 414 Royal Denhigh Lodge,
at the Crown Inn, Denbigh, N. Wales. 415 Lodge Absalom, have met since 1740 at
Hambourg. 416 Lodge St. George, ditto, 1743, ditto. 417 Lodge Emanuel, ditto,
1774, ditto. 418 Lodge Ferdinand Caroline, ditto 1776 ditto. 419 Lodge of
Perfect Harmony, St. Thomas Mount, No. 3, Coast of Coromandel. 420 Lodge of
Social Friendship, at Madras, No. 4, ditto. 421 Lodge at Trichinopoly, No. 5,
ditto. 422 Lodge of Social Friendship, St. Thomas Mount, No. 6, ditto. 423
Prince of Wales's Lodge, White Heart, Gainsborough, Lincolnshire, 3d Monday. 424
St. Paul's Lodge, Montreal, Canada. 425 In the Regiment of Anhalt Zerbst. 426
Lodge of Unity, at Fort William Henry, in Canada. 427 St. James's Lodge, at
Cataraqui, ditto. 428 Select Lodge, at Montreal, ditto. 429 New Oswegatchie
Lodge, ditto. 430 St. John's Lodge, at Niagara, ditto.
1788.
432 Wiltshire Lodge, at the Black Swan, Devizes, Wiltshire. 433 Lodge of
Unanimity, George Inn, Ilminster, Somersetshire, Tu. before full Moon. 434
Salopian Lodge, at the Fox, Shrewsbury, 1st Tu. 435 Bank of England Lodge,
Guildhall Coffee House, King street, Cheapside, London, 4th Thurs. 436 Lodge of
Honor and Perseverance, Ship, Cookermouth, Cumberland, 1st Thurs. 437
Philanthrophic Lodge, Bull Inn, Melford Suffolk, Tu. preceding or on full Moon.
438 Duke of York's Lodge, White Bear Inn, Doncaster, 1st M. 439 Royal Yorkshire
Lodge, Devonshire, Arms, Kighley, Yorkshire, 1st M. 440 The Old Globe Lodge,
Old Globe Inn, Scarborough. 441 Lodge of Napthali, New Market Inn, Manchester.
442 Lodge of Unity, Royal Oak, Manchester. 443 Lodge of Union, St. John's
Tavern, Manchester. 444 Lodge of Fidelity, Thorn Inn, Burnley, Lancashire.
1789.
445 Egerton Lodge, Red Lion Inn, Whitchurch, Shropshire. 446 Star and Garter,
Pall Mall, London. 447 Lodge of Unity, at Dan^zick. 448 St. John's Lodge of
Secrecy and Harmony, at Malia. 449 Country Steward's Lodge, Free-masons Tavern,
Great Queen street, London. 450 At Fredericton, New Brunswick, N. America. 451
Cambrian Lodge, at the Swan Inn, Brecon, S. Wales, 3d M. 452 Royal Clarence
Lodge, White Horse, Brighthelmstone, Sussex, 2d, and 4th Mond. 453 Lodge of
Harmony, at the White Heart, in the Drapery, Northampton. 454 Beneficent Lodge,
at the Angel, Macclesfield, Cheshire. 455 Royal York Lodge, Bush Tavern, Corn
street, Bristol, 1st and 3d W. 456 Lodge Frederic Charles Joseph, of the Golden
Wheel, at Mentz. 457 Wrekin Lodge, at the Pheasant, Wellington, Shropshire, M.
previous to full Moon. 458 Lodge of Tranquillity, Three Tuns Tavern, Smithy
Door, Manchester, last Friday. 459 Independent Lodge at the Black Lion, and
Swan, Congleton, Cheshire. 460 Albion Lodge, at Skipton, Yorkshire. 461 Lodge
of Harmony, Bacchus, Halifax, Yorkshire, 2d M. 462 Lodge Good Fellowship,
Saracen's Head, Chelmsford, Essex, F. on or preceding full Moon. 463 Lodge of
Friendship, at the Angel, Oldham, Lancashire. 464 Lodge of the North Star, at
Fredericksnagore, 7th Lodge of Bengal. 465 Calpean Lodge, at Gibraltar.
1790.
466 Friendly Lodge, King's Head Tavern, Hollorn, 2d Th. 468 Harmony Lodge,
Dolphin Hotel, Chichester, Sussex. 469 Royal Clarence Lodge, George Inn, From,
Somerset. 470 Corinthian Lodge, at the Ram Inn, Newark, Nottinghamshire. 471
St. John's Lodge, at the Lion and Dolphin, Market Place, Leicester, 1st Wed.
472 Lodge Archimedes, of the three tracing Boards, Altenburg, Germany. 473
Lodge of the Three Arrows, at Nurnburg, ditto. 474 Lodge of Constancy, at Aix
la Chapelle, Germany. 475 Lodge of the Rising Sun, at Kempton, in Swabia,
ditto. 476 Lodge of the Temple of true Concord, at Cassel, ditto. 477 Lodge
Charles of Unity, at Carlsruhe, ditto. 478 Lodge of Perfect Equality, at
Creyfeld, ditto. 479 Lodge Astrea, of the Three Elms, at Ulm, ditto. 480 Lodge
St. Charles of the Red Tower, at Ratisbon, ditto. 481 Lodge of Solid
Friendship, at Trichinopoly, No. 7, Coast of Coromandel. 482 Lodge of
Benevolence, Red Lion, Stockport, Cheshire. 483 Rein Deer Inn, Worcester, 2d
and 4th Th. 484 Lodge of Fortitude, at the Golden Shovel, Lancaster.
1791.
485 Silurian Lodge, King's Head Inn, Kington, Herefordshire. 486 Lodge of
Friendship, Gibraltar. 487 Bedford Lodge, King's Arms, Tavistock, Devonshire,
1st and 3d W. 488 Lodge of Amity, Swan Inn, Rochdale, Lancashire. 489 At
Aberistwith, South Wales. 490 Lodge of the Silent Temple, at Heldesheim, in
Germany. 491 Doric Lodge, Ship Tavern, Grantham, Lincolnshire, 3d F. 492 St.
John's Lodge, at the Talbot, Henley in Arden, Warwickshire, 1st and 3d Friday.
493 Lo^^l and prudent Lodge, Leeds, Yorkshire. 494 Lodge of Love and Harmony,
Barbados.
1792.
495 At Bulam, on the Coast of Africa. 496 North Nottinghamshire Lodge; Town
Hall, East Retford, 2d F. 497 Lodge of St. George, at a private Room,
North-Shields, Northumberland. 498 Rawdon Lodge, between the lakes in Upper
Canada. 499 Faithful Lodge, at Biddeford, Devon. 500 Lodge of Prudence, at the
Three Tuns, Halesworth, Suffolk. 501 Two Necked Swans, St. Peters's, Mancroft,
Norwich. 502 Lodge of Love and Honor, Bell Inn, Shipton-Mallet, Somerset, 2d
and 4th Tu. Win. 2d Tu. Sum. 503 Royal Gloucester Lodge, East street,
Southampton. 504 Samanitan Lodge, at the Devonshire Arms, Kighly, Yorkshire.
505 Philanthropic Lodge, Devonshire Arms, Skipton, Yorkshire. 506 Lodge of the
Three Graces, Barnoldswick, in Craven, Yorkshire, 2d Sat. 507 Bermuda Lodge, at
St. George's in Bermuda. 508 Noah's Ark Lodge, Canal Coffee House, Middlewich,
Cheshire. 509 Lodge of Unanimity, Stockport, Cheshire, 1st W. after full Moon.
510 Urania Lodge, Angel Inn, Glamford Briggs, Lincolnshire. 511 Lodge of
Harmony, Bacup, Lancashire. 512 Lodge of Fidelty, Old George Inn, Brigg^^^,
Leeds.
1793.
513 White Heart, Huddersfield, Yorks^ire. 514 Union Soho Lodge, Handsworth,
Suffordshire, 1st and 3d W. 515 Cambridge New Lodge, Red Lion, Cambridge. 516
Skakespeare Lodge, White Lion, Stratford upon Avon, Warwickshire. 517 Rural
Philanthropic Lodge, Highbridge Inn, Huntspill, Somersetshire, Tu. preceding
full M. 518 At the Castle, Lord str^^t, Liverpool. 519 Scarsdale Lodge, Angel
Inn, Chesterfield, Derbyshire. 520 The King's Friends Lodge, Three Pigeons,
Nantwich, Cheshire. 521 Union Lodge, at Cornwall, in Upper Canada. 522 St.
John's Lodge of Friendship at Montreal. 523 Friendly. Brothers Lodge, at the
Roebuck, Newcastle, Staffordshire, 1st Wed. 524 Lodge of Urbanity, Bear Inn,
Wincanton, Somersetshire, 1st F. 525 Constitutional Lodge at the Tiger,
Beverly, Yorkshire. 526 Union Lodge, Macclesfield, Cheshire, 1st Th. 527 Royal
Brunswick Lodge, Royal Oak, Sheffield, Yorkshire. 528 At Chunar, in the East
Indies, 8th Lodge of Bengal. 529 Lodge of Mars, Cawnpore, 9th L. of Bengal. 530
Witham Lodge, Rein Deer Inn, City of Lincoln. 531 Lodge of Unity, Half Moon,
Marketplace, Yarmouth, Norfolk, M. nearest full Moon. 532 At Reyton,
Lancashire. 533 Royal Edward Lodge, Red Lion, Leominster, Herefordshire, 2d M.
534 Lodge of St. John, at the Grapes, Lancaster.
1794.
535 Lodge of Emulation, Marquis of Granby, Dartford, Kent, Tu. nearest full
Moon. 536 Lodge of Minerva, King's Arms, Ashton under Line, Lancashire. 537 The
Apollo Lodge, Angel, Alcester, Warwickshire, 1st and 3d Wednesday. 538 Lodge of
Unity and Friendship, Bradford, Wilts. 539 Lodge of Hope, Talbot Inn, Bradford,
Yorkshire. 540 Benevolent Lodge, at the Newfoundland Fishery, Teignmouth,
Devon. 541 Lodge in the Cheshire Militia. 542 Philanthropic Lodge, Crown Inn,
Kirkgate, Leeds.
A correct List of Domestic Lodges will, as soon as possible, be printed
separately and delivered to the Subscribers of this work GRATIS.


