DIVINE ORACLES THE TRUE ANTIDOTE AGAINST DEISM, AND FALSE CHRISTIANITY, OR,
THE CLEAR LIGHT OF REVELATION CONTRASTED TO THE DARKNESS OF A BOASTED AGE OF
REASON. IN LETTERS TO A SON. TO WHICH ARE PREFIXED, INTRODUCTORY STRICTURES ON
SOME LATE WRITINGS.

PROVIDENCE (R. I.) Printed by B. WHEELER, for D. BREWER, of Taunton, and sold
at their respective Book-Stores. MDCCXCVII.

BRIEF INTRODUCTORY STRICTURES UPON LATE BLASPHEMOUS WRITINGS, etc.
A PERSONS' raising the dust of controversy against the holy scriptures,
obscures not their luster (however blinded he may be himself) but like the Sun
they shine with unclouded light, far above little emmets encompassing
themselves in clouds of dust.

It is said; let the potsherd strive with the potsherds of the earth, but woe
to him that striveth with his Maker. And whose heart can endure, and whose
hands can be strong, when the woe falls with all its weight? However great a
person may be thought to be, he is quite unequal to a combat with his Maker,
and is but an emmet of a larger size.

The abilities of a writer, and the beauty of his style go far in gaining him
proselytes. Words are the dress of thoughts, whether those thoughts are truths
or lies; and the beauty of the dress, draws no small share of attention in
favor of the writer. An attorney, who in the cause of falsehood employs all
the force of eloquence, may so charm his hearers, that they will have no ear
for plain truth, appearing in a plain dress, upon the opposite side; show and
appearance often captivate the inclination and draw with it the judgment in its
favor.

The force of the language of the Author of the Age of Reason is well known.
The strokes of his pen are sufficient to convert many to any falsehood he
wishes them to embrace. The world not long since, has been presented with a
specimen of his abilities, displayed against Him in whose hand his breath is.
His pen dipped in the blackest falsehood, has shed blasphemies against the Lord
of Glory, who in the days of his flesh, bore the blasphemies of this man's
predecessors.

Sordid interest actuated his pen; he saw that infidelity was in the height of
fashion, and that blaspheming Jesus would turn to his worldly advantage; and
like an attorney, ready to display his talent in any cause whatever, he at once
blasphemes the word of God, trumpets his own fame, and gets his reward. Had he
lived where it would have turned to his ignominy, it is presumed his pieces had
never seen the light.

Could he have found his interest in painting the Christian Religion in
beautiful colors, it would receive no benefit from it; nor can it receive any
damage from his representation of it. It stands on a basis firm as the
everlasting mountains, the truth of God; and will triumph when men greater than
he, and even kings shall call on the rocks to fall on them and hide them from
the wrath of the lamb.

Though multitudes are willingly carried away with plausible language, in a
case of life and death, and in the concerns of that life whose length no pen
can describe, yet none of God's designs in his word can be frustrated.

The holy scriptures declare themselves to be the word of the living God. No
man may presume to dictate in what way God's word shall be communicated. It
must be in the way, which he pleases, who gives no account of his matters.

It is written Psalm 68, 11. The Lord gave out the word, great was the company
of those who published it. The prophets, and apostles, and all that were
inspired, make up this company. Beautiful upon the mountains are their feet,
bringing good news from a far country in on hand, and full evidence of their
mission in the other. The testimony they bring is not their's but God's. It is
the King's Proclamation, and they are only heralds. It is written, where the
word of a king is, there is power. The testimony in the scriptures is all
divine. It stands high above all the assaults of the most subtle and powerful
upon earth. The blows men aim against it recoll upon themselves. He that sits
in the heavens, laughs, and has in derision, the most combined, and malignant
force employed against it. Psalm 24.

The testimony of God is not moved by any opinion which either individuals or
even whole kingdoms may have about it. Its being the fashion in France, or any
other country, to make it of no effect to themselves, by tradition, in one age,
and in another, to reject those traditions and the scriptures with them, does
not affect the holy scriptures any more than the late convulsions and carnage
in France affected the course or shining of the sun in the heavens.

Whole nations disbelieving the word God, or perverting it from its native
simplicity, and fathering their favorite plans upon it, does but fulfill its
prophecies; the wisdom of men plotting against it proves their own folly; their
power employed against it works their own ruin. Great is the truth and will
prevail. When the curtain drops, and this world of phantoms disappears,
realities will be brought into full view, to the anguish of many.

Then it will be manifest, as if written with a sun beam, that the scriptures
are the word of that God whose voice spoke the heavens and earth into
existence, and the same forcible voice which calls up the dead from their
graves.

Events in Europe, for a series of ages have been a fulfillment of scripture
prophecy, as to the appearance, growth and decline of the man of sin; and
events of the present age, are a fulfillment of a part of that prophecy yet
remaining to be completed. Matters are ripening for an issue which is little
though it of; and indeed it is foretold both that men shall not expect it, and that
in the twinkling of an eye it will fearfully surprise them. When they say peace
and safety then sudden destruction comes upon them as travail upon a woman
with child, and they shall not escape.

Whether it will be allowed, that the boasted reason of the present age has
been truly exemplified, and carried out into practice in France, the center of
it, I shall not examine; but it may be boldly affirmed, that the boasted reason
of this author leads a man into a labyrinth of fond conjectures, and dreams,
and there leaves him to perish, and turn to corruption, in fearful
apprehensions of dreadful wrath beyond the grave; but the glorious Gospel of
the blessed God abolishes death, brings life and immortality to light, plucks
out the sting of death, and presents, as the only hope of guilty dying man, Him
who is the resurrection and the life; in whom he that believes, though he were
dead, yet shall he live; and whosoever lives, and believes in him, shall
never die.

LETTER I.
DEAR SON,
TO deny divine Revelation or to hold the Truths it contains loosely is death.
Sensible of your imminent Danger from a Deluge of Infidelity and false
Christianity I address you. But it can only come of God to teach you and me the
things which belong to our peace before they are hid from our eyes. What I now
write is designed as a preliminary to other Letters upon the clear light of
divine revelation contrasted with the darkness of a boasted age of reason. The
expression an age of reason is plausible and captivating. The word reason is
often abused and prostituted to the vilest purposes. Men boast of reason, and
every one is fond of being thought to be under its influence. In all opinions a
man entertains, in all actions which he does, he is ready to be persuaded
himself and to persuade others, that he is under the guidance of reason; In all
contentions between individuals or bodies of men both opposite parties allege
that they are influenced by reason. The same is true of nations at war, and
what is called reason in one camp passes for its opposite in the other. The
opposite opinions of men in religion are all professedly grounded in reason on
both sides. In most of the practices of men however base, and even in the late
barbarities in France, the actors no doubt alleged that they were governed by
reason. Indeed the word reason, has been a specious cover for the vilest
opinions and practices. The boasted reason which men plead for, when examined,
turns out to be the inclination of their hearts, or rather their lusts. We may
see the spring and fountain head of this boasted reason in the serpent's
reasoning to turn Eve aside from the simple voice of revelation, and her own
reasoning corresponding to his, which closes Genesis 3, 6. And when the woman saw
that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a
tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did
eat. Three reasons are in her view which enclose three lusts; the lust of the
flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life, which taking the place of a
regard to God's voice, brought ruin. Awful it is to depart in the least from
the voice of God, and give ear to our own lust, under the name of reason.

The Apostle declares the weapons of their warfare to be mighty through God for
casting down logismous reasonings and every high thing which exalts itself
against the knowledge of God. Reasonings are to be reckoned among the high
things which thus stand exalted against the knowledge of him. The word rendered
casting down signifies utterly demolishing, and in knowing the true God they
are utterly demolished.

But to proceed; it will one day appear, that men are as unreasonable (so to
speak) in their reasonings against the truth of God's word as they would be in
reasoning against the truth of the sun's shining, though in the latter there is
not that guilt.

Should any one choose to argue that there was no Sun in the heavens, we should
be better employed in enjoying its influence, than in controverting with him.
Should he choose to argue that there is no God, we should be better employed, in
attending to the plain evidence of conscience, testifying that every breath we
draw, every beat of the pulse, every motion even of a finger, and every thought
of the mind, proclaims a God, in whom we live, move and have our being; while
every thing above, and around us declares his glory. -- So if any one chooses to
reason against the light of the glorious gospel; we should be better employed
in attending to the clearness of that light, and to the Apostles, commending
themselves to every man's conscience in the sight of God, than in pursuing
them, into their labyrinth of reasonings; knowing that if the gospel be hid it
is hid to them who are lost, and that the God of this world blinds the minds of
them who believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel should shine unto
them.

The holy scriptures carry in themselves evidence that God is the speaker, and
the truth of this is enforced upon illiterate men who have not access to
profane history; and who are incapable of entering into argumentation. Indeed
the scriptures are never believed in truth, but upon the bare testimony of God
himself, speaking in them, aside from profane history, and men's reasonings to
prove them true. The Record, or the witness of the three in heaven, 1. John
5.7, 8, 9, is plainly the witness of the one God in three persons, distinct
from the witness of men. And it is there said to be greater than the witness of
men; and thus it proved among the first believers in its great effects, and
thus it will prove among all whose faith is unfeigned, or who have obtained
like precious faith with them, through the righteousness of God and their
savior.

While we turn aside from the common tract of reasoning, the idea to be kept in
full view, is, that the scriptures are the witness of God himself, carrying in
themselves evidence that they are his truth. This is the only conviction of
their truth, that is to any purpose. As to any belief men may have, on account
of the professed belief of the country they live in, or the belief of their
forefathers, or men whom they esteem for religion; as it rests on the testimony
of men, it is as different as darkness from light from a belief grounded upon
the record of God, and may be easily shaken, by the plausible reasonings or the
sneers of an infidel. Indeed the step from such faith to infidelity is short
and easy.

The same shift from one to the other, which has taken place in France, may
easily take place in any other nation now professing christianity, when their
worldly interests favors it, and it suits the policy of the nation.

Among ourselves we see those who have received their christianity by
tradition, and not upon the testimony of God, holding it by a very slender
handle. They speak of the scriptures as doubtful, dark and inconsistent with
each other. Indeed they are though it scarce able to support any point of doctrine
or practice, without the aid of some able voucher, and men find little more use
for them, than to furnish a jest, or show their abilities in argument, and
eloquence upon detached passages, or advance their interest by shaping what
they profess to hold from them so as to suit the general taste where they live.
More confidence is placed in the writings of Seneca, or some other wise pagan,
by many who call themselves christians, than in the holy scriptures. And those
who would be esteemed guardians of the word of God (which spurns at such a
thought) appear to be only guardians of their own interests. The christian
world, so called, whose confidence is in the testimony of men and not the
record of God, seeing their teachers so divided in opinion, and belief, as well
as others, either rest satisfied in utter uncertainty, or anxiously grope like
men in the dark, not knowing which way to look for truth. -- But leaving them I
would just say that where the scripture is believed upon the testimony of God,
it comes not in word only, but in power, and mighty indeed are its effects,
which must be manifest to any one who reads with but small attention, the lives
of those who were under its influence in the beginning, which may be seen in
the Acts of the Apostles and elsewhere.

I am your affectionate father, etc.

LETTER. II.
DEAR SON,
THE holy scriptures present themselves, not as the word of man, but the word
of God. They bear the stamp of divine truth, which accords with every man's
conscience, but is pointed like a sword against every man's natural biass, and
therefore cannot be the devide of man. Wherever they have had effect they have
borne down the reasonings and lusts of men.

There has been an universal struggle of mankind against the scriptures, or
the truth of God. The history of all ages, the history of all nations, even of
the Jews the peculiar people shows it. Their conduct in the wilderness, and in
Canaan, and the united conduct of Jews and Gentiles toward Jesus Christ, and
the profession of his name shows it. It is manifest not only in persecutions on
account of it, but in corrupting and perverting it. A corruption of the truth
is as really a struggle against it as a direct opposition to it; even as an
attempt to take Jesus by force and make him a King, was opposition to his
Kingdom, as well as an attempt to root it out of the world. The corruption of
the word of God in France in past ages was as really an opposition to the
scriptures as their late rejection of them.

Nations who are now holding the scripture corrupted cannot boast of being less
opposed to the Word of God, than France who has openly rejected it. All the
nations who are now holding the scriptures in subserviency to their own lusts,
maintain a struggle against them as well as France. The opposition of the world
to the truth which appeared in the days of the Apostles has not failed of
being kept up to this day, either in rejecting the scriptures or corrupting
them. The world has uniformly maintained its opposition to the word of God in
one way or other.

The way in which the scriptures have gained ground has been by the mere dint
of evidence, bearing down men's reasonings and inclinations; and this compelled
the first publishers themselves to receive the same truth they published to
others, for to them as well as others, it was like a sharp piercing two edged
sword.

The Apostle says, 2 Pet. 1, 16, We have not followed cunningly devised fables,
when we made known to you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but
were eye witnesses of his majesty, etc. It cannot be conceived possible that
Peter and others should invent and publish a Fable, which was firstly contrary
to every natural inclination of their own hearts, and secondly would destroy
every thing which they held dear; their interest, reputation, and comfort in
life; and lastly would lead them into severest sufferings from the wrath of the
world kindled against them, and bring life into the utmost danger, yea should
perish in it unto the death. They must in such case act contrary to every
principle that can be in man, and it might as soon be expected to see the
stones falling upwards.

Nothing short of a firm belief of the things they testified, could influence
them to suffer the loss of all things, and not count life itself dear; and this
belief was firmly grounded upon the divine testimony, set before them in the
most convincing manner. The apostle says, we were eye witness of his majesty.
John says, 1st Epistle 1, 1.2, That which we have heard, seen and handled of
the word of life, that which we have seen and heard declare we unto you, etc.
And God showed his concurrence with their testimony by the miracles he wrought
by them. And not only the Apostles but a multitude of others, sealed the same
testimony with their blood, in hope of life eternal through that truth; so far
were they too, from the least apprehensions of its being a cunningly devised
fable.

The Testimony of the Apostles, and the Prophets also, center in one point, the
resurrection of Jesus, after his being delivered for our offenses; from whence
alone arises hope to man. This fact established the whole; and every part, both
of the old testament and the new, however wounderful, or unaccountable it may
seem, is established with it; and all seeming difficulties must vanish before
it like mists before the Sun. Many have scoffed at the miraculous things
reported, such as the account of Jonah, Samson, etc. but instead of being
thought incredible to one who knows the scriptures and the power of God, they
appear wonderful displays of the power of that God with whom nothing is
impossible. They have taken upon them too to say that many things ascribed to
God in the scripture were unworthy of him, and have supposed themselves
competent judges what was becoming their Maker. Swelled with self importance
they do not conceive the distance between God and them, is far greater than
between themselves and a worm. A child or an idiot, dictating a wise general or
politician is not to be heeded. The disparity between the wisest man, and his
Maker is far greater; and it is the highest presumption to determine what is
fit and becoming him, whose ways are as far above ours, as the heavens are
higher than the earth.

While the twelve authorized witnesses of the resurrection of Jesus, declared
God's testimony concerning his Son, and men saw what an effect it had on them,
and beheld the miracles which God wro't by them, they were led to say that God
was with them of a truth; and this testimony is not merely their's, but God's:
and they considered God himself speaking by their mouth. Thus it is said of
some of them, 1 Thessalonians. 2, 13, that when they received the word of God which
they heard from the Apostles they received it not as the word of man but as it
is in truth the word of God. In like manner when this testimony of God which
was first communicated by the voice of the Apostles, was afterward
communicated by their writings, in this way too, the word was received not as
the word of man but as it is in truth the word of God. The same is true of all
the sacred writings. The holy scriptures then present themselves not as the
word of man but as the word of God. They point out God to be their author,
without a train of reasoning, as the works of creation point out God to be
their creator. He is read in one, as he is in the other. -- They draw a black
portrait of this lower world as under the curse, show that every man by nature
is a child of wrath, that every mouth must be stopped, and that the whole world
is become guilty before God, and that no flesh can be justified in his sight in
any way but through him who was made a curse in their stead, and thereby
redeemed them from the curse. They give a portrait of the character of Jesus
Christ. They present to us his features, his likeness. He is called the Word of
God and there is that in them which bears his resemblance as the impression
does that of the seal which makes it. As the world stood affected to him so
they are affected to the word of God. Of himself he says, the world hates me
because I testify of its works that they are evil. The scriptures fully
maintain the same testimony, and incur the same hatred. The professed liking of
many is no more than that of the Jews to Jesus, when they would fain make him a
temporal King; which very thing proceeded from a disrelish of his real
character. Men's hatred of the real truth in the scriptures has been
abundantly manifest in perverting and putting a false meaning to the words, as
well as an open rejection of them. It is natural to all men, though fallen, to
stand for what they think are their rights before their Maker, and to stand
opposed to what appears to invade them; and as the word of God like a sharp
two-edged sword gives a fatal stab to them, and to every hope of man aside from
the death and resurrection of Jesus, leaving nothing but a fearful looking for
of fiery indignation; it is impossible that the world should receive it,
otherwise than corrupted and perverted from its native simplicity. It appears
impossible in the nature of things that any man or number of men should invent
a plan of Religion like this, so opposite to the biass of their own hearts; and
the hearts of all others, with a view to its spreading in the world, without
either worldly weapons or allurements; and utterly impossible it should spread
if it could be supposed to be divised. Could we make the supposition that there
were no scriptures in the world at this time. We cannot conceive it possible
that they being fabulous should thus spread, nor indeed that they should be
invented. So it has always been the case as human nature is the same in all
ages i. e. opposed to them as they also testify.

The fact is obvious to all that they actually have spread over the world,
testifying men's guilt, and only hope, in spite of the opposition of the world;
and it cannot possibly be accounted for in any way but this, that they are in
truth the word of God; that Jesus Christ the son of God, who gave his life a
ransom was raised from the dead; and that ocular demonstration of this led the
apostles at the risque of life to publish Salvation through him alone, in
opposition to the world of Jews and Gentiles combined against it.

This testimony confirmed by miracles and sealed with their own blood forced
attention in mankind, contrary to their desire, and made its way against
violent opposition of heart, and was mighty through God to the pulling down
their strong holds. -- This Testimony was carried far and wide, and when men in
various parts of the world, saw the boldness of these witnesses, and that their
life was embarked in their testimony, and beheld their miracles, and finally
saw their blood shed, in full hope of eternal life through the Lord Jesus, they
were awed about that which they stood opposed to, they had great reasonings
among them; they wished to appear upon friendly terms with that which
exceedingly troubled them. They used their arts with professors to engage them
to lower down the force of the divine testimony so to speak, to parley and to
league with them. This had its effect on multitudes who had grown weary of the
cross themselves. This coalition spread so far that in the days of Constantine
the great, the minds of his subjects were so much in favor of christianity
thus modified, that it appeared consistent with sound policy to establish it,
in room of paganism as the religion of the Roman empire called the whole world.
But before it was established, it ceased to be what it was at first. It became
another Gospel or the gospel of Christ perverted. Here was a wide gate and a
broad way opened, under the christian name, which they supposed led to life,
and that many were going in thereat. From that day the world has adopted the
name of christianity, in some form or other. The name has been retained, but
the thing was lost or wrapped in darkness. The continuance of the scriptures is
hence easily accounted for. From this time being construed to men's liking,
they have been forced to become a tool of state, and an instrument of gain to
priests, who sometimes locked them up from the common people, or when they let
them out compelled men to take their interpretations of scripture, for the
scripture itself. The word of God in their hands foretold, and testified
against the corruption which they were barefacedly guilty of, as may be seen 2
These. 2 chap. 1. Tim. 4, 1.4. 2 Timothy 3 chap. 2 Pet. 2d and 3d chapters, the
Epistle of Jude, and the book of Revelations.

Thus because they knew him not, nor the voices of the apostles, they fulfilled
them; as the Jews long before had fulfilled the voices of the prophets
respecting Jesus. Acts 13, 27. The conduct of nations called christian, in
every age since, in conformity to those mentioned, has been a standing
fulfillment of the prophecies above, and an evidence of the truth of the divine
testimony.

To return, it appears impossible to conceive of the scriptures having so great
a spread in any other way* So that the mind is as it were reined up to the time
when the testimony was first published, and led to attend to that forcible
evidence which had so mighty an effect on many, and occasioned a general awe
among men, which led them to corrupt and establish christianity.

At this present time God is still upholding the same testimony by the writings
of the prophets and apostles, though men would fain drown his voice by the
noisy clamor of lo here and lo there, and by attempts to palm that upon them
for his truth, which he has never spoken. His voice is still testifying to the
world that its works are evil, and that there is no hope for any man aside from
Christ Jesus. Its awful representation of the character of mankind or men, of
which a summary is given in the three first chapters of the Romans, is
confirmed by the history it gives of their conduct from age to age; witness the
account of the Antideluvians, Babel-builders, Sodomites, Egyptians, Assyrians,
etc. It is confirmed in the account it gives of the Jews from age to age in the
wilderness, in Canaan, before and after the captivity, when the Messiah came
and was among them, and after his crucifixion till the destruction of their
city and temple and utter dispersion.

The Scripture does not stop like the histories of men with informing of events
which have taken place, but proceeds to give a history of the future down to
the end of time. It brings to view a constant war against the truth carried on
by the old serpent, the devil or satan, deceiving and conducting all nations in
the conflict, who are made drunk with the wine of the wrath of the fornication
of the great whore, who pretending to be the spouse of Jesus commits
fornication with the Kings of the earth who dress her out in rich apparel.
Strikingly this has been verified in the wealth and honors both clergy and
churches have obtained by a close connection with civil rulers.

But to return, such is the divine testimony of mankind and such the
corresponding history. And there is no room for any to stand forth and say we
are better than they; no in no wise, for there is none righteous no not one. In
the view of all nations, ages, and of our own characters, the heart of a man
must die within him, were it not for one character which knew no sin, but was
made sin for his people that they might be made the righteousness of God in
him. The scriptures then in all ages and at this present time, bespeak
themselves to be the word of the most high God. The Book proclaims itself
divine. It is said John 8.47. He that is of God hears God's words, which
implies that God is heard in distinction from any man. And again 1 John 4.8. We
are of God: he that knows God hears us, he that is not of God hears not
us. The Apostles were appointed his ambassadors that by their mouth men might
hear the words of God, and the words spoken or written by them are God's words.

In confirmation of the divine truth of the scriptures I might mention the
fulfillment of their prophecy in the destruction of Jerusalem, and various other
kingdoms. The Jews remaining a distinct people among all nations to this day,
is a standing evidence of their truth. Another standing evidence is the great
whore committing fornication with the kings of the earth which has lived thus
deliciously for ages; though it is true she is now declining fast with a
consumption. And this too confirms their testimony; and particularly what has
happened in France of late appears a fulfillment of what is said Rev. 17, 16, of
hating the whore and making her desolate and naked. The prophecy of Peter 2
Epist. 2. 1, 2. appears also fulfilled, where showing that false teachers
should rise under the christian profession followed by multitudes, says by
reason of them the way of truth shall be evil spoken of. The People of France
incensed at the pernicious ways of the priests take occasion hence to vilify
the scriptures the way of truth. Although this is more or less true in every
country yet there it appears in a striking manner. And authors take occasion to
vilify the scriptures in connection with the clergy, as if there had been some
affinity between them, and the shame of their practices belonged to the
scriptures. Yea they open their mouths in the most daring blasphemies against
God's Word, and against Jesus Christ, who is the brightness of his Glory, and
the express Image of his person. These things instead of weakening, confirm the
faith of God's people, as they thereby see the prophecies fulfilled.

I am your affectionate father, etc.

LETTER III.
DEAR SON,
THE separation of the children of Israel from all other nations, in conformity
to the scriptures, and their continuing distinct from them, for a series of
ages, in the observance of laws, which it is the bias of man's heart to break
away from; laws which made them a laughing flock to all other people, and their
holding that testimony sacred which condemned their own conduct entirely, and
left them without hope aside from mere mercy through the promised Mesiah, these
are a strong evidence of the truth of the revelation which they held to. Here
was a whole nation kept together in this manner against their natural
inclinations, a whole nation professing a firm belief of a revelation from God,
a whole nation witnesses of miracles, a whole nation to judge whether there
were any tricks* or impositions, and that not merely for a day or a year, but
for a succession of ages, a nation too that often showed their inclination to
turn away from God, and to be conformed to other nations, but contrary to their
bias were brought back by threatenings and judgments. -- In their course for
ages they were led contrary to their natural bias by the direction of the Lord,
as the two milch cows mentioned 1 Samuel 6.10, etc. on whom there had come no
yoke, went straight away from their calves tied up at home, drawing the ark of
God in a new cart, lowing as they went. As the hand of God was manifest, in
leading the cows against their bias, so it was manifest in leading Israel, both
in the wilderness, and in Canaan; and one is an emblem of the other.

Israel was under the guidance of the lively Oracles of God, though it is true
that they often rebelled.

The oracles to which pagans resorted for information, probably took their rise
from what was observed among the Jews. But the children of Israel had recourse
to an Oracle indeed, and had information from the most high God. When an oracle
gives information, that voice alone, in distinction from all others, is the
object of attention. When God revealed any thing to Israel, every word that he
uttered, claimed their utmost attention. The Scriptures, the lively oracles of
God, claim the sole attention, and are jealous of any voice being attended to
aside from them. There is no attention due to any man whatever, any further
than his voice echoes (as I may say) the voice of the Oracle.

When Pharaoh applied for the interpretation of his dream, Joseph answers, it
is not in me, God shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace. And while the answer
comes from his own mouth, he says again, God has showed Pharaoh what he is
about to do. Genesis 41.16, 28. So Daniel says, 2 c. 30 v. on a like occasion,
but as for me this secret is not revealed to me, for any wisdom that I have
more than any living; but he asserts that there is a God in heaven, who
reveals secrets. -- None of the prophets, or Apostles, make any more account
of their own voices, when declaring what God spoke by them. Paul says, 2 Cor.
4.7, But we have this treasure in earthen vessels that the excellency of the
power may be of God, and not of us. An earthen vessel containing gold and
silver is overlooked, the treasure gains the whole attention. Again he thanks
God 1 Thessalonians. 2, 13, that when they received the word of God by his mouth, they
did not receive it as his own word, but as it was indeed the word of God. And
he informs, 1 Cor. 1, 1-6, that when he came to them declaring the Testimony of
God, he came not with excellency of speech, wisdom, enticing words, but was
with them in weakness and fear, and much trembling, and it was that their
belief should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. He would
be himself as it were thrown aside, as a wretched guilty sinner, that the
testimony of God, of which he was the bearer, might have all its weight. He
also tells the Galatians, to hold him accursed if he should preach any other
Gospel to them, than what God had already declared by his mouth. He also
asserts the same even respecting an angel from heaven. The scriptures in the
plainest and most express manner hold forth the idea, that God is the speaker
in them. Dives in torments, is reminded that if his brethren to whom he wished
to give warning, did not hear Moses and the prophets, they would not be
persuaded by his rising from the dead to warn them of the horrors of that
torment, which he felt, and to which he supposed them advancing. This implies
that God's voice by Moses and the prophets, was the only means of repentance. A
multitude of passages expressly mention God as the speaker in the scriptures,
it may suffice to quote a few only. The apostle quoting a passage from the
Psalms expressly ascribes the words to God Heb. 3, 7, Wherefore as the Holy
Ghost faith to day if ye will hear his voice, etc. The prophet Isaiah pointing
forward to the gospel day, says, chap. 52, 6, Therefore my people shall know my
name; therefore they shall know in that day that I am he that does speak,
behold it is I. Language cannot more clearly express both that God is the
speaker, and that he is also known to be so by his people. But I would more
particularly notice Heb. 1.1, 2. God who at sundry times and in diverse manners
spoke to the fathers by the prophets has in these last days spoken to us by
his son. Here God is held forth as the speaker in the whole revelation which
the Jews ever had by means of the prophets. God has spoken at what time he saw
fit. He himself has chosen the manner of speaking, whether by a voice himself
or by a messenger; whether an Angel or a man; whether by voice or writing. He
is above all control in this matter. And we find even earthly princes claim a
right of addressing their subjects, in the way they themselves choose.

It has pleased God most high, that his revelation to his people in the
several ages of the world, should be chiefly by writing, and that they should
look to the law and testimony and reject every voice that spoke not according
to that word. The greatest stress is laid upon what was written. The Lord
repels each of the temptations of Satan in the wilderness, saying it is written
thus, etc. Mat. 4 chap. Again he says, Luke 24, 44, Thus it is written, and
thus it behoved Christ to suffer, etc. And Mat. 26, 44, But how then shall the
scriptures or writings be fulfilled, that thus it must be.

Whatever God has spoken by voice or writing has been attended with evidence
that he was the speaker. When Moses had a message to Pharaoh he gave evidence
that God sent him. Exodus 7, 9.10. And so it was too in his messages to Israel.
The fame may be said as to all the prophets and all the apostles.

In the beginning it seems that divine Revelation was preserved not by writing,
but in the memory of the faithful, which being comprised in few words, might be
more easily retained; and the great length of man's age facilitated the
preservation of it in this way. A revelation of the only hope of man was made
to our first parents immediately after the fall, in the faith of which the
saints lived. It is not necessary we should know all the evidence attending its
being handed down to posterity: I would only make one remark here, viz. that
the lives of the faithful, and the lives and opposition of the seed of the
serpent both, were at this time and in all ages a confirmation of the divine
testimony, and an evidence of in truth. -- We read not of any writing till
Moses. Then whatever he wrote under inspitation, respecting what had passed
before, or took place in his own time, became a standing revelation for the
Church in all ages. Additions were made to the revelation afterward before
their eyes, which when written, enlarged the book called the scriptures. Time
after time additions were made, till the whole of the old testament was
completed, which was probably about the time of Ezra.

These Revelations were made to God's chosen people and the oracles of God in
writing were put in their custody; and they were taught to regard them alone as
the pure voice of God. A departure from this idea of them gave rise to the
Talmud, a roll of traditions, by which they made the scriptures of no effect;
as Jesus charged them with doing and teaching for doctrines the commandments of
men. The Apostle Peter points to this, 2. Epis. 2, 1 and shows that the same
thing should take place under the Gospel, which prediction has since come to
pass.

Through the course of revelation the grand point was from time to time more
clearly revealed, till the fullness of the time was come, and God sent forth his
Son made of a woman. The whole law was a school master to lead unto Christ, the
end of the law for righteousness.

The appearance of the Son of God, was like the rising of the sun. We was
ushered in by his forerunner John, by the ministry of Angels, and by many
wonderful things which took place at his birth. His life, doctrine, miracles,
death and resurrection, were a clear revelation to them who saw and heard; and
when committed to writing by the Apostles, became a standing revelation to his
Chruch. And what was further communicated to the Apostles, to whom God bare
witness by signs, and miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, was a continuation
of the revelation, and when written were to be a completion, of the revelation
which began in the days of Jesus. The Apostles did not barely profess to be
God's ambassadors as some do at this day, but proved they were so by their
miracles. They had their credentials to show it with the broad seal of heaven
affixed to them. And what these chosen witnesses testified, finished the whole
of God's revelation to man, which closes with an awful threatening to any man
that shall add to, or take from the words of God, Rev. 22.18, 19.

The divine Record is then closed, and as to any new revelations, dreams and
visions, we may cry avaunt! It becomes with full purpose to turn a deaf ear to
the noisy multitude, crying lo here and lo there, knowing that God is as really
speaking, as if he were on earth, and that it is at our peril to have any other
resort. To take our idea of the scripture doctrine one from another, is no more
than receiving the witness of man, but we are assured, that he who believes
not God, has made him a liar, because he believes not the record which God
gave of his son, 1. John 5.10, the Apostle says, let God be true and every man
a liar; and again it is said, cursed be the man who trusts in man, and
blessed is the man who trusts in the Lord.

The Holy Ghost by the apostle gives a solemn caution, Heb. 12.25. See that you
refuse not him who speaks; for if they escaped not who refused him, who spoke
on earth, much more shall not we if we turn away from him who speaks from
heaven. Fearful will be the consequence of attending to the words of man,
instead of the words of God.

I will conclude this letter with a passage of Scripture, Heb. 10.28, 31. He
that despised Moses' law died without mercy under two or three witnesses. Of
how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be thought worthy who has
trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the covenant
wherewith he was sanctified an unholy thing, and has done despite unto the
spirit of Grace. For we know him that has said Vengeance belongs unto me,
etc. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

I am your affectionate father.

LETTER IV.
DEAR SON,
THE invisible things of God from the creation of the world, are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and
Godhead. Conscience agrees with this testimony of the Apostle. But while the
works of creation enforce the thought that there is an eternal God, they give
not the least information, how sinful man shall obtain his favor. It is not in
the power of human reason to point this out. The reasonings of the world in all
ages, have not afforded the least spark of light in this matter. Their
opposition to each other proclaims their blindness. The whole world is in total
darkness in this matter, and from the light of divine revelation. It is not
uncommon for those at the greatest remove from light, to think themselves most
enlightened. Every age is ready to boast of their light in Religion. Many have
imagined, that men's light in religion has kept pace with their improvement in
the Arts and Sciences; and that those ages wherein these have flourished most,
have had most knowledge in religion. But there is no period of human History
which has had any light at all in Religion, aside from Revelation. I will
mention an age which other ages have agreed to esteem an enlightened age of the
world. It was the Age when the Lord Jesus, and his Apostles, were on earth.
Then the Greeks were in high renown for wisdom; then the Roman Empire having
subdued the world, was in all its splendour, the Jews at the same time boasted
of high improvements in religion.

I will now introduce what the Holy Ghost says of it. See Isaiah 60, 4.
speaking of the time when the redeemer should come to Zion, he says: For behold
the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people, but the Lord
shall arise upon thee and his glory shall be seen upon thee and Gentiles shall
come to thy light, etc. See again Luke 1.78, 79. The day spring from on high
has visied us, to give light to them who sit in darkness and the Shadow of
Death, Acts. 26.17.18. Delivering thee from the people and the nations to whom
now I send thee to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light and
from the power of Satan to God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, etc.
We may connect with it Is. 42, 6, 7. I the Lord have called thee, etc. and will
keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the People, a light of the Gentiles
to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them
that sit in darkness out of the prison house, etc. -- These may suffice to
point out the horrors of that darkness which then overspread the world, amidst
all their boasted light. It is pointed out as under the dominion of the prince
of darkness, as in the situation of prisoners in a dark dungeon, and the
expression sitting in the shadow of death is enough to make one shudder.

To pass by other periods we may just notice that the present age is supposed
to be very enlightened, and perhaps men never boasted more of their
improvements and light in religion. But let the endless diversity of
sentiments, with that professed charity for men of almost any sentiment, and
doubtless in every point of doctrine, speak for itself, what light there is in
the present age. I would only say that the present time is doubtless enclosed
within that period mentioned, Rev. 8, 13. Woe, woe, woe, to the inhabiters of the
earth, by reason of the other voices of the trumpet of the three Angels, which
are yet to sound. Indeed the whole of that history of the future, the book of
revelations, points out the earth as covered with darkness and full of the
habitations of cruelty. It is true the scriptures are among men, but they cover
that light from themselves, wresting the scriptures to their own destruction.
They love darkness rather than light. The Light shines in darkness, but the
darkness comprehends it not. -- The pleasing words with which men have amused
each other, are like siren songs to lull to sleep, and fortify their minds
against fear of that wrath which they may see pursuing man down to the grave,
and may well lead to tremble with fearful apprehensions of what follows after
death. Did men see their real situation with regard to their maker, black
despair must cover the earth, aside from the knowledge of him, who says of
himself, I am the light of the world. The holy scriptures which testify of him,
diffuse light abroad, and contain glad tidings of great joy to all sorts of
people. Blessed are the people who know the joyful sound, and who while they
have the light, believe in the light, that they may be children of light.

I am your affectionate father, etc.

LETTER V.
DEAR SON,
THE voice of God in the scriptures, is the fountain head of all information in
religion. If our eyes be turned off from them, to any reasonings of our own, or
reasonings of others, they meet nothing but darkness. While God calls for the
sole attention, he points out the danger of its being turned off any where
else. He says beware of men, and take heed that no man deceive you. The caution
is very particular, that there be no man in whose favor you are strongly
prepossessed, who should be suffered to insinuate a thought different from what
God has revealed. Obedience to this command implies a most firm and unshaken
reliance on the voice of God alone -- As the word of God is the only light, so
that alone binds the conscience. So that the conscience of every man living is
set at the most entire liberty, from every other man in the world, and is
subjected alone to that God with whom he has to do. Those who in truth hold
divine revelation carry this Motto, Let God be true and every man a liar. They
contend for the truth of God at all risques though it should lead to hold their
most darling friends liars. This truth is called the faith once delivered to
the saints, for which Christians are exhorted earnestly to contend Jude 2. It
was once delivered while revelation was completing, and when that was
finished, there is no more delivering of it, but the word the delivered is to
run through all the Earth as the witness or record of God. It is said I John,
5.7, etc. That there are three which bare record in heaven, which three are
one, and this witness of God is said to be greater than the witness of men, and
10th verse, He that believes not God has made him a liar, because he
believes not the record which God gave of his son. Here is pointed out
strongly that God's testimony is more forceable, and carries higher evidence
than man's; and that those who do not believe upon his testimony, give God the
lie. It is only in holding things revealed true upon God's testimony, that men
hold God true; in holding them false, they hold God a liar. All knowledge
approved of in Scripture comes from God. It is said, John 6.45, It is written
in the prophets they shall all be taught of God, every man therefore that has
heard and learned of the father comes unto me. So it is said of the holy
ghost, he shall bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said
unto you. It is by revelation that the father teaches, and it is only truth of
revelation which the holy Ghost brings to remembrance.

We have the language of the new covenant, Heb. 8.10, 11. I will put my laws
into their mind, and write them in their hearts. And they shall not teach every
man his neighbor and brother saying, know the Lord, for all shall know me,
etc. Here divine revelation written in the mind by God himself is pointed out
as the only teaching, instead of man's teaching.

The Lord in opposition to the Pharisees in the 23 d. Mat. 8, 9 verses says,
But be not ye called Rabbi, for one is your master even Christ, and all ye are
brethren. And call no man father on earth, for one is your father which is in
heaven. The Disciples casting their eyes upon the world of Jews and Gentiles,
saw men at that time as we may see them now, teaching and taught one of
another, in religion (aside from God's teaching) and placing dependence on one
another, as a child upon a father or master. But the Lord will not suffer it to
be so among them. There was not a man on earth, whom they were to look up to as
a father and master, either to teach or govern in religion. While God alone was
to be viewed as a father, and himself as a master, they were to think of each
other merely as brethren. And no man could be considered even as a christian
brother, only as he appeared subject to the same father and maker alone. It is
added neither be ye called masters, etc. 10th v. How far they should be from
exercising authority over one another we read, Mark 10, 42, 44. After speaking
of the great ones among the Gentiles exercising authority upon them, he says,
so shall it not be among you. Whosoever of you will be chiefest shall be the
servant of all.

The voice of God in the beginning called out disciples, and subjected them to
him as a father, and to Christ as a master, and the discovery of this
subjection in each other, brought them together as brethren, subject to one
father and led them to the mutual offices of brotherly love. Thus Churches were
raised up, and kept together who are called Christ's sheep, and heard his
voice, and followed him. Nor are we allowed to think of Christ's disciples or
churches being made in any other way.

But pretended disciples are influenced by the voice of man instead of God's
voice. Though they may profess some regard for God's word, yet they take their
understanding of Scripture from men, and not from God alone, and the word of
God is made of none effect through their tradition. Worldly churches are
brought together by human persuasion and eloquence, by the fashion of the
country where they live, by worldly allurements, and in some cases by human
authority and worldly force; and by the same means are they kept together. And
it is far from their thought that churches can be formed, and held together by
the power of the divine word, aside from human aid. Yet that must hold true
spoken, Zech. 4, 6. Not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit, says the
Lord of hosts. And we are not allowed to speak of any spirit but what speaks in
the scriptures. For the Lord says of the Holy Ghost he shall not speak of
himself -- he shall take of mine and show it unto you -- and whatsoever he
hears that shall he speak -- and the things which Jesus speaks he brings to
remembrance. His agency appears to be entirely in and about the scriptures. The
words of revelation then they are spirit and they are life agreeable to John
6.6, 3. -- The effect of God's teaching in revelation at first was to make the
disciples of one heart and one soul. The effect of man's teaching appears, in
the diversity of opinions at this day, and in the language being divided, and
confounded, as in the building of Babel. The mischiefs which have followed
man's usurping the place of God in teaching and exercising authority, are
manifest every where, not merely in the mother of Harlots but in her numerous
train of prostitute daughters. Human teaching has led mankind to associate
together in various sects, holding doctrines and ways of their own. Each of
their sects has looked for heads, leaders and teachers, in religion, as in the
common arts or professions in life; and have trained up youths to a more
thorough knowledge of their plan of religion, that they may become teachers,
and leaders to instruct others, and defend their faith whatever that faith
happens to be. And here is supposed to be the fountain head of information; and
here it is judged proper to resort for instruction, as we resort to men trained
up to any art or science, to get information about it. It is true this is not
the only refort for instruction, for it is common for every man to teach his
neighbor and in his turn to be taught by him. In general there is no
dependence on any thing else but human teaching in religion, for though some
individuals professedly resort to the scriptures, yet it appears that they will
have no weight with them against the peremptory assertion of a darling teacher,
in whom the highest confidence is placed.

It is not denied that human teaching has in the concerns of this world
contributed greatly to the stock of knowledge. This is manifest in the
mechanical arts, in navigation, commerce, husbandry, etc. So exercising human
authority has had a salutary effect in the societies of this world, securing
life and property and promoting order. But in the concerns of that life beyond
the grave, they both have had an opposire effect.

In the early days of christianity, it was agreeable to the natural bias of
man's heart, (even as it is now) to thirst for some teaching beside God's, and
different from his, and so they heaped to themselves teachers, having itching
ears who turned them from 'the truth to fables. In like manner they were
impatient of being under the entire control of God in his word, and were
desirous that man should share the authority with him, and their consciences
became subjected to human authority. They allowed their bishops the authority
of a father and they were each called Papa, or Pope, in express opposition to
those words call no man father on earth. Though the name was confined
afterward to the Bishop of Rome as the general father, yet all the rest were
still accounted as having the authority of subordinate fathers.

The Protestants as the name denotes, have protested against some of the
enormities of the Church of Rome; still in general they are fond that man's
teaching, should take the place of God's teaching by his word, and man's rule
and authority, should take the place of his entire sway. Indeed their not
allowing him to speak in his word so that he can be well understood by men of
ordinary capacity, at once robs him of his prerogative of teaching and ruling
both, for no one can either teach or rule if his words are unintelligible.

Men slattered themselves no doubt when they were departing from the authority
of God, in his word that they were aiding his cause and advancing his kingdom.
A grand kingdom has been built up it is true under the christian name as is
manifest in the Church of Rome, and other national establishments. Grand
temples have been erected, pompous services introduced, which in splendour might
vie with the ancient pagan temples and services, in whose place they came.
These have drawn admiration on earth, but none from him who fled; when they
would once have taken him by force, and made him a king. When the Supreme God
(...) the height of his sanctuary, and from heaven beholds the earth, it is not
to take pleasure in the pompous parade of these temples, but it is to hear the
groaning of the prisoner and to loose those who are appointed to death, to
declare his name in Zion, etc. Psalm 102.19, 20. His eye is turned from these;
and his ears are open to a poor wretch though in a dungeon; who durst not list
up his eyes, but smites upon his breast crying, God be merciful to me a sinner.
And where two or three such are gathered together in his name; there he is in
the midst of them.

I am your affectionate father, etc.

LETTER VI.
DEAR SON,
ONE confirmation of the divine truth of the holy Scriptures, is, that
incontestible facts forcibly set forth the same testimony with the Scriptures,
in many instances while men practically deny both. I shall only instance the
testimony of both scripture and fact; as to the wisdom of this world in matters
of religion, which mankind are bent to make high account of, against their
joint evidence of its vanity. See. 1 Cor. 1.19, 22. It is written I will
destroy the wisdom of the wise, and bring to nothing the understanding of the
prudent. Where is the wife? Where is the scribe? Where is the disputer of this
world? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? For after that in
the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching, to save them who believe, ver. 27. God has chosen
the foolish things of the world to confound the wise. 3 chap. 19, 20. The
wisdom of this world is foolishness with God, for it is written he takes the
wise in their own craftiness; and again, the Lord knows the thoughts of the
wise, that they are vain, 182. If any man among you seems to be wise, let him
become a fool that he may be wise. The words need no comment. We cannot
conceive of language more forceably pouring contempt upon all that wisdom so
highly esteemed among men.

This testimony of the Holy Ghost concerning the wisdom of this world, was
strikingly illustrated by facts, in the Apostle's day; and it is not less so in
the present day. The more a person is informed of the several religious
opinions that have been, or are now in the world, the more full will be his
evidence of this truth. The vast variety of sects and plans of religion in the
world, which are opposite to each other, have been the product of man's wisdom;
for in the first place they originated from wise men, who invented and set them
afoot, for if each sect was traced to its beginning, it would appear that its
founder was a wise man of more than ordinary capacity. Secondly, wise men have
been selected, as teachers, champions, and defenders of them from age to age;
and though there may be a difference as to their wisdom, yet the stress of
their defense has been upon men that were the most wise. Thirdly, they have
mostly been under the patronage of civil rulers, who are allowed in general to
be of the wifest of the people; and these have exerted their power, in
connection with the religious teachers, to build up the religion that is in
fashion, among their subjects, whatever it may be. In this way, most, if not
all the sects in religion, have been reared up and supported, confronting each
other. Thus human wisdom appears in the whole affair, and as it were stands
proclaiming its own folly, inconsistency, and contradiction.

Should one apply to the wisest man in France, or China, or any other country,
for information about religion; each of them might appear to answer wifely; but
no one aside from revelation could produce more than a mere conjecture, couched
in wisdom of words, and probably their answers would be all contradictory.

Human wisdom by cooking the scriptures for men's palates, has not only raised
up a multitude of sects, called christian, but also has led them mutually to
esteem each other for wisdom, and piety; while holding doctrines and practices
opposite to each other. They care not what reputation the truth of God has, and
it will be suffered to fall in the street, provided they extract to themselves
a name for wisdom and piety, with an easy living. Here indignation might rise,
but God says vengeance is mine! We may be sure that truth will prevail, and all
its purposes will be fulfilled. To some it will be the favor of life unto
life, and to others, of death unto death. Happy they who are made partakers of
its afflictions according to the power of God, who calls them with an holy
calling, according to his own purpose and grace, given them in Christ Jesus,
before the world began.

I am your affectionate father, etc.

LETTER VII.
DEAR SON,
WE may now turn our attention to the scriptures as the only safe guide in
religion, and altogether sufficient for the grand purpose of man's salvation.
Simon Peter upon a particular occasion says, Lord to whom shall we go, thou
have the words of eternal life. The words of Jesus in the scriptures are the
words of eternal life. How they are so appears Acts 11.14. Who shall tell the
words whereby thou and all thy house shall be saved. It is said, the excellency
of knowledge is, that wisdom gives life to them that have it. Eccles. 7.11. It
is expressly declared to be life eternal to know the only true God and Jesus
Christ whom he has sent, John 17. This knowledge is conveyed only through the
scriptures. Jesus also prays, sanctify them through thy truth, thy word is
truth. We are told, Psalm 12. 6. The words of the Lord are pure words as silver
tried in a furnace, purified seven times. The Psalmist's 19th Psalm, after
pointing to the heavens as declaring the glory of God, and setting before us
his handy work, etc. in the 7th verse, and on, shows the far superior light of
revelation as perfect; converting the soul, making wise the simple,
enlightening the eyes, rejoicing the heart, etc. and then speaks of it as more
to be desired than fine gold, and sweeter than the honeycomb. Upon a certain
woman's crying out, blessed is the womb that bare thee, etc. Jesus replies, yea
rather blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it, Luke 11.28. He
rather fixes the blessedness here, than upon even being the parent of the son
of God. The first of his parables, that of the sower which is recorded by three
evangelists and closes with this cry, he that has ears to hear let him hear,
points out that as the harvest originates from the seed cast into the ground so
his own harvest which was to be gathered in at last, would all originate from
that seed the word of God. So that whatever is great, good, or desirable in his
kingdom rises from that seed the word of God. He however shows that where it is
not understood, is catched away by Satan, or is choked with cares, the seed is
made of none effect. It is said Jam. 1.18, of his own will begat he us with the
word of truth, etc and 2.12. Wherefore lay apart all filthiness, etc. and
receive with meekness the engrafted word which is able to save your souls. It
is well known that a graft inserted in a thorn bush will bear fruit partaking
of its own nature, and not that of the thorn: So the word of God engrafted,
bears fruit as it is said, Coloss. 1.6. That the word of the truth of the
Gospel brings forth fruit. They are said to be begotten by it, and it is
expressly said to be able to save the soul. -- The Apostle Peter speaks of the
saints as being born again of incorruptible seed by the word of God which
lives and abides forever. He then speaks of all flesh as grass, and all the
glory of man as the flower of grass, but the word of the Lord endures forever,
and this is the word which by the Gospel is preached unto you while all flesh
turns to corruption, and all their glory withers, the word of the Gospel is
held forth for dying man to confide in, as everliving, and able to give him
life, though he finds his flesh and his heart are failing. How excellent this
word!

The Apostle says of Timothy, that from a child, he had known the holy
scriptures which are able to make wise to salvation, and then adds, all
scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness; that the man of God
may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3.15, 17. At
parting with the elders at Ephesus he says, Acts 20.32. And now brethren I
commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up
and give you an inheritance among all them who are sanctified, etc. We may
notice three expressions quoted above, James says it is able to save the soul.
The passage from Timothy says, it is able to make wise to salvation, this last
quoted says, it is able to build up and give the inheritance, etc. They are
full to one purpose. And the Apostle commends his brethren only to God and this
word as all-sufficient. There had been no safety in commending to any man,
however eminent, or to his own strength, or any thing under the sun but the
word of God's grace.

It is said, Deuteronomy. 8.3. And he humbled thee, etc. that he might make thee know
that man does not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of
the mouth of the Lord, does man live. Jesus in reply to the tempter quotes
these words, Mat. 4.4. The end of Israel's severe trials, was to bring to this
point of knowledge, that God's word was their life, and as man's natural life
must fail without sustenance, so his life beyond the grave must fail but for
the word of God. Agreeably we read the just or justified shall live by faith or
through the truth believed. The grandeur of the subject seems to forbid
descending to any particular notice of the length men have run in vilifying
this word, which one would think scarcely possible had he not daily evidence
set before him.

One text more may be noticed, Is. 55.10, 11, 12. For as the rain comes down
and the snow from heaven, and returns not thither again but waters the
earth and makes it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower and
bread to the eater, so shall my word be which goes out of my mouth, it shall
not return to me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it
shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it. Here we are reminded whose mouth
it proceeds from to inspire with awe: it is clothed with the authority of him
who speaks. Again it is like the rain, which fails not to clothe the earth with
verdure, and furnish sustenance for man and beast, ministering life and vigor.
All the verdure, life, and vigor of Christ's kingdom arises from the word of
his mouth. And this word does not return to him void, like a messenger unable
to perform his errand; but fully accomplishes the purpose for which it is sent
forth. It effects all that God designed that it should on the earth.

The word from the same mouth at first said, let their be light, and failed not
of producing it. It said also, let the earth bring forth grass, and herb,
yielding seed and the fruit tree yielding fruit, whose seed is in itself, after
his kind, and its force continues in vegetation from year to year; as also the
source of that word be fruitful and multiply and replenish the earth, continues
renewing the face of the earth, though one generation passes away, after
another. So his word in the scriptures has had, and still will have its full
effect, in gathering in all his chosen people, that not one be lost. And though
an apostle may be bound, yet the word of God is not bound. Yea those things
which appear like checking its progress, often turn out to the furtherance of
it. It has its free course, and makes its way through gates of brass, and bars
of iron. Without human aid it will triumph over all the force of men and the
powers of hell.

Its effects are not splendid in this world, in the eyes of those who like the
Jews, are thinking of a temporal kingdom for the Messiah. The kingdom formed by
it, comes not with observation. A bruised reed and the smoking flax are fit
emblems of it. But hereafter it will appear conformable to him, who though once
crucified in weakness shall appear in his glory as the only potentate, the King
of Kings and Lord of Lords. Paint must be our conception of the splendour of his
kingdom at that day, when those whom he calls his sheep, who hear his voice,
and follow him, in sufferings; are all gathered together in one general
assembly, to share in his glory, and shall appear as one grand royal family,
crowned with glory and honor and immortality. Then the issue of hearing God's
voice in the scriptures will be strikingly manifest, while this world is
smoking in ruins.

I am your affectionate father, etc.

LETTER VIII.
DEAR SON,
SUNDRY striking passages of Scripture upon the energy of God's word were
omitted in my last, which I will mention in this, and finish with some remarks
upon the resistance the truth has met with in the world. -- It is said, Jer.
23.29. Is not my word like as a fire, says the Lord? and like a hammer that
breaks the rock in pieces? Heb. 4.12. For the word of God is quick (or
living) and powerful and sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the
dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. It is said of numbers who
received it that they were pricked in their heart. While it gives a deadly
stab, it conveys a salutary balsam. While it demolishes the hopes of man, it
presents a grand reason of hope through the blood of Jesus. -- Its force as the
grand weapon of the Apostle is expressed, 2 Cor. 10.4. For the weapons of our
warfare are not carnal but mighty through God; to the pulling down strong
holds, casting down reasonings and every high thing which exalts itself
against the knowledge of God, bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ. -- This brings to mind the idea of a strong fortress
demolished by powerful artillery. Mighty were the effects of God's word in the
Apostle's days. It came not in word only but in power and in the holy ghost,
and in much assurance. It wrought effectually in them. They turned from idols
to God, to serve the living God and wait for his son from heaven, 1 Thessalonians. 1.9,
10. The course of the whole could of witnesses mentioned Heb. 11th chap. and
the course of their followers under the new testament was opposite to the
course of this world and to the bias of their own hearts. They were influenced
by the word of God and something supernatural appears in their course all one
way, as if a stream should turn about and run toward its source.

The two witnesses which prophecy 1260 days, clothed in sackcloth, called the
two olive trees, and the two candlesticks standing before the God of the whole
earth appear to be the old and new testament, and it is said if any man hurt
them, fire proceeds out of their mouth and devoureth their enemies, and they
have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of their prophecy to
turn water to blood and to smite the earth with plagues as often as they will,
as God's word of old did by Moses, see Rev. 11.3, 7. The fulfillment of their
prophecy particularly under the seven trumpets and seven vials is smiting the
earth with plagues, and in the just judgment of God falls on those who received
not the love of the truth. Their shutting heaven that it rain not in the days
of their prophecy appears to point to the same thing mentioned Rev. 7.1, under
the similitude of holding the four winds of the earth, the consequence of which
is dearth and destruction. As to fire proceeding out of their mouth and
devouring their enemies, it leads us to think of the last effect of the
scriptures upon those who abuse them, and reminds of what Jesus says, John
12.18. He that rejects me and receives not my words has one that judges
him; the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him at the last day.
Here we see the power of the supreme judge as it were attributed to the word of
God in the last awful decision. Then their threatenings will burst forth like
fire which had been long concealed, vomited from their mouth, and it will
appear that heaven and earth shall sooner pass away than one jot or tittle of
them shall fail. -- The conclusion of the whole book of revelation points out
the curses of the man that shall dare to add to or take from the words of God,
Rev. 22.18, 19.

It is said, Psalm 138.2. Thou have magnified thy word above all thy name. The
voice of the Lord is indeed powerful and full of majesty. His word called up
the heavens and earth into existence, Heb. 11.3. And the heavens and earth
which are now by the same word are kept in store reserved unto fire, 2 Pet.
3.7. And the hour is coming when all that are in their graves shall hear his
voice and come forth to the resurrection of life, or resurrection of damnation.
John 5.28, 29. -- God's voice in the scriptures is from the same mouth, and
deems it no usurpation to be counted equal with that voice which raises the
dead.

The state of mankind as to believing this holy word, is not unlike that of the
Jews, who under clear evidence came round Jesus saying, how long do thou make
us to doubt, if thou be the Christ tell us plainly.

However light the scripture is accounted among men, yet Jesus Christ is said
to tremble at this word. For thus speaks he whose throne is the heaven, If.
66.2. To this man will I look to him who is poor and of a contrite spirit, and
trembles at my word. This passage must be understood to refer to Jesus Christ
in whom alone God is well pleased.
And as to those who tremble at the same word in conformity to him it is said,
5th verse, Hear the word of the Lord ye that tremble at his word, your brethren
who hated you and cast you out for my names sake said, let the Lord be
glorified, but he shall appear to your joy and they shall be ashamed. Jesus
declares, Mark 8.38, that whoever is ashamed of his words, of him he will be
ashamed when he comes in his glory. The Saints in every age, afraid of their
own lusts under the specious show of reason, have thought themselves bound to
believe what they are told by God, and to do as they are bidden by him,
wiithout adding or diminishing, avoiding vain reasonings. They have been from
age to age in the midst of an adulterous generation, who under a boast of
reason have always resisted the truth. And no doubt but that a boast of reason
has run through the whole resistance it has met with from infidels and
corrupters of the truth, whether we think of Pharaoh, Korah and company, the
Israelites proposing a captain to lead back to Egypt, or opposed to the report
of the spies, or the whole resistance in the wilderness and Canaan, by men of
their own body or nations round them. No doubt but that the Jews boasted of
reason in all their perverse cavils against Jesus, under the light of striking
miracles, and in putting him to death. The same is true as to men's conduct
toward the Apostles. The same is true as to the church of Rome professing to
hold the word of God sacred, and yet making it of no effect through their
traditions (as the Jews had done before) in whom was found the blood of many
who were slain for the word of God. So at this day while multitudes profess to
hold the scriptures to be the word of God, they openly deny its plainest
truths, even that Jesus Christ is the son of God -- that there is salvation in
no other -- and that he who believes not shall be damned, contrary to plain
assertions of the holy Ghost. The boasted light of reason has been the dictates
of their own lusts, and not the light of their conscience. As to such unhappy
men, the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. But if our gospel be hid, it is hid to
them who are lost. In whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of them
who believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the
image of God, should shine unto them. They stumble at the stumbling stone laid
in Zion. They stumble at the word, being disobedient, whereunto also they are
appointed 1 Pet. 2.8. The fearful lengths men have gone, are a fulfillment of
several prophecies, particularly 2 Thessalonians. 2 chap. which foretells the rise of
false christianity under the energy of Satan, and that for this cause God shall
send them strong delusions that they should believe a lie, that they all might
be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness, see
2.11, 12 v. Here is also mention that this man of sin should be destroyed by
the brightness of his coming. And from prophetic computation it appears, that
the time of the second visit of Jesus is not far distant, when we are assured
it shall be as it was in the days of Noah and in the days of Lot. It becomes
those who have an ear to hear him saying, behold I come as a thief, and to bear
in mind that exhortation, Heb. 2.1, 5. Therefore we ought to give the more
earnest heed to the things we have heard lest at any time we let them slip. For
if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression received a
just recompense of reward. How shall we escape if we neglect so great
salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed
to us by them who heard him; God also bearing witness both with signs and
wonders, and with diverse miracles and gifts of the holy Ghost according to his
own will.

I am yours affectionately, etc.

FINIS.
The Reader will please to correct the following Errors of Press.
Page 12. -- 18th Line, for perish read persist. Page 13. -- 7th Line, for
Josiah read Jonah. Page 24. -- 1st Line, read is was whered. Page 25. -- 7th
Line from Bottom, for and from read aside from. Page 27. -- 5th Line, for
doubtless read doubt. Page 31. -- 14th Line, read each of these. Page 36. --
6th Line from Bottom, for inverted read inserted. Page 38. -- 3d from Bottom,
for source read force. Page 40. -- 7th Line, for could read cloud.

