THE SPEECHES OF THE Hon. THOMAS ERSKINE, IN THE COURT OF KING's BENCH, June
28, 1797, BEFORE THE RIGHT HON. LLOYD LORD KENYON, AND A SPECIAL JURY, ON THE
TRIAL THE KING versus THOMAS WILLIAMS, FOR PUBLISHING THE AGE of REASON,
WRITTEN BY THOMAS PAIN; Together with Mr. STEWART KYD's REPLY, AND LORD
KENYON's CHARGE TO THE JURY.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR, AND SOLD BY WILLIAM COBBETT, OPPOSITE CHRIST CHURCH.

Nov. 1797.

THE SPEECHES, etc.
MR. ERSKINE's SPEECH ON THE PART OF THE PROSECUTION.
GENTLEMEN OF THE JURY,
THE charge of blasphemy, which is put upon the record against the printer of
this publication is not an accusation of the servants of the crown, but comes
before you sanctioned by the oaths of a grand jury of the country. It stood for
trial upon a former day; but it happening, as it frequently does, without any
imputation upon the gentlemen named in the panel, that a sufficient number did
not appear to constitute a full special jury, I thought it my duty to withdraw
the cause from trial, till I could have the opportunity which is now open to me
of addressing myself to you, who were originally appointed to try it. I pursued
this course, however, from no jealousy of the common juries appointed by the
laws for the ordinary service of the court, since my whole life has been one
continued experience of their virtues; but because I thought it of great
importance, that those who were to decide upon a cause so very momentous to the
public, should have the highest possible qualifications for the decision: that
they should not only be men capable from their educations of forming an
enlightened judgment, but that their situations should be such as to bring them
within the full view of their enlightened country, to which, in character and
in estimation, they were in their own turns to be responsible.

Not having the honor, Gentlemen, to be sworn for the king as one of his
counsel, it has fallen much oftener to my lot to defend indictments for libels,
than to assist in the prosecution of them. But I feel no embarrassment from
that recollection; since I shall not be found today to express a sentiment, or
to utter an expression, inconsistent with those invaluable principles for which
I have uniformly contended in the defense of others. Nothing that I have ever
said, either professionally or personally, for the liberty of the press, do I
mean today to contradict or counteract. On the contrary, I desire to preface
the very short discourse I have to make to you with reminding you, that it is
your most solemn duty to take care that it suffers no injury in your hands. A
free and unlicensed press (in the just and legal sense of the expression) has
led to all the blessings both of religion and government, which Great Britain
or any part of the world at this moment enjoys, and is calculated still farther
to advance mankind to higher degrees of civilization and happiness. But this
freedom, like every other, must be limited to be enjoyed, and like every human
advantage, may be defeated by its abuse.

Gentlemen! the defendant stands indicted for having published this book, which
I have only read from the obligations of professional duty, and which I rose
from the reading of with astonishment and disgust. Standing here with all the
privileges belonging to the highest counsel for the crown, I shall be entitled
to reply to any defense that shall be made for the publication. I shall wait
with patience till I hear it. Indeed, if I were to anticipate the defense which
I hear and read of, it would be defaming by anticipation the learned counsel
who is to make it. For if I am to collect it, even from a formal notice given
to the prosecutors in the course of the proceedings, I have to expect, that,
instead of a defense conducted according to the rules and principles of English
law and justice, the foundation of all our laws, and the sanctions of all our
justice, are to be struck at and insulted. What is the force of that
jurisdiction which enables the court to sit in judgment? What but the oath
which his Lordship, as well as yourselves, have sworn upon the gospel to
fulfill? Yet in the king's court, where his Majesty is himself also sworn to
administer the justice of England -- in the king's court -- who receives his
high authority under a solemn oath to maintain the Christian religion, as it is
promulgated by God in the Holy Scriptures, I am nevertheless called upon as
counsel for the prosecution, to produce a certain book described in the
indictment to be the Holy Bible. No man deserves to be upon the rolls of the
court, who dares, as an attorney, to put his name to such a notice. It is an
insult to the authority and dignity of the court of which he is an officer;
since it seems to call in question the very foundations of its jurisdiction. If
this is to be the spirit and temper of the defense; if, as I collect from that
array of books which are spread upon the benches behind me, this publication is
to be vindicated by an attack of all the truths which the Christian religion
promulgates to mankind, let it be remembered that such an argument was neither
suggested nor justified by any thing said by me on the part of the prosecution.
In this stage of the proceedings, I shall call for reverence to the Sacred
Scriptures, not from their merits, unbounded as they are, but from their
authority in a Christian country -- not from the obligations of conscience, but
from the rules of law. For my own part, Gentlemen, I have been ever deeply
devoted to the truths of Christianity; and my firm belief in the Holy Gospel is
by no means owing to the prejudices of education (though I was religiously
educated by the best of parents), but arises from the fullest and most
continued reflections of my riper years and understanding. It forms at this
moment the great consolation of a life, which, as a shadow, must pass away; and
without it, indeed, I should consider my long course of health and prosperity
(perhaps too long and too uninterrupted to be good for any man) only as the
dust which the wind scatters, and rather as a snare than as a blessing. Much,
however, as I wish to support the authority of Scripture from a reasoned
consideration of it, I shall repress that subject for the present. But if the
defense shall be as I have suspected, to bring them at all into argument or
question, I shall then fulfill a duty which I owe not only to the court, as
counsel for the prosecution, but to the public, to state what I feel and know
concerning the evidences of that religion which is reviled without being
examined, and denied without being understood.

I am well aware that by the communications of a free press, all the errors of
mankind, from age to age, have been dissipated and dispelled; and I recollect
that the world, under the banners of reformed Christianity, has struggled
through persecution to the noble eminence on which it stands at this moment,
shedding the blessings of humanity and science upon the nations of the earth.
It may be asked, by what means the reformation would have been effected, if the
books of the reformers had been suppressed, and the errors of condemned and
exploded superstitions had been supported as unquestionable by the state,
founded upon those very superstitions formerly, as it is at present upon the
doctrines of the established church? Or how, upon such principles, any
reformation, civil or religious can in future be effected? The solution is
easy: -- Let us examine what are the genuine principles of the liberty of the
press, as they regard writings upon general subjects, unconnected with the
personal reputations of private men, which are wholly foreign to the present
inquiry. They are full of simplicity, and are brought as near perfection, by
the law of England, as, perhaps, is consistent with any of the frail
institutions of mankind.

Although every community must establish supreme authorities, founded upon
fixed principles, and must give high powers to magistrates to administer laws
for the preservation of the government itself, and for the security of those
who are to be protected by it: yet, as infallibility and perfection belong
neither to human establishments nor to human individuals, it ought to be the
policy of all free establishments, as it is most peculiarly the principle of
our own constitution, to permit the most unbounded freedom of discussion, even
by detecting errors in the constitution or administration of the very
government itself, so as that decorum is observed, which every state must exact
from its subjects, and which imposes no restraint upon any intellectual
composition, fairly, honestly, and decently addressed to the consciences and
understandings of men. Upon this principle, I have an unquestionable right (a
right which the best subjects have exercised) to examine the principles and
structure of the constitution, and by fair, manly reasoning, to question the
practice of its administrators. I have a right to consider and to point out
errors in the one or in the other; and not merely to reason upon their
existence, but to consider the means of their reformation. By such free,
well-intentioned, modest, and dignified communication of sentiments and
opinions, all nations have been gradually improved, and milder laws and purer
religions have been established. The same principles, which vindicate civil
contentions honestly directed, extend their protection to the sharpest
controversies on religious faiths. This rational and legal course of
improvement was recognized and ratified by Lord Kenyon, as the law of England,
in a late trial at Guildhall, when he looked back with gratitude to the labors
of the reformers, as the fountains of our religious emancipation, and of the
civil blessings that followed in their train. The English constitution, indeed,
does not stop short in the toleration of religious opinions, but liberally
extends it to practice. It permits every man, EVEN PUBLICLY to worship God
according to his own conscience, though in marked dissent from the national
establishment, so as he professes the general faith, which is the sanction of
all our moral duties, and the only pledge of our submission to the system which
constitutes a state. Is not this system of freedom of controversy, and freedom
of worship, sufficient for all the purposes of human happiness and improvement?
And can it be necessary for either, that the law should hold out indemnity to
those who wholly abjure and revile the government of their country, or the
religion on which it rests for its foundation? I expect to hear, in answer to
what I am now saying, much that will offend me. My learned friend, from the
difficulties of his situation, which I know, from experience, how to feel for
very sincerely, may be driven to advance propositions which it may be my duty,
with much freedom, to reply to; and the law will s^^ction that freedom. But
will not the ends of justice be completely answered by that right, to point out
the errors of his discourse in terms that are decent, and calculated to expose
its defects; or will any argument suffer, or will public justice be impeded,
because neither private honor and justice, nor public decorum, would endure my
telling my very learned friend, that he was a fool, a liar, and a scoundrel, in
the face of the court, because I differed from him in argument or opinion? This
is just the distinction between a book of free legal controversy and the book
which I am arraigning before you. Every man has a legal right to investigate,
with modesty and decency, controversial points of the Christian religion; but
no man, consistently with a law, which only exists under its sanctions, has a
right not only broadly to deny its very existence, but to pour forth a shocking
and insulting invective, which the lowest establishments in the gradations of
civil authority ought not to be permitted to suffer, and which soon would be
borne down by insolence and disobedience, if they did.

The same principle pervades the whole system of the law, not merely in its
abstract theory, but in its daily and most applauded practice. -- The
intercourse between the sexes, and which, properly regulated, not only
continues, but humanizes and adorns our natures, is the foundation of all the
thousand romances, plays, and novels, which are in the hands of every body.
Some of them lead to the confirmation of every virtuous principle; others,
though with the same profession, address the imagination in a manner to lead
the passions into dangerous excesses. But though the law does not nicely
discriminate the various shades which distinguish these works from one another,
so as that it suffers many to pass, through its liberal spirit, that upon
principle might be suppressed, would it or does it tolerate, or does any decent
man contend that it ought to pass by unpunished, libels of the most shameless
obscenity, manifestly pointed to debauch innocence, and to blast and poison the
morals of the rising generation? This is only another illustration to
demonstrate the obvious distinction between the work of an author, who fairly
exercises the powers of his mind, in investigating doctrinal points in the
religion of any country, and him who attacks the rational existence of every
religion, and brands with absurdity and folly the state which sanctions, and
the obedient tools who cherish the delusion. But this publication appears to me
to be as mischievous and cruel in its probable effects, as it is manifestly
illegal in its principles; because it strikes at the best, sometimes, alas! the
only refuge and consolation amidst the distresses and afflictions of the world.
The poor and humble, whom it affects to pity, may be stabbed to the heart by
it. They have more occasion for firm hopes beyond the grave, than those who
have greater comforts to render life delightful. I can conceive a distressed
but virtuous man, surrounded by children, looking up to him for bread when he
has none to give them, sinking under the last day's labor, and unequal to the
next, yet still looking up with confidence to the hour when all tears shall be
wiped from the eyes of affliction, bearing the burden laid upon him by a
mysterious Providence which he adores, and looking forward with exultation to
the revealed promises of his Creator, when he shall be greater than the
greatest, and happier than the happiest of mankind. What a change in such a
mind might not be wrought by such a merciless publication? Gentlemen! whether
these remarks are the overcharged declamations of an accusing counsel, or the
just reflections of a man anxious for the public freedom, which is best secured
by the morals of a nation, will be best settled by an appeal to the passages in
the work, that are selected by the indictment for your consideration and
judgment. You are at liberty to connect them with every context and sequel, and
to bestow upon them the mildest interpretation. [ Here Mr. Erskine read and
commented upon sever^l of the selected passages, and then proceeded as
follows:] -- Gentlemen, it would be useless and disgusting to enumerate the
other passages within the scope of the indictment. How any man can rationally
vindicate the publication of such a book, in a country where the Christian
religion is the very foundation of the law of the land, I am totally at a loss
to conceive, and have no ideas for the discussion of. How is a tribunal, whose
whole jurisdiction is founded upon the solemn belief and practice of what is
denied as falsehood, and reprobated as impiety, to deal with such an anomalous
defense? Upon what principle is it even offered to the court, whose authority
is contemned and mocked at? If the religion proposed to be called in question,
is not previously adopted in belief and solemnly acted upon, what authority has
the court to pass any judgment at all of acquittal or condemnation? Why am I
now, or upon any other occasion, to submit to your lordship's authority? Why am
I now, or at any time, to address twelve of my equals, as I am now addressing
you, with reverence and submission? Under what sanction are the witnesses to
give their evidence, without which there can be no trial? Under what
obligations can I call upon you, the jury representing your country, to
administer justice? Surely upon no other than that you are sworn to administer
it under the oaths you have taken. The whole judicial fabric, from the king's
sovereign authority to the lowest office of magistracy, has no other
foundation. The whole is built, both in form and substance, upon the same oath
of every one of its ministers to do justice AS GOD SHALL HELP THEM HEREAFTER.
What God? And what hereafter? That God, undoubtedly, who has commanded kings to
rule, and judges to decree with justice; who has said to witnesses, not by the
voice of nature, but in revealed commandments -- THOU SHALL NOT BEAR FALSE
TESTIMONY AGAINST THY NEIGHBOR; and who has enforced obedience to them by the
revelation of the unutterable blessings which shall attend their observance,
and the awful punishments which shall await upon their transgression. But it
seems, this is an age of reason, and the time and the person are at last
arrived, that are to dissipate the errors which have overspread the past
generations of ignorance. The believers in Christianity are many, but it
belongs to the few that are wise to correct their credulity. Belief is an act
of reason, and superior reason may, therefore, dictate to the weak. In running
the mind along the long list of sincere and devout Christians, I cannot help
lamenting, that Newton had not lived to this day, to have had his shallowness
filled up with this new flood of light. -- But the subject is too awful for
irony. I will speak plainly and directly. Newton was a Christian! Newton, whose
mind burst forth from the fetters cast by nature upon our finite conceptions --
Newton, whose science was truth, and the foundation of whose knowledge of it
was philosophy -- not those visionary and arrogant presumptions, which too
often usurp its name, but philosophy resting upon the basis of mathematics,
which, like figures, cannot lie -- Newton, who carried the line and rule to the
uttermost barriers of creation, and explored the principles by which, no doubt,
all created matter is held together and exists. But this extraordinary man, in
the mighty reach of his mind, overlooked, perhaps, the errors, which a minuter
investigation of the created things on this earth might have taught him, of the
essence of his Creator. What shall then be said of the great Mr. Boil, who
looked into the organic structure of all matter, even to the brute inanimate
substances which the foot treads on? Such a man may be supposed to have been
equally qualified with Mr. Pain to look up through nature to nature's God. Yet
the result of all his contempla^^on was the most confirmed and devout belief in
all which the other holds in contempt, as despicable and drivelling
superstition. -- But this error might, perhaps, arise from a want of due
attention to the foundations of human judgment, and the structure of that
understanding which God has given us for the investigation of truth. -- Let
that question be answered by Mr. Lock, who was, to the highest pitch of
devotion and adoration, a Christian -- Mr. Lock, whose office was to detect
the errors of thinking, by going up to the fountains of thought, and to direct
into the proper track of reasoning, the devious mind of man, by showing him its
whole process, from the first perceptions of sense to the last conclusions of
ratiocination, putting a rein besides upon false opinion, by practical rules
for the conduct of human judgment. But these men were only deep thinkers, and
lived in their closets, unaccustomed to the traffic of the world, and to the
laws which practically regulate mankind.

Gentlemen! in the place were we now sit to administer the justice of this
great country, above a century ago, the never-to-be-forgotten Sir Matthew Hale
presided; whose faith in Christianity is an exalted commentary upon its truth
and reason, and whose life was a glorious example of its fruits in man,
administering human justice with a wisdom and purity drawn from the pure
fountain of the Christian dispensation, which has been, and will be, in all
ages, a subject of the highest reverence and admiration. But it is said by the
author, that the Christian fable is but the tale of the more ancient
superstitions of the world, and may be easily detected by a proper
understanding of the mythologies of the Heathens. Did Milton understand those
mythologies? Was he less versed than Mr. Pain in the superstitions of the
world? No, they were the subject of his immortal song; and though shut out from
all recurrence to them, he poured them forth from the stores of a memory rich
with all that man ever knew, and laid them in their order as the illustration
of that real and exalted faith, the unquestionable source of that servid
genius, which cast a sort of shade upon all the other works of man -- He passed
the bounds of flaming space,
Where Angels tremble while they gaze:
He saw, till, blasted with excess of light,
He closed his eyes in endless night.
But it was the light of the BODY only that was extinguished: "The celestial
light shone inward, and enabled him to justify the ways of God to man." The
result of his thinking was nevertheless not the same as the author's. The
mysterious incarnation of our blessed Savior (which this work blasphemes in
words so wholly unfit for the mouth of a Christian, or for the ear of a court
of justice, that I dare not, and will not, give them utterance) Milton made the
grand conclusion of the Paradise Lost, the rest from his finished labors, and
the ultimate hope, expectation, and glory of the world.

A Virgin is his Mother, but his Sire,
The power of the Most High; he shall ascend
The throne hereditary, and bound his reign
With earth's wide bounds, his glory with the heavens.
The immortal poet having thus put into the mouth of the angel the prophecy of
man's redemption, follows it with that solemn and beautiful admonition,
addressed in the Poem to our great first parent, but intended as an address to
his posterity through all generations: This having learned, thou have attained
the sum
Of wisdom, hope no higher, though all the stars
Thou know by name, and all the ethereal powers,
All secrets of the deep, all Nature's works,
Or works of God in heaven, air, earth, or sea,
And all the riches of this world enjoy'st,
And all the rule, one empire; only add
Deeds to thy knowledge answerable, add faith,
Add virtue, patience, temperance, add love,
By name to come called Charity, the soul
Of all the rest: then will thou not be loath
To leave this Paradise, but shall possess
A Paradise within thee, happier far.


Thus you find all that is great, or wise, or splendid, or illustrious, amongst
created beings; all the minds gifted beyond ordinary nature, if not inspired by
its universal Author for the advancement and dignity of the world, though
divided by distant ages, and by clashing opinions, distinguishing them from one
another, yet joining as it were in one sublime chorus, to celebrate the truths
of Christianity, and laying upon its holy altars the never-fading offerings of
their immortal wisdom.

Against all this concurring testimony, we find suddenly, from the author of
this book, that the Bible teaches nothing but "lies, obscenity, cruelty, and
injustice." Has he ever read our Savior's sermon on the Mount, in which the
great principles of our faith and duty are summed up? -- Let us all but read
and practice it; and lies, obscenity, cruelty, and injustice, and all human
wickedness, will be banished from the world!"

Gentlemen! there is but one consideration more, which I cannot possibly omit,
because I confess it affects me very deeply. The author of this book has
written largely on public liberty and government; and this last performance
has, on that account, been more widely circulated, and principally among those
who attached themselves from principle to his former works. This circumstance
renders a public attack upon all revealed religion from such a writer
infinitely more dangerous. The religious and moral sense of the people of Great
Britain, is the great anchor which alone can hold the vessel of the state
amidst the storms which agitate the world; and if I could believe for a moment,
that the mass of the people were to be debauched from the principles of
religion, which forms the true basis of that humanity, charity, and
benevolence, that has been so long the national characteristic, instead of
mixing myself, as I sometimes have done, in political reformations, I would
rather retire to the uttermost corners of the earth, to avoid their agitation;
and would bear, not only the imperfections and abuses complained of in our own
wise establishment, but even the worst government that ever existed in the
world, rather than go to the work of reformation with a multitude set free from
all the charities of Christianity, who had no sense of God's existence, but
from Mr. Paine's observation of nature, which the mass of mankind have no
leisure to contemplate; nor any belief of future rewards and punishments, to
animate the good in the glorious pursuit of human happiness, nor to deter the
wicked from destroying it even in its birth. But I know the people of England
better. They are a religious people, and, with the blessing of God, as far as
it is in my power, I will lend my aid to keep them so. I have no objections to
the freest and most extended discussions upon doctrinal points of the Christian
religion, and though the law of England does not permit it, I do not dread the
reasoned arguments of Deists against the existence of Christianity itself,
because, as was said by its divine Author, if it is of God it will stand. An
intellectual book, however erroneous, addressed to the intellectual world upon
so profound and complicated a subject, can never work the mischief which this
indictment is calculated to repress. Such works will only employ the minds of
men enlightened by study, to a deeper investigation of a subject well worthy of
their deepest and continued contemplation. The powers of the mind are given for
human improvement in the progress of human existence. The changes produced by
such reciprocations of lights and intelligences are certain in their
progressions, and make their way imperceptibly, as conviction comes upon the
world, by the final and irresistible power of truth. If Christianity be founded
in falsehood, let us become Deists in this manner, and I am contented. But this
book has no such object, and no such capacity: it presents no arguments to the
wise and enlightened. On the contrary, it treats the faith and opinions of the
wisest with the most shocking contempt, and stirs up men, without the
advantages of learning, or sober thinking, to a total disbelief of every thing
hitherto held sacred; and consequently to a rejection of all the laws and
ordinances of the state, which stand only upon the assumption of their truth.
Gentlemen, I cannot conclude without expressing the deepest regret at all
attacks upon the Christian religion by authors who profess to promote the civil
liberties of the world. For under what other auspices than Christianity have
the lost and subverted liberties of mankind in former ages been re-asserted? By
what zeal, but the warm zeal of devout Christians, have English liberties been
redeemed and consecrated? Under what other sanctions, even in our own days,
have liberty and happiness been extending and spreading to the uttermost
corners of the earth? What work of civilization, what commonwealth of
greatness, has this bald religion of nature ever established? We see, on the
contrary, the nations that have no other light than that of nature to direct
them, sunk in barbarism, or slaves to arbitrary governments; whilst, since the
Christian era, the great career of the world has been slowly, but clearly
advancing, lighter at every step, from the awful prophecies of the Gospel, and
leading, I trust, in the end to universal and eternal happiness. Each
generation of mankind can see but a few revolving links of this mighty and
mysterious chain; but by doing our several duties in our allotted stations, we
are sure that we are fulfilling the purposes of our existence. YOU, I trust,
will fulfill yours this day!

A Mr. Fleming, one of the clerks of the Bank, was the only witness called on
the part of the prosecution. He said, he purchased the book in question of the
defendant, at his shop, on the 7th of February last.

The NOTICE which Mr. ERSKINE mentioned in his speech was here read, and Mr.
JOHN MARTIN, the attorney for the defendant, readily admitted that he had sent
it to those who were concerned for the prosecution.

Mr. KYD made a very learned and ingenious speech for the defendant. He said he
would endeavor to discharge the important duty which he owed to his client, in
a manner that was consistent with the dignity of that court, and with that
decency and solemnity which, he felt, belonged to the subject. The question
was, whether the author, when he wrote this book, felt as he wrote, and
expressed himself as he felt. He humbly submitted, that the inferences which
Mr. Pain had drawn from the premises, were such as he might have drawn with a
fair and honest intention. Whether those inferences were just or not, was
totally a different question. But, if his lordship and the gentlemen of the
jury could discover no wicked or malicious intent, they would not punish a man
for a mere error in judgment. If the jury could collect no wicked intention in
the author from reading the whole of this performance, he contended he was
completely protected under the right which he and every other man had to
exercise the powers of his mind in discussing any controversial points of
religion. Supposing then the book had been written innocently, he might infer,
as a general proposition, that it was also published with an innocent
intention. At the same time he admitted, that what was so written, might be
published from a malicious motive, for which the publisher would be amenable to
the laws of his country. The learned counsel next selected several passages
from this performance, to show, that the author felt the most profound
reverence and veneration for the Supreme Being, and denied the truth of
revelation only because he could not reconcile it to the character and
attributes of the Deity. It was stated in that publication, that the law of
nature was engraven on every man's heart, and that he might clearly collect the
knowledge of that duty which he owed to his Creator from a contemplation of his
works. Mr. Kyd next endeavored to justify the charges made upon the Bible by
the author, by a variety of passages which he selected, but which, at the
desire of his lordship and the jury, he did not read, but only referred to
them, and contended, that if those passages were found in any other book, they
would be considered as indecent and immoral. He appealed to the writings of Dr.
Lardner, Dr. Bentley, and other eminent divines, in support of the right of
free discussion upon all subjects of a controversial nature. He then spoke in
severe terms of this prosecution, which, he said, would never have been
instituted, had it not been for Bishop WATSON's APOLOGY, which had been very
widely circulated, and had excited a curiosity to read the book, to which it
was an answer; and to gratify that public curiosity, it was, that this book,
which, he believed, had been first published at Paris, was afterward published
in this country. Mr. Kyd insisted, at great length, upon the freedom of
inquiry, and a free press, and gave the reformation and revolution as two
instances of the inestimable blessings which had resulted from them to this
country.

Mr. ERSKINE made a most eloquent reply. He said, he was bound, in respect to
his learned friend, as a member of a most honorable profession, to suppose,
that he was placed in a very irksome situation, to be called on for a defense
so exceedingly difficult to make, and so extremely delicate to manage, without
violating that common decency that was due to a court of justice. He could not
therefore help considering him as entitled to a considerable degree of
indulgence. Mr. Erskine here adverted to several of the passages selected from
the Old Testament by Mr. Kyd, and explained the reason of their introduction
into the sacred writings. The history of man he said, was the history of man's
vices and passions, which could not be censured without adverting to their
existence; and many of the instances that had been referred to, were recorded
as memorable warnings and examples for the instruction of mankind. Mr. E. next
entered most forcibly and deeply into the evidences of Christianity,
particularly those that were founded on that stupendous scheme of prophecy,
which formed one of the most unanswerable arguments for the truth of the
Christian religion. "It was not," he said, "the purpose of God to destroy free
agency by overpowering the human mind with the irresistible light and
conviction of revelation, but to leave men to collect its truths, as they were
gradually illustrated in the accomplishment of the divine promises of the
Gospel. Bred as he was to the consideration of evidence, he declared he
considered the prophecy concerning the destruction of the Jewish nation, if
there was nothing else to support Christianity, absolutely irresistible. The
division of the Jews into tribes, to preserve the genealogy of Christ, the
distinction of the tribe of Judah, from which he was to come; the loss of that
distinction when that end was accomplished; the predicted departure of the
scepter from Israel; the destruction of the temple of Jerusalem, which imperial
munificence in vain attempted to rebuild to disgrace the prophecy; the
dispersion of this nation over the face of the whole earth, the spreading of
the Gospel throughout the world; the persecutions of its true ministers, and
the foretold superstitions which for ages had defiled its worship -- these were
topics upon which Mr. Erskine expatiated with great eloquence, and produced a
most powerful effect on every part of the audience. He concluded with a
vindication of the authors of this prosecution. He said, they were men of the
highest character and greater consideration in the country. Many of them were
charged with the offices of religion; others of them were clothed with the
robes of magistracy; most of them were men of deep learning and thinking; and
all of them justly entitled to the thanks of the public for their noble
exertions in the cause of religion and virtue.

LORD KENYON's CHARGE.
"GENTLEMEN OF THE JURY,
"BEING now in possession of all the facts of this case, and convinced, in my
own mind, what conclusion ought to be drawn from them, I am not sure, that it
is necessary to say any thing at all to you upon the subject. Gentlemen, before
you proceed to decide on the merits of this or any other cause, it is proper to
see whether the parties litigating stand in a fair light before you. I was
extremely hurt when the learned counsel for the defendant thought fit to state
to you, with very considerable emphasis, and a very determined tone of voice,
that this was a scandalous prosecution. I cannot help wishing that sentence had
not been uttered. Who commenced this prosecution I certainly know not. But from
what fell from the very learned counsel who has just sat down, I am inclined to
suppose it proceeded from a society of gentlemen instituted for the most
important of all purposes, for preserving the morals of the people; a society
composed of clergymen, and laymen of the most respectable character in the
kingdom, who, feeling how the country is overrun with profligacy and
wickedness, which boldly raise their heads in defiance of the law of the land,
were determined to see whether, in the first place, by admonition and advice,
they could not stop the torrent of vice and immorality; and secondly, if that
should fail, to try what could be done by punishment. If people with the very
best intentions carry on prosecutions that are oppressive, the end may not
always perhaps sanctify the means. But the manner in which this prosecution has
been conducted, is certainly not oppressive; for instead of proceeding in the
more expensive mode, the prosecutors went before a grand jury of the country:
and it was necessary to obtain the opinion of that grand jury before the party
could be put in process. -- Gentlemen! we sit here in a Christian assembly to
administer the laws of the land, and I am to take my knowledge of what the law
is from that which has been sanctioned by a great variety of legal decisions. I
am bound to state to you what my predecessors in Mr. Woolston's case (2
Strange, 834) stated half a century ago in this court, of which I am an humble
member, namely, that the Christian religion is part of the law of the land.
Christianity from its earliest institution met with its opposers. Its
professors were very soon called upon to publish their apologies for the
doctrines they had embraced. In what manner they did that, and whether they had
the advantage of their adversaries, or sunk under the superiority of their
arguments, mankind for near two thousand years have had an opportunity of
judging. They have seen what Julian, Justin Martyr, and other apologists have
written, and have been of opinion the argument was in favor of those very
publications. The world has been lately favored with another apology from a
most learned and respectable prelate, who calls his work An Apology for the
Christian Religion. I shall not decide between the merits of the one and the
other. The publications themselves are in the hands of the world; and I
sincerely wish, in the concluding language of the work to which I have just
referred (I do not affect to use the very words), I sincerely wish that the
author of the work in question may become a partaker of that faith in revealed
religion, which he has so grossly defamed, and may be enabled to make his peace
with God for that disorder which he has endeavored to the utmost of his power
to introduce into society. We have heard today, that the light of nature, and
the contemplation of the works of creation, are sufficient, without any other
revelation of the divine will. Socrates, Plato, Xenophon, Tully -- each of them
in their turns professed they wanted other lights; and knowing and confessing
that God was good, they took it for granted the time would come when he would
impart a farther revelation of his will to mankind. Though they walked as it
were through a cloud, darkly, they hoped their posterity would almost see God
face to face. This condition of mankind has met with reprehension today. But I
shall not pursue this argument; fully impressed with the great truths of
religion, which, thank God, I was taught in my early years to believe, and
which the hour of reflection and inquiry, instead of producing any doubt, has
fully confirmed me in. I expected the learned counsel for the defendant would
have differed the case of the publisher from that of the author of this work;
that he would have endeavored to convince you that whatever guilt might belong
to the author, nothing was imputable to the publisher. He has, however, to my
utter surprise, exactly reversed the case. He tells you it was originally
published at Paris in 1794; that the feelings of the author's friends were
wounded by this work, which I call a nefarious publication, and that it was in
a great measure forgotten; and you are now called upon to judge of the merits
or demerits of the publisher, who has brought forth a still-born work,
forgotten by every body, till he ventured, in defiance of the verdicts of
mankind on the author's political works, to send it forth among the inhabitants
of this country. Unless it was for the most malignant purposes, I cannot
conceive how it was published. It is however for you to judge of it, and to do
justice between the public and defendant."

The Jury instantly found the Defendant -- Guilty.

FINIS.

