DISPUTE BETWEEN THE United States and France.

JUNE. 1797.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE DISPUTE BETWEEN THE United States and France, ADDRESSED BY
ROBERT GOODLOE HARPER, OF SOUTH CAROLINA, TO HIS CONSTITUENTS, IN MAY, 1797.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED and SOLD BY THOMAS BRADFORD, BOOKSELLER and STATIONER,
No. 8, South Front-Street. 1797.

ENTERED ACCORDING TO LAW.

OBSERVATIONS, etc.
IT will be recollected, my fellow citizens, that while I have claimed, as one
of the representatives of the American people, the right of acting according to
my own judgment, on all questions which concern their general interests, I have
always deemed it my duty to you, from whom I received the appointment, to make
you acquainted, not only with my opinion and conduct on every important
measure, but also with the reasons by which I have been guided.

This duty I am now about to fulfill in a case of the highest importance. Having
on two former occasions declared to you in the most unreserved manner, my
opinion respecting the differences which have unfortunately arisen between this
country and France, I am now about to explain the reasons whereon that opinion
is founded.

After stating some considerations which have induced me to believe that the
charges alleged against us by France, are wholly unfounded, I shall endeavor
to place her conduct and views respecting this country in their true light, and
to develope the general system of policy toward other nations, which she
appears to be pursuing. This part of the subject I apprehend will be found
deserving of particular attention; for without taking into view her general
plan of foreign policy, it will be extremely difficult to discern the
principles whereby her conduct toward ourselves is directed.

And permit me, fellow citizens, to introduce my remarks on this subject, by a
declaration to the truth whereof most of you can bear witness. Permit me to
declare, that while France appeared to be engaged in a struggle for liberty and
national independence, no heart beat higher than mine with affection for her
cause. I joined with enthusiasm in the general exultation of my country for her
victories, mourned for her disasters, and wished to draw a veil over her
crimes, her follies, and her excesses. Even her crimes appeared only as
mistakes in my eyes, and her most enormous atrocities as natural, and perhaps
necessary consequences of the violent external and internal struggles wherein
she was engaged; I called them the crimes of the revolution, not of France, and
I pardoned them. Where I could not pardon, I excused, I palliated. I considered
her as fighting in the cause of freedom and humanity, and an end so excellent
afforded much consolation for the means which she often employed.

This end we have now seen her most fully attain. We have seen her repel all
her enemies, and establish her independance upon the firmest and most
formidable basis. We have seen her instead of being crushed herself,
threatening to crush all the surrounding states; annexing some to herself,
reducing others to an absolute subserviency to her will, and making deep
inroads on the power of the rest; we have seen her after various revolutions at
home, adopt at length the government for which she contended, the government of
her own free choice.

Why then instead of confining herself to her own defense, has she become the
assailant? Why does she refuse that peace which her enemies have over and over
proposed, and whereby she would be left in possession of very large
acquisitions? Why after renouncing repeatedly, and in the most formal manner,
all idea of conquest, does she still press on to new conquests, and proudly
refuse even to treat for peace, unless all that she has seized be first
confirmed to her, and all that she has lost be first restored? It is on this
ground that she has twice repulsed the advances of England and Austria; she has
expressly refused the basis of mutual restitution, and declared that she would
not hear any proposal resting on it. This amounts to saying, all that I have
taken I will keep, and all that you have taken you shall give up, and then I
will hear what you have to say


Why does she compel all those states, whose councils she can influence or
co^troul, to join her in the war? Why does she endeavor to excite the Russians
and the Tutks against Austria, which offers and even solicits peace on terms
highly advantageous to her? Why does she attempt to bribe Prussia with a part
of the spoils of Austria, to assist her in reducing it under her power? Why
does she strive to arm every neutral state against the commerce of the English,
and to exclude their ships from every port? Why does she declare that she will
never lay down her arms 'till she has broken and destroyed the maritime
strength of England?

It is that she has formed a plan of aggrandisement at the expense of all her
neighbors; that after the example of the Romans, those ferocious and
systematic destroyers of mankind, she has resolved to make all Europe, and
finally the whole world, bend beneath her yoke; a resolution in the
accomplishment whereof she pursues the Roman policy, of dividing to destroy; of
bribing one nation with the spoils of another; of enticing the stronger to
inaction, reducing the weak to submission, and by the resources of the one, and
the connivance of the other, breaking the strength of those whose power she
dreads, and whose policy she cannot deceive.

And is this a project, my fellow citizens, in which we ought to wish her
success? Is it desirable that the balance of power, whereby the great nations
of Europe have heretofore been mutually checked, and in some degree confined
within the limits of justice and moderation, should be wholly destroyed, to
make way for one uncontrouled and despotic master, whose power being unchecked,
must from the very constitution of human nature, be constantly abused? Is this
a plan which deserves the good wishes of this country? Shall we be more safe
when Europe shall have been reduced under the uncontrouled influence of France,
than while her power is checked and balanced by that of other nations, who will
be induced by the desire of preserving that balance to shield us from her
aggressions? I believe that every principle of sound policy will answer in the
negative.

Had France however, been content to pursue her projects of ambition in Europe,
and leave us in peace, though we might have wished, for the good of humanity,
to see them defeated, yet a due regard to our own interests, and even to those
of the civilized world, would have forbidden us to join in the attempt: for
although we should certainly be exposed to temporary evils by the preponderance
of her power, yet our strength increases with a rapidity, which must place us
in a very short time beyond the reach of danger or dread, and may also enable
us to preserve the liberties of mankind, by forming a counterpoise and a check
to the ambition of France, after they shall be lost in Europe. This strength
would be greatly diminished, and its increase long retarded by a premature
exertion. To remain in peace therefore, amidst the present conflict of empires,
was a duty to ourselves, to posterity, and to the human race.

This wise policy, the result of deep foresight, and of an enlightened regard
to the interests of this country and of humanity, was early adopted by our
government. But France did not thus judge, nor so determine. She early saw in
this country a powerful instrument for promoting her ambition, and she early
formed a resolution to use it. Hence her efforts to gain the control of our
affairs: hence her unceasing endeavors to excite jealousies against the
government, and divisions among the people, to blow up our animosities against
England, and foment our ancient discontents. Hence those unfounded pretensions,
which we saw her first minister set up; pretensions which, if admitted, must
have placed the affairs of this country entirely under his control. Hence did
we see him, when the government refused to yield to these pretensions, treating
it with insult and outrage, and threatening to appeal from its decisions to the
people. We saw him arm and commission privateers in our ports, against the
express orders of the government, and send them to sea in contempt of its
authority. We saw him attempt to levy an army in our country, for the purpose
of invading nations with whom we were in peace. We saw him make a formal
complaint against the President for refusing to convene Congress at his
instance.

All this he did in the avowed pursuit of the object of his instructions,
which, to use their own words, enjoined him to excite to the utmost the zeal of
the Americans, and induce them, if possible, to make a common cause with
France. See the instructions to Mr. Genet published by himself on the 20th of
December, 1793


When he was recalled on our complaining of his conduct, our warm and partial
regard for France induced us to hope, and even to believe, that the system was
relinquished with the change of the Minister.

We soon however found our mistake; we found that not the object, but the mode
of pursuing it had been changed; and that instead of threats and blustering
whereby it was perceived that the plan was counteracted instead of being
promoted, an artful insidious course was adopted, more dangerous because more
deceptive.

With this change in the form, the principles and substance of Genet's system
were invariably pursued by his successors: the same attempts to drive us from
our neutrality, under the pretense of preserving it, were renewed and
incessantly repeated: his most inadmissable pretentions, those pretentions so
incompatible with our sovereignty, so repugnant to our system of impartial
neutrality, were renewed and unceasingly urged; and the steady refusal of our
Government to yield to them, with its firm resolution, to persist in conducting
our affairs in the manner which it conceived most conducive to our interests,
and most consonant with justice toward other nations, have been made the
ground of proceedings on the part of France, the most insulting and injurious.
The French Government has at length made that appeal to the people of America,
which her Minister formerly threatened. It has explained its pretensions,
stated its complaints, and detailed its injuries. In revenge for those
injuries, as it informs us, it has broken the treaty between the two countries,
let loose its ships of war and privateers to pillage and maltreat our citizens,
and has insultingly driven from its territory a minister sent expressly to
explain and conciliate. It has declared, that it will hear nothing from us,
until the injuries of which it complains are redressed; or in other words, that
we must submit to the terms which it shall think proper to prescribe, before it
will deign to negociate, or even to converse, on the points in dispute. It has
informed us that it is "terrible to its enemies;" reminded us, as it has very
frequently done before, that we are indebted to it for our independence; and
promised that when we bring back our Government to its true principles, we
shall again be regarded as friends and allies.

It has said in effect, you Americans whom we redeemed from slavery when you
were about to sink again under the yoke of your former masters, and who for
that reason ought to become in all things subservient to us, have instituted a
government which in the management of your affairs, has presumed to judge for
itself, and refused to be guided by our directions. As a friendly admonition of
our just displeasure, we take your vessels, confiscate your property, and throw
your citizens into dungeons and prison ships; for we are 'terrible to our
enemies.' But as soon as you shall reclaim your government from its errors, and
teach it to conform to our will, you shall again be received into favor. In
the mean time, having signified to you our pleasure, we expect silent and
submissive compliance. We will hear nothing from you, or from this government
which has given us offense, until you repent and amend. The rod, under which
you now smart, shall still be extended over you, till you kiss it and return to
your duty. Then indeed will we hold out the scepter of forgiveness; for though
'terrible to our enemies,' we are generous to our friends. This is the plain
language of their conduct, the true interpretation of their words.

And is America so low, so fallen, that she must tamely and submissively kiss
this rod? Has that spirit which twenty years ago, when she had not half her
present population, not a tenth part of her present wealth, no government, no
bond of union among her different parts, no experience of her strength, no
establishments of national defense, no name, no existence as a people; which
then impelled her to resist the haughty pretensions and tyrannical
encroachments of Britain, in the zenith of her power and elated by her recent
triumph over the arms of France; is that spirit so totally extinguished, that
she must crouch at the feet of this haughty, this ambitious republic, and by
abject submission, purchase a precarious, a dishonorable quiet? Americans of
76, ye who fought at Bunker's Hill, at Bennington, at Quebec, at Saratoga, at
Monmouth, at Guilford, Kings-Mountain, Eutaw and the Cowpens; companions of
Warren, of Montgomery, of Gates, of Mercer, of Morgan, of Wayne, of Green and
of Washington, where have ye retired? Has your courage rusted with your swords;
or is the soil which gave you birth, no longer capable of nourishing Patriots
and Heroes? Shall your country, that country which notwithstanding the insulting
taunts of this proud republic, your arms rescued from the oppression of a
tyrannical parent, shall it reap no other fruit from your toils and your blood,
than to be reduced under the obedience of an unjust and ambitious neighbor,
who in return for benefits always gratefully acknowledged, though conferred
because they were useful to herself, and with which for four years past she has
never ceased to upbraid us, claims a surrender of our interests and our rights,
and the direction of our affairs? I hear you with one voice answer NO. "The
sons of America," I hear you cry, should her wise and moderate endeavors to
preserve her rights by peacable means still prove unsuccessfull, will again at
her call beat their plowshares into swords, and the proud and insolent
aggressor shall soon be convinced, that a brave and just people, though long
patient under injuries from those whom once it loved, will rouse at last, and
desirous of peace will remember that it must sometimes be preserved by war.

The American people, then my fellow citizens, and you as part of them, are
called upon to decide between their own government, and that of another nation;
to decide whether their affairs shall be conducted by those whom they have
selected for that purpose from among themselves, or by the agents of a foreign
power: Whether that power under pretense of a treaty, which it asserts an
exclusive right to expound, and claims the privilege of violating as often as
its operation shall be found disadvantageous, See Mr. Adet's note of October
27, 1796; where this right is expressly asserted.
and of the law of nations, which it has publicly professed to disregard, See
the letter of M. Tilly, French Charge des Affairs at Genoa, to the Secretary of
State of that republic, dated July 24, 1794: Debrets state papers, vol. 2, page
347 -- In a controversy between them, the Genoese Secretary relied on the law
of nations: M. Tilly replied, "that he did not acknowledge as public rights, (
Droits publics which ought to have been transla^ed public laws) papers drawn up
under the authority of kings," It was to ascertain and establish the true
public law, he said, that the French had taken up arms, until this work of
theirs, he adds, shall be completed, their ministers resident in foreign
states, are bound provisionally to make the French name respected, by
conducting themselves conformably to reason and justice, which are the only
basis of true public rights; of this reason and justice the French themselves
were to be the judges, and under this pretense, they were to control and set
aside the established law of nations. This was pretty much of a piece with the
declaration of Mr. Genet, who thanked God that he had long since forgotten,
what was contained in the worm eaten volumes of Vattel, Grotius, and Pu^^e^d^^s.


shall snatch the reins of our government from the hands in which we have
placed them? whether, in fine, they will give their confidence to men of their
own choice, having the same interests with themselves, or to strangers and
foreigners, charged with the interests of another country, and always seeking
to promote them at our expense? Can the decision be difficult?

And what are these pretensions, which France enforces by the plunder of our
merchants, and the imprisonment of our citizens? What are those injuries which
she avenges by insulting our government and our country, and whereof, with a
more than magisterial haughtiness, she declares, that the redress shall precede
all explanation?

She complains of our treaty with Great Britain, of the construction which we
have put on some articles of her own treaties with us, of our refusal to form a
new and more comprehensive treaty with her; of a backwardness, which she says,
has appeared on our part, to accept her assistance in our negotiation with
Algiers, and of violations of our neutrality, which, she alleges, we have
authorized, or winked at in favor of England. Of the British treaty she
complains, that it is a violation of the treaty concluded with France in 1778,
and equivalent to a treaty of alliance with Great Britain. She declares that in
this treaty the United States have knowingly and evidently sacrificed their
connections with the republic, and the most essential and least contested
prerogatives of neutrality.

But in this treaty the rights of France are expressly secured; for in the
twenty-fifth article, it is provided, that, nothing in the treaty contained
shall be construed, or operate, contrary to former and existing public
treaties, with other sovereigns or states? How then can this treaty infringe
the rights of France, or violate the treaty subsisting between her and this
country.

But she replies, it makes concessions to Great Britain, of important rights;
admitting this to be true, France could not complain; for those rights would
immediately become common to her: It being expressly stipulated in the second
article of her treaty with us, that neither of the parties shall grant any
particular favor to other nations, in respect of commerce or navigation, which
shall not immediately become common to the other party, who shall enjoy the
same favor freely, if the concession is freely made, or on allowing the same
compensation, if the concession was conditional; each party therefore may make
concessions to other nations. There is nothing in the treaty which forbids it;
and if it should be done, the other party cannot complain: It however becomes
entitled to the benefit of the concession.

But what right have we conceded to the British by the late treaty? France
charges us with having conceded to them the right to take the goods of their
enemies, out of our neutral ships; the right to consider various articles as
contraband, which are not so by the law of nations; and the right, in some
cases, to consider even provisions as contraband.

As to the right of taking enemies goods out of neutral vessels, it is not a
right conceded to Britain by the treaty; the treaty says not one word about it,
except that it shall hereafter become the subject of negotiation, and that if
vessels in the mean time, shall be stopped on that account, they shall be
released with as little delay and inconvenience as possible: It is a right,
indisputably given by the law of nations; and which Britain, though we urged her
to the utmost of our power, refused to surrender at present; the exercise of
it, being of the greatest importance to her in the present war: She however
intimated that hereafter, it might perhaps be relinquished. It was then agreed
that things should remain, for the present, on the footing whereon the law of
nations has placed them, and that hereafter, negociations shall take place on
the subject. Does this look like conceding a right! What more could we do;
could we make war on Britain, to compel the relinquishment of this right? This
no doubt was what France wished; it has been the object of all her intrigues,
all her threats, and all her complaints; but our government wisely took a
different resolution.

That this right was given to Britain by the law of nations, we have the
express authority of Mr. Jefferson, of every writer on the subject, and of
France herself.

Mr, Jefferson in his letter to Mr. Genet, of July 24, 1793, says, I believe it
cannot be doubted, that by the general law of nations, the goods of a friend
found in the vessels of an enemy are free, and the goods of an enemy found in
the vessels of a friend, are lawful prize. Upon this principle, I presume, the
British vessels have taken the property of French citizens found in our
vessels, and I confess I should be at a loss on what principle to reclaim it.
It is true, that sundry nations, desirous of avoiding the inconvenience of
having their vessels stopped at sea, etc. have in many instances introduced by
their special treaties, another principle between them, that enemy bottoms
shall make enemy goods, and friendly bottoms friendly goods; but this is
altogether the effect of particular treaties, controuling in special cases the
general principles of the law of nations. England has generally determined to
adhere to the rigorous principle. -- Afterward in his letter of August 16th,
1793, to our minister in Paris, on the subject of Mr. Genet's conduct, he says,
We suppose it to have been long an established principle of the law of nations,
that the goods of a friend are free in an enemy's vessel, and the goods of an
enemy lawful prize in the vessels of a friend. We have established a contrary
principle, that free ships shall make free goods, in our treaties with France,
Holland, and Prussia, it is our wish to establish it with other nations; but
this requires their consent also, and is a work of time. In the mean time they
have a right to act on the general principle, (that enemies goods are prize on
board of neutral ships,) without giving us or France cause of complaint.

So say all the most respectable writers on the law of nations, with Vattel at
their head, whose works, though treated with contempt by Mr. Genet, and called
"worm-eaten volumes," are acknowledged as authority by all the nations of
Europe.

France, however, has sufficiently proved, not only by her declarations, but by
her conduct, that she pays no regard to the writers on the law of nations, or
to the law itself; but perhaps she will permit her own laws and public acts to
be relied on as authority.

By her treaty with this country in 1778, she expressly relinquished the right
of taking enemies goods out of neutral vessels: she did the same thing by her
treaty with England in 1786; but why should she relinquish this right, if she
did not believe herself to have possessed it? How could she possess it but by
virtue of the law of nations? That she did believe herself to possess it, is
most evident, from her marine laws, in one of which, passed in the year 1744,
and in force when this treaty was made; it is provided, that if there are found
on board of neutral vessels, of whatever nation they may be, merchandises
belonging to the enemies of his majesty, (which is the same as of France,) they
shall be good prize, even though they be not of the growth or manufacture of
the enemies country.

If then it be not permitted by the law of nations, to take enemies goods out
of neutral vessels, the standing marine regulations of France, which remained
of force from 1744 to 1778, little less than half a century, were a plain and
direct infringement of that law.

And yet France alleges that we have conceded to Great Britain, the right to
take the goods of her enemies out of our neutral vessels!

She even pretends that the law of nations is altered in this respect, by what
she calls the principles of the modern law, introduced by the armed neutrality;
and this modern law of nations she says we have abandoned.

But what is this armed neutrality, by which the law of nations is said to have
been altered? What is this modern law of nations, by which the former system is
said to have been superceded?

During the American war, the Empress of Russia published a declaration of the
principles on which she would protect her subjects in carrying on commerce. One
of these principles was, that free ships should make free goods. She invited
the neutral powers to join with her in this declaration, and ordered her fleet
to arm in support of it. Several of them did join, particularly Denmark,
Sweden, and the other northern powers, and they entered into a convention to
support each other. This is what is called the armed neutrality, which being no
more than a partial agreement among certain states, in the nature of a treaty,
could make no alteration in the general law of nations. It could only, like any
other treaty, modify that law with respect to the contracting parties
themselves.

Yet this agreement thus partial in its extent, and violated since by its
authors themselves, is the modern law of nations, for the establishment and
defense of which, the United States are required by France to engage, against
the most obvious dictates of prudence, in a quarrel with the greatest maritime
power on earth.

If the charge of conceding to Britain, the right to take the goods of France
out of our vessels, a right which the law of nations gives her, and which, far
from conceding, we did all in our power to prevail on her to relinquish, has
appeared to be wholly untrue; that which relates to contraband, is equally void
of foundation.

By the law of nations, there are certain goods which neutral nations cannot
carry to one power at war, without their being good prize, if taken by the
other: these goods are called contraband, they include, according to the best
writers on the law of nations, commodities particularly used in war; such as
arms, military and naval stores, ship timber, horses, and even provisions in
certain junctures; and the prohibition rests on this principle, that a nation
engaged in war, has a right as a natural means of defense, to prevent its enemy
as far as it can, from being supplied with those things, which are peculiarly
of use in carrying on the war; but though the law of nations enumerates the
articles which shall be considered generally as contraband, and specifies the
particular cases, in which even other articles may be added to the list; yet in
this respect, as in all others, its operation as to particular states, is
liable to be restricted and modified by treaties between them. Two states for
instance, have a right by the law of nations, to consider naval stores as
contraband, and each to prevent the other from carrying them to its enemy, as
far as this can be effected by capture and condemnation; but these two states
may agree mutually, to relinquish this right; and may make a treaty for that
purpose; this treaty does not alter the law of nations, as to others; any more
than an agreement between two men, that neither of them should go along such a
road, would prevent other people from using it; it only restricts the operation
of the law as to themselves.

Treaties of this kind, are very usual among nations: In some of them naval
stores are agreed to be contraband; in others, not. In our treaty with France,
made in the year 1778, the right to consider ship timber and naval stores as
contraband is mutually relinquished. When we came to treat on this subject with
Great Britain, we were anxious to prevail on her to relinquish i^ also, but she
refused: She insisted on her right by the law of nations, and we had no means
of compelling her to recede; naval stores and ship timber therefore,
notwithstanding our efforts to get them excepted, continue to be contraband
between us and Great Britain, as they were before the treaty.

And yet one of the accusations of France against the United States, and
against this treaty, is, that it has ceded to Britain the right of considering,
naval stores as contraband! we are charged with giving to Britain, what she had
before, and what we strove in vain to make her relinquish!

But, says France, if ship timber and naval stores were contraband before, why
mention them in the treaty! Because it is useful, that the rules whereby the
conduct of nations toward each other is to be regulated* should become as
public, as precise, as little doubtful as possible; any merchant can read a
treaty, though every one does not find leisure or opportunity to study the law
of nations; for this reason, and a very good one it is, the enumeration was
made.

The last accusation of France against this treaty, is, That it concedes to
Britain the right of considering even provisions as contraband; and thereby
becomes manifestly injurious to France, whose supplies from this country, it
permits Britain to cut off, This charge is, if possible, even more void of
foundation than the former.

The part of the treaty complained of, is the second clause of the 18th
article; which instead of being a concession by us to Britain, is a very
valuable concession by her to us; and far from offering any injury to France,
must when it affects her at all, operate very much to her advantage; to prove
this nothing more is necessary than simply to recite the clause; which is in
the following words:

And whereas the difficulty of agreeing on the precise cases, in which alone
provisions and other articles not generally contrabanded, may be considered as
such, renders it expedient to provide against the inconveniences and
misunderstandings which might thence arise. It is further agreed, that whenever
any such articles, so becoming contraband, according to the existing laws of
nations, shall for that reason be seized, the same shall not be confiscated,
but the owners thereof, shall be speedily and completely indemnified; and the
captors, or in their default the government under whose authority they act,
shall pay to the masters or owners of such vessels the full value of all such
articles; with a reasonable mercantile profit thereon, together with the
freight, and also the demurrage incident to such detention.

To what cases do the regulations of this clause apply? to such, and such only,
where provisions etc. may be regarded as contraband by the existing law of
nations; are there any such cases? no maxim in the law of nations, is clearer
or better established, than that there are such; and if there are not, then it
is manifest that the article is perfectly harmless? and when provisions etc.
are seized in such cases, what is to be done with them? instead of being
confiscated, as they might be by the law of nations, they are to be paid for
with a mercantile profit, freight, and damages for the detention: In which case
is the risk to the merchant least! certainly in the latter, where his goods, if
taken, are not, as in the former, to be condemned as prize, but paid for with
profit and charges: which regulation, that of the treaty, or that of the law of
nations, is the most beneficial to France? certainly that of the treaty; for
where the risk is the least, the merchant will be most inclined to send her
provisions; and on what account was this regulation adopted? to prevent those
misunderstandings which might arise between us and Britain, from the difficulty
of ascertaining the cases in which provisions are made contraband by the law of
nations.

And yet France alleges, that we have ceded to Britain, the right of
considering provisions as contraband! and yet this article so just in itself,
so liberal on the part of Britain, so beneficial to us, and so useful to France
herself, has been laid hold of by her, as a ground of quarrel! whence can
proceed her displeasure at this article? the true cause of it is to be found in
the word "misunderstandings" the tendency of this article, to prevent
"misunderstandings" between this country and Britain, has given umbrage to
France; those misunderstandings which it has been her unceasing endeavor to
foment, and her constant hope to blow up into a quarrel.

Hence too her anger at the treaty; hence those objections so manifestly
unfounded; those flimzy pretexts, which throw so thin a veil over her real
motives. She saw many causes of difference existing between this country and
England; she saw those causes aggravated by ancient resentments, and recent
injuries; and she looked, with confident and eager expectation, to the moment,
which she thought fast approaching, when these differences should produce an
open rupture: then should we become her associates in the war; then would our
commerce be cut off from her rival; then, like Holland and Belgium, should we
have been placed under the control of her agents, our ports possessed by her
ships, our towns seized by her troops, our country pillaged to supply her
armies, and our resources exhausted to replenish her treasury. If we escaped
the necessity of surrendering to her, as Holland has been compelled to do,
important parts of our territory, as the price of what she would not have
failed to call "her protection" we should have had much reason to rejoice in
our good fortune.

These prospects, which she regarded as so certain, and contemplated with so
much pleasure, were blasted by the treaty. By it she saw our differences
composed, a mutual spirit of justice and conciliation restored, and the
foundation of a friendly and beneficial intercourse solidly laid; hence her
efforts to prevent its conclusion; hence her disappointment and rage, at its
final accomplishment.

Thus manifestly unsounded, fellow citizens, thus plainly destitute of even
plausible appearances, are the ostensible objections, thus unfriendly and
mischievous to us are the real motives, from which the French government
declares, that she regards this treaty as a violation of that between her and
this country, as equivalent to an alliance with Great Britain, and as a wilful
and evident sacrifice on the part of the United States, of their connections
with France, and of the most essential and least contested rights of neutrality.

Let us examine her next charge, the charge of having put a wrong and injurious
construction on some articles of her treaties with us.

Under this head she complains, that contrary to the 17th article of the treaty
of commerce, we have suffered our courts of justice to take cognizance of
prizes brought into our ports by her armed ships; that in violation of the same
article, British ships of war, which have made prize of her vessels, have been
allowed shelter in our harbors; that we have suffered British ships to arm in
our ports; that we have prevented the sale of her prizes, which she contends is
permitted by the treaty; that a provision of the consular convention, which
makes part of the treaties, has been rendered ineffectual by our neglect to
pass laws for enabling the French consuls to enforce their decrees; that our
judges and magistrates, in contempt of the fifth article of this consular
convention, have required the masters of French ships, applying for warrants
against absconding sailors, to produce in evidence the original roll of their
crews instead of the copy, whereby the power given to French consuls of causing
the arrest of sailors who desert, has been greatly impeded; and finally, that
contrary to the 19th article of the treaty of commerce, we suffered a public
ship of war, belonging to France, to be arrested in one of our ports, for acts
done on the high seas.

It is not of the decision of prize causes made by our courts, that France
complains, it is the right to decide which she contests. She alleges, that by
the treaty of 1778, article the 17th, our courts are prohibited, in all cases
whatsoever, from taking cognizance of captures made under color of a French
commission. This is the true point of dispute. If the courts be thus
prohibited, their decisions however upright and legal in themselves, must be
improper. If on the contrary, they have a right, notwithstanding the treaty, to
take cognizance in certain cases, of prizes made under pretense of French
commissions, they must be the judges when those cases occur, and no complaint
can be admitted against their decisions.

I have said, under the pretense and color of a French commission, because, if
the allegation of the French government be well founded, our courts are
precluded in all cases where any thing called a French commission is produced:
they can take no cognizance, can enquire into nothing; consequently they cannot
even enquire whether the commission be true or forged; whether the vessel be in
fact a privateer or a pirate.

To admit this pretension, would be to admit in the words of Mr. Jefferson,
(...) August 9^, to Mr. Mo^^i^ at ^^r
that any armed vessel of any nation, might cut away our own ships, or those of
persons coming to trade with us, from the wharves of Philadelphia, Charleston,
or New York, and by calling them prizes, prevent our courts from redressing the
wrong. Can it be conceived, that any nation would cede such a right by treaty?
The stipulations on this subject between us and France are mutual. Can it be
conceived, that France has intended to cede, or now would permit such a right
to us? We know perfectly well that she would not.

The 17th article of our treaty with France indeed stipulates that the prizes
made on its enemies by one party shall not be arrested or seized when they come
to enter the ports of the other; nor shall the searchers or other officers of
such ports search such prizes, or make any examination concerning their
lawfulness. But we contend that the prizes here intended are prizes made on the
high seas, without the jurisdiction of either party; and not by its people, or
by vessels equipt or armed in its ports. We contend that notwithstanding this
stipulation, we have a right to protect our own vessels and those of our
neighbors, within our territories, and the jurisdiction of our laws; that we
have a right to prevent vessels from being armed and sitted in our ports for
cruising against nations with whom we are at peace, and to restrain our
citizens from carrying on war against those nations under a foreign commission.
These rights we contend, we ought to enforce, by restoring property taken in
contempt of them whenever it comes within our power. This and this alone our
courts have done. In these three cases alone have they taken property from
French captors, and restored it to the owners: where it was taken, either
within the jurisdiction of our Laws; by our own citizens, under French
commissions: or by vessels sitted out, armed, or equipped for war in our ports.

Of this France complains. Her Minister had armed and commissioned privateers
in our ports; her armed vessels had seized ships, not only within a league of
our coast, to which distance, by the Law of Nations, the jurisdiction of every
country extends, but even in the Delaware: our citizens had taken French
commissions, and under them made prize of vessels belonging to nations at peace
with us. When prizes, made in either of these three cases, were brought into
our ports, the courts interfered, and after trials in which the facts were
proved, restored the property to the former owners. It is by this interference;
so necessary for maintaining our neutrality and the independence of our
government, that France alleges we have broken the treaty.

But this interference is justified not only by necessity, but by the Law of
Nations, and their universal practice. To these, however, France has shown that
she pays very little regard; and to discuss the points would lead to too great
a length. But fortunately, we are saved the trouble, she has herself decided
the question in our favor. Her own laws now in force, and her own practice at
this moment, support our interpretation of the treaty. Let us now hear France
against herself: her laws against her complaints.

A commentary on the marine laws of France, drawn up by an Valin.
officer of the government, and first published under its authority in 1776,
says, that as far as the distance of two leagues, the Sea, according to the
rule universally acknowledged, is under the dominion of the sovereign of the
neigbouring coast; the effect of which dominion is that within it, every
sovereign has a right to protect foreign commerce, as well as to secure his own
territories from insult. How is foreign commerce to be protected within our
dominion? Certainly by restoring property taken there. In extending our
dominion only one league from the coast, we have gone only half as far as
France goes herself: and yet she accuses us of breaking the treaty, because we
do not suffer her privateers to take vessels on our shores and even in our
rivers.

The Marine ordinances of France, which are now in force, and which her
commissions to privateers require to be observed, prohibit all her subjects
from taking commissions from foreign kings, princes or states, to arm vessels
for war, or to cruise at sea under their colors, without express permission,
under pain of being treated as pirates. "These rules," says the commentary,
have no exception; they extend to all commissions from friends or allies, as
well as neutrals, and include all Frenchmen, whether they dwell in France or in
foreign countries; for Frenchmen are not less Frenchmen for having gone to live
in foreign parts. See Valin vol. 2. page 276.


Thus, what has been long practiced and is now established in France, we have
done, and no more; and yet she complains. We have forbidden our citizens to
take commissions from her, against nations with whom we are at peace, and as
the only method of enforcing this prohibition, we have restored property taken
in contempt of it; and in all this, we have precisely practiced her own rules.
Yet she charges us with breaking the treaty.

The whole scope and tenor of her laws forbid vessels under foreign
commissions, from arming in her ports, against nations in peace with her. This
we have also forbidden, after her example; and we have enforced the
prohibition, by stopping and disarming the vessels when in our power, and by
restoring the property which they had taken and brought into our country. And
this France alleges as a breach of the treaty.

She next accuses us of another infraction, in suffering ships of war of her
enemies, which have made prizes on her citizens, to find an asylum in our ports.

The treaty in article 17th provides, that no shelter or refuge shall be given
in the ports of either party. to such as shall have made prize of the subjects,
people or property, of the other and the 22d article forbids foreign
privateers, in enmity with one party, to sell or exchange their ships or
prizes, in the ports of the other.

Now it is clear, that nothing is expressly forbidden here, but the sale or
exchange of prizes, and the entrance of ships that had taken prizes; the prizes
themselves, according to the literal construction, might be sent in, though not
sold; and this would have been a great advantage to the captors: This advantage
the United States supposed, that the treaty did not intend to give to the
enemies of France.

Beside if no British ship of war, which had ever taken a French prize, could
be admitted into our ports, how was the fact to be established; the British
might deny the fact: could we take it for granted, because asserted by the
French; or must we in every case, before we could send off the vessel,
institute a suit to decide whether at any time, or in any part of the world,
she had taken a French prize? This it is evident, would have been a subject of
endless and vexatious contention.

Our government therefore adopted a construction more beneficial to France,
more conformable to the spirit of the treaty, and much easier of execution.
Instead of admitting prizes made on France by her enemies, and excluding all
vessels which were charged with having made them, it resolved to exclude the
prizes in all cases, and to admit all ships of war except such as might attempt
to come in with their prizes, those were to be, and have been excluded.

France complains of this construction, and calls it a breach of the treaty;
she does not recollect that if we were to adopt her construction, and follow
the letter of the article, we should do her a much greater injury, by admitting
all the prizes which her enemies might think sit to send in.

Another breach of the treaty with which she charges us, is that we have
permitted British ships to arm for war in our ports.

This charge is directly contrary to fact, the strictest orders have always
existed against such armaments, and every attempt to make them, has been
prevented as soon as known to the government; two or three instances have been
mentioned, in which vessels armed and went out, before the government, or even
the French minister or consuls, had information of it. But what could be done
after the vessels were gone? had they returned, they would have been seized;
and their prizes, had they come within our power, would have been restored to
the owners. But neither of those cases happened; and I would ask again, what
could be done after the vessels were gone? Go to war, France would have said,
to revenge the injury; this was her aim, and this she did say, over and over,
though not in express words. But if acts like this, had been a proper reason for
going to war, we ought to have attacked France herself long ago; for she has
attempted ten armaments, where the English have attempted one; and several of
them, moreover, her minister sent to sea, against the express orders of the
government, and in contempt of its authority.

As to the sale of her prizes in our ports, for preventing which, she charges
us with another infraction of the treaty, she has by the treaty no such right:
there is not one word said about her prizes; except that she may bring them in
and carry them away. This she says, is the same thing as a permission to sell;
but common sense, and the plain meaning of words, say otherwise. Her own laws
also, say otherwise; which notwithstanding this treaty with us, expressly
forbid the sale of foreign prizes, in her ports.

We did indeed for a time, permit the sale of her prizes in this country, as a
matter of special favor; but we soon found this permission productive of many
ill effects; our sea ports having became the resort and station of privateers,
whose crews are generally among the most profligate of mankind, were converted
into scenes of riot; many disorders took place, our citizens were drawn off
from their regular industry, and by the introduction of goods, under pretense
of prize, frauds on the revenue began to be practiced. The permission
therefore, was very properly revoked; the only subject of regret is, that it
ever was granted.

The consular convention, comes next into view: this convention makes part of
the treaties between us and France, and she alleges that we have infringed it
in two points.

The 12th article provides, that the consuls of France and the United States,
shall possess the power of deciding, respectively, all differences which may
arise between the people of one country in the territories of the other. We
have never hindered the French consuls from deciding all such controversies
between French citizens; but the French government has lately found out, that
we have passed no law to enable those consuls to enforce their decisions. It
might be asked, why has this matter rested in silence so long? why has nothing
been heard of this complaint till now; although the fact complained of, has
existed for more than eight years? We might remark on the extraordinary and
unprecedented nature of the complaint itself; whereby, contrary to universal
usage and the first principles of national sovereignty, a government is
required to put compulsory process into the hands of persons not amenable to
its laws, for the purpose of enforcing decisions not under the control of its
judiciary authority: But it will be sufficient to observe, that France herself
has never passed, or been required by us to pass, any such laws as she demands
from us; and that it most evidently appears, from the convention itself, that
no such laws, were ever intended to take place in either country; since the
decrees of the consuls are to be enforced against the parties by their own
governments respectively; to whose courts the right of appeal, and of course
the power of reversing, confirming, and executing the decrees, is expressly and
solely reserved.

Another article of this convention authorizes the consuls of each nation
respectively, to cause the deserting sailors of their nation, to be arrested
and delivered to the captains, on application to a magistrate of the country,
and the production of proof. The French government has lately found out, that
our magistrates when applied to for the arrest of their sailors, require the
original articles to be produced. Those articles contain the agreement of the
sailors and are signed by them. They remain on board the ship, and are the only
authentic document by which any dispute between the captain and sailors can be
decided. It is an invariable and most excellent maxim of our laws, that no copy
of a paper can be produced in evidence, especially where life or liberty is to
be effected by it, unless the paper itself be proved to be destroyed, or in the
power of the other party. In conformity to this maxim, our majestrates very
properly require, that the original articles themselves should be produced to
prove that a man belongs to the ship, before they will arrest him for deserting
from it; The convention itself also expres^^ requires, that the orginal roll,
(...)
of this the French government, after eight years silence, has at length
bethought itself to complain. It calls this a breach of the consular
convention, and alleges, that copies of the articles, certified from the
consuls office, ought to be received; although it is most evident from the
slightest view of the consular convention, that the copies whereof it speaks,
are wholly of a different kind, and to be used for a different purpose.

I have explained these two points thus particularly, not from a belief that
they are of the least weight or importance, even in the eyes of France herself;
but to show with what eagerness she catches at the most futile accusations
against this country.

The last accusation under the head of breaking treaties, is, if possible, more
extraordinary than any of the former. France accuses us of having broken the
19th article of the treaty, by permitting a public ship of war belonging to the
republic, to be arrested in one of our ports for an act done on the high seas.
Would it be believed, that this ship, arrested by process of the courts, at the
instance of a citizen, and for a most reprehensible act, had been actually
released by the interference of the executive, on the express ground, that
being a public ship of war, she was potected by the treaty? yet such is the
fact. Complaint being made of her arrest by the French minister, the executive
directed the attorney general to file the necessary proceedings in the court
for obtaining her release. He did so, and after hearing the case she was
released; but as the forms of the court, the priority of other business, and
the course of proceedings, did not admit of a decision so speedy as Mr. Adet
desired, he refused to accept the vessel after she was released, and declared
that he would abandon her to the government, and claim damages. These damages
have never been refused, nor even demanded; and yet because the president would
not undertake at the instance of a foreign minister, to overrule the courts of
justice, whose independence is expressly secured by the constitution, because he
would not with a strong hand arrest their proceedings, and in open defiance of
the constitution and the laws, wrest from their hands the object of their
deliberations; we are accused of having broken our treaty with France! we are
charged with an arrest, which instead of sanctioning; we caused to be removed;
we are charged with breaking a treaty by an act which we redressed!

Such are the grounds whereon for four years together, and in terms the most
disrespectful, we have been unceasingly charged with violation of treaties!

But we have refused, she says, to enter into a new and more extensive treaty
with her. She says, that under "the most frivolous pretexts," See Mr. Adet's
note.
we have evaded all her advances to a new negotiation. This also is an
accusation against us, made by the minister Genet, and which Mr. Adet has
renewed and enforced.

But had we not a right, without offending France, to decline a new treaty if
we thought it would not suit us? We already had a treaty; was it a ground of
quarrel that we were satisfied with it? Why was a new treaty proposed? For our
benefit; if so we were the proper judges how far it was beneficial. For the
benefit of France? In that case we certainly had a right to decide, how far the
advantage which she desired was compatible with our own interests. Who ever
heard, that to decline an advantageous bargain ourselves, or refuse one to
another person, was a cause of offense?

The truth however is, that we did not decline this negotiation; we did not
wish it indeed, but our government was willing to hear what France had to say
on the subject, and frequently expressed its willingness. The proposition was
first made by Mr. Genet, in May 1793, but Mr. Jefferson, at that time secretary
of state, informed him, that the business could not be entered on immediately,
because the senate was not in session. He renewed the subject the September
following, but before that time he had behaved so much amiss, that the
government had requested his recall, and did not think fit to communicate with
him, except on matters of immediate and pressing necessity; it therefore
politely waved the business, with an assurance that it should be considered,
with all the respect and interest which its object necessarily required.

His successor, Mr. Fauchet, never mentioned the new negotiation; the next that
we heard of it was from Mr. Adet, in June 1795. The president immediately met
his advances, and directed the secretary of state to enter on the negotiation
without delay. He informed Mr. Adet of this, and proposed a mode of proceeding;
Mr. Adet promised to enter on the business, but he postponed it from time to
time, on the plea of indisposition or business, and it was finally dropped by
himself.

And yet Mr. Adet says, that his offers to treat were evaded, under the most
frivolous pretexts.

But although our government was willing, and even desirous to hear what France
had to propose on the subject of a new treaty, it could not have agreed to one
on the terms which she held out, without sacrificing the best interests of this
country.

Those terms are to be found in Mr. Genet's instructions, by which Mr. Adet,
when pressed on the subject, declared that he also was to be guided; and from
those instructions it appears undeniably, that our joining France in the war,
engaging to defend her iands, and forming an alliance offensive and defensive,
were to be essential conditions of the new treaty; an extension of commercial
privileges with the islands, was the lure thrown out to us.

The instructions begin with declaring, that the executive council have highly
approved the overtures made to a former minister, by the American government,
on the means of renewing and consolidating the commercial treaties between the
two countries, and are disposed to set on foot a new negotiation on those
foundations -- that they do not know but that such a treaty admits a latitude
still more extensive in becoming a national agreement, in which two great
nations shall suspend, (that is according to the French expression, shall
closely unite) their political and commercial interests, and establish a mutual
understanding to befriend the empire of liberty wherever it can be embraced to
guarantee the sovereignty of the people, and to punish those powers who still
keep up an exclusive colonial and commercial system, by declaring that their
vessels shall not be received in the ports of the contracting parties. Such a
pact, they add, will quickly contribute to the general emancipation of the new
world.

This "general emancipation of the new world," we know was to include the
liberation of the slaves, whom this very French government soon after set free
in its islands.

"Besides the advantages," continue the instructions, which humanity in general
will draw from the success of such a negotiation, we (the French) have at this
moment, a particular interest in taking steps to act efficaciously against
England and Spain, if, as every thing announces, those powers should attack us.
In this situation of affairs, we ought to excite by all possible means, the
zeal of the Americans, who are as much interested as ourselves in disconcerting
the destructive projects of George third; the executive council has room to
believe, that these reasons, in addition to the great commercial advantages,
which we are disposed to concede to the United States, will determine their
government, to adhere to all that citizen Genet shall propose to them on our
part -- and the executive charges him, in expectation that the American
government will finally make a common cause with us, to take such steps as
exigencies may require.

Hence it manifestly appears, that we were to make a common cause with France
for her interest, against Great Britain and Spain, and that commercial
advantages were to be our wages. Subsequent parts of the instructions are still
more explicit.

The Executive Council recommends it especially to Citizen Genet, to sound
early the disposition of the American Government, and to make it (the guarantee
of their Islands) a condition sine qua non of their free commerce with the
West Indies, so essential to the United States. It nearly concerns the peace
and prosperity of the French Nation, that a people, whose resources increase
beyond all calculation, and whom nature has placed so near our rich colonies,
should be interested, by their own engagements, in the preservations of these
Islands. Citizen Genet will find the less difficulty in making this proposition
relished in the United States, as the great trade which will be the reward of
it, will indemnify them ultimately for the sacrifices which they may make in
the outset, and we shall immediately put ourselves in a condition to fulfill our
engagements, by sending to the American ports a sufficient force to put them
beyond insult, and to facilitate their intercourse with the Islands and with
France.

I have been the more full and particular in citing these instructions, because
they not only prove, incontestibly, what were to be the conditions of the new
treaty proposed to us by France, but also that her project, from the beginning
of the war, was to draw us into it. We shall presently see that although she
recalled Mr. Genet, she neither disapproved his measures nor abandoned this
project.

That the refusal of our government to enter into a new treaty on these terms,
should have been matter of displeasure and vexation to France, is perfectly
natural; because it disconcerted one of her most favorite schemes: but none of
its measures have either merited or received, more warmly or more universully,
the approbation and thanks of this country.

And yet France has made it one of her charges against us, that we have evaded
this new treaty under the most frivolous pretexts.!

She has gone further. She has accused us of having eluded her friendly offers
of assistance in our negociations with Algiers.

Here again I would ask, whether we had not a right to decline her mediation in
this business, if we thought fit? Are we to make no treaties without not only
consulting France, but employing also her assistance? should one of my
neighbors offer to interfere in composing a difference between me and another,
surely I might decline his interference without giving him cause of offense? He
might think it very unfriendly, or very unwise; but surely it would not
authorize him to quarrel with me.

The truth however is, that far from "eluding" this friendly offer of France,
we showed the utmost readiness, and even inclination, to avail ourselves of it
to the utmost. Our minister in Portugal, to whom the Algerine negotiation was
entrusted, went first to Paris, "in order to engage the assistance of the
French government," in the mean time, he sent an agent immediately to Algiers
to pave the way; and as the Algerines are known to be a very fickle, capricious
people, difficult to be managed, and capable of being dealt with at particular
times only, he furnished this agent with proper powers, that he might avail
himself of any favorable moment which shoeld chance to offer; such a moment
did offer very soon after his arrival: he seized it, and concluded a treaty,
disagreeable indeed, but far better than none, and more favorable than Algiers
has lately, if ever, made with any other country.

Ought he to have lost this moment in waiting for the assistance of France?
Before the orders from France could arrive, the opportunity might have passed
away, never to return.

Besides; our agent, who concluded the treaty, declares that neither France,
nor her consul, had the least interest with the Algerine government at that
time. It was for this reason, he says, that he did not request the assistance
of the French consul; which would have only injured the cause. But he applied
for this assistance in negociating with the other Barbary States, where the
French were supposed to possess influence.

So much for this complaint: the bitterness with which it is urged, gives some
ground to suspect, that her anger does not arise from our having made a treaty
without her assistance, but from our having made one at all; and that her
interference was intended to prevent, not to promote the object. It is very
difficult to believe that the freedom of our flag, and the extension of our
commerce, in the Mediterranean, can be desirable objects to her, or to any
other commercial power.

She charges us further, with having authorized, or permitted, various
infractions of our neutrality by the English, or in their favor.

One of these infractions is the impressment of our seamen by British ships of
war; we have not adopted, she says, or at least have not made known to her, any
efficatious measures for repelling this violence; whereby her enemies are
suffered to support and increase their maritime forces, from among our citizens.

In the first place, we have adopted such measures as we judged most
efficacious for this purpose; and those measures being public, were known to
France. Our government has, at all times, resisted the impressment of our
seamen, by every means short of hostility; and early in the year 1796, before
this complaint was made, Congress passed an act, for the sole purpose of
protecting and relieving American seamen from impressment. These measures
indeed, were not such as France wished, and probably hoped to see adopted; for
they were calculated to produce the effect without hostility: but they were
such as our own government, to whom, and not to France, we have entrusted the
protection of our citizens, considered as the most advisable.

As to our not having informed France of these measures, it is not true; she
did not need information of a public law, which was printed in the newspapers;
and she knew that other measures were pursued, though she said that they were not
efficacious; we well know what we means by efficacious measures; but on this
point, we and not France, were the proper judges.

And let me be permitted to ask, what obligation we were under to inform France
of our measures? Is she to prescribe to us in what manner our citizens are to
be protected! If under pretense, that the inefficacious manner in which we
conduct our affairs, operates to her injury, she may direct and control us,
there is an end of our independence. This complaint is of a piece with that of
Mr. Genet against the President, "for refusing to convene Congress at his
instance."

We have also, she says, restrained our citizens from receiving commissions
from her, or serving on board of her armed vessels.

We have indeed done so, and it was our duty; a duty enjoined by our own peace
and safety, and by the impartial justice which we wished to observe toward
other nations. We never objected to our citizens going to France, and engaging
in her service, which many of them did; but we objected to their receiving
commissions from her in our own country, or entering on board of her
privateers, to rob those who were coming peaceably to trade with us. This was
conformably to prudence, as well as justice; and it was, moreover, what we had
stipulated with her to do, and to the utmost of our power had done, in the case
of her enemies.

It is worth while to remark the inconsistency of these two complaints. She
first quarrels with us, because we could not prevent, in her own words the
marine of England from being augmented by our seamen, and in the same breath,
she accuses us of infringing the laws of neutrality, by prohibiting our seamen
to serve in her privateers! We forbad both, and as far as we could, we
prevented both; but unfortunately, it was not always in our power to prevent
either; and yet she quarrels with us, for not preventing, even by hostility, in
the case of her enemies, the same thing, which she also quarrels with us, for
having attempted to prevent in her own case! such is the justice, moderation,
and impartiality of France!

We are also charged with permitting the English to violate our neutrality, by
capturing French property on board of our ships; and even American property
when bound to, or from the ports of France.

As to the capture of French property on board of our ships, it has already
appeared to be a right which Britain possesses by the laws of neutrality. How
then can the permission of its exercise be a breach of them? But we never did
willingly permit its exercise. We acquiesed in it indeed, because we knew that
the right existed, which the English, notwithstanding all our endeavors, could
not be induced to relinquish. Had it been in our power to induce her, we most
certainly would have done so; for of all things, next to keeping out of the
war, it was what we most desired, and what would most effectually have promoted
our interests.

But France says, that our measures for this purpose, were not efficacious; and
when she says so, we well know what she means. The instructions to Mr. Genet,
and the whole tenor of her conduct, leave no doubt on that point.

With respect to the capture of American property, bound to or from French
ports, we were so far from permitting it, that after remonstrating in the
firmest manner, though not in terms of outrage and insult, we demanded
satisfaction, and armed to enforce it; and had not the measure been
discontinued, and reparation agreed on, there is no doubt that war would have
been the consequence. That we accepted this reparation, that we did not fall
into her views, by making war in the first instance, is the true cause of
offense which we have given to France.

Another breach of neutraltiy with which she charges us, is that we suffered
the British to declare her Islands in a state of blockade.!

But I would ask, how we were to prevent this declaration? Or how we were bound
to prevent it, had we been able? France does not pretend that we were bound by
treaty; the treaty of alliance indeed, stipulates for a guarantee of her
islands; but the treaty of alliance was purely defensive, not offensive; and it
being perfectly certain, that she was the aggressor in the war with England,
the guarantee in this instance could not operate. But we were bound, she says,
by the laws of neutrality. How! can the laws of neutrality oblige us to defend
the possessions of our neighbors? This would amount to saying, that neutrality
required us to enter into the war.

We know that by the law of nations, provisions cannot be carried to a
blockaded place. The British declared, that certain French islands were
blockaded, and that all persons attempting to carry provisions to them, should
be dealt with according to the law of nations. While they adhered to this
declaration, and dealt with us according to the low of rations. we had no right
to complain; whenever, under color of the declaration, they infringed the law
of nations, they have engaged to make reparation, and are pursuing the most
effectual measures for fulfilling the engagement.

In the mean time, as these blockaded islands were prevented from receiving
provisions, France suffered an injury; but it was an injury which we could not
prevent; for we had no fleet to drive away the English ships which formed the
blockade. Even had we possessed a fleet, it would not have been incumbent on us
to engage in a war, merely to save one of our neighbors from an inconvenience.
We also suffered an injury; reparation for which we demanded, and are to
receive.

Her next complaint, with which the long catalogue is terminated, rests on an
outrage offered to Mr. Fauchet, a former French minister, by a British ship of
war in the waters of the United States; and which, she says, we have suffered
to pass with impunity.

The outrage offered to Mr. Fauchet, was an attempt to seize his person and
papers, on board of a vessel in which he had taken his passage from New York to
Rhode Island. The attempt was made by a British ship of war, lying near Newport
in Rhode Island. The vessel was stopped, and the trunks of Mr. Fauchets
attendants were searched, he and his papers escaped, because having been
informed of the design, he went ashore, and proceeded to Newport by land:
perceiving that they had missed their prey, the British party released the
vessel and those on board.

When the President heard of this daring insult to our country, he felt and
expressed a proper indignation; but as he received the information from one
party only, prudence no less than justice, required that before he acted, he
should hear the other side. He accordingly directed enquiries to be made;
having fully ascertained the facts, he ordered the British man of war to depart
immediately from our harbors, and directed that in case of her disobedience
for more than forty eight hours, all intercourse between her and the country
would be cut off. Our minister at London was instructed to complain against the
Captain, and demand his punishment; this was done, but the Captain with his
ship, was in Nova Scotia, from whence he went to the West Indies. He lately
returned to England, and as soon as it was known, the minister was ordered to
renew his demand.

What could we do more? we could not seize him on board of his ship to punish
him? we could not follow him to Nova Scotia, the West Indies, or England to
punish him. If the British government should neglect to punish him, shall we
declare war against them to avenge this injury? even France perhaps might
allow, that this would be to buy vengeance at too dear a rate.

This is what France calls "suffering the insult to her minister to pass with
impunity!" and yet much greater lenity was exercised, when her consul at
Boston, with an armed force, rescued a vessel from the officers of justice; and
when one of Mr. Genet's illegal privateers resisted the custom-house offieers,
and the militia sent by the President to arrest her in the Delaware, and
proceeded to sea in defiance of his authority.

Such my fellow-citizens, is a true picture of French grievances! Such are the
injuries for which we have been subjected, during four yeass, to the
importunate and insulting remonstrances of three successive ministers! for
which we have been accused of making an insidious proclamation of neutrality,
of sacrificing France to her enemies, and prostituting our own rights to Great
Britain, of permitting by a perfidious complaisance, the English to violate
rights which our honor and interests required us to defend, of presenting to
England under the cloak of neutrality, a poignard to cut the throats of our
faithful allies, of partaking in the tyrannical and murderous rage of Great
Britain, and joining with her to plunge France into the horrors of famine, See
Mr. Adet's notes. and his letter of September 29, 1795.
and of covering our proceedings with the veil of dissimulation.

For such injuries, it is, that we have been insultingly told of the "cold
impartiality of our government," of our "inability to maintain our treaties,"
See Mr. Fauchet's letters of May 2, and June 8, 1795. It is obvious, that his
expressions, though more guarded than those of ^is p^^^cessor, convey the same
offensive and i^su^ing meaning.


of having abandoned our neutral situation through an excessive complaisance
for England, of amusing the French by specious correspondences to cloak our own
inactivity, of making forced constructions of our treaties, and endeavoring to
throw a veil over the measures of the English government, and that the
respectable and heretofore unimpeached proceedings of our courts, have been
termed "unjust chicaneries. *"

These are the injuries, on account whereof, the President has been
contemptuously charged with promulgating philosophical principles; the
expression applied by France to that proclamation of neutrality, which she, on
another occasion, terms insidious, but which has received the sanction of both
Houses of Congress, and the universal approbation of the American people: that
the government has been accused of acting under an unknown influence, and of
being guided by foreign impressions; that we have been upbraided with a
cowardly abandonment of our friends, that we have been told that we had no
flag, no regard for our laws, no reliance on our strength, and no sentiment of
national dignity, that France by the mouth of her minister has said to us, If
we have been deceived, if you are not able to maintain the sovereignty of your
people, speak; we supported it while we were slaves, and we shall know how to
render it respectable, now that we are become free. Those are the words of Mr.
Genet, in his letter of July 25, 1793. S^^ al^^his I ^ers of June 8 and 22, and
of July 9, in the same year.


It is, in fine, for such injuries as these, that our treaty with France has
been expressly violated, that swarms of privateers have been let loose upon our
commerce, that our property to the amount of many millions of dollars has been
plundered, that hundreds of our ships have been seized and condemned,
multitudes of our sailors thrown into jails and prison ships, that our seamen
who may be found in Bri^sh ships of war, although brought there by compulsion,
are declared liable to be condemned as pirates; The ^^b a late decree of the
Directory.
and, to fill up the measure of outrage, that a messenger of peace and
conciliation, a minister expressly "sent to explain our conduct, to remove
misunderstandings, and restore harmony, has been contemptuously driven away,
without a reception or a hearing!

Having taken this view of the injuries complained of by France, permit me now
fellow citizens, to make some remarks on her pretensions; permit me to trace a
little the consequences o^ a compliance with her demands; the nature and extent
of the terms to which she requires us to submit.

This submission, it must be remembered, is to precede any explanation on our
part, or even the reception of a minister. The directory told genesis Pinckney,
through Mr. Munroe, that France would receive no minister plenipotentiary from
the United States, till all the injuries whereof she had complained and of
which she had a right to expect redress, should first fully receive it

The first of these injuries is the British treaty, which she declares to be a
violation of here is, and a departure in us from the principles of neutrality.
This injury must be redressed; therefore the treaty, though sanctioned by every
branch of the government, and executed in part, must be broken: the posts which
have been given up under it, must be re-delivered; the prospects of
reimbursement for their losses which it affords to our merchants, must be
renounced, and the commissioners now employed in deciding on their claims, must
b^ recalled. In fine, our whole dispute with Great Britain must be renewed
under circumstances of the highest aggravation, and we must be left to settle
it by a new treaty under the direction of France, or by a war in her alliance.

Without all this it is most evident, that the injuries of which France
complains under this treaty, cannot be redressed, and she requires them to be
redressed before she will even hear our explanation.

She next complains against the decision of our courts. The constructions put
upon our treaties, and upon the laws of nations by our courts, she complains of
as injuries, which, like the others, must be redressed before she will listen
to us.

Therefore the decisions of our courts, wherever she complains of them, and
that is in every case where they have been adverse to her claims, must be
reversed. How is this to be done? Those decisions have been carried by appeals
into the supreme courts of the Union, and there confirmed. The judicial power
is independent of the legislative and executive by the express terms of our
constitution, which to render the courts more completely independent, provides
that the judges shall not be displaced, like other officers, at the pleasure of
the president, but shall hold their places till turned our by impeachment. In
the mean time there is no power in the government by which their decisions can
be altered. France, however, informs us, that they must be altered before she
will listen to us.

It is plain therefore, that in order to satisfy her, we must violate our
constitution in its most valuable part, the independence of the judicial power.

And this is not all, we must place these courts hereafter under the control
of her minister, and restrain them from taking cognizance of any causes which
he may pronounce improper for their interference; for France complains not only
of the decisions of our courts, but of their creating delay to her privateers,
by taking cognizance of cases which have finally been decided in her favor.

Therefore our courts having issued process to bring a cause before them on the
complaint of our citizens, must dismiss it on the orders of a French minister.
Should they refuse to dismiss it, what then is to be done? The executive must
interfere with a strong hand and overruled them, and this not from his own
judgment, but at the instance of a French minister. Thus the public force of
our country must be placed in the hands of a foreign agent, to be employed in
compelling our courts of justice to submit to his orders.

This is the very lowest stage of dependence and degradation; and it is
manifest, that this must be done before the demands of France can be satisfied;
for there is no other method of preventing that interference of our courts
whereof she complains as one of her greatest injuries.

The legislature must also share in this degradation. It must be compelled to
repeal one of its laws; for one of them, the act of June 5, 1794, unfortunately
confirms the principles which had been adopted by our-courts and by the
executive. This act accordingly is placed by France in the catalogue of her
injuries, and must be repealed.

Therefore the legislature must hereafter ask France what laws it shall enact,
and what, being already enacted, it shall suffer to remain; for it is evident
that if she can insist on the repeal of one law on the pretense of its being
injurious to her interests, or contrary to her rights, she may equally object
to the continuance or the passing of any other, there being none to which this
pretense may not be extended. France has taken care to give us an example of
the manner in which it may be extended, and in which she would exe^cise this
right, were we weak enough to concede it. We had indulged her with the
privil^^ge, not granted by the treaty, of selling her p^izes in our ports.
Finding after wards that the indulgence had been abase^, and operated in a
manner very prejudicial to our ourselves, a bill was brought into the House of
Representatives last year to prevent it in nature, this hill passed with little
opposition. Mr. Adet immediately entered a formal complaint against it, as a
(...) if (...) treaty, and concluded with exp^^^^ng his hopes (...) that the
"government would take the necessary measures, for preventing the effects of a
law contrary to treaties, and the duties or a ^^tual nation." See his letter of
May 18, 1796, to the Secr^^^y of State.




When these obnoxious decisions and laws shall be removed, then will France
enter into the exercise of those rights, which through them have hitherto, as
she alleges, been unjustly withheld from her. She will give commissions to our
citizens in our own ports to privateer against her enemies with whom we are at
peace. These privateers, if they please, will capture vessels on our coasts, in
our rivers, and even at our wharves, and our courts will be prevented from
giving redress. She will arm vessels in our ports, and if they can proceed to
sea by stealth, or in despite of the President's authority, as they have
heretofore done, neither they nor their prizes on their return into into port,
can be questioned by the courts. She will sell her prizes in our country,
whereby our harbors will again become a station for her privateers, our towns
overrun by their crews, our police insulted and disturbed, our regular commerce
interrupted, and our revenue defrauded. She will even arm and equip vessels for
war in our ports, for the prohibition against it rests at present, on that law
of June 5, 1794, whereof she requires the repeal; and should British ships of
war enter our harbors, she will allege that they have at some time or other
made prize on her citizens, and we, without waiting to examine the truth of her
allegation, must compel them to depart.

All this is the plain and necessary consequence of complying with her demands.

Having proceeded thus far, we must go on to declare war against England, or at
least to exclude her commerce from our ports, for the prevention and avengement
of what France tells us are infractions of our neutrality and insults to our
honor. France tells us, that we have heretofore submitted to these insults,
and winked at these infractions; that our measures to repel or redress them,
have been inefficacious, and the inconvenience which she suffers from this
inefficacy, is numbered among the greatest of her injuries.

It has already been seen, that these infractions and insults consist chiefly
in the capture of French property in our vessels, that is in the exercise of a
right which we acknowledge, and the law of nations clearly supports. They also
consist in part of real injuries, whereof we have complained, and for which the
authors have engaged to make, and now are making ample satisfaction. These two
descriptions include the whole list of "infractions and insults." But if it
were otherwise; if as France asserts, all the acts complained of were really
infractions, and we had failed to obtain satisfaction, still it is evident that
the measures which we have adopted for that purpose, were the most efficacious
in our power short of hostility, or what would have immediately led to it.
Since therefore she requires us to adopt more efficacious measures, such as
shall satisfy her and remove the evil, it manifestly appears, that nothing
short of hostility, or measures that must speedily end in it, would content her.

Therefore we must make war on Great Britain, contrary to our own inclination,
and to what, in our judgment, the best interests of our country require.

When we shall have done all this, when we shall have broken our treaties,
repealed our laws, and in contempt of our constitution, reversed the most
solemn decisions of our courts; when we shall have placed the judicial power of
our country under the control of a French minister, and abandoned the whole
system of our foreign policy, so wise and adopted after so much deliberation;
when weshall have placed our ports, our rivers, and our commerce at the mercy
of French privateers, and engaged in a war with the enemies of France, to
compel the surrender of an acknowledged right, because its exercise happens to
be inconvenient to her; when we shall have done all this, what will be gained?
Will France then restrain her privateers, restore our property, and respect our
few remaining rights? No! she promises no such thing; she requires all this to
be done as a preliminary, and when it is done, she will then hear what we have
to say, and will signify to us her further pleasure.

And are the people of America, who once generously resolved to maintain their
independence, or die in the last ditch, are you, my fellow citizens, whose
blood has often slowed in the cause of your country, prepared for this? Are you
prepared to lay your country prostrate at the feet of France? Are you prepared
to put your courts under the control of her agents, violate your constitution
at her orders, and tamely allow her minister, under the pretense of watching
over the execution of a treaty, and of enforcing the laws of neutrality, to
overruled the legislature, dictate to the President, and assume the absolute
direction of your affairs? If you be thus prepared, which I will never believe
till I see it, I freely, nay proudly, declare to you that I am not, and that my
voice shall never sanction this surrender of our rights and independence.
Sooner would I see every ship sunk, every town in ashes, and devastation once
more spread from one end our coast to the other.

With the loss of these things we might retain our soil, our hands, our
courage, our independent spirit, and our constitution; and we should be a
nation still. Industry would again give us ships and towns; again might
commerce gladden our ports, and agriculture smile over our land; and our
children possessing in peace and honor, the blessings which with so many
sacrifices, we had purchased, might proudly look on our graves, and say, "these
were our fathers." But independence once lost, is most rarely regained: Such is
the condition of our nature, that a nation once fallen, once reduced under
foreign rule, most rarely rises again; and where its fall proceeds, as in our
case it must, not from its want of means, but its want of courage to use them,
from its pusillanimity, its intrinsic weakness of character, it is destined
never more to shake off the yoke.

But it may be said, is not this picture exaggerated? Can it be supposed that
France, even should we yield to her present demands, would attempt to push thus
far her abuse of our concessions?

Let us enquire of the Dutch, let us ask the Belgians, they can give us some
useful information; and from their example, we may learn that the oppressions
of France always keep pace with the weakness, the credulity, and the submissive
spirit of those with whom she has to deal. Let us ask the Swiss; from them we
may receive a lesson equally important, that the only means of setting bounds
to her unjust and haughty pretensions, is a firm and manly opposition.

In the winter of 1794, the French armies having overrun Belgium, and being
favored by the intense cold, which covered the rivers with Ice, marched into
Holland. On the 20th of January, a few days after their arrival, the French
commissioners with the army, published a proclamation, in which they told the
Dutch, In the midst of war, we consider you as our friends and allies; it is
under this name that we enter your country, we seek not to terrify, but to
inspire you with confidence. It is but a few years since a tyrannic conqueror
prescribed you laws; we abolish them, and restore you freedom.

We come not to make you slaves, the French nation shall preserve to you your
independence.

Personal safety shall be secured, and property protected.

All this was very friendly, and the Dutch very good naturedly believed it,
more especially as the French generals, when they were approaching the country,
had constantly repeated the same thing. They however soon found their mistake.

Seven days after this first proclamation, the same commissioners, having now
been admitted into all the towns with their troops, and obtained complete
possession of the country, published a second, in which they formally invited
the Dutch government to furnish the army, within one month, with the following
supplies, viz. 200,000 quintals of wheat; 500,000 of rations of hay; 200,000
rations of straw; 500,000 bushels of corn; 150,000 pair of shoes; 20,000 pair
of boots; 20,000 coats and waistcoats; 40,000 pair of breeches; 150,000 pair of
pantaloons: 200,000 shirts; and 50,000 hats; and besides all this, 12,000 oxen
to be delivered in two months. This requisition they call their amicable
intentions, which they flatter themselves the citizens and the government will
show equal ^eal to second, and in the execution whereof, they hope that the
slow forms of ordinary administration, and all doubts about the want of
authority, which might impede the operation, will be carefully set aside? and
they give the Dutch to understand, that in case the articles were not
furnished, they should be exacted by force.

It was now too late to hesitate; the French had crossed the rivers, their army
was in the country, and the Dutch had opened their gates to these restorers of
their liberty; they were therefore obliged instantly to comply, and on the same
day, they addressed a proclamation to the people, informing them of the demand,
and directing them to furnish their respective proportions. In this
proclamation, they remind the people of the absolute necessity of furnishing
the supplies, without the smallest delay, and of the distress to which they
must expose themselves, if they manifest the least unwillingness, or even
procrastination.

This however was only the commencement; they subsisted their armies in Holland
during the winter, took every thing they wanted, and paid in depreciated
assignats at par; and finally they forced the Dutch to form an ossensive and
defensive alliance with them against England for ever. The treaty was signed on
the 15th May, 1795. It obliges the Dutch to cede to France, "as indemnities"
two of their most important frontier towns, with the adjoining territories, and
one of their provinces; to admit French garrisons, in case of war in that
quarter, into three others of their strongest frontier towns; to admit a French
garrison both in peace and war, into one of their principal seaports? to give
France the free navigation of one of their principal rivers; to employ half
their forces in carrying on the present campaign, under the command of French
generals; and finally, to pay France, as a further indemnification for the
expenses of the war, one hundred millions of livres, equal to twenty five
millions of dollars, in cash or bills of exchange on foreign countries.

In addition to this, it has lately appeared from the statements made to the
Dutch government by a committee of Finance, that for fourteen months then last,
the Dutch had paid two millions of dollars per month, amounting in the whole to
twenty eight millions, for the support of the French armies. The these two sums
add the value of the first contribution which was exacted in kind, and they
amount at the least, to fifty-five millions of dollars, two thirds of the whole
expenses of our revolution; of this enormous sum have the Dutch been plundered
by France, under the name of amity and alliance in less than two years, and in
addition to the immense amount of assignats they have been forced to receive,
to the surrender of a whole province, of their five strongest frontier towns,
and of a principal seaport, and to the employment of one half of their troops
in the service of France.

In return for all this, the French have driven away the Statholder and changed
the government. They have not suffered the Dutch however to adopt one to their
own mind. A convention was called for that purpose, a great majority of which
was in favor of a federal republic. The minority having opposed this plan in
vain, sent two of their members to Paris to obtain the interference of the
French government. The French government did interfere, and the majority was
forced to yield. The plan of government, which this great majority had
favored, was now rejected, and a different form, more suitable to the views of
France was imposed on the nation. The names of the deputies who went to France
are Van Vicreede and Hooffe. They afterward published a letter, in which they
avow the affair and boast of it. See Gazette of the U. S. April 25, 1797.


The Dutch have also obtained in addition to all these proofs of amity, an
offensive and defensive war with France against England, in which they have
already lost all their rich possessions in the East Indies, the Cape of Good
Hope, a great part of their fleet, and the remains of their trade.

The easy conditions granted to the Dutch were complained of in the French
convention, and it was alleged, that the commissioners had not drawn from
Holland all the advantages which the republic had a right to expect. The
commissioners justified themselves by alleging that it would have been
impolitic to demand harder conditions at first, because in that case, the Dutch
might have been driven to resistance. See the report made to the national
convention by Cannot, Feb. 18, 1795, in which this whole affair is stated, and
the means of resistance that Holland might have used, had she been assailed
under any other appearances than those of "fraternity," are ably pointed out.


Thus we see openly avowed and approved, the system of coaxing a nation into
their power, under the pretense of rendering it services, and then plundering
and oppressing it without bounds or remorse, under pretense of receiving a
reward for those services: and this by a government which has talked to us of
our perfidious neutrality!

Without entering into so minute a detail respecting belgium, it will be
sufficient to state, that the French entered this unfortunate country under
repeated and solemn promises of protection and freedom; no sooner had they
obtained possession by the success of their arms and the favor of the
inhabitants, who were foolish enough to confide in their promises, than they
put every article of property which could be of use to their armies into
requisition, and compelled the people to receive payment in depreciated
assignats at par. They next levied immense pecuniary contributions on all the
towns, they ordered measures to be taken for compelling the people to exchange
their money for assignats at par. See the decree of December 15, 1792, and the
instructions to the commissioners, dated January 8, 1793.
They placed the country under the government of military commissioners:
finding that a majority of the conventions, which they had assembled under the
pretense of making the people free, were adverse to their views, they dissolved
these conventions by force, though freely chosen by the people, and this for
the express purpose, to use the words of one of their commissioners Publicola
Chausaid.
in the account of his proceedings, of raising up the minority, and destroying
or counterballancing the power of an ante patriotic majority.

Having thus afforded "liberty and protection" to the Belgians, having thus
broken their chains, and released them from the yoke of their ancient tyrants,
they proceeded to seize and confiscate, for their own use, the whole property
of the clergy in Belgium, to the amount of more than two hundred and fifty
millions of dollars.

The military government and contributions levied at the point of the bayonet,
still go on in this liberated country, for the gazettes have lately informed us
of parties of horse being sent to seize the provisions of such farmers as
neglected to bring them in at the orders of the commissioners.

It may also be useful to consider the example of Italy, to the people of
which, the French when they invaded it, also promised liberty; they even
carried on for some time the farce of a convention, at which genesis Buonaparte
sent one of his officers with a detachment of troops to preside. Having by
these means enticed these simple people to assist them against their own
government, they have lately in their treaty with the Pope stipulated, that
these provinces which belong^^ to him, shall not be made free, but be ceded to
France. In the mean time they plundered the churches and the cities, stripped the
country to which they had promised freedom, of its wealth by enormous
contributions, and compelled the militia to join their armies. Besides the
territory which they compelled the Pope to relinquish, they exacted from him
upwards of six millions of dollars, and many of his most valuable effects, and
forced him to receive a French garrison into one of his seaport towns.

Thus it is that France deals with countries which she can entice or compel
into her grasp. Let us see how she acts toward such as are willing and able to
resist.

The Swiss being neighbors to France, and having resolved according to their
usual policy, to remain neuter in the present war, she early began as she has
done in our case, to claim the right of directing their affairs under the
pretense of enforcing the observance of treaties and of the laws of neutrality.
The Swiss, as we have done, for a long time bore with her through a love of
peace, but still, though in the mildest terms, repelled her pretensions.
Emboldened by this moderation on their part, and by seeming compliances into
which they had been led by their anxiety to avoid a quarrel, she increased in
her demands, and at length formally required them to drive from their territory
the numerous French emigrants who had taken refuge there, and were residing
peaceably under the protection of their laws. The assylum granted by them to
these unfortunate exiles, deprived of their all, and hunted by the implacable
vengeance of France from country to country, was declared by her to be a breach
of neutrality. The Swiss resolved not to yield this essential point of their
sovereignty, but unwilling to refuse directly, for some time evaded the matter;
France persisted, called their evasions outrageous and ridiculous delay, asked
them how they dared to hold a conduct so reprehensible, and demanded without
delay, "a frank and amicable" explanation, which might dispel her doubts, and
restore "their state to her "sentiments of good will." See the letter of
Barthelemi, the French minister, to the canton o^ Bazil, May 9, 1796.


The Swiss made a firm reply, marked however with great moderation, and showing
a wish still to evade the question, rather than give a direct and pointed
refusal.

But this did not satisfy France: she returned to the charge. Her minister
tells the Swiss, I conceive it my duty, agreeable to my INSTRUCTIONS, to
request formally from you, that you will banish from your territory all
descriptions of those strangers so dangerous to the tranquillity of France and
of Switzerland, as well those whom a false pity has hitherto tolerated, as
those who may hereaster take refuge there. They cannot any longer prolong their
stay there, without injuring that confidence which ought to subsist between two
nations, one of which cannot grant an assylum to (the enemies of) the other,
without essentially affecting the duties of neutrality. The directory demands
and expects from your friendship, that listening only to your true and solid
interests, you will drive from among you the emigrants and French priests. --
Your wisdom will appreciate the extreme and pressing importance of this
request. See Barth^l^mi^^ letter of June 2^, 1796


The Swiss however were resolved to judge themselves of what "their true and
solid interests" required; and finding that moderation only invited new
ins^^^s, and that there was nothing left for them, but to submit, or firmly and
plainly assert their rights, they replied that they themselves were the judges
of the interests of their country; that they were desirous of avoiding offense
to France and had given none; that those Emigrants and Priests were peaceable
exiles, whose misfortunes as well as their virtues and good conduct, gave them
a claim to the assylum, which they had received in the Swiss territory: that
far from plotting against the interests of France, as she had alleged, these
exiles were honestly and peacably laboring for their bread: that they had
received in Switzerland the rights of hospitality which no duty of a neutral
nation forbid it grant, and that in these rights the Swiss were resolved, at
all hazards, to protect them.

This reply put an end to the dispute; France perceiving that the Swiss were
resolved not to yield, and that, considering their warlike character and the
situation of their country, an attempt to force them would be attended with
hazard and difficulty, she wisely determined to give up the point. The
emigrants remained; and after all this blustering, she left the swiss quietly
to manage their own affairs.

From these various examples my fellow citizens, we may learn the consequences
to be expected from submission, and from resistance; we may learn that to make
the concessions now demanded, would only embolden her in new requisitions, to
be constantly extended in proportion as we should betray a disposition to
yield; whereas the true and only method of repelling or preventing aggression,
is to show by our conduct that we are resolved, at all hazards, to maintain the
exclusive and uncontrouled direction of our own affairs. Before she will desist
from her attempts, we must convince her that in this resolution we are firm and
united. Till then, she will continue to require from us, as she now does, the
sacrifice of our See their reply in the Gazette of the U. S. of September 21,
1796.
interests and self government at the shrine of her own ambition.

And what are the titles whereby she claims this sacrifice? She claims it from
our justice, and our gratitude.

Her claims on our justice, rest upon the stipulations of treaties, and the
duties of neutrality. These have already been examined, and it has appeared how
far they are from supporting her pretensions.

But our gratitude, we are told, forms a stronger tie, and rests on foundations
still more sacred. She proudly holds up to our view her assistance in our
struggle for independence; her commercial benefits, conferred in the present
war; and the religious punctuality wherewith, as she asserts her stipulations
in the treaty with us have been fulfilled. On these is sounded, according to
her, a debt of gratitude, which-nothing less than our independance can pay.

Again and again has she reminded us that to her we are indebted for the
possession of our freedom: again and again has she recalled her services to our
recollection, and upbraided us with our ingratitude: again and again, has she
repeated her claim to unbounded compliance with her wishes, as the return for
her assistance. These pretensions at first were urged with some degree of
modesty. The instructions to Mr. Genet go no further than to allege that the
french nation contributed to acquire our independence, as the just price
whereof we ought to submit to engagements which might appear burdensome. But
Mr. Genet soon afterward told us that France had established our freedom and
that gratitude required us to yield to his demands. Mr Adet declares that
France wrought and guaranteed our independence, at a time when, as the price of
it she might have granted us conditions less liberal. And at the conclusion of
that long list of complaints, which are founded on pretentions so inadmissable
and extravagant, he declares that our Government, in refusing to yield to them
has set aside the duties of Gratitude, as if ingratitude was a duty of
Goverments.

To crown the whole, the directory in a public speech to our late our late
minister at Paris, expressed their hope, that the Americans, proud of their
liberty, would never forget that they owe it to France.

In the affairs of private life it is a rule, that to be upbraided with
benefits received, very much impairs the obligation they create; and that to
demand a reward for what was conferred as a favor, changes the obligations of
gratitude into a debt by contract. The debt in this case must be weighed in the
scale of strict justice, or measured by the extent of precise stipulations.

As to stipulations, there are none which can warrant the demands of France;
for in that very treaty whereby the assistance so boasted of was furnished, it
is expressly declared, that each party being resolved to fulfill on its own part,
the clauses and conditions of the present treaty of alliance, according to its
own power and circumstances, there shall be no after claim of compensation on
the one side or the other. The only benefit stipulated for France, was our
guarantee of her islands; but this stipulation, which was to take effect only
when France should be engaged in a defensive war, does not operate in this
case; because in the present war she is clearly the aggressor: and of this she
is so sensible, that amidst all her extravagant demands, she has never called
on us for the fulfillment of the guarantee.

A reward claimed for services on the principles of justice, must be regulated
by two considerations; what the services were fairly worth, and what the
parties at the time, may be supposed to have tacitly contemplated as the price.
But can any possible service be worth our independence, nothing less than which
France demands? Ought we in justice to make her this return, even if, as she
pretends, she had bestowed this independence? Can it be supposed, that when the
services were rendered, she ever expected, or we would ever have consented,
that this should be considered as their price? What in that case should we have
gained by our seven years struggle, by the destruction of our property, by the
devastation of our country, by the long toils and the blood of our citizens,
and by our debt seventy millions of dollars? We should have gained not freedom,
but a change of masters; of and whether a change for the better, let Holland,
Belgium, and Italy, bear witness.

But is it true that France gave us independence? Let us appeal to dates and to
her own assertions for an answer to the question.

Let us ask at what time she concluded this alliance, to which she says we are
indebted for our success? At wh^^ time she rendered this assistance, by which
she so confidently affirms, that our independence was maintained? It was in the
year 1778, after we had supported the war three years by our own forces; after
we had captured Burgoyne's army; after the English, convinced of their
inability to subdue us, had offered us every thing we asked, except
independence: it was after we having declared our independence, and fully
assured of being able to support it, had unanimously refused to listen to their
offers.

Before these events, and while the contest was yet doubtful, she had
constantly refused to form an alliance, or to grant us assistance. She allowed
us indeed to purchase arms and ammunition from her merchants, but for these we
paid, and with these we were furnished by the merchants of other nations also.

This is the testimony of dates and facts; testimony written on the plains of
Saratoga, and behind the breast works of Bunker's Hill.

But what is the testimony of her own declarations?

After the treaties of alliance and commerce became known to England, she
published a manifesto in justification of the war, which on account of those
treaties she had resolved to wage against France. The French court gave a
public answer to this manifesto, in which it vindicated its own conduct, and
justified the treaties, on the express ground, that the United States had
already not only declared, but established their independence, when the
treaties were concluded. The answer asserts, that the capture of Burgoyne
overthrew the plan which England had laid for the reduction of her colonies;
that England had become unable to subdue her colonies; that on the 6th of
February, 1778, the date of the treaties, the Americans were in the full and
public possession of their independence: that the colonies had established
their independence, not only by a solemn declaration, but also in fact, and had
supported it against all the efforts of the mother country; that England had
displayed her power to chastise the Americans, and reduce them by conquest, but
that the result of all her efforts had been to demonstrate to America, to
Europe, and to England herself, her impotency and the impossibility of her ever
bringing the Americans again under the yoke.

And yet we are now told by France, that she gave us our independence!

Assistance indeed she did give us, though not our independence, and all the
world knows how fondly, how proudly, we have always acknowledged the
obligation. All the world knows with what religious reverence, with what
heartfelt gratitude, we have shut our eyes to the motive, while we looked only
at the act. All the world knows how much delighted we have been to forget that
France was an interested associate, and to regard her only as a generous, a
magnanimous benefactor. With what pain it is that we find ourselves obliged by
her reiterated reproaches, to abandon this voluntary this pleasing delusion!
With wha^ pain do we see ourselves compelled, by her taunting recalls to our
recollection of services which she says w^ have forgotten, to draw aside the
veil, and expose to the world and to ourselves, the objects for which we always
knew that those services were rendered!

Her objects were to exhaust and divide the British empire, by fomenting and
supporting the quarrel between the colonies and the mother country; and then to
gratify her resentment and exalt her own power, by seizing the moment of
weakness, to humble and reduce her most formidable and her most dreaded rival.
To effect this object, she did not wish the colonies to become independent, but
to be reduced after a long struggle: because in that case both their resources
and those of England, would be the most completely exhausted. For the proof of
this position, we appeal once more to her own testimony.

Nothing is better known than that the pride of France never received so deep a
wound as at the peace of 1763. It was by that peace, that after a war, in which
her power, in the four quarters of the globe, had sunk under the arms of
Britain, guided at that time by the genius of the elder Pit, she found herself
obliged to subscribe to terms which her statesmen, her warriors, and her
writers, have never ceased to reprobate and lament. She tried every means to
recruit her strength; sought to fortify herself every where by new alliances;
and waited with impatience for the moment, when circumstances might enable her
to renew the combat, with better omens of success. This moment she saw approach
in the quarrel which broke out in 1775, between Great Britain and her colonies:
and she immediately took into consideration how the opportunity might best be
improved. This was the subject of her most anxious care, of the most profound
deliberations of her wisest statesmen.

The result of these deliberations may be seen in a piece drawn up in April
1776, by Mr. Turgot, at that time one of the ministers of Lewis the sixteenth,
and entitled, Reflections upon the manner in which France and Spain ought to
regard the consequences of the quarrel between Great Britain and her colonies;
in this piece, which Mr. Turgot declares to be entirely conformable to the
opinions of Mr. De Vergennes, it is declared, that the event the most desirable
for the interests of the two crowns (France and Spain) would be the reduction
of the colonies again under the yoke of England. The reason assigned for this
opinion is extremely striking, and unveils most completely the system of the
French policy. If the colonies should not he reduced till after the ruin of all
their resources, England would lose the advantages which she has hitherto drawn
from them, not only for the augmentation of her commerce in time of peace, but
in the use of their forces in time of war. If on the contrary, the colonies
should be subdued without the destruction of their wealth and their population,
they would preserve also their courage and their desire of independence, and
England would be compelled to employ part of her forces in preventing a new
revolt.

Thus we see that these generous beenefactors desired no^^ing so much as the
destruction of all our resources, and even of our population, by a tedious and
bloody, contest; and then our final reduction under the yoke of our former
masters.

To effect this plan; to enable us to make this long resistance, by which our
wealth and population were to be destroyed; Mr. Turgot advises, that France
should furnish us, by means of the merchants, with the warlike stores, and even
with the money, which we might be in need of; but without abandoning her own
neutrality, or affording any direct assistance. This he said was by all means
to be avoided; because it would involve France in the war; who, without
remaining in peace herself, could not reap all the expected advantages from the
weak and ruined state, whereto England and the colonies would be reduced by the
struggle.

Another reason, and in his opinion a decisive one, for avoiding war, or even
the appearance of it, he declares to be the tendency which the one or the other
would have to bring about a reconciliation between the colonies and the mother
country, and thus expose France to the danger which she most dreaded, that is,
the danger of their speedy reunion, with undiminished forces.

And finally, the better to accomplish this plan, he recommends the adoption of
measures for obtaining exact information of all that passed in the colonies;
without however giving room to suspect, that France had there any direct or
authorized agent. This piece of Mr. Turgot was found with many other secret
state-papers, in the Cabinet of Louis the Sixteenth, and after his death was
published by the Convention.


The tendency of this plan to weaken and reduce the power of England is easily
seen; but I cannot find in it the least trace of good faith, or good will,
toward the colonies; much less of a wish to promote their prosperity, or
establish their independence. The very contrary indeed is expressly declared.

That this plan, contrived by Turgot and Vergennes, was afterward adopted by
the French government, is perfectly well known; not only from the power which
those two ministers then, and for a long time after, enjoyed in France, but
from the conduct of the government and its express declarations. In March 1784,
we find M. de Vergennes, in a memoir addressed to Louis the sixteenth, on the
conduct observed by the French government toward other powers, reminding him,
(...) his majesty, provoked by the violence and injustice of England, had
employed himself seriously about the means, of doing, what? of establishing the
independence of the colonies? No: This memoire of M. de Vergennes, was another
of the pieces found among the private papers of Louis the Sixteenth.
but of repressing the pride and ambition of that enterprising nation, and of
preventing the revolution which had broken out in North America, from turning
to the prejudice of France; for which view a negotiation had already been
commenced with the United States, when the unexpected death of the Elector of
Bavaria called his attention to the affairs of Germany.

Thus when the king and his minister come to talk over the matter in private,
where men tell the truth without disguise, they explain the true motives of
their conduct. We find that they were actuated, not by good will to the
Americans, but by resentment against England; not by a wish to promote the
advantage of America, but to repress the pride and ambition of England; and
that it was for this view, and not to secure our independence, that the
negotiation was commenced.

It is indeed perfectly well known that until they heard of the capture of
Burgoyne, and the conciliatory offers of England, the French government treated
all our advances with the greatest indifference; and to use their own words in
their answer to the English manifesto, had all times manifested a dislike to
any engagement with the colonies, this was entirely conformable to her policy
of avoiding the war, while Britain and the colonies should go on to exhaust
each other by a long struggle, and afford her an opportunity of attacking them
both afterward with entire forces. But when Burgoyne was taken, and the
English offered us all we asked, except independence, then France, for fear we
should accede, and lest that reunion which she so much dreaded, should take
place, immediately departed from her former policy, and concluded a treaty with
us, on terms far more favorable than those, which we had before solicited in
vain.

Her reasons for doing so, are very fully and strongly expressed, in the
following extract from her answer to the British manifesto.

It is sufficient for the justification of his majesty, that the colonies,
which form a nation considerable for the number of their inhabitants as well as
for the extent of their dominion, have established their independence, not only
by a solemn declaration, but also in fact, and have supported it against the
efforts of their mother country; such was in effect the situation of the United
States, when his majesty began to negociate with them. His majesty had full
liberty of considering them as independent, or as subjects of Great Britain;
and he chose the first part, because his safety, the interest of his people,
invariable policy, and above all, the secret projects of the court of London,
imperiously laid him under the necessity.

The answer then asserts, that the alliance, formed under the pressure of this
imperious necessity, was, eventual and purely defensive; not to take effect
unless France should be attacked by the court of London before the cessation of
hostilities with the colonies.

Thus we find that this boasted alliance, to which we have have been so often
and so insultingly told that we owe our independence, was not resolved on by
France, till after she knew that our independence was in fact established; was
dictated by imperious necessity, and a regard to the safety and interests of
France; and was not to take effect unless she would be attacked by our enemies!

And lest the evidence of circumstances and the pointed declarations of the
former government of France on this subject, should be doubted, the republic
has also added its restimony. The executive council, in its instructions to Mr
Genet, declares that the minsters of Louis the sixteenth thought it right for
France to hinder the United States from taking that political stability of
which they were capable; because they would soon acquire a strength which it
was probable they would be eager to abuse. The same machivelian policy,
continue the instructions, influenced the operations of the war for
independence; the same duplicity reigned over the negocitions for peace, and in
fact we know that the French government thwarted these negociations to the
utmost of its power, and strove to render the conditions of the peace, which it
had in vain striven to prevent, as disadvantageous to us as possible, by
depriving us of the Fisheries, the western country, and the navigation of the
Mississippi. This was conformable to their system of keeping us at war as long
as possible, and leaving us at the end of it, as weak as possible.

Surely therefore it may be expected, that we shall at length cease to be told
of the disinterested generosity of France in establishing our independence, and
of our ingratitude to her on that account.

Does her claim to our gratitude for commercial favors during the present war,
rest on a better foundation? She has indeed opened her West India ports to us;
and of this we have been again and again reminded. But at what time was it
done? At the time when she had resolved to give up her commerce, and convert
all her ships into privateers for the purpose of destroying that of England.

As the productions of her colonies were of indispensible use to her, it was
infinitely her interest that we should become the carriers of them, more
especially as we were the only neutral power, whose local situation, and number
of ships, could enable it to effect the object.

She hoped also to obtain another very desirable object. It was well known to
her that England claimed a right to take the goods of her enemies on board of
neutral vessels. When we should engage in this carrying trade between France
and her colonies, we should of course become exposed to infinite vexation from
the exercise of this right. The profits of the trade would tempt us on one
hand, while the vexations would provoke us on the other; and by this double
operation the great object of bringing us into the war would be very much
promoted. France also would be furnished with that pretext which we find her
now using, for insisting on us to employ what she calls efficacious means in
causing her property on board of our ships to be respected by England. If we
should succeed, the property would go free, and that would be a great benefit;
if we should fail, we should nevertheless be involved in the war, and that
would be a greater still.

The sweets of this commerce too, it was hoped, would entice us into an
alliance offensive and defensive for the purpose of securing it; and
accordingly we find that when Mr. Genet was instructed to draw us into such an
alliance, this was the bait which he was ordered to employ.

Thus it is manifest, that what we are now upbraided with as a generous and
useful indulgence, was in fact a most dangerous snare, from which great good
fortune and the prudence of our government, joined to its unshaken firmness,
could alone have enabled us to escape.

She rests her claim to our gratitude in the last place, on the respect which
she has paid to our interests and our wishes, and the punctuality wherewith she
has fulfilled her duties toward us.

One instance of her attention to our wishes is, the recall of Mr. Genet, in
which she now asserts, that listening only to the complaints of the American
government, she immediately gave the most ample satisfaction. See Mr. Adet's
note


We, however, perfectly well know, that this recall proceeded not from
complaisance to us, but from the fall of the Brissotine party, to which Mr.
Genet belonged, and by which he was sent here. Robespiere, who then came into
power, not only drove all the men of that party from their employments, but
destroyed as many of them as he could catch; but that France never abandoned
the system which Genet had pursued, is most evident from the present measures,
in which we see that system avowed and enforced. It is also evident from the
whole correspondence of his two successors, which though not always quite as
offensive in expression as that of Genet, was no less exceptionable in
principle and substance. Indeed that appeal to the people, the mere threat of
which was considered as the most offensive and outrageous of all Genet's
proceedings, has actually been made by one of his successors, in the most
formal manner and by express orders of the French government.

Another instance is, that France, on the application of our minister,
repealed, as far as respected us, one of her decrees, which was injurious to
the commerce of neutral states. This repeal, it is true, did take place; but
unfortunately, the repealing law itself was repealed three days afterward,
through the influence of some French privateers, which had taken a very rich
American ship; and the first decree was left for many months to operate in a
manner the most injurious to our commerce.

This leads to the question, how far France has entitled herself to particular
favor from us by her punctual observance of treaties? For this also is one of
the merits; whereof in the midst of her reproaches, she has repeatedly reminded
us. Her ministers have repeatedly told us of the religious punctuality with
which the French Republic keeps her engagements with a nation to whom she has
not ceased to testify her attachment. See Mr. Fauchet's letter of May 23,1795,
and Mr. Genet's correspondence throughout.
Let us see how punctual this observance has been, and what are the proofs of
this attachment.

On the 9th of May, 1793, before the British commenced their spoliations on our
commerce, the national convention of France passed a decree, authorizing her
ships of war and privateers, to capture all neutral vessels loaded, in whole or
in part, with merchandises belonging to enemies, or with provisions belonging
to neutrals, but bound to enemies ports.

This was prior by one month, to the first orders of the British government,
under which our provisions, destined for French ports, were made prize. Thus
did France set the example of those very measures, against which, even while
she contiued to pursue them herself, she so violently exclaimed as soon as they
were imitated by the British, and to compel the recall whereof she has so often
told us that our honor, and our good faith to her, required us to make war
against England!

This decree of May 9, 1793, being a plain and direct violation of our treaty
with France, Which declares, that free ships between us and her shall make free
goods.
our minister at Paris complained, and on the 23d of the same month a new
decree was passed, declaring that the former should not extend to American
vessels; and thus plainly confessing its injustice. The second decree however
was repealed only two days after it passed, and the first remained in force
against our commerce. Our minister again complained, and on the first of July
the convention again decreed, that the decree of May the ninth should not
extend to American vessels. This was a second acknowledgement of its injustice;
and yet twenty-seven days afterward, it was again enforced against our
commerce by the repeal of the last decree for restricting it: and then it
remained in force until January the 4th, 1795.

During this period a very considerable number of our vessels were carried into
French ports by her privateers and ships of war. It also became a practice to
seize cargoes sent in to her ports by our merchants, and employ them for public
use, without paying for them. Her agents also purchased considerable quantities
of provisions from our citizens, and drew bills for payment on the government
of France, or on her minister in this country, which in many instances were not
paid. Those agents frequently made contracts also with our citizen for supplies
of provisions, which, when the provisions arrived, they refused to fulfill. The
privateers and ships of war of France, frequently committed spoliations at sea
on such of our vessels as did not come within the decree of May 9, 1793, and
finally an embargo was laid on our vessels in Bourdeaux, and continued during
the greater part of the years 1793 and 1794, whereby one hundred and three of
our vessels were detained, and our merchants sustained very great injury.

There were many cases of all these descriptions, and each of them was a plain
infraction of the treaty, the law of nations, or the rights of neutrality. Many
of them included a breach of all three; and the whole number amounted to one
hundred and seventy, exclusive of those for detention by the embargo at
Bordeaux.

Our government, however, did not imitate that of France, by directing our
ministers to importune and insult it, to raise an outcry in the country, or
threaten the government with an appeal to the people. It sent an agent to Paris
with instructions to attend to those claims, and endeavor to obtain
indemnification.

Let us hear this agents account of the manner in which the French government
respected the rights of its allies, and fulfilled the stipulations of treaties.

The agent, Mr. Skipwith, in a letter addressed to the American minister at
Paris, and dated October 1794, writes thus.

At your request I now lay before you a statement of the innumerable
embarrasments which our commerce has for a long time, and continues still to
labor under, in the different ports of the French Republic. It is evident, if
their government does not soon remedy the incessant abuses and vexations
practiced daily upon our merchants, vessels, captains, and crews, the trade of
the United States with France must cease. I cannot give you an ample detail of
all the inconveniences and oppressions which have been thrown upon our
commerce; many of the consuls and their agents to whom you have written to
forward such documents to my office not having yet done it; besides, it would
take volumes to expose them at full length.

From the communications, however, already received from the different ports,
and from the information I have collected from the captains present, I can
assure you that there are near three hundred sail of American vessels now in
the ports of France, all of which have suffered, or are suffering more or less
difficulty and delay. -- The hardships of which I have chiefly to complain, and
out of which there grows incalculable evils, may be developed under four
general heads.

1st. The capture indiscriminately, of our vessels at sea, by the vessels of
war of the republic. 2d. The impossibility of Americans selling their cargoes,
and receiving payment in the ports to which they are conducted, or of their own
accord arrive. 3d. The difficulties and procrastination which they find in
their transactions with the boards of marine and commerce. 4th. The
noncompliance, or heretofore delay, in fulfilling the contracts made by the
agents of the French Republic in America for provisions.
The seizure of our vessels at sea, often gives rise to the most serious and
well founded complaints. -- The stripping them of their officers and crews, who
are generally replaced by boys and inexperienced hands, in order to be
conducted to ports, exposes them to much injury, and sometimes to total loss;
the confinement of our sailors taken out of those vessels, the seals upon their
cargoes, and above all, ^he sending the papers to the commissioners of marine
at Paris, involves the most unwarrantable hardships and delays; and indeed I am
sorry to add, that all our vessels experience some of those difficulties, and
indeed such as arrive with cargoes on account of the Republic, months clapsing
before the captains can get their clearances and papers, many of which are
often lost or mislaid.

As to the second head, the agents of the commission of commerce at the
different ports, having no power to treat directly for cargoes, it follows that
they must write to the commission at Paris for orders, and after one or two
months fruitless correspondence, it often happens that the captains are obliged
to come up to Paris, where being ignorant of forms and language, they have to
encounter a thousand difficulties.

It would be too tedious to mention all the inconveniences resulting from the
third general complaint. In the first place, the delays at the commission of
marine are incredible. The captains, whose vessels are brought into ports by
the armed vessels of the Republic, cannot withdraw their papers from the hands
of the marine agents, but are forced to Paris to solicit, time after time, of
the marine, a report upon them to the committee of Public Safety. The cruel
delays attending this will be illustrated in the examples annexed. The report
being made before it can reach the latter body, it must have the signature of
the commissaries, and go through other formalities, and when it receives the
sanction of the committee of safety, it has to travel nearly the same road
back. Judge, sir, of the tedious delay attending this; indeed you will see
cases where the poor captains have been many months in arriving at the above
point, and I myself, after having pressed several reclamations for weeks past,
have not been able yet to bring one to that issue.

To sell to the commission of commerce is still more difficult. When a bargain
is concluded with them, an order is issued to the keepers of the public
magazines, to receive the cargo sold; who often pretend that there is no room
to receive it, and frequetly they keep the captains waiting weeks before their
convenience or whim will induce them to receive it. This point gained,
application must then be made at Paris to the commission of commerce for
payment; who refer the captain to their board of agency. They make a report to
the comptability (the accountants department) of the same commission, from
whence it must go to the committee of Finance, then to the committee of public
safety, from whence it returns to the comptability. This labyrinth of
perplexity of course throws the captain into the hands of an agent, who preys
upon his distress; and when all these forms are fulfilled, it is not always
that he can touch his money.

If in the first instance, the commission will not purchase his cargo on the
terms he asks, they tell him he may depart; but on returning to his vessel, he
is most commonly prevented from sailing by the agents at the ports. If it is
mutually agreed that merchandise shall be taken in exchange, the difficulties
become greater. If assignats with permission to export wines and brandy, the
captain finds himself taken in; for the agents will put those very articles in
requisiton. If the commission tells the captain that they do not want his
cargo, and that he may sell to individuals, he finds that he cannot export the
proceeds without giving security to import afterward to the same amount in
articles of the first necessity, such as provisions etc. If the captain is so
unfortunate as to have to treat with the agents of the commission, he is sure
to feel their imposition. They frequently refuse to confirm their own
agreements. In short after every sort of delay and vexation, should the captain
claim an indemnity, he has to wade through double the difficulties heretofore
stated, and perhaps after all to leave his business incomplete in the hands of
an agent.

The 4th and last general complaint is of a delicate and important import. Mr.
Fauchet the French minister, has made considerable purchases of provisions in
America in the name and for account of the French republic. One House has
engaged to furnish 20,000 barrels of flour. Thirteen vessels loaded with these
provisions have already arrived, and in vain have I demanded of the commission
of commerce their answer respecting the payment of these contracts; except that
in the commencement they assured me, the committee of Finance had ordered the
payment of three cargoes at Bordeaux; but to my surprise I found two days
after, that no report had been made to the commission of that committee.

Thus far the agent. He then proceeds to state 24 particular instances of
oppression, by way of illustration, and gives a list of one hundred and seventy
cases which he had then brought forward. To this he adds a list of one hundred
and three vessels detained by the embargo at Bordeaux.

Let it be remembered that all this took place in the years 1793 and 1794;
previous to the existance of the British treaty, which France has since made
the pretext of her outrages, and at the very time when she was boasting to us
of the "religious punctuality" with which she fulfilled the engagements of her
treaty, and the duties of a neutral and allied power. While she was quarrelling
with us for the detention of a few privateers and their prizes, whose whole
number at the utmost did not exceed twenty: she had three hundred of our
vessels in her ports, subject to incessant vexations, abuses, and oppressions
and a great part of which had been carried in by her cruisers, contrary to the
law of nations, and in express violation of our treaty. While her ministers
were insulting our government, because it did not take what they chose to call
efficatious measures, to prevent the capture of our vessels at sea by the
British, and the impress of our seamen, her ships of war were seizing our
vessels at sea indiscriminately, stripping them of their officers and crews,
confining our sailors, and leaving the ships to the care of boys and
inexperienced hands. While she was complaining in the bitterest and most
offensive terms, of delays in our courts, the citizens of the United States,
even such as had gone to her ports under the faith of express contracts with
her minister, were obliged, in the prosecution of their claims, "to encounter a
thousand difficulties," to submit to every arbitrary imposition, to suffer
every sort of delay and vexation, and finally to give up the pursait, and leave
their business in the hands of an agent.

And yet France upbraids us with her favors and our ingratitude! and yet she
reproachingly boafts of the religious punctuality wherewith she fulfils her
engagements with a people, to whom she has never ceased to testify her
attachment!

Such, my fellow citizens, being the claims of France, and such the foundations
on which they rest; such being the inadmissible nature and alarming extent of
her pretensions; it remains for me to present you with a concise view of the
measures whereby she is now attempting to enforce them.

These measures commenced with a formal statement of her complaints presented
to our minister at Paris on the 9th of March, 1796. It was answered by the
minister and transmitted to the government here immediately after. The
complaints and the answers to them were the same in substance with those
already explained.

On the 3d of July, 1796, she passed a decree directing her privateers and
ships of war to treat the vessels of neutrals in the same manner in which those
neutrals should suffer their vessels to be treated by the English. This decree
was notified to our government by the French minister at Philadelphia, on the
27th of October, 1796.

This decree goes expressly upon the principle, equally unjust and absurd, that
if neutral states receive an injury from one party which they are unable to
repel, the other acquires a right to inflict it likewise. As it respects the
United States it goes much further, and avows another priciple no less
repugnant to every idea of justice and good faith. Britain possesses by the law
of nations, a right to take the goods of her enemies sound on board of our
ships. This right France resinquished expressly by the treaty with us; but
because Britain continues to exercise it, notwithstanding our endeavors to
obtain her relinquishment, France declares by this decree, that she will
exercise it also, in express violation of the treaty. The reason assigned for
it by her minister is, that since Britain continued to exercise this right,
France could find only a real disadvantage in the articles of her treaty with
us, whereby she had resigned it: thus expressly avowing the principle that she
has a right to refuse the performance of a solemn engagement whenever she may
think its operations disadvantageous to herself.

The minister says that he has no doubt that we would acknowledge the justice
of this measure, and that he would order his note to be printed for the purpose
of making known publicly the motives whereby the French government has been
guided in adopting the measure. In this he kept his word, and the note was
published.

On the 15th of November, 1796; the French minister, performing, to use his own
words, "a duty painful but sacred," signified to us the resolutions of a
government terrible to its enemies, but generous to its allies; this note,
which he also published, contains the whole list of complaints urged against us
by France, and announces that his functions as minister were from that time to
cease. This suspension, however, he tells us, must not be regarded as a rupture
between the two nations, but as a mark of just displeasure on the part of
France, to continue till our government should return to sentiments and
measures more conformable to the interests of the alliance, and to the sworn
friendship between the two nations, and after reminding us in very inflamatory
terms, of the cruelties of the English, and the generous assistance of France,
he concludes with an assurance that when our government shall return to itself,
we shall again find in the French, faithful friends and generous allies.

Such is the scope of that famous manisesto, wherein Mr. Genet's threat of an
appeal to the American people against their government, was carried into
execution.!

Other measures in the mean time had been adopted in pursuance of this system.
On the 1st of August, 1796, the special agents of the Executive Directory in
the West Indies, issued a decree authorizing the capture and condemnation of
all vessels loaded with contraband goods. The pretext for this decree was, that
some of the United States, especially Virginia, had fitted out vessels loaded
with contraband articles for the English, contrary to the law of nations;
which, as the decree affirms, forbids neutrals to carry contraband goods to the
enemy.

This however, in the first place, is not true. The law of nations does not
forbid neutrals to carry contraband goods to the powers at war; it provides
only that if those goods taken by the enemy of that power to which they are
going, they may be made prize. Neutrals therefore, may lawfully send contraband
articles to any or all the powers at war; but they are sent under the risk of
capture and condemnation by the opposite party.

This had been admitted by Mr. Adet; for although he complained at first of our
supplying the English with horses, which by the French treaty are contraband,
yet this explanation having been given, he omitted the complaint in his
manifesto.

In the next place, by the law of nations, and the express terms of the French
treaty, the contraband goods alone are to be condemned, but neither the ships
which carry them, nor the rest of the cargo. This decree however, makes both
the ships and the whole cargo liable to condemnation; and consequently is a
direct and formal violation of the law of nations, and the treaty between us
and France. The decree does not say expressly, that the rest of the cargo shall
be condemned; but it is understood in that manner by the French agents in the
West Indies, and in that manner executed.

The law of nations and the treaty, moreover, make contraband goods liable to
condemnation in the single case only where being sent to one party at war, they
are taken by the other. But this decree subjects them to capture in all cases,
whether bound to French or English ports, and with them the ships and cargoes.

On the 27th of November 1796, the French commissioners at Cape Francois passed
a decree authorizing the armed ships and privateers of France to capture all
American vessels bound to or from English ports. This decree was founded on the
act of the Directory, declaring that France would treat neutrals as they
suffered themselves to be treated by the English; but this act, iniquitous as
it was, did not justify the decree; for at the time of passing the one and the
other, the orders of the British for the capture of neutral vessels bound to
French ports, had long ceased to exist.

It is to be observed moreover, that those orders never went as far as this
decree.

The first, those of June 8th, 1793; directed all vessels laden wholly or in
part with corn, flour, or meal, and bound to any port in France, or occupied by
the arms of France, to be brought in, and the corn, flour, or meal, to be
purchased and paid for with freight. But the decree orders all American
vessels, whatever may be their lading, bound to or from British ports to be
captured.

The orders of the 6th of November 1793, directed all ships laden with goods,
the produce of any colony belonging to France, or carrying provisions or other
supplies for the use of such colony, to be brought in for adjudication. Even
this falls short of the decree; which directs all American vessels, bound to or
from British ports, and however laden, to be captured.

On the 8th of January, 1794; these obnoxious orders of November 6th were
repealed, and instead of them, it was ordered that all ships of the following
description should be brought in for adjudication. 1st. Ships with their
cargoes laden, with the produce of the French islands, and bound directly from
thence to any port in Europe. 2d. Ships with their cargoes laded with French
property, being the produce of those islands, and bound to any place. 3d. Ships
attempting to enter any blockaded port in those islands; and 4th. Ships bound
to any port there, and laden, in whole or in part, with naval or military
stores. These last orders, though extremely outrageous, and a clear infraction of
the law of nations, still fell far short of the French decree, which consigns
to capture all our vessels indiscriminately, bound to or from any British port,
in America, Europe, or elsewhere. They, as well as the preceding ones, have all
been long ago countermanded, and the British have engaged to make compensation
for the acts done under them.

These orders were further distinguished from the French decree in question by
another equally important circumstance. They extend to all neutral vessels
alike; whereas the decree is confined solely to American vessels: which proves
that it is not, like the British orders, a measure of general policy toward
all neutral states, but of particular resentment and hostility against us. It
is moreover in direct violation of a treaty, which was not the case with the
British orders. The British too had some provocation, and made us no
professions of friendship. We had celebrated their defeats and those of their
allies, by universal rejoicings; and had shown their enemies every mark of
public good will, and private affection. The direct contrary of all this took
place toward France, and yet she has treated us abundantly worse.

This decree however of the commissioners at Cape Francois, unjust and
injurious as it is, falls short of one since adopted by the French agents at
Guadaloupe. On the first of February 1797, they decreed that all neutral
vessels bound to any port in the West Indies, which had been delivered up to
the English and was occupied and defended by the Emigrants; and all neutral
vessels cleared out for the West Indies generally, should be liable to capture
and condemnation.

The French government has never publicly confirmed or acknowledged these
decrees; but it has never disapproved, much less countermanded them: and they
are carried into execution with every circumstance of insult and injury. The
vessels taken are sent into one port, their papers into another, and the
captains and crews into a third. When brought to trial, nothing is heard in
favor of the owners; and indeed as the papers and captains are sent to another
place, there is often no person to make a desence, nor any means of supporting
it. Vessels bound to neutral, and even French ports, are often taken and
condemned copies of the condemnation are generally refused: the captains and
crews are sometimes beaten, always left destitute of subsistence, and generally
confined, as prisoners of war, in dungeons or on board of prison ships; where a
miserable and scanty allowance of the worst food, scarcely suffices to prolong
their sufferings.

The number of ships taken, as far as has yet been ascertained, is above two
hundred and fifty: there is no accurate amount either of the value of property,
or the number of seamen.

These are some of the marks of "just displeasure," whereby France reminds us
that she is terrible to her enemies, and admonishes our government to return to
itself, to conform to her orders!

In the mean time, as soon as the President was informed by the dispatches from
our Minister at Paris, which have been already mentioned, that the French
government expressed serious discontent at the measures we had pursued, he
resolved to send a new Minister, for the express and special purpose, as his
credentials declared, of banishing suspicions, effacing unfavorable
impressions, and restoring harmony. General Pinckney was selected for this
purpose, not only on aceount of his talents and great respectability of
character, but also for his known good will to France, and warm attachment to
her cause. He sailed from Charleston in August 1796, and having stopped at
Philadelphia for his instructions, arrived at Paris in December following, and
laid his credentials before the Directory.

The Directory however refused to receive him as Minister, and informed his
predecessor, whose letters of recall had been presented at the same time, that
they had determined not to receive another Minister Plenipotentiary from the
United States till after the redress of grievances demanded from the American
government, and which France had a right to expect. This was saying in plain
and express terms, we will hear nothing from you, till you have first submitted
to our will as already made known to you.

They even refused him cards of hospitality by which alone, according to their
laws, his person could be protected from arrest; and told him verbally through
his secretary, that they expected him to leave the country. They went so far as
to intimate, that if he did not depart he should be arrested. With becoming
firmness and dignity, however, he declared that he would rely on the protection
of the Law of Nations, and must remain at his post, till he had received a
written order to leave it, whereby he might be justified to his own government.
This order they perfisted in refusing, till they heard of Buonaparte's last
victory in Italy. The day after that intelligence arrived, which was toward
the last of January, General Pinckney received a written order to quit France.
He immediately went to Holland, where he now remains waiting for new
instructions.

Thus has France not only refused to listen to our explanations till we submit
implicitly to her will, but driven from her territory with ignominy and insult
a minister sent, like a messenger of peace, for the express purpose of removing
unfavorable impressions and restoring harmony.

This to use the language of the President in his late manly and patriotic
speech to Congress, is to treat us neither as allies, nor as friends, nor as a
sovereign state.

Pursuing still the same system, the Directory on the 2d of March last,
published a decree, whereby our treaty with France is expressly violated in two
important points, under pretense of assimilating it to that with Britain: And
it is further declared that every American who shall hold a commission from the
enemies of France, as well as every seaman of that nation, composing the crew
of the ships or vessels (of those enemies I suppose) shall by this fact alone
be declared piratical and treated as such without suffering the party to
establish, that the act was the consequence of threats or violence.

This last regulation worthy in bloodiness and injustice, of a country whose
citizens have butchered two hundred and fifty thousand women, carried infants
to be drowned, stuck on the points of spears, and chopped off the hands of
mothers stretched out for mercy to their tender babes, It has been proved by
judicial proceedings, that acts of this kind took place at Nantz, under the
authority of the agents of the Convention. Others equal in cruelty, happened in
various other places, particulari^^ a Lions, Avignon, Laval, Samur, Arles, etc.
It is computed that in the year 1795; 2,000,000 of persons had been massacred
in France during the revolution; of those two hundred and fifty thousand were
women, two hundred and thirty thousand children, and twenty four thousand
ministers of the Gospel! This computation, which amounts to nearly one tenth of
the whole population of France, does not include any who were killed in arms.

See a work ^^^led "the cruelties of the Jacobins," published (...) P^^^ ^n
1795.


is sheltered under the pretext of a stipulation in the British treaty, which
provides that such Americans as take commissions from the enemies of Britain,
to privateer against her subjects, may, if taken by them, be treated as
pirates. Our treaty with France contains precisely the same stipulation; so
also do those with Holland, Prussia, and Sweden. It is found in almost every
treaty, and means no more in our case, than that if our citizens take
commissions from a foreign power to privateer against people with whom we are
at peace, and should fall into their hands, we will not interfere in their
behalf. It extends only to our own citizens, not to those of France; to such as
take commissions to privateer, not to sailors, even on board of privateers, nor
to persons having commissions in public ships of war; not to punishment which
we engage to inflict, but to such as those who take our citizens in these
unlawful pursuits, may inflict, without our interposing for its prevention.

And in revenge for this wise, equitable, and almost universal arrangement,
which, though it now offends France by preventing in some degree our seamen from
augmenting her marine, she herself entered into with us long before we made it
with Great Britain, the French government has declared, not that in case of our
being engaged in war, her citizens shall not take commissions from us to
privateer against our enemies, which would be the utmost extent of just
retaliation, but that she will treat as pirates all such of our citizens,
whether with or without commissions, as shall be found on board of her enemies
vessels, whether public ships of war or privateers; and with a thirst of
vengeance as inhuman as it is unjust, she adds that they shall experience this
treatment for the simple fact of being on board, though brought there by threats,
or even by force!

Thus if an American seaman, has the misfortune of being impressed by a British
ship, he is liable to be hanged for it by France! Such is the conduct of a
nation which perpetually proclaims its own justice and magnanimity, and boasts
of being "generous to its allies."

This decree it might have been supposed, would fill up the measure of
unprovoked and insolent aggression. But no! not content with acting thus
toward us herself, France has endeavored to excite the Dutch and Spaniards
against us likewise. The poor humiliated dependant Dutch, afraid to refuse,
begged off for a while, and were excused. Her attempts however, in all
appearance, have been renewed, and as she has 25000 troops in their country,
there is little probability of their being able to hold out. As for Spain, she
has come into the measure; her minister has lately presented a memorial
containing the complaints of his Catholic majesty: these complaints are, for
the most part, an echo to those of France. There is one however, peculiar to
Spain, the manifest and even ridiculous futility of which, may be taken as an
example of all the rest. Spain has been made to complain of the British treaty
as an infraction of that concluded lately with her: notwithstanding this
British treaty was prior in ratification by more than ten months.

Thus in case we are driven to a war with France, are those two nations to be
compelled to join her, as they have done in that against Great Britain. Their
fate in both will no doubt be the same. It will be out of their spoils that we
also, like Britain, shall take our indemnification; and this affords a complete
and most useful example of the arbitrary and selfish conduct of France toward
those powers whom she can frighten or seduce into her measures. She compels
them to form an alliance, for which they pay with most of their wealth and a
part of their territories; and then she forces them to join her in wars,
wherein having no possible interest, all their resources are sacrificed to
promote her ambition or revenge. This is the fate she intended for us, had she
been able to draw us into her snares. This was the common cause with her,
wherein Genet was instructed to engage us; this was the meaning of those
efficacious measures against Britain, about which his two successors never
ceased to declaim.

That her object from the beginning has been to draw us into the war, is
manifest, not only from the instructions to Genet, and the correspondence of
his successors, but also from the measures themselves, which she wished us to
adopt, from the plan of aggrandizement we see her pursuing in Europe, and from
her uniform conduct toward other countries.

As to Mr. Genet's instructions, they are full and explicit; they go directly
to the object, and point out, not unskilfully, the means whereby it was to be
effected. This nobody has denied; but some have been of opinion, that when he
was recalled, the system was abandoned.

If so, whence those reiterated complaints by his successors, that we had not
adopted efficacious measures to make our neutrality respected by Britain, and
to compel a relinquishment on her part, of rights which we acknowledged her to
possess? what more efficacious measures than those which we had pursued, were
in our power, short of hostility, or of what must have produced it? why did M.
Fauchet on the 2d of May, 1795; See his letter of that date.
say to the secretary of state, I hope therefore, sir, that the executive of
the United States will not rest satisfied under its treaty with England, since
every thing proves that that mean is insufficient? what did he mean by our not
"resting satisfied" under the treaty? what could we do if resolved not to rest
satisfied with the treaty, bu^temploy coercive means to extort what according
to him, the treaty had been found insufficient to obtain? why after informing
us, In his letter of June 8th, 1795.
that the history of our neutrality would prove it to have been a prey to the
arbitrary conduct of Great Britain, did he assert the necessity of an energetic
and vigorous reaction on our part, and a solemn reparation, which by giving to
America what her honor required, would have manifested toward the French
republic the inclinations and intentions of our government? we had already done
what we thought sufficient, or in our power for protecting our neutrality; what
then beside hostility could have been meant by an energetic and vigorous
reaction? why did he recall: specially to our attention, the energetic and
liberal execution of our treaty with France, and the support of our neutrality
upon a respectable footing? we have already put it on the most respectable
footing in our power by any means short of war? why then talk to us of
energetic measures, and a "respectable footing," unless something more was to
be done, and some further means to be used? Why did M. Adet in his note of
September 29th 1795, tell us that "he had no doubt but that we would oblige
England to cease from violating the rights of nations." whence the clamor,
still fresh in every one's recollection against the proclamation of neutrality,
which this minister has branded as insidious, but which having no possible
object but the preservation of peace, could not have given offense unless war
had been desired? why did he make it a ground of complaint afterward "that we
had not compelled England to respect our neutrality;" that is, according to
him, to relinquish the right of taking enemy's goods out of neutral ships? was
it not manifest and well known to this minister, that we had done every thing
in our power to accomplish those objects, except attacking England? how were we
to oblige her to desist from violating the rights of nations, but by war?

If in fine the system of Mr. Genet, whereof an alliance offensive and
defensive was manifestly a part, had been relinquished at his recall, why were
all his pretensions renewed and enforced on the 15th of November, 1796; by the
manifesto of Mr. Adet?

The measures themselves, which France required us to adopt, leave no doubt
about her objects. In the In the (...) letter.
first place, that we should compel Britain to relinquish the right of taking
enemies goods on board of neutral ships. This right she knew, that Britain had
always refused to relinquish in time of war; even in the American war, when she
stood alone against the United States, France, Spain, and Holland; and when
Russia, Sweden, Denmark, Prussia, and the Hanse towns, had formed an
association to repel the right. She had never, of late years at least,
renounced it even in peace, except to France herself in 1786; and then she
received very great equivalents. For us therefore, to insist on her
relinquishment of this right, during such a war as the present, wherein her
very existance is staked on the support of her maritime superiority and the
extent of her commerce, France well knew would be a vain attempt, which if
persevered in, must infallibly end in war. On this point therefore, she
insisted with unwearied and importunate perseverance; and made it the grand
hinge of all her complaints.

So also, as to the impress of seamen: she well knew that Britain claimed the
right of impressing such of our seamen as having been her subjects at the
conclusion of the revolution war, had since that time come to settle in this
country. This was a right liable to abuse indeed, and very much abused, but too
important to England, in a maritime war, to be relinquished. This France well
knew, and accordingly she required us to compel the relinquishment; an attempt
to effect which must of necessity have brought on a quarrel.

She further required us to admit a construction of the treaty with her,
whereby she would have been permitted to arm vessels, enlist crews, and sell
prizes in our ports, capture British vessels within our jurisdiction, and
exclude every British ship of war from our harbors. To this partiality, so
advantageous to her, and so hurtful to her enemy, and in no wise intended by
the treaty, she well knew that Britain would not patiently submit; for the
latter had already begun to complain. Had we in compliance with the importunate
and clamorous demands of France, adopted this system, there is no doubt that
Britain would have opposed it; for a proud and angry rival is not apt to see
without discontent, favors injurious to itself gratuitously accorded to its
opponent. Hence abundant matter for a quarrel must have arisen. All this France
knew, and the urged the demand with increasing earnestness.

These were the leading measures required of us by France, and they all had an
obvious and necessary tendency to bring about a war: a tendency whereof it was
impossible for her to be ignorant. Hence the eagerness with which she pursued
them, and her vexation and resentment at seeing them defeated. The same
tendency, though not in all cases equally strong, may be perceived in all her
other steps.

But it will be impossible to understand fully the views of France in this
country, without attending a little to her projects in Europe.

It is perfectly well known, that she long since formed, and still pursues with
the most steady perseverance, a system of aggrandizement in Europe, for
ensuring the success of which, it is absolutely essential that the maritime
power of England should be reduced. Germany opposed barriers to her by land,
which were also to be removed. Accordingly Germany was to be divided and a
maritime coalition formed against England. Of this coalition the United States
were to form an important part; for though we had no navy, it was known that we
had the means of speedily forming one, and that when once engaged in the war we
should be obliged to exert them. The great number of our merchant ships, in the
mean time, the skill, numbers, and enterprizing character of our seamen, the
abundance of provisions and naval stores in our country, the convenience of our
harbors, and above all our vicinity to the West Indies, where the commerce and
navy of England are most easily susceptible of a deep and deadly wound, would
have rendered us a most important ally in a maritime war against that power. To
out off our commerce with her at the same time, the importance whereof to her,
though certainly great, has been far overrated by France, would greatly aid the
blow.

Accordingly we find that as soon as the republic and the power of the Jacobin
leaders were established, and before the war with England commenced, Mr. Genet
was sent out with express instructions to bring about this alliance; and I have
been assured by a gentleman who about that time acted a considerable part in
the convention, but has since visited America, that this maritime coalition was
early devised, and that nothing was wanting to its completion but the consent
of the United States. "That consent," he added, with an air of resentment which
four years have not been able to allay, "was applied for and was refused."

In this refusal, and in that proclamation of neutrality against which the
ministers of France have never ceased to cry out, from Genet who said it was a
breach of the treaty, to Adet who brands it as "insidious," was laid the
foundation of our present quarrel with France. She did not however begin the
quarrel immediately; for she still entertained hopes of drawing us gradually
into the war by fomenting our ancient differences with England, and prevailing
on us, under the pretext of fulfilling our obligations by treaty and the laws
of neutrality, to adopt measures which her antagonist would not have failed,
and justly too, to consider as hostile. When she saw these efforts constantly
baffled by the firm prudence of our government, and all her hopes of a quarrel
finally extinguished by the treaty with Britain, she then suffered her
resentment to blaze out in the measures which she now pursues.

In the mean time, the plan went on in Europe, and was pursued with varying
success, but undeviating perseverance: nor did it receive the least check or
alteration from the frequent changes of government in France. Various factions
wished to rule at home, and in their struggles for power, slaughtered each
other without remorse or forbearance: but they all had the same object as to
their neighbors; and that object was aggrandizement to France at their expense.

They began with Germany, which being nearest to them, it was necessary first
to cripple. They considered it likewise as the most vulnerable, by the two
weapons wherewith they meant to assail all Europe. Those weapons were division
and insurrection. Mr. Fauchet, in his intercepted dispatch, has informed us
that France had an eye to the use that might be made of them here also.

Germany is composed of a great number of independent powers, some of them very
inconsiderable, and all held very loosely together by a kind of league, at the
head of which is the emperor. Austria, which composes the peculiar dominions of
the emperor, is by far the most powerful of the German states, and possessed
also of very extensive dominions out of Germany, especially in Italy and
Belgium. Prussia comes next, which though formerly inconsiderable, was raised by
the talents and long reign of the late king to a very high pitch of power and
importance. This power regards itself as the rival of Austria, against which it
entertains a jealousy mixed with resentment and dread. These two great powers
mutually balance and control each other in the affairs of Germany; and the
smaller states adhere some to the one, and some to the other, as general policy
or particular motives may happen to dictate.

It is easy to see how abundantly the seeds of division are sown in this
system. These were also circumstances which seemed to favor the plan of
exciting insurrection.

All the governments of Germany, except a few towns, were arbitrary in their
form; and some of them very oppressive in their practice: and although the
apparent vices of these governments were greatly corrected by mild customs and
fixed laws for the security of person and property, which could not easily be
violated; yet there, as in all other countries where a vast population, and its
certain consequence great inequality of conditions, have taken place, there
were great numbers, who possessing little, and obliged to gain their
subsistence by constant labor, would naturally look with an eye of discontent
on the wealth and privileges of the superior classes. It was by this
description of people that France meant to work. It was by exciting them to
insurrection, that the persons who then directed her affairs, had enslaved
slaved their own country, after overturning a government established by free
and general consent; and it was by the same engine that they intended to
subjugate Germany, having first subverted and trampled under foot those
governments whereby her force had been united and directed.

Those who had nothing, were to be the instruments abroad, as they had been at
home; and they were to be set to work by pointing to the plunder of those who
had something. Their exertions were to be aided by large bodies of French
troops drawn to the frontiers, and held in readiness to profit by
circumstances. To repel some small assemblages of French emigrants, whom the
Emperor himself had compelled to disperse, was the pretext for these armaments;
meanwhile every expedient of fraud and dissimulation was used to lull the
vigilance of the German states, and inflame their resentments and jealousies
against each other. The French carried this diffimulation so far, as to assure
the Emperor, that they abhorred the idea of exciting commotions; and when
England afterward complained of their measures for this purpose, they assured
her that those measures were not meant to affect her, but were exclusively
intended against A^stria, and Prussia! See the correspondence. Nothing can be
more incontestible than the position, that France was the aggressor in the
present war. Any one who will read the correspondence between the courts of
France and Vienna, will find that before the Austrians and Prussians began to
arm, or took any hostile measures of any kind, France threatened and alarmed
Germany and the low countries by great military preparations on their
frontiers. This was not denied by France, but she justified it under various
pretexts. One was, the necessity of repelling the emigrants. But the forces
collected were ten, perhaps twenty times more numerous than the emigrants who
were collecting in arms. The Emperor had moreover forbidden them to assemble in
arms on his territory. He had actually compelled them to disperse; and had
induced the German princes in the neighborhood of France to adopt the same
system. Some small corpse of emigrants did notwithstanding remain in arms in
different places, but not on the Emperors' territories; and they were too
inconsiderable to give any alarm to France. Another pretext was, the convention
of Pilnitz; but this convention was in its very nature defensive and eventual.
It was an agreement between the emperor and the king of Prussia, that if either
of them should experience those attacks from France wherewith they were
threatened, they would assist each other; and moreover, that they would protect
the king of France from personal violence. They did not arm in support of this
convention; and as soon as the king gave his assent to the constitution, and
declared himself free, they suspended the convention by a public declaration.
Another pretext was, that the emperor had sent additional troops into some of
his frontier dominions, and had directed one of his generals to march to the
assistance of a certain German prince should he be attacked. But the emperor
had a right and was also bound, to assist the German states if attacked; and as
to the additional troops, they did not exceed four thousand, the usual
compliment of recruits sent annually to his peace establishment in that
quar^er: while France had drawn a large army to the same quarter. These facts
were stated on the part of Austria in the correspondence, and no^ denied by
France. A fourth pretext was, that the emperor gave protection to the
emigrants; but he gave them an assylum only and hospitality, with an express
prohibition to arm on his territories. France demanded of him to reduce his
troops, while she expressly refused to reduce hers, to drive away the
emigrants, and to abandon the convention of Pilnitz; and because he refused to
comply with these demands, she declared war against him. The same happened with
respect to Prussia.

The French minister who was at Vienna, when the war broke out, declared it as
his opinion, that the system of the ^^pe^ or war pacific. Mr. De Lessarts who
was minister for Foreign Affairs in France at the same time, and who carried on
the correspondence which preceded the war against Austria and Prussia, wrote a
letter afterward to Mr. Neckar, in which he declares that it was clear to
demonstration, that they (the Austrians and Prussians) were unwilling to make
war against France; that it was evident from unanswerable proof, that France
provoked them to hostilities, and set all Europe against her. See Necka^^s
address to the French people in behalf of Louis the sixteenth, wherein this
letter from De Lessarts is cited.

The testimony of Brissot to the same point, will perhaps be thought worthy by
some of more credit. When accusing the French king in the Convention, of want
of fidelity to the nation, he charged him with unwillingness to attack Austria,
and exclaimed "we," meaning himself and his party, "compelled him to declare
war, in order to put him to the test." After the king was dethroned, Brissot
justified the war, and took the credit of it to himself and his friends.
"Without the war, says he in his gazette of September 22d 1792, the revolution
of the 10th of August would never have taken place; without the war, France
would never have been a republic," and in h^s address to his constituents (page
56) he declares "that the war with Austria was forced on France by outrages and
threats, and that to ensure success, the was obliged to begin it." It has
already appeared what these "outrages and threats" were, and we have the
testimony of Brissot himself that it was not by them that the war with Austria
was rendered necessary, though they were used as the pretexts. It was to bring
about the revolution of the 10th of August; to give the Briss^tine party arms,
wherewith they might destroy the king and constitution, and afterward rule the
nation under pretense of establishing a republic. In the mean time it being
clear that every man's testimony is good against himself, we must believe on
that of Brissot, that he and his party began the war against Austria.

As to Holland, they declared war against her, without ceremony or pretense;
except that seeing her frontiers approached by war, she had taken some
precautions purely defensive. They even violated her acknowledged rights before
she began those precautions.

With respect to England, it is perfectly certain that France was the agressor;
besides the facts and papers, which speak for themselves, the point is
established by the positive testimony of three French writers, all well
informed, and two of whom acted a very considerable part in the revolution and
in the war. These are Calonne, Brissot, and Dumourier; all of whom affirm that
France attacked England. Brissot was a leading member of the Convention at that
time, and when he was afterward brought to the block, one of the charges
against him was, his having been the author of the attack. He replied that
Robespierre's party were the authors of it: but he did not say that France was
not the aggressor, which would have been a complete justification. On the
contrary, he asserted that France was the aggressor most unwisely, and that
Robespierre's party had induced her to become so. In his appeal to his
constituents, he says the same thing over and over: In this appeal (page 47) he
expressly asserts, that England did not begin to arm till three months after
France. He also says (page 60) "that a determination had been made to brave all
Europe."

In October 1792, the Convention, as appears by the same authority, had ordered
formidable naval equipments to be made in the expectation of a war with the
^^^^time powers. This was previous to most, if not all, of those acts on the
part of England, which France made the grounds of her declaration of war.

Damourier loudly charges the Convention with having driven England into the
war, which he repeatedly declares might ea^ily have been avoided.

See his life 3d vol. containing the history of his campaigns.

It must at the same time be admitted, that although the combined powers were
attacked and driven into the war in their own defense, yet, when they found
themselves engaged in it, and began to entertain prospects of success, they
also began to form projects of aggrandisement at the expense of France. It is
also highly probable that most of the powerful governments became very little
averse from war, when they found reason to suppose that France by her internal
commotions, and the universal indignation which the execution of the king and
the murders at Paris had excited against her, had become an easy prey. It is
not however, the less true, that France began the war, particularly against
Holland and England, which for a long time showed every appearance of desiring
peace.




The king of Prussia, however, and the emperor, ^^reatened alike by this common
and formidable danger, resolved to suspend their animosities, and unite in
measures for their common defense. France required them to relinquish those
measures, to disarm while she was increasing her forces on their frontiers; and
when they refused, she immediately declared war against them. Her minister at
Vienna, at that time declared, that the emperor was disposed for peace. Her
minister for Foreign Affairs declared the same thing, and a proof of it is,
that The declaration of war was April 20th 1792. The duke of Brunswick did not
begin his march from Coblents till July 27th, 1792.
three months elapsed after this declaration, before the Austrians and
Prussians were able to collect an army on the frontiers of France sufficient
for offensive operations.

The Emperor's dominions in Belgium, being at a great distance from his other
territories, and in the close neighborhood of France, were exposed to an
immediate and easy attack. They were also thought more obnoxious to the weapon
of insurrection than any other country; for though they enjoyed the freest
constitution of any people on the continent of Europe, except the Swiss and
Dutch, some invasions of their rights attempted by a former Emperor, had
planted deep the seeds of discontent and distrust. These attempts had been
given up by Austria, but the jealousy and resentment inspired by them, were far
from being extinguished. These sparks it was the care of France to fan by
emissaries and promises; and when her armies entered the country, they were
preceded by declarations that they came as the friends of the people, to assist
them in breaking the chains of their ancient tyrants.

We have already seen what kind of friendship it was which they had for the
Belgians, and how the chains of this deluded people have been broken. They have
been plundered of every thing they possessed to replenish the treasury of
France, drained of all their resources to support her armies, and are now
subject to a military government.

England for a while was let alone: It was not the season yet for attacking
her, till Austria and Prussia should be exhausted, Holland subjugated, and
Belgium annexed to France. The maritime coalition, moreover, had not yet been
formed; consequently the plan against England was not yet ripe. Correspondence
in the mean time was kept up with the revolutionists in England and Ireland,
open encouragement was held out to them, and their deputations had public
audiences from the French convention.

The British government was alarmed at these measures. It also took umbrage at
the proceedings in Belgium, and the attacks made on Holland, with which last it
was in alliance. It complained of these attacks, and of the decrees whereby the
Convention had made a formal promise of support to the insurgents of every
country. The Convention justified the attacks on Holland, and assured England
that the decrees had been misunderstood; that they meant nothing at which any
government ought to be offended, and were only to be executed in cases where a
whole people having resolved to change their government, should call for the
assistance of France. On the same day when these assurances were made, the
Convention sent commissioners into Belgium to execute those decrees, with
instructions to treat as enemies all persons, and even whole countries, which
should refuse to alter their governments according to her will.

England in the mean time, justly considering these explanations as deceptive
and unsatisfactory, went on with her preparations for the defense of herself
and her ally. France required her to desist; and when she refused, and sent
away a minister who employed himself in exciting sedition, war was declared
against her. This war many of the politicians of France condemned because it
was declared too soon: and yet they confessed that France had begun to arm for
it, three months before England. If any are in doubt of all this, or ignorant
of it, they are requsted to read the correspondences between France and
Austria, those between England and France, the speeches and reports of Brissot
and his address to his constituents, and the relation published by Chaussard
one of the commissioners for executing the decrees in Belgium, wherein he gives
an account of his own proceedings, and explains the plans of the Convention.
The reply to Brissot's address by Camile Desmoulins, in behalf of the
Robesperrian party should also be consulted; and Necker's address to the French
in behalf of Louis the sixteenth. Brissot in one of his letters declares, "we,
the French, must set fire to the four corners of Europe;" Camille Desmoulins in
his reply, asserts, that to disorganize Europe was one of the sublime vocations
of the Convention: Brissot in his address, asks what did enlightened
Republicans wish before the 10th of August? (the day when the king was
dethroned) men who wished for liberty not only for their own country, but for
all Europe? They believed that they could generally establish it, by exci^ing
the governed against the governors and letting the people see the facility and
advantage of such insurrections. But Cha^ssard explains himself, and developes
the system, most fully. "No doubt," says he, it was the interest of France to
raise and secure by conquest the trade of the Belgic provinces, so crampt by
that of Holland; and thence to threaten and alarm the United Provinces, to
place our assignats on the very desks of their counting houses, there ^o ruin
the bark of England, and in short, to complete the revolution of the money
system. It was the interest of France to monopolize as it were, these vast
implements of trade, these manufactories of national prosper^ty. It was the
interest of France to weaken her mortal enemy (the Empetor) to cramp his
efforts, to aggrandize herself with his spoils: in short to m^^^late the
colossus of Austria, by rending from him these fertile provinces of Belgium,
for obtaining and securing the possession of which, he has for ages been lavish
of gold, of blood, and of intrigues. Thus also it was the interest of France to
mutilate the colossus of England, by rending from him the colonies in America.
And yet she tells us and the Belgians of her disinterested services in giving
our independence.

"England and Pressia," continues Chaussard, in the words of a speech which had
been delivered in the Convention, and approved of by it, know very well that
France had the greatest interest to substitute a popular and representative
government for the aristocratic and degenerate one that actually exists in
Holland: that with the forces of that country, France would irrecoverably
destroy the trade of England, and by means of her navy soon command the Baltic;
that all that would be wanting would be the renewal in that part of the North,
of an alliance of situation then become necessary; and that an intimate union
between France and Holland being once formed, the suprem^y of the English trade
both in the East and West Indies would rapi^ty disappear; while Prussi^ on her
side would irrecoverably loose, sooner or later, all her possessions in
Westphalia

Here the plan stands confessed, The Emperor was to be stripped in Belgium, and
the king of Prussia in Westphalia. The bank of England was to be ruined by
operations in Holland, and a popular government substituted in that country, in
order to place its forces under the direction of France; and with these forces
aided by her own, France was to destroy irrecoverably the trade of England in
Europe, and make its supremacy both in the East and West Indies rapidly
disappear. And all this was to be effected, by setting sire to the soar corners
of Europe, and exciting the people every where to insurrect on against the
government. It must be confessed tha^ a project so atrocious in its end and so
abominable in its means has never been conceived before, not even by the Romans.

While all this was going on, the Convention, in order to hoodwink England, was
making to her the most solemn assurances of pacific intentions. It even carried
its dissimulation to the almost incredible length of requesting the mediation
of England to bring about a peace with Prussia and the Emperor.

A further and a very strong confirmation of these poin^s is found in the date
of the instructions to Genet, the manifest object of which was to bring the
United States into a war against Great Britain. These instructions we^e signed
January 3d, 1793, the supplementary instructions, January 1^th, 17^^; Mr.
Chauvelin was ordered to quit England January 24th, 1793, and war was declared
against England February 1st, 1793. It this dissmi^sa^ was the occasion of the
war, as (...) alleged, why those instruction before the dismissal? Had France
been disposed for peace, as she alleged, would the on account of this
dismiss^^, have declared war within six days after it took place?

And yet there are men, men too of talents and information, who remain blind to
all this! Who while France was openly forming projects of empire against all
her neighbors, and ^^^^ly pressing forward their ^^ecation, by every mean of
artifice and force, believed that she was inj^red and attacked, because in the
face of he^ ow^ ^^ts, she said so! From a late pamphlet published by Mr.
Erskine, and containing an ingenious and plausible apology for the English
opposition, it appear, that he and his friends in Parliamement, who certainly
leave high prentensions to ^bility and information, are still per^sting in this
e^^or of ^egarding only the (...) of France^ and wh^^^ (...)




In the course of the war, means were found to det^ch the king of Prussia by
working on his avarice, exciting his ancient rivalship and resentment against
the House of Austria, and tempting him with the prospect of a share in its
spoils. The price of this defection lay long concealed in the secret articles
of the treaty of peace: and the king of Prussia remained quiet, being kept in
awe by the Empress of Russia who threatened him in case he should make any
attempts against the House of Austria or the Germanic body.

The Empress however being lately dead and her successor having adopted some
measures from which it was thought that weakness of character and incapacity
might be inferred, if not a disposition favorable to the views of France, the
secret articles have come to light, and the king of Prussia has assumed a very
threatening tone and aspect toward Austria. The Emperor of Russia however, it
is said, has given him to understand that he must be quiet, or expect an attack
from the whole force of the Russian empire. Thus much is certain, that his
hostile movements have abated; and thus the plan of turning the force of
Germany against itself, has once more been defeated.

Belgium has in the mean time been overrun, and Holland has been subdued,
partly by force and partly by division: for France openly and avowedly raised
up and supported a party against the government in the bosom of the country,
which was powerfully instrumental in promoting her views. Spain also, too
feeble and spiritless to defend itself, sunk under the arms of France, and has
been compelled to join her in the war.

In this situation France finding her schemes opposed only by the vast maritime
power of England, and the unbroken courage and constancy of Austria, formed the
resolution of destroying the commerce of England, thereby to cut of her
pecuniary resources, and sap the foundation of her naval strength. This plan
rendered the cooperation of the United States more important to her than ever;
for she considers us as one of England's best customers, and consequently as
the nation which contributes most to the support of her commerce, her
manufactures, and her wealth. Our situation too in the neighborhood of the
West Indies, our abundance of provisions and of warlike and naval stores, and
the great number of our ships and seamen, would enable us to be very hurtful to
England in war, as well as very useful in peace. By such a war indeed we should
suffer greatly, but that is no part of the care of France.

Accordingly she has unceasingly renewed, and pressed with greater and greater
eagerness, her indirect attempts to bring us into the war. Foreseeing that her
hopes of success would be greatly lessened, if not wholly destroyed by the
treaty, she opposed it with all her might and in all its stages. Even the
unconstitutional opposition to it in the House of Representatives, she aided by
every mean in her power. Finding all her attempts finally frustrated, her
vexation and ill humor no longer knew any bounds, and she resolved to try
different means for effecting what she had in vain essayed to bring about by
intrigue.

That this is the true spring of her conduct, that her anger at the British
treaty does not arise from any of its particular provisions, but from its
general tendency to preserve peace between this country and Great Britain, is
proved in the most manifest manner by the conduct she pursues at this moment
toward other neutral nations who have made no treaties with England. She has
long threatened Portugal with invasion by the Spaniards, unless she will shut
her ports against the English. She has lately required Hamburg and Bremen to
break off all commerce with England, and on their refusal has recalled her
minister from Hamburg. She has made the same demand on Denmark; and even
required the Danes to block up the mouth of the Elbe, a river not in their
territories, against the English. We have not heard the pretext for these
demands, which Denmark has pointedly refused; but no doubt they were founded on
the French construction of the laws of neutrality; the same laws whereby,
according to France, the Swiss were bound to drive the emigrants from their
territories, and we to permit her to raise armies, equip ships of war, and sell
prizes in ours.

That such is the real project of France and the true source of her anger at
the British treaty, is further proved by the testimony of General Pinckney, who
having traveled through a great part of France, and continued near two months in
Paris, had the best means of penetrating their views. In his letter from Paris
of Feb. 1st. 1797, he says, I most ardently wish that we would banish all party
distinctions and foreign influence; and think and act only as Americans -- for
all parties in this country (France) unite in thinking that we ought to act as
if we were altogether their dependants, and indebted to them solely, and not to
our own exertions, for our liberty and independence. Hence, our treaty with
Great Britain is here generally execrated; and our having any kind of
commercial connection with that country, even if the treaty had not been made,
would I believe, have been disliked. They wish to destroy the trade of England,
and they look upon us as one of her best customers; and to obtain their object
they care not what we suffer.

This is the testimony of a man remarkable for the warmth of his good wishes
toward France, and who, if he did not dislike the British treaty, certainly
never said a word in its favor. From his testimony, as well as the evidence of
their own conduct, it manifestly appears that their dislike to the treaty does
not proceed, as they pretend, from any stipulations in it injurious to them,
but from its tendency to preserve an amicable intercourse between us and
England.

The united force of all these considerations, drawn from the instructions to
the ministers of France in this country and their conduct here, from the plain
and direct tendency of the measures which she wished us to adopt, from the
nature of her plans in Europe, and from her recent conduct toward the
neighouring powers, establish in the most incontrovertable manner the opinion,
that her object always has been to draw us into the war. This point is still
further confirmed by another event. It has been proposed through the Dutch, to
our minister at Holland, as appears by his letter of Nov. 4th 1796, that we
should make common cause with France and Holland against England, in order to
compel her to relinquish the right of taking her enemies goods on board of
neutral ships, and to restore peace to the two Hemispheres.

This leads us to enquire what are the motives of her present conduct; and
gives us also the clue whereby they may be discovered.

It is impossible to suppose that the measures lately adopted by France can
mean no more than retaliation for the injuries which she pretends to have
received. Admitting those injuries to have taken place, and many of them she
knows never did take place, admitting all her pretensions to be well founded,
and many of them she knows not to be well founded, still those injuries and
pretensions could never have authorized her present proceedings. The detention
of a few privateers, and the restoration of a few prizes by our courts, even if
illegal as she pretends; the privileges said to be ceded to Britain, even had
they been ceded; the prohibition to arm vessels and sell prizes in our ports,
had she possessed a right to do so; the suffering a few British ships of war to
violate our neutrality, even had we suffered it; more especially considering
that all these pretended injuries were much more than counter-ballanced by real
ones from her; could never have occasioned, much less authorized, the universal
capture and condemnation of our property, the imprisonment, and in many cases
which may occur, the death of our citizens, and the expulsion from her
territory of a minister sent to conciliate. Some other cause must be sought for
aggressions such as these.

Still less can it be believed that mere anger and vexation at the
disappointment of her views, could have given rise to them. They may, and no
doubt, have been much aggravated by this cause, but it could not have produced
them.

Nor can it in my opinion, be supposed that a design to drive us into a serious
quarrel with her, can have given birth to these measures. She too well knows
the consequences of such a quarrel to herself, and its necessary effect in
counteracting her most favorite scheme, to force it upon us. Her most
favorite scheme is to undermine the naval power of England, by destroying the
commerce whereby it is nourished and supported. Hence her requisitions to
Denmark and the Hanse Towns; hence the precipitation wherewith she forced
Holland and Spain into the war against England; hence her threats to Portugal;
hence the violence wherewith in contempt of every right and every engagement
she seized Leghorn, a neutral port, in which England carried on an extensive
trade; hence her oppressions at Genoa; and hence too her unwearied efforts to
work up the discontents between us and Britain into an open rupture. The direct
and even the avowed object of all these measures has been to sap the very
foundations of the English power, by excluding its commerce from every port.
But France well knows that a quarrel between her and this country would of
necessity bring us nearer to England. She knows that having then a common
interest with England against her, this common interest would beget an union of
means, and a cooperation of measures. She knows that our commerce armed for its
own defense would float safely into the ports of England, under convoy of the
British flag. She knows that Britain would gain our ports as stations for her
ships, would be permitted to recruit her marine among our seamen, and to draw
supplies of all sorts from our country, while she herself would be excluded
from all these advantages. She knows that as a consequence of these united
measures, her colonies and those of Spain and Holland, which she justly
considers as her own, would be instantly deprived of all supplies, and must
sink under the arms of the two countries. She knows that the American market,
already so great, and increasing with a rapidity so incalculable, must in that
case be secured almost exclusively to England, and wholly shut to herself and
her associates. She knows that by a war with her we should be compelled to call
forth our resources for the formation of a marine, which would place us in a
situation to be still less in fear of her power or in need of her assistance.
She knows, in sine, that a war against her, in which we must cooperate with
England, would have a powerful tendency to restore that union of interests, of
means, and of good will between the two countries, which for half a century
past has been the object of her jealousy and dread, and which she has
undertaken two wars to break. Her policy, as profound as it is attrocious, will
not be confined to the present time only, but looks forward to the period, not
a remote one, when the United States must, in the necessary course of nature,
become the most numerous, the most opulent and the most powerful nation on
earth.

I cannot therefore be persuaded, that France intends to quarrel seriously with
this country. To think so I must suppose that her counsels are guided by
passion and not policy, of which I have perceived no appearance. I have
observed much wickedness in her plans, but no folly. I have observed a
determination in her to oppress where she thought it advantageous, and to
deceive where she could not oppress; to drive or seduce every nation into her
measures, in order to crush by their assistance those whose power she dreaded,
and and on whose vigilance she could not impose; in fine, to sacrifice without
remorse to her ambition, all those whom she found weak enough to became her
instruments under the name of allies: but I have not observed a neglect of the
means whereby her schemes were to be promoted, much less a system of measures
calculated to defeat them; and I firmly believe, that nothing could so
obviously and strongly tend to defeat her schemes against England as that close
union of measures and interests between the two countries, which a quarrel
between us and herself must produce.

The very anxiety which she has discovered to place the vast weight of this
country in her own scale, is a security that she does not intend to throw it
into the scale of her adversary.

Her measures therefore, I believe, have a different and indeed an opposite
object. Having failed to seduce, she now is attempting to drive us into her
schemes. The means which she employs for effecting this purpose, though most
unjust and attrocious, are wise according to the information on which she acts.
By this information she has been wholly deceived: we know that she has been
deceived, in what manner and to what extent, and this knowledge gives us the
true key to her present conduct.

In the first place she has been deceived by the measures of our government.
She has seen in them a moderation and forbearance, a desire of peace, and a
patience under her numberless acts of insult and injury, which she has
construed into a mean, spiritless, and submissive disposition. Having no idea
herself of justice, good faith, or moderation, she cannot conceive of them in
others; and the acts which they produce, she attributes to avarice, weakness,
or fear.

To the same motives has she imputed the spirit of peace and conciliation which
our government has displayed toward England.

She has been deceived by the conduct of that party in our government, whereby
the measures of which she complains, have been opposed. Observing that this
party had always expressed very warm good will to her, and a strong attachment
to her cause, and had advocated a system of measures much more conformable to
her views, than that which was finally adopted, she took up an opinion that
they were actuated, not by a desire to promote what they believed to be the
good of their own country, but by a blind devotion to her interests. She
believed, and still does believe, this to be a French party, ready to go all
lengths in assisting her projects, and sufficiently powerful, if not to direct
the government according to her will, at least to prevent it from taking
effective measures against her. It must be confessed, and a painful confession
it is, that there are some individuals whose conduct has given too much reason
for this opinion; but it is also most certain that France has fallen into an
utter mistake about the views and principles of this description of our fellow
citizens in general. They, like the rest, advocated certain measures not
because they were thought desirable to any foreign power, but from a belief
that they were calculated to promote the good of this country: and France
should she push her experiment, will find that however the Americans may differ
in opinion about the best method of conducting their own affairs, there will be
but one mind and one spirit among them on the question of repelling foreign
aggression and foreign interference.

France has also been deceived by the conduct of the people in this country. At
the commencement of her revolution she saw them every where display the
strongest proofs of attachment to her cause, and good wishes for her success.
She saw her minister, on his arrival in the country, received with the warmest
cordiality. She heard the whole American people exultingly hail the birth of a
new republic, in a nation which they fondly called their ally and friend, and
to which they were proud to acknowledge their obligations and their gratitude.
Far from ascribing these generous effusions to their true source, she regarded
them as proofs of a blind and slavish attachment to her interests; and when she
saw the government repel her attempts, and steadily refuse to come into her
measures, she supposed that it acted in opposition to the wishes of the people,
by whom in ease of (...) struggle, it would not be supported.

She has observed also a strong and universal resentment, excited throughout
this country, by the aggressions of England; and this she construed into a
deadly and lasting hatred to the British nation, which would at all times
incline the people to war with it, and render any cooperation or union of
measures between the two countries, difficult if not impossible,

In these two points, she mistakes as widely as in the former. We were
delighted with the French revolution, because we thought that it would bestow
liberty and happiness on a great people. We felt affection to France because we
considered her as our ally and our friend. We felt grateful for her assistance,
because it had been highly useful to us. But when these services are made the
pretense for the most inadmissible demands, when, instead of an ally and a
friend, we find her a proud and unjust assailant, we seel a resentment
proportioned to the injury, and strengthened by the reflection, that this
injury comes from a quarter, where we had given friendship and expected to
receive it.

So, with respect to England, when her injuries ceased and an honorable
reparation was agreed to, we thought our resentment ought also to cease.

In these mistakes there can be no doubt that France has been greatly fortified
by her emissaries in this country, and by some of our citizens both here and in
Europe. They have confirmed her in the idea, to adopt the expression of general
Pinckney, in his letter of Dec. 20th, 1796, that our government acts upon
principles opposed to the sentiments of a large majority of our people; that we
are a people divided by party, the mere creatures of foreign influence, and
regardless of our national character, honor and interest.

Believing therefore, that the government, torn by party, is too feeble to
resist her: that thwarted in its operations by the affections, the sentiments,
and the wishes of the people, it will be unable to oppose any effectual
exertions against her attacks; that a powerful party in the government, and a
great majority of the people, will take part with her against the government
itself, or at least will withhold from it all effectual support; that the
people, wholly immersed in the pursuits of gain, have lost that martial spirit
whereby they were distinguished in the late war, and will submit to any
indignities or injuries, rather than risk their persons and wealth in a
contest; she has come to a resolution to attack and pillage us, to mal-treat us
in every manner, and to refuse all intercourse with us, in the firm persuasion
that the government, however unwillingly, will be obliged to yield, and that we
shall submit to her terms, as the price of her forbearance.

These terms, in substance and necessary effect, are a rupture with Britain and
the exclusion of her commerce from our ports; and such a construction of the
treaty with France, as shall permit her to arm vessels, inlist crews, and sell
prizes in our country, free from the interference of our courts of justice.

Should she even fail in this, still she has no doubt that we, from our desire
of peace, will always be ready to make an accommodation, and to relinquish our
claim to indemnity as the price of deliverance from further aggression. In the
mean time she will accomplish, she thinks, two very important objects; she will
wound the commerce of England through our sides; and by plundering us, she will
not only acquire some aid to her treasury, but also give employment and support
to great numbers of her people. A third object and of no small importance, will
be the destruction, in part, of our resources; whereby we should be rendered
more dependant on her as allies, and less formidable as enemies.

Such in my opinion, my fellow citizens, are the objects of France in her
present measures toward this country; and I am firmly persuaded that the only
method of inducing her to abandom those measures, is to convince her by our
conduct that they will not be effectual: to convince her by firm united and
vigorous measures, that her opinions respecting us are erroneous; and that we
are determined, at all hazards and under any possible sacrifice, to maintain
our rights, repel unjust attacks, and seek reparation for injuries wantonly
committed: that we are not a feeble, pusillanimous or divided people, opposed
to our own government, and ready to acquiesce in or aid the interference of
foreigners in our affairs. We ought to show them at the same time, that while
we are resolved to repel injury, we are willing to make every reasonable
advance toward a just accommodation: that while we prepare firmly and
vigorously for war, we are desirous of cultivating peace, as long as any hope
of preserving it remains: that although we mean to appeal firmly to the sword if
driven to that extremity, we shall make the appeal with reluctance and regret.

This is the system recommended by the President in his speech to both Houses
at the opening of Congress. He declares his resolution to make another attempt
to negociate and recommends that this attempt should be fortified and seconded
by serious preparations at home. This will give weight to our complaints, and
should redress be refused, will place us in a situation to meet the unfavorable
event with energy and success. I perfectly concur in these sentiments and shall
give my voice for supporting them in the House in the most efficacious manner.
The subject is now under discussion, and I have reason to believe, that the
system recommended by the President will be adopted.

This system is exactly conformable to that which was formerly adopted
respecting Britain. When Britain, after repeated remonstrances on our part,
continued her depredations on our commerce, though in so doing she broke no
treaty, though she did not recall her minister or drive away ours, we resolved
to prepare for resistance, but in the meantime to make another attempt by
negotiation; and fortunately the attempt was successful. Britain gave up her
measures, and agreed to make restitution for the past. Should France be induced
to act in the same manner, we shall once more have the satisfaction of seeing
our rights vindicated by that union of moderation and firmness which has
heretofore redounded so much to the honor and advantage of our country. Should
she refuse and war prove necessary, the recollection that we have done all in
our power to avoid it, will enable us to support the struggle with unanimity
and fortitude.

Should the system recommended by the President be adopted, it is impossible to
foresee what particular measures of preparation will be preferred. As to the
person to be sent to France, there can be no doubt that it will be general
Pinckney. The firmness, good sense, and moderation which he displayed while in
Paris, reflect honor on himself and the country, and have received universal
approbation here. It is agreed by all parties, that our honor and interests
can be no where safer than in his hands.

Such, my fellow citizens, is the system of measures toward France, which in
my opinion, ought to be adopted. I am persuaded that they intend not to make
war upon us, but to scourge and frighten us into submission: and that the only
possible method of making them desist from the attempt, is to convince them,
not merely by declarations, but by effectual preparations for war, that we are
not frightened, and will not submit to be scourged. When they understand this,
I am fully persuaded that they will abandon their project. Our negotiation I
believe will be successful, but the foundations of its success must be laid in
the House of Representatives; and those foundations must be vigorous and
effectual preparations for war. We must confider ourselves as in the presence
of a bully, who can be prevented from striking us in no manner but by showing
him that we are able and resolved to return the blow.

Should I however mistake in all this, still the same system will be right.
Should the views of France be different from what I have supposed; should the
plan of French aggrandizement, to borrow the words of an eloquent speaker in
the house of representatives, require America to be driven into the war, war we
shall have, in spite of all our peaceable endeavors to avert it: and in that
case, the sooner we set about serious preparations, the better we shall be able
to repel and retort the attack.

Thus in either case, our course must be the same. Whether France intends to
make war upon us, to bully us, or under pretense of "just displeasure" to
continue her depredations on us for the purpose of injuring England, as long as
we will submit to them, still our wisdom lies in speedy and effectual
preparation.

Should any ask, what are the sacrifices we must incur by a war, and what are
our means of becoming formidable to France? I would answer that as to
sacrifices the greatest we can make is that of our rights and our independence;
that war is an evil always to be avoided, but infinitely less than national
degradation, and submission to the will of a foreign power; that every possible
loss of property and lives may be repaired by time and industry, if we preserve
our honor and our government, but that these, once lost, can never be restored;
in fine that a nation which weighs its purse against its rights, never fails in
the end to lose both one and the other.

To show that we will submit to injuries, for fear of loss, amounts to bribing
foreign nations with our own money, to insult and attack us.

I would answer that we magnanimously resolved to resist the power of Britain
more than twenty years ago, when our resources were infinitely less than at
present, and our situation for employing them far more disadvantageous, and
that this resolution created the means of resistance. I would answer that we
possess a population probably little short of six millions; a country abounding
with every thing necessary for the subsistence and arming of troops; more ships
and sailors than any nation on earth except England; an extensive revenue not
felt by the people, and capable of very great increase without oppression; an
union among ourselves, cemented by habit, mutual interest, and affection; a
martial spirit and enterprise, which so gloriously displayed itself in the war
for our independence; experienced officers formed in that war, and still ready
to bleed for their country; a wise government possessing our confidence, and
capable of uniting and directing our exertions; in a word, that steady
persevering courage, that lofty unconquerable spirit of independence, wherein
the true strength of nations consists, more than in population, in wealth, in
fleets, in armies, or in generals; and which, wherever it exists, finds all
other means or makes them.

I would answer that we still possess WASHINGTON, the Hero and Patriot, who
conducted us with so much glory through our former struggle, and whose martial
figure, which age has rendered more venerable without impairing its strength,
would again be seen at the head of our armies,

I would answer that with not half our numbers, few of our other advantages,
and in a situation far more contiguous and more exposed, the Swiss have
courageously and successfully maintained their rights, and preserved their
tranquillity, by those measures which we now recommend, by proving to all
parties: that though desirous of peace they were prepared for war; were
prepared to place their houses, their families, and the bones of their fathers,
under the protection of their swords, and to stake the last drop of their blood
on the success of the contest.

I would answer that if driven into a war we can buy at a price cheap to
ourselves, the full cooperation of the British navy: that our numerous
merchant ships can speedily be converted into ships of war: that by withholding
supplies from France and her allies in the West Indies, we can most effectually
aid the operations of her enemies: tha^ Britain being thus enabled to call home
a great part of her present force in the West Indies, will increase still more
her internal safety, and the superiority of her navy in Europe: and that New
Orlea^^ and the Floridas must fall into our hands, whereby we shall secure the
navigation of the Mississippi, free ourselves from a troublesome neighbor, and
obtain complete control over the southern Indians.

I would answer in sine, in the words of a celebrated writer, that where
courage is not wanting, all other means will be found or created.

I might conclude this long address my fellow citizens, by an exhortation to
summon up your fortitude, and prepare bravely to meet the attacks which may be
made on our country. The subject supplies ample materials for an appeal to all
the feelings which distinguish the Patriot and the Hero. But I know it is not
necssary. The men who fought at King's-Mountain and the Cowpens, do not need an
exhortation, to bleed for their country should she be forced to call for their
assistance: and I know that, in case of that awful event which we so anxiously
desire to avert, America will again sind the sons of ninety six district among
the bravest of her defenders.

Philadelphia May 25th. 1797.

