SHORT HISTORY OF THE YELLOW FEVER, THAT BROKE OUT IN THE CITY OF PHILADELPHIA,
IN JULY, 1797: WITH A LIST OF THE DEAD; OF THE DONATIONS FOR THE RELIEF OF THE
POOR, AND A VARIETY OF OTHER INTERESTING PARTICULARS.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY RICHARD FOLWELL, No. 33, Carter's-Alley. M.DCC.XCVII.

SHORT HISTORY OF THE YELLOW FEVER, That broke out in Philadelphia in 1797.
ABOUT the end of July, 1797, the yellow fever again made its appearance in
Philadelphia. It continued to extend through various parts of the City and
Liberties, for about three months. Toward the close of October, some days of
cold weather, or perhaps some natural cause beyond the reach of human
conception, by degrees, abated its violence. Its ravages have now ceased; or,
if a few remaining patients can be found, they are only to be considered as
convalescents, and rare exceptions to the general statement, that the city is
now restored to its usual proportion of healthiness.

The citizens became more early aware of their danger than in 1793; and the
speedy flight of many thousands of them into the country, seems to have been
the chief cause why the mortality of this contagion has been so much less
violent than that of the former. By the way, though not so generally known as
to create alarm, it is true, that in the fall of 1794, Philadelphia had a
transient visit from this fatal scourge. A small number of persons, perhaps
twenty or thirty, died of it. The unexpected intervention of one or two days of
a wind more than usually cold for that season of the year, was the apparent
cause of its abrupt extinction. Perhaps the infection might be less violent in
its nature than that of the former year. It is well known, that the plague,
while remaining identically the same disease, has yet very different degrees
of violence in its successive visitations. In 1794, the sickness was kept a
secret by those who had an opportunity to be acquainted with its having reached
the city. The news was, on every account, unwelcome; and, happily, there did
not occur any positive occasion for its being generally divulged.

As the consequences of the present fever have been much less dreadful than of
that in 1793, an account of it will be far less interesting; besides, the
subject has lost much of novelty. The silent desolation of our streets in one
year, displays a close resemblance to the same scene in another year. But still
it may be proper that some compendious account should be given of this
calamity, that has again so abruptly swept away so many of our relations and
acquaintances.

On the 11th of August, 1797, the governor of Pennsylvania issued a
proclamation. He mentioned the intelligence of a contagious disease existing in
the West Indies. He enjoined that every vessel from the Islands, from
New-Orleans, or from any French, Dutch, or Spanish ports on the Main, should
perform quarantine for five days, at the health-office, on State-Island; or for
such longer time, as the resident physicians and officers of the health-office
should advise.

A second copy of this proclamation was issued on the 15th of August, with the
addition of " British" ports on the Main. On the 14th, the governor wrote a
letter to Dr. John Redman, president of the college of physicians, requesting a
state of facts as to the origin and progress of the contagion. The answer,
dated August 16th, said, in a few words, that "a malignant contagious fever has
lately appeared in Penn-street, and its vicinity, of which ten or twelve
persons have died." He promised to communicate, as speedily as possible, the
advice of the college.

The following piece appeared, on the 16th of August, in the newspapers:

To the Citizens of Philadelphia. HEALTH-OFFICE, STATE-ISLAND, August 16, 1797.
A considerable alarm having been created in the city, respecting the
prevalence of the yellow fever, in consequence of the death of some persons in
the neighborhood of Penn and Pine-streets; and as some have attempted to trace
the disease to certain vessels from the West Indies, it is necessary for me to
assure the citizens, that as every vessel entering the port of Philadelphia
from a foreign port, undergoes an examination at their arrival off this place,
I will pledge my reputation, that no person, ill with the yellow fever, or
other contagious disease, has passed through my hands from sea into the city,
during the present summer.

The armed ship Hind, from Cape Nichola Mole, has been accused of importing
the disease, The ship Hind arrived at Philadelphia on the 3d inst. and lay in
the stream till Sunday the 6th, the day after the decease of Mr. Nathaniel
Lewis.
although that vessel lay at a distant part of the city from Pine-street wharf.
It has been asserted publicly (and by those whom I should have expected would
have ascertained the fact, before circulating a report, so absurd in its
nature, and injurious to my character) that the above vessel was never examined
previously to her arrival, but permitted to pass, after enquiring where she was
from!! The falsity of this story may at once be proved by referring to the
files of the health-office, Philadelphia, where the usual official
interrogatories of the captain of the Hind are preserved, which are proposed
to the masters of all foreign vessels, at their arrival at the health-office,
State-Island.

The ship Arethusa, from Havannah, in ballast, arrived healthy, and continued
so after five days quarantine, on the 24th of July, when she came up to the
city. She has also been accused of infecting the people of Penn-street; but it
has never been proved that any of the citizens who have died were nigh that
ship. The pilot, it appears, from imprudently sleeping on deck during the
quarantine, was seized with a fever on his way up to the city. Dr. Currie, his
physician, informed me, that it was attended with inflammatory bilious
symptoms, and that he was well in five days. For the satisfaction of the
public, I shall make a future statement of the deaths on board this ship during
the voyage, before her arrival at the Havannah.

JAMES MEASE, Resident Physician of the Port.


On the 16th of August, a proclamation was issued from the health-office.
Citizens, in general, and especially those keeping lodging-houses for sailors,
and passengers from vessels, were advised to give notice of any such persons,
if seized with indisposition, having the appearance of the yellow fever, to the
health-office; to Dr. Samuel Duffield, No. 12, Chesnut-street; to captain
William Allen, No. 2, Key's-Alley, or to any of the inspectors of health in the
City or Liberties, that the patients might be removed to the city hospital,
where every accommodation was provided for their reception.

On the 18th, the board of health published the following account of patients
supposed to be ill of the contagion:

Friday, 18th August, 1797.

In consequence of circular letters addressed to the physicians, for the
purpose of obtaining information of the number of patients who may be afflicted
with fevers of a malignant or contagious nature, the following reports have
been received yesterday and today, viz. Drs. Seybert, Pascalis, Cutbush, Goss
and Parks -- no case of a contagious nature. Dr. Thompson -- one patient, with
every symptom of a malignant nature. Dr. Dorsey -- two do. in a bilious yellow
fever. Dr. Griffiths -- one case, suspicious only. Dr. Currie -- three cases,
two recovering, the other removed. Dr. Gallaher -- one case, suspicious only.
Dr. Budd -- one do. Dr. Woodhouse -- one, recovering. Dr. Caldwell -- one, in a
bad way. Dr. Annan -- one, do. Dr. Dewees -- one, suspicious only. Dr. Wistar
-- two, suspicious only, and those under a consultation.


Mr. Brown,
From wrong information I stated in my note to the public of today, that the
Hind armed ship, hauled in to a wharf distant from Pine-street; and that the
pilot of the Arethusa caught cold by sleeping on deck during the quarantine of
the vessel. I have since found that the Hind lay very near to Pine-street
wharf, and that the pilot of the Arethusa attributes his cold and subsequent
fever to sleeping in the cabin the evening before going to town, in a hammock,
and to the rain which beat in through four windows upon him. Neither of these
facts, however, will tend to prove the above vessels were concerned in
producing the disease of Penn-street.

JAMES MEASE.
Health-Office, Aug. 16, 1797.

The following letter, from Dr. Currie, appeared in reply to those above
inserted from Dr. Mease. They deserve to be printed entire, as tending to throw
light on the origin of the contagion:

To the Citizens of Philadelphia. August 18th, 1797.
Doctor Mease, in his address to the inhabitants of this city, has pledged his
reputation, that "no person ill of the yellow fever, or any other contagious
disease, has passed through his hands, from sea, into this city, during the
present summer."

He has also mentioned, that I informed him, that the pilot who brought up the
ship Arethusa, "had a fever, attended with inflammatory bilious symptoms."

From my knowledge of doctor Mease's conduct, and from the character he has
hitherto supported, with so much credit, and even eclat, I have not the most
distant doubt that he has stated facts precisely as they are, or at least as he
believes them to be. But, from the general propensity of mariners to smuggle;
from the ridiculous and farcical period prescribed by law for performing
quarantine; from the nature of infection; from the various articles of clothing
and bedding being capable of retaining infection for a long time; from the
neglect of masters of vessels, (who are not aware of the consequences) to throw
overboard the clothing and bedding of seamen that die on board their vessels;
from the time, the place and the manner that the disease (which has lately
appeared in this city) commenced and has progressed, and from the most perfect
resemblance of the fever to the yellow fever of the West Indies, there can be
no hesitation with those that have a competent knowledge of medical history, in
pronouncing the disease, or the contagion which gave rise to the disease, to
have been imported in some vessel from the West Indies, though no person ill of
the disease, had arrived from sea with it.

And that the disease was introduced by some articles on board the Arethusa,
the following circumstances render more than probable:

The ship Arethusa transported fifty-seven slaves from Jamaica to the Havanna,
some time in June last; and lost three men on the passage with the yellow
fever: to the truth of this, Mr. Philip Kingston, who was passenger on board,
has subscribed; nor is it pretended to be denied by the captain or mate. The
captain also omitted making report to the physician of the health hospital, of
a boy that died on board after Mr. Kingston left the vessel. The vessel arrived
at the fort on the 18th or 19th of July, with eleven hands, all apparently
healthy; performed five days quarantine; left the mate at the hospital, where
he remained twelve days, with symptoms of diarrhoea, or dysentery.

The pilot was conveyed to his lodgings in Shippen-street soon after his
arrival: I visited him the next morning, and found him laboring under symptoms
of high fever, resembling those of the inflammatory kind, with a pain in his
head and back; red eyes, tinged with yellow; had been delirious in the night;
all these symptoms subsided the day following, succeeded by great debility and
sickness at stomach. These gave way to evacuating remedies, and he had no more
complaint of fever after the 5th day. I suspected the case, at the time, to be
the same as the yellow fever of the West Indies, which has been usually, but
very improperly, called the inflammatory bilious fever; and in compliance with
common language, in conversation with Dr. Mease, did mention that the fever was
attended with inflammatory bilious symptoms, instead of inflammatory symptoms,
succeeded by those of a bilious nature, which I declare was the fact, and ought
so to have been stated to express my precise meaning.

Five days after the arrival of the Arethusa, while lying along-side of her,
five of the crew of the Iris were attacked with symptoms of the yellow fever;
all on the same day, or within one day of each other, and a few days after, two
more of the crew: one of these, whose name was Flood, died with unequivocal
symptoms of the yellow fever; among other symptoms, he had the black vomiting
to a high degree.

These facts can be substantiated by unquestionable evidence. I, therefore,
have thought proper to make this hasty statement for the information and
satisfaction of those concerned.

WILLIAM CURRIE.
P. S. The disease almost invariably gives way to judicious bleeding and
mercurial purges, when application is made soon after the attack. The attack is
generally sudden, and begins with pain in the head and back, accompanied with
chills. The patient, though uneasy at stomach, seldom has any puking before the
end of the second day. The disease terminates on the third or fourth day when
properly treated. This disease may be effectually escaped, by avoiding all
communication with the sick, and the houses where they have been sick.




The following letter was transmitted from Dr. Redman, to governor Mifflin, in
answer to his request for the advice of the college of physicians:

SIR,
The college of physicians having attentively considered your request "of
giving an opinion on the best mode of averting the calamity which threatens
us," have directed me to communicate to you the following methods: 1st. For
preventing the spreading of contagious diseases when introduced amongst us, and
2dly. For preventing the introduction of such diseases.

1st. To prevent the spreading of contagious diseases when introduced; -- we
recommend the most scrupulous attention to cleaning and watering the streets,
particularly washing out the gutters, habits of temperance, caution as to
clothing, fatigue of body, and exposure to the sun and night air. When it is
ascertained that such diseases exist, let the physicians of the city be
enjoined to give information to the board of health, to whom they should daily
report such cases as may occur. Let all unnecessary intercourse be suspended
with that part of the city where the disease first appears. Let such of the
sick and their families, who reside in any part of the city where their
residence may prove hurtful or dangerous, be immediately removed. When the
disease is ascertained to exist in several houses near to each other, in any
part of the city, let all the neighboring families who have escaped infection,
be removed, and all communication between the infected families and the city be
suspended, by preventing any persons except those whose visits are essentially
necessary to the sick, previous to their removal, from entering into that part
of the town. For this purpose, mercantile business must, of course, be
suspended there, and the vessels removed from the adjoining wharves. All
suspected wharves and houses, particularly such as have been occupied by the
sick, should be purified by order of the board, in the manner formerly
recommended by the college.

2dly. To prevent the introduction of contagious diseases, we recommend, that a
new law on this subject be made, constituting a board of health, consisting of
five persons, including two physicians, of whom three shall be citizens of
Philadelphia, one an inhabitant of the Northern Liberties, and one an
inhabitant of Southwark; who shall meet daily during the months of June, July,
August, and September. They shall have full power to do every thing necessary
respecting the quarantine to be performed by vessels arriving in this port, as
well as to direct the removal of any vessels, after their arrival at the city,
which may be found or suspected to be unhealthy. A consulting and a residing
physician should be appointed; the former to dwell in the city, and the latter
to be generally at the health office on State-Island, from which he is never to
be absent during the abovementioned months. Every vessel which arrives from
the West Indies, from the American Main to the southward of Florida, or from
the Mediterranean, during these months, should perform a quarantine of not less
than thirty days; and all suspected vessels should have every article, wrought
or unwrought, which is used for clothing or bedding, or which may be supposed
to contain infection, particularly those which are composed of cotton, wool and
silk, unladen and purified at the island.

By order of the college of physicians of Philadelphia, JOHN REDMAN, President.
THOMAS C. JAMES, Secretary.
August 17th, 1797.
THOMAS MIFFLIN, Esquire. Governor of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

Hopes were still entertained that the progress of the contagion might be
checked. On the 21st of August, the inspectors of the health office published
an address to the citizens. They began with assuring the public that the
infection which had made its appearance in Penn-street and its vicinity, was so
limited in its extent, that, by proper exertions, it might, in their opinion,
be entirely removed. They next published a series of resolutions, to which was
subjoined a note signed by Mr. Dallas, as secretary of Pennsylvania: he
signified the approbation of the governor. The resolutions directed, that every
person infected with the yellow fever, and whose case would admit of removal,
should be conveyed by his friends, or the health officer, to a proper situation
distant from Philadelphia. The adjoining inhabitants were directed immediately
to remove; a yellow flag was to be placed to houses containing, or which had
recently contained, the sick. No person, the needful attendants excepted, was
to enter any such house, till it had been properly cleansed. Physicians were
requested to give notice of such contagious cases as came under their
observation. The board farther announced, that a number of houses and tents had
been procured for accommodating the healthy people who might remove from the
city. At the same time, there was published a list of the inspectors, being
twenty-four in number, with the respective places of their residence. A note,
of the 21st of August, from their chairman, John Miller, jun. stated, that
since the 17th inst. ten cases of fever had occurred south of Pine-street, and
mostly in Penn-street, of which several had been sent to the hospital. Two
others in the city had been traced back to Penn-street.

The newspapers now began to be crowded with publications respecting the yellow
fever. Dr. Caldwell, in a letter of the 21st, said, that the report of the
committee of health, exhibited but "a very faint and imperfect image of the
health of the city, relative to the prevailing malignant fever." On the 22d,
Drs. Dobel, Cox, Pleasants, and Church were appointed to visit the City and
Liberties, in quest of new cases. On that day, only three were reported to the
board of health. The Wigwam Tavern, out Race-street, near Schuylkill, some
years since converted into an hospital, was made use of for the reception of
the sick. It was said that some dead bodies were removed from it, about this
time, back into the city, for interment. If it was intended to spread the
disorder, a more apt method could not have been contrived. The idle parade of a
number of people at burials, ought to have been forbidden, as also the custom
of ringing bells for the dead, which served only to alarm the sick. However
irreligious it may seem, places of worship ought to have been universally shut
up. To assemble a thousand or fifteen hundred people, of all ages, and from all
parts of the city, into one place of meeting, in weather which was moderately
warm, and during the prevalence of such a distemper, was certainly imprudent,
as it could not fail to promote the disorder.

Another mistake was, the enduring of a public market in the midst of the city.
This spot was frequently, upon market days, so crowded, that one could not walk
twenty yards through it without jostling against persons on every side. Their
very breath and clothes were sufficient to convey contagion. This fever may
well be termed a younger branch of the plague. In countries where the latter
prevails, if as little attention was given, as has lately been exhibited in
Philadelphia, to keep people at a distance from each other, the human race
would, perhaps, in these parts of the world, be extirpated. It would have been
very easy to adjourn the market to a spot on the commons, where people should
not have been under the necessity of squeezing each other in this way. Taverns,
as another vehicle of infection, should have been discouraged from being kept
open, unless such as were designed for the reception of travelers from the
country. The latter exception would have been necessary for securing
subsistence to the inhabitants.

The alarm continued gradually to increase: on the 23d of August, the board of
health reported that fifteen new cases had occurred since the day before, and
that the utmost diligence would be necessary to prevent the disorder from
spreading. The inhabitants began to move into the country; and, in a short
time, they emigrated in such prodigious numbers, that the city was said to be
half empty. On every road from Philadelphia were seen wagons conveying
families and their effects to the country. Many merchants removed to
Wilmington, where they began business. Germantown, Chester, Wilmington,
Frankfort, Darby, Trenton, Bordenton, Easton, and Burlington were more or less
crowded with fugitives, who fled in every direction. Sometimes they carried the
disease along with them; as in the instance of Mr. Robert Carry, glazier, who
died at Burlington of the disorder; which, almost at the same time, cut off his
son Mr. James Carry, a clerk in the office of the Philadelphia Gazette. He had
remained in the city, and was universally lamented, as a young man of uncommon
merit. So greatly was Philadelphia thinned, within the space of a week or two,
that almost nobody was to be seen upon the streets. Even of those who staid in
town, many shut themselves up in their houses, as in so many castles, and
entertained no commerce with their neighbors, unless when they ventured out to
market; and that, above noticed, was a dangerous service. Among other
misfortunes, the markets grew dearer than usual, and some of the bakers made
their bread as light, it is said, as when flour had been at fifteen dollars per
barrel. We must, however, take into account, the very great risk which they
ran, by staying, upon any terms, in the city.

The appearance of the streets was not, upon the whole, so exceedingly dismal
as in the fall of 1793. Sometimes one met a cart driving at considerable speed
to Potter's field. The man who took care of it was frequently singing. The dead
bodies were not, on every occasion, very decently put into coffins; but this is
a topic too delicate to be enlarged upon. One cart broke down, above the corner
of Chestnut and Seventh-streets; and the body, which was not removed for several
hours, annoyed the neighborhood with a most intolerable smell.

An alarm had now spread over the continent. On the 18th of August, the
governor of New York published a proclamation, directing that all vessels from
Philadelphia should, till further orders, perform quarantine. On the 23d, the
governor of this state issued a proclamation. -- He therein ordered that all
communication should be cut off with the wharves, houses, and inhabitants
situated between Spruce and Front-streets, to extend from the river to the west
side of Front street. Necessary attendants only were to be admitted within this
spot. Poles or fences were to be placed across the streets and avenues leading
to it. The shipping were to be removed from the wharves, and yellow flags to be
placed at the corner of each of the streets leading to the rest of the city. An
injunction was added for the removal of the sick, if the case would admit of
it, and the inhabitants were also to remove upon orders from inspectors of the
health office. Yellow flags were to be suspended from the tops of the houses,
wherein the sickness had appeared. The physicians were requested to give notice
to the health office, of all cases within their knowledge. A fine of three
hundred dollars was to be imposed on any person obstructing the execution of
this order, or neglecting to pay obedience to it.

The latter part of this proclamation met with an immediate refusal; for, on
the very next day, the 24th of August, the inspectors informed the public, that
they could no longer tell whether any new cases had occurred, because the
physicians had not given them any communications. A misunderstanding had taken
place: The doctors declined to name the number of their patients, because the
latter were liable, when discovered, to be hurried off to the Wigwam in carts.
This treatment gave general offense. Had a coach been employed for that end, as
it was in the sequel, and something more of gentleness been displayed, the
scheme would have succeeded much better. It is here stated, on respectable
authority, that an English gentleman was hurried away to the hospital, although
he offered five hundred dollars for leave to continue where he was, and
although the people where he lodged were willing to have kept him. It is added,
that he died soon after his removal.

Another instance is generally reported and believed, of a woman being hurried
off, as in a yellow fever, and who next morning was delivered of a child. Very
strong objections were made to the peremptory orders of removal, as both
inhuman and impracticable. Dr. Caldwell, in a letter to the printer of the
Philadelphia Gazette, of the 28th of August, inveighed severely against it. He
related that he had on Saturday, the 26th, been called to a patient. This man
was seized with illness on the Wednesday preceding, and had forborne, as he
said, to call in assistance, for fear of being conveyed to the hospital. He
mentioned another case of a man, who, when dying, sent for him to enquire if
any thing could be given to alleviate his pain. He did not expect to be cured,
but had merely sent for aid in the hope of obtaining a mitigation to the agony
of his last moments. Dr. Caldwell added, that many other cases of this sort had
occurred. He farther said that he had lately observed in the crowd of the court
house in Chesnut-street, three persons who, a few hours before, had been
visiting patients ill of the fever. He had them called out, and persuaded them
to go away. On the 28th, the inspectors advertised that a coachee was kept in
readiness at the constable's office, at the corner of Front and Almond street,
for the removal of those who desired to be sent to the hospital, as also that a
hearse was kept at the same place. But it was more easy to raise an alarm than
to suppress it.

The enclosure recommended by the governor, and likewise the yellow flags, were
pulled down, in spite of the threatened penalty of three hundred dollars.
Indeed, the best safeguard was the removal of the inhabitants into the
country, which, of course, crippled the progress of the contagion. Much of its
violence may be ascribed to the wretched practice common in Philadelphia, as
well as in all other large towns, of jamming and heaping houses together, as if
the surface of the country did not afford room for holding them. Nothing can be
more completely ridiculous, than that, in a continent twelve hundred leagues
wide, and where land is so extremely plenty, that contagion should be promoted
by the narrowness of the streets. In 1793, only thirty-nine persons died in the
whole extent of Market-street, from the Delaware to the Schuylkill; whereas, in
Pewter-Platter-Alley, containing perhaps forty houses, thirty-two persons died;
in Elfrith's-Alley, twenty-three, in Combes's-Alley, twenty-nine; and in
Moravian-Alley, thirty-seven. These make, in whole, an hundred and twenty-one
deaths, in only four alleys. If each of them had been as wide as Market-street,
the chance is, that at least half of these lives would have been saved. If
Water-street, and several others, were near an hundred feet broad, the ravages
of this dreadful disorder would surely have been less fatal; as ventilation is
an evident preventative. This appears from the distemper having made such very
small progress in the country. It would have saved many lives annually, if
every street in the City and Liberties had been thirty or forty yards broad,
even if there never had been a yellow fever. In the hot summer months,
Philadelphia is far from being a healthful situation, and to children it is
extremely fatal. Two or three hundred additional acres of ground, which at the
planning of the city was not worth twenty dollars per acre, would have saved,
by this time, thousands of lives. It is well known that previous to the great
fire in London, in 1666, the plague had seldom, if ever, been entirely out of
that city. But after it was burnt, the streets being rebuilt on a wider plan,
that distemper has never since been known to infest it.

The assembly of the state met on the 29th of August, and, on the same day
voted ten thousand dollars to be appropriated for the accommodation,
employment, and relief of the sick and indigent, during the prevalence of the
fever. The money was acceptable and useful; yet, if the sum given had been even
considerably larger, there was no want of objects of charity to receive it. The
state is worth some millions of dollars, and an additional donation could
scarcely have injured its interest.

A committee from the health-office were appointed to visit the hospitals, at
State-Island, and the Wigwam, which they did on the 26th of August. They
reported, that at the former place they found only thirteen patients; all of
whom appeared to be on the recovery. At the Wigwam, forty-eight had been
received, of whom sixteen were dead, and most of the remainder either cured, or
in a state of convalescence.

It has already been hinted, that a misunderstanding had arisen between some of
the physicians and the inspectors of the health-office, in consequence of
which, the former had declined giving in any further reports of their patients.
On the 29th of August, a letter appeared in the newspapers from Dr. Currie. He
therein stated, the reason for the physicians not giving in lists of their
patients to the board of health, as arising from want of time to do so. He
said, that it was the duty of the board to send for such a list. He subjoined a
catalogue of all persons who had been infected, from the 22d of July to the
25th of August. On the 1st of September, the number of houses shut up, was
supposed to be thirteen hundred and sixty-five, besides those in the enclosures
of Penn-street, etc. to which access had been forbid by the governor's
proclamation.
On the 1st of September, 1797, the board published a narrative of their
proceedings, in consequence of the governor's proclamation. They denied that
force had been employed, or even contemplated, for the removal of the sick to
the hospital; and that no such removals had taken place, unless when the
attending physician declared the measure to be necessary. As to the former
assertion, the general belief is otherwise; though force might be used, and
undoubtedly was used, by some agents of the board, perhaps without their
knowledge. If the physicians had in every case been consulted, they could have
had no reason to be offended, as they certainly were, when they declined the
reporting of cases. The board further said, that all persons near the sick,
necessary attendants excepted, had been earnestly advised to remove. They
mentioned, that the City-Hospital had been kept in a state of complete
preparation for the receiving of patients; and that five physicians, Drs. Cox,
Dobel, Pleasants, Church, and Leib, had been appointed in different parts of
the city, to seek out and administer relief to such persons as required
assistance.

After giving this view of the subject, the inspectors expressed a hope, that
all sick or indisposed persons, as well as those employed in the care of them,
would see the propriety of an early application either to their
family-physician, to Dr. Duffield, consulting physician of the port of
Philadelphia, or to some of the medical gentlemen above named. There was a
postscript at the bottom of this notice, which must have been the consequence
of some hesitation among the members of the board themselves. It was signed by
four members, who said, that during the consideration of this address, they had
requested and obtained leave to withdraw. The burials at this time began to be
more numerous. An account appeared in the Philadelphia Gazette, stating, that,
during the forty-eight hours preceding Monday, the 4th of September, at noon,
there had been thirty-six interments. This was a greater number of dead than
had yet occurred within an equal period.

The commissioners appointed by the governor to carry into effect the law for
alleviating the distresses of the poor, by the expenditure of ten thousand
dollars, attended punctually to their appointment. Their names are as follow,
viz. FOR THE CITY.
Robert Wharton, (Chairman) South Third-street, No. 135. George Krebs, North
Fifth-street, No. 17. John James, (Treasurer) do. do. No. 18. Israel Israel,
corner of Chestnut and Third-streets. Thomas Savery, North Fifth-street, No. 20.
Edward Garrigues, Cherry-street, No. 39.
FOR THE NORTHERN LIBERTIES.
Samuel Wheeler, Vine-street, No. 99. John Wagner, Noble-street. George Inglis,
New Market-street.
FOR SOUTHWARK.
Samuel Church, corner of South and Water-streets. William Linnard, South
Second-street. Robert M'Mullin, Swanson-street.


They invited the inhabitants to recommend in writing such indigent persons as
might come within their knowledge. These were to be assisted by applying at the
state-house from three to nine o'clock in the evening, of Wednesday, the 6th
inst. and thereafter, on "every 2d, 4th, and 6th days of the week, called
Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, while necessary." The commissioners, as above,
were twelve in number, and their names and respective places of residence were
printed, that people, during the recess of their meetings, in want of
employment or relief, might know where to apply. Numbers of persons were
immediately set to work upon the streets and high-roads near the city. The
funds were not adequate to give them full wages; and some of the overseers told
them that a whole day's work was not, of course, to be expected from them. The
reader may suppose that no such hints were necessary, for idleness is natural
to man. But relief was essential, and it was proper to find them employment, if
only to divert them. Should their performances not have been equal to the
expense which they cost, still it was fit that they should have something to
do. Even supposing that only ten of them were dishonest, the temptation to
robbery might have proved more detrimental to the citizens, than the whole
amount of the expenditure; for some of them, after getting their wages,
actually robbed one another. On South-street and Broad-street, the indulgence
was taken in its utmost latitude; but when it is considered that some were
emaciated, others delicate -- and that many soon got blisters on their hands,
no great exertions could be expected.

The contagion continued to extend. For the twenty-four hours preceding
Saturday the 9th, at noon, the Philadelphia Gazette reported thirty-two deaths;
being about double the amount of any former single day. From that time, till
Monday at noon, the deaths were by the same newspaper, fifty-seven. On
September 7th, the inhabitants of the Northern Liberties appointed a committee
to assist the board of health. On the 12th, the commissioners for assisting the
poor, sent a letter to the governor, giving an account of their proceedings.
They stated that, from the 4th to the 9th instant, two hundred and eighty-four
persons, chiefly heads of families, had been relieved, at an expense of two
hundred and sixty-nine dollars and sixty-five cents, besides a quantity of
bread, the cost of which an account had not been received. Two hundred and
fifty men, at seventy-five cents per day, had been employed on the roads, and
to open the courses of water in Southwark, so as to drain the grounds.
Provision was further made for about two hundred people, who had removed to the
tents on the Schuylkill.

On the 22d of September, a note appeared in the newspapers, signed by James
Oldden, No. 1, South Sixth-street; John Gardener, jun. No. 28,
Strawberry-alley; Franklin Wharton, No. 268, South Second-street; John Clifton,
No. 74, Swanson-street, Southwark; and Thomas Anderson, No. 63, Shippen-street,
do. They stated, that the guardians of the poor having generally left the city,
they had voluntarily undertaken to superintend the poor, near Schuylkill; and
had appointed David Thomas to be steward, who constantly resided there. They
notified, that those who desired to remove from the neighborhood of the sick,
to the tents, were to apply to them for an order, before they could be
admitted. They requested contributions of straw, of old blankets, of children's
clothes, etc.

In a second letter from the commissioners, appointed to inspect the
distribution of money, to the governor, dated September the 18th, they related,
their having, during that week, relieved six hundred and fifty-eight persons,
chiefly heads of families, with five hundred and ninety-five dollars and fifty
cents, besides a considerable quantity of bread; that about 520 persons, who
were thrown out of employment, and destitute of subsistence, had been paid at
the rate of seventy-five cents per day, for laboring on the high-roads, etc.
They had been obliged, from the state of their funds, to lower the wages to
fifty cents.

In a third letter to the governor, dated September 25th, the commissioners
mentioned, that, since their last, they had relieved eight hundred and
fifty-five persons. They had paid six hundred and thirty-nine men for labor on
the roads; and including provisions for the people in the tents, and forty-six
dollars and fifty-four cents for incidents, their whole expenditure came to
five thousand seven hundred and eighty-one dollars and forty-nine cents. Some
accounts were likewise unsettled. Hence the total outlay came to upwards of two
thousand dollars per week; and, consequently, the whole money granted by the
legislature, being ten thousand dollars, would last only for five weeks, or to
the end of the one then current.

To remedy this deficiency, the mayor of Philadelphia was authorized, by an
ordinance, to borrow on the credit of the Corporation, from either of the banks
in the city, ten thousand dollars; one thousand were to be applied to the
repairing of the high roads, and the remainder for the hiring of patroles, and
such other measures as might be necessary for the protection of the city.

On October 4th, the commissioners for taking care of the poor, addressed a
fourth letter to the governor. They stated, that the weekly expense of
supporting them, came to upwards of two thousand five hundred dollars. They had
since their last publication, relieved a number of men, by employment on the
roads, at fifty cents per day, to the amount of fifteen hundred dollars; other
distributions had come to the amount of twelve hundred dollars more. They
earnestly recommended private subscriptions for the relief of the poor, and
subjoined a catalogue of donations already made. This is reserved for a
separate article, including the whole of such donations, as far as it shall be
found possible to collect them.

The Merchant's Advertiser of October 10th, contained another address from the
commissioners. They began by stating, that, on September 1st, they had accepted
of their appointment. They then received the ten thousand dollars bestowed by
the legislature, and which had generally been supposed more than sufficient for
the purpose. They found, upon examination, upwards of three thousand people, of
all ages, destitute of work or subsistence. The number had since greatly
increased, and the whole yet remained in the same suffering condition. They
next, in pathetic terms, addressed the richer class of their fellow-citizens
for aid; and considerable supplies were gradually procured.

By the 15th of October, sixteen physicians had been affected with the
disorder. Of these, eight, whose names are in Italic, fell its victims: the
names of the whole are as follow: Dr. Way. Dr. Thompson. Dr. Annan. Dr. Dobel.
Dr. Jones. Dr. Pleasants. Dr. Clements. Dr. Hunt. Dr. Reynolds. Dr. Physic.
Dr. Caldwell. Dr. Church. Dr. B. Duffield. Dr. Haworth. Dr. Boys. Dr. Strong.


If a generous contempt of danger and of death merits the gratitude of mankind,
that tribute is, on the present emergency, unquestionably due to the physicians
of Philadelphia. The most laborious, hazardous and disagreeable task was, in
almost every instance, to be performed gratuitously. Dr. Dobel, with a view to
this contagion, had previously made his will. He was of independent
circumstances; had been married but a few months before, and could have no
temptation for the office which he undertook, but what arose from pure
benevolence.

Apprehensions had been, for some time, entertained by the steward of the city
hospital, that illicit practices were carried on at that place; after some
vigilance, one of the attendants was, on the 12th of October, taken with a bag
full of sundries belonging to the public. On a promise of forgiveness, he
confessed that property, to a considerable amount, had been secreted in the
house of a certain John Brown, another of the attendants. A search-warrant was
issued; and the fact being proved, Brown was directly committed to prison.

Before the middle of October, the mortality in the city began to abate. On the
13th of that month, the inspectors of the health-office addressed a note,
signed by William Montgomery, as chairman, to such of their fellow-citizens
whose families were then out of town. They were advised not to return for a few
days longer, because, although there was an appearance of the fever having begun
to subside, still they did not think it advisable to return at so early a
period. They particularly cautioned citizens resident in the country from yet
entering Southwark, and the lower parts of the city. They further advised, that
proper persons should, in the mean time, be employed to ventilate and clean
their houses.

Nothing, however, could exceed the impatience of some citizens to return.
There had been complaints of extortion in those small towns and places in the
country to which many had retired. This is worthy of observation, that we may
be cautioned, in case Providence should permit Philadelphia to be again visited
by a similar misfortune. That quadrupeds, birds, and aquatic animals, should
prey upon each other, seems, in many classes, to have been the previous
destination of nature; but that human beings should practice the same rapacity
against their fellow creatures, is a very poor illustration of the pretended
sanctity so pompously displayed by some of them. Many of the country people
have gained largely by the city; yet when its inhabitants came into their
power, they discovered what small reliance should be placed on their gratitude.
Both lodging and provisions were often unconscionably enhanced in price. This
extortion was sometimes attended with much affected concern for the sufferers,
and many pleas of merit for giving them admittance on any terms whatever. To
this account, exceptions were to be found, and this contrast added still more
to the shame of the inhospitable.

As a relief to the sameness of this detail, we shall here insert a few
anecdotes which have come within our information.

Soon after the commencement of the fever, and while the inhabitants kept a
guarded distance from each other, the bar-keeper of Mr. Wucherer's tavern, in
Chesnut-street, happened to be abroad, fell into company, came home inebriated,
and went to bed. Suspicion immediately took the alarm; and a doctor was sent
for, who pronounced his case to be the yellow fever. The neighbors were under
apprehensions for their safety, and began to pack up their furniture for a
retreat to the country. But next morning unfolded their mistake, by the
patient's resuming the duties of his station. Several loungers about
Market-street wharf, were, like the bar-keeper, considered as having caught the
contagion, and, consequently, conveyed to the hospital. Some of them, perhaps,
got infected in that place by the disease, as one or two paid their last debt
to nature. During this time, a volunteer patrol guarded the city. One night,
some of them took up three foreign sailors; and in accompanying them to their
vessel, one of them, either to escape from the patrol or by accident, fell into
the river, and was drowned. His body was found and buried next day. The
committee of health requited each of the patrol with twenty-two dollars per
month; and the latter have since been raising a contribution from individuals
by subscription, as a further reward for their own vigilance.

Tricks were played by some of the prisoners in the city gaol. They feigned to
have the disorder, were conducted to the hospital, and after partaking of a
warm supper, and a good night's lodging, disappeared on the wings of the
morning. Several who had been really attacked by the fever, and others who had
been sent to the hospital against their will, by virtue of the governor's
proclamation, in consequence of the medical verdict of a suspicious case, fled,
as soon as they were able.

A Mr. Horn, a young German, had been about five days from Philadelphia, when
he was taken ill in Northumberland county, and died of the yellow fever. A
remarkable circumstance is here stated respecting his illness, on the authority
of his landlord, a Mr. Rittenhouse. Such was the deceitful and flattering state
of the disorder, that within two hours of his exit, he had no apprehension of
the approach of his dissolution: he appeared sensible, though his continual
theme was love; and he was planning his happiness in a connubial life; but
Death, in so short a space, triumphed over the fascinating desires of Cupid.

A Mr. Barry visited the city, during the calamity. He had been advised to keep
his body open, as a preparative, in case that he should be attacked.
Accordingly, he went to an apothecary, and bought a box of thirty-two purgative
pills. -- From ignorance, he swallowed the whole immediately, and was suddenly
taken unwell in the street, opposite to the bank of North America. A sick-cart
happened to pass by empty, and the drivers believing him attacked with the
disorder, forced him into it, and were proceeding to the hospital. At the
corner of Twelfth and Chesnut-streets, one of the drivers quitted the cart.
Anger or fright perhaps had stopped the operation of the pills; for he summoned
strength, got loose, and beat the driver that remained. He led the man, his
horse and cart to the City-hall, where he left them with many complaints of bad
treatment.

Mr. Robert Longdon, a carpenter, at the beginning of the sickness, had gone to
Darby to work for Mr. Jesse Sharples. Having come to town upon a Sunday, he
was, on the following Thursday, seized with a chill, at Darby, and on Friday,
the black vomit appeared. The family where he was lodged, left the house, and
he must have died, if he had not with the fever, for want of necessaries, but
for the humanity of David Ross, a young man who attended in the store of Mr.
Sharples. Two physicians visited him on the ensuing Monday, and pronounced it
to be a case of the yellow fever: salivation was recommended; but the patient
became delirious, and died on the same afternoon.

Mr. Sharples bespoke a coffin, and got his grave dug in the Friends'
burying-ground, near Darby. The people of that town became alarmed: the
grave-digger and coffin-maker fled through fear; and there was some danger that
the corpse might be suffered to putrify in the street. James Ryan and David
Ross, clerks to Mr. Sharples, along with that gentleman and a stranger, went
through Darby to the burying-ground, with the hearse, every door in the place
being shut. This was about nine o'clock at night. The horse stumbled, and fell,
at the distance of a quarter of a mile from the place of interment. Both the
shafts of the hearse were broken; and it was with great difficulty that these
four persons contrived to drag the hearse forward. On their return, every door
was shut against them, except that of Mr. Sharples. His two clerks, who had
assisted at the funeral, found it necessary to return to the city. Such were
the difficulties which occurred not only to the sick, but to the healthy.

The landlord of the Golden Swan, North Third-street, hired a horse and
carriage to the board of health, for the purpose of conveying the dead to the
burying-ground. One day, the driver stopped at a tavern: the horse, not being
properly fastened, ran off with an empty coffin that happened to be in the
carriage; and returned, with full speed, homeward. In passing through the yard
of the inn, toward the stable, he was espied by the cook and bar-keeper. They
instantly raised an alarm that the horse brought home a dead body, instead of
conveying it to the place of interment. Fame or calumny soon after reported
that two or three persons were dead at the Golden Swan.

Two persons employed by the committee of health, pursued a man into the
War-Office, whom a physician had condemned to the hospital. The patient had
been an old soldier. He held in his hand a rusty bayonet, and kept them off. He
had only been too free with his bottle, and would not be made a prisoner.

Some have imagined themselves to be attacked by the contagion, when they had
only been intoxicated. One young man, an apprentice in Philadelphia, drank too
much port wine. It returned from his stomach: he mistook it for the black
vomit; and when he got sober, he became delirious, through fear he should be
sent to the hospital.

One of the most affecting circumstances of death, was, in the case of Dr.
Jacob Thompson. He had been married in the evening -- had gone to bed, and
within two hours, felt the symptoms of the disorder approaching. The family
were alarmed. The bridegroom was removed, and died on the third day, leaving
his unfortunate wife, "at once a widow and a bride."

Dr. Pleasants had removed to the country: philanthropy actuated his return,
whereby he also perished. Dr. Annan, another physician, who lost his life, had,
like Dr. Thompson, been but newly married. David Thomas, of Southwark, fell an
early and much lamented victim to this scourge. In the different and successive
capacities of constable, deputy-sheriff, and as steward to the poor at the
tents, on Schuylkill, he had served with integrity, vigilance and humanity. Mr.
Peter Helm, so distinguished in 1793, and who, upon this occasion, again
offered his services at the City-Hospital, was likewise attacked, but has since
recovered.

During this contagion, Wilmington became the general mart for trade over
Philadelphia: merchants notified, in a joint advertisement, their removal to
that place. Many country customers, however, went else here for their fall
assortments; in consequence of which, we fear some will feel themselves
embarrassed to preserve that promptitude, which has hitherto generally
characterised the mercantile houses of our metropolis.

Some of those who were most courageous in 1793, were timid, and fled among the
most early, in 1797. They had witnessed such distress then, that their
resolution now faultered. At the commencement of the attack, more or less of
panic seized every one; but those who procrastinated a flight, and saw "Death's
shafts fly thick," were like soldiers in a battle, who, as we are told, cannot,
at its commencement, dispossess themselves of terror; but, after balls have,
for some time, flown over their heads, feel less apprehension for personal
safety, and composure and firmness generally succeed.

No such instances of general fatality occurred now, as in 1793. Then,
according to Mr. Matthew Carey, a man of the name of Collins, buried his wife,
his two daughters, his son, and his son's wife, with her child; after all this,
he got married a second time, before the close of the fever, buried his new
wife, and, to wind up the scene, died himself. Such fatal occurrences being
rife in the mind, people were happily impressed with the danger of remaining in
the city.

Drs. Hunter and Stafford distinguished themselves by benevolence. The poor
were invited to call at their stores for medicines, which, with the general
prescriptions for the relief of those infected, they actually supplied, free of
expense. Such instances of philanthropy should be recorded not only here, but
in the grateful minds of our citizens.

Among other persons meriting public notice, for their liberality during the
disorder, two bakers, Christopher Ludwick and Frederick Frailey, ought not to
be forgotten. They baked, gratis, for the poor, several thousand loaves of
bread, of flour furnished by the commissioners.

On the Saturday previous to the meeting of the assembly of the state, the
Mayor expressed his apprehension of the progress of the contagion, to an
association of Friends, who styled themselves, "a society for improving the
condition of the poor." John James, Thomas Wistar, Edward Garrigues, Thomas
Savery, George Pennock, Samuel Garigues, jun. and Peter Barker, were appointed
to apply to the assembly, as the funds of the society itself were not adequate
to the necessities of the case. Henry Drinker, sen. and Thomas Wistar, who were
not members of that society, joined themselves to the committee. They waited on
the Tuesday following upon the legislature, and the ten thousand dollars were
granted on the same day. The promptness of this grant merits considerable
encomium. The Mayor had, from his office, peculiar opportunities of learning
the public distress. People's necessities impelled them to sue for debts, while
those who were sued, pled in defense, the general langour of business, in
consequence of the desertion of the citizens. Jonathan Penrose, late magistrate
of Southwark, and now sheriff, in a struggle between sympathy and the duties of
his office, actually refused to grant a warrant against a person in distress,
and absented himself, to avoid the pain of being importuned to bring suits for
creditors. Toward the more advanced periods, however, of the calamity, the
courts of justice were suspended.

A grateful mind will recur with singular pleasure to the recollection of those
gentlemen, who, after having encountered, in 1793, every degree of toil and
hazard, returned in 1797, to the same arduous and alarming duty. Among these
were, Israel Israel, John Letchworth, Thomas Savery, Stephen Girard, Caleb
Lownes, and John Connelly. Mr. Israel had, in 1793, first suggested, and
afterward assisted in promoting the plan of an orphan committee, of which he
and Mr. Letchworth were active members. The latter also served in the committee
of distribution. On the late emergency, they again officiated with eminent
usefulness; as did likewise Mr. Savery; who, in 1793, had been also a member of
the committee of distribution. Messrs. Girard, Lownes, and Connelly now
superintended the City-Hospital. In 1793, Mr. Girard had volunteered as one of
the managers of Bush-hill hospital. Mr. Lownes, at the same awful period, was
secretary to the committee for relieving the sick and distressed, while Mr.
Connelly acted in various capacities. In 1793, he twice caught the contagion,
and, as soon as he recovered, returned to his charge.

The prudence of the commissioners, in providing employment, as well as
subsistence for the poor, should ever be respectfully remembered. The
necessitous who were relieved, doubtless feel gratitude ingrafted in their
hearts, to those gentlemen who stood to their respective posts, at the imminent
hazard of their lives, to be their guardians and benefactors. What must have
been the feelings of the Board of Health -- the Commissioners -- the Committee,
and Inspectors of the Hospital and Tents -- the Overseers of the Poor Joseph
Galley, Michael Baker, John Smith, and David Graham, were the only persons, out
of fourteen of the Overseers for the City and Liberties, who adhered to their
posts. Their funds, by the number of applicants, at an early period, got
exhausted; and, to the honor of the Bank of Pennsylvania, they lent them four
thousand dollars, on the private credit of Mr. John Inskeep, Treasurer of the
Guardians of the Poor, and Isaac W. Morris, one of the Managers of the
Almshouse.
, when they were relieving the needy -- easing the sorrows of their
fellow creatures, and drying up the tears of a parent, and of numerous and
helpless children? ************ To many of them crowds often flocked with
children in their arms. -- Perhaps one-half of the family were lying sick at
home:********** Was it interest which actuated them? The heart which can feel
for another's woe, will answer, that it was sympathetic benevolence.

Names of the inspectors of the health-office.
John Miller, jun. John Savage Thomas W. Francis Jacob Clarkson Edward Russel
William Montgomery Thomas Morgan Abraham Kintzing, jun. John Gardener, jun.
Jacob Sperry Samuel Meeker William Smith, jun. William Sansom James Oldden
Leeson Simmons Jonathan Jones James Whitehead Standish Forde John Starr James
King William Doughty Joseph Marsh, jun. Franklin Wharton David Evans, jun.


One of the most lamented victims of the disorder, was Dr. Nicholas Way, who,
during 1793, resided at Wilmington, and was remarkable for his hospitality to
the fugitive citizens of Philadelphia. He had since removed to our metropolis,
where his talents as a physician, and philanthropy as a man, which his fortune
enabled him to support, introduced him to extensive practice. Few men either
lived or died with a greater number of friends, or a smaller number of enemies.
It was by his suggestion, that, during the late calamity, five physicians were
appointed to search for and attend such of the poorer citizens as might be
affected with the disorder. He was treasurer of the mint. -- While the public
lament his departure, they will be pleased to hear, that that office is now
filled by a gentleman, to whom they owe an equal respect; -- one, who, like
him, could feel for the distressed, and always exerted himself to benefit his
fellow creatures.

The Committee of Enquiry, appointed on September 7th, for the Northern
Liberties, consisted of the following gentlemen, viz. First District.
James Pentland John Kunckle John Graul Jacob Souder.
Second District.
Jesse Groves John Kesler Christian Kunckle John Goodman, jun.
Third District, or Spring-Garden.
Thomas Kehrom John Alberger John Breish William Lawrence.
Fourth District.
Casper Snyder Samuel Lehman Charles Fleming William M'Intire.
Fifth District.
Henry Summers George Forepaugh Conrad Rohram Jacob Zigler.
Sixth District.
William Coats Daniel Groves Albertus Sherlock Samuel Brown.
Seventh District.
Daniel Miller Conrad Seybert Frederick Wolbert Simon Shugart.
Eighth District.
Peter Gabel Jacob Keen John Fisher Peter Smith
Ninth District.
Samuel Macferran John Bender John Kehr Joseph Baker
Tenth District.
Lewis Deets Jacob Toy Adam Upperman Christian Shitz.


William Coats, Esquire. officiated as Chairman.

The following list of patients, who were copiously bled in the fever, and
recovered, we give on the authority of Dr. Redman Coxe: Charles Burrel 120 oz.
Horace Hall 120 Thomas Smith 96 George Air 100 Stephen Thompson 110 David
Evans 126 oz. Mr. M'Gahan 124 Dr. Physic 176 Mrs. Lewis 96 Mrs. Elliot 90


Mr. David Evans, jun. was twice attacked. In the first illness, he lost an
hundred and twenty-six ounces of blood, and in the second, twenty-four. This
account is given by himself.

About the middle of October, the Board of Commissioners, having considered
that the distresses of the poor would be likely to continue through the ensuing
winter, opened a subscription, to raise money for the purchase of wood and
provisions, to be distributed in the rigor of the season; and appointed agents
to buy up five hundred cords of wood, which has been purchased, and is daily
distributed to them.

As an instance of the malignity of this disease, we shall mention, that a man
from Baltimore, in a convalescent state, called, during this time, at a store
in Newcastle, kept by Clay, Bond and Co. Mr. Clay and Mr. Shelly, of the firm,
and Mr. Ruth, an accidental purchaser, received the contagion, and expired
within twenty-four hours of each other.

At Philadelphia, a dead body, said to be thrown from the Arethusa, was found
in the Delaware, sewed up in a bag. Another body of a man was picked up, that
had a note about him, signifying that he had spent his whole money upon the
doctors, without recovering from his complicated infirmities, and that he
thought Death was the most certain relief. No evidence appears, however, that
he was the writer of the note. Possibly he might have been murdered, and that
the perpetrator wrote it to elude suspicion.

The College of Physicians recommended, in preference, as nurses to the sick,
Negroes who were natives of Africa. This produced an inconvenience; for, the
blacks of this country became alarmed, and generally refused to attend; while
the scarcity of Africans, made people bid high for them, and raised, to
exorbitance, the price of their attendance.

The practice of burning the clothes of the infected, must, on serious
reflection, be viewed as highly improper. For, the pestilential air, arising
with the smoke, it is more than probable, aided by wind, might have a tendency
of communicating the fever to any one who inhaled such noxious effluvia. One
gentleman, who was at a considerable distance from the Hospital, observing the
practice, imagined that from them proceeded a disagreeable smell: be this as it
may, he was soon after seized with the contagion, and now imputes it to that
cause.

A gentleman in this city, who was attacked with the disease, immediately sent
for his physician. By the application of the usual remedies, he was, in a short
time, out of danger. But, though relieved from the fever, he still remained
under a deep affection of the salivary glands. In consequence of this, a basin
was provided, which received the saliva that fell from his mouth. One day, two
young cats entered the room, unperceived by him, at first, and licked up part
of the contents of the basin. They were seized, within an hour afterward, with
violent chills, and continued to waste away to mere skeletons, loathing all
kinds of food. On the fourth day, one of them died. The person having
experienced the good effects of mercury, in relation to himself, supposed it
might be of some service to the surviving cat, and accordingly gave her twelve
grains. In a short time, to his expectations, it operated, and the cat, before
to appearance nearly dead, seemed to recover, and was, during the day, much
revived. The medicine was not continued, and the next day she drooped as
before. The day after (the seventh) it died. The mother of the cats never left
them while in this situation! -- She appeared slightly diseased, but did not
die.

On the 13th of August, a man of the name of Peter Molisis, late a seaman of
the ship Hind, was sent to the Marine Hospital, from Love-lane; and died in
two or three days. This was eleven days after the vessel was examined. Also, on
the 14th, another man, a Portuguese, was taken from the corner of Penn and
South streets, to the Hospital, who had the fever, and said he had been landed
about five days from the same ship; another man, belonging to the Hind, was
also landed sick, and lodged at the corner of Almond and Front streets, at Mrs.
O'Connor's. -- He was, by the alarm of the neighbors, and his landlady,
carried off from thence.

On the 24th of August, a meeting of a few citizens was held; who appointed a
committee, consisting of the following gentlemen: -- Dr. William White, Dr.
Nicholas Way Stephen Girard was appointed in the place of Dr. Way, after he
died.
, Nathaniel Falconer, John Connelly, Samuel Coats, and Caleb Lownes. The
object of this association was, to visit the houses of the sick, and,
generally, the sick and distressed, for the purpose of administering such
relief, as their suffering situations required. Samuel Coats was appointed
treasurer; and, besides answering the orders drawn by the gentlemen of the
committee, he visited with them the houses of the sick, during the prevalence
of the fever. This early association had not contemplated the extensive duties
which the different recesses of distress unfolded to their view. The unwearied
and disinterested labors of these gentlemen, their posterity may hear with
gratification: -- It may bring in view the unexampled character of the
philanthropic Howard. With their pecuniary aid, they raised a fund, without any
solicitation, to the amount of about three thousand six hundred dollars. With
this sum, the sick were assisted without distinction to the City or Liberties.

An association of young ladies, of the sect called Friends, under the name of
" The Female Society," a considerable time since formed in our city, for the
purpose of relieving the poor without discrimination, at this awful period,
amidst the frowns of Providence, continued that goodness, which, in more
tranquil hours, inspired their tender souls. The last mentioned committee gave
them, to aid their views, two hundred dollars; thirty pair of childrens' shoes,
and sixty blankets. They procured numerous donations from other sources
Distress plead not here in vain: -- The charitable -- the virtuous -- the
religious, yet left in a corrupted city, may, we hope, avert the correction of
Heaven.**** May the recording angel drop a tear, and blot out many of the
faults inherent in our natures, that we may, by repentance, be spared like
Nineveh!

Mr. James Smith, merchant (brother to one of the firm of Gurney and Smith)
resided, at the beginning of the sickness, in the most infectious part of the
city. He assisted strangers that were sick, and particularly the poor, who were
forsaken by their friends; helped many patients to the Hospital, and many
bodies to their graves. He defied all danger that could ease the patient, or
could render respect to the dead. He offered his gratuitous service to the
Board of Health, to superintend the cleansing of infectious houses. As soon as
he got his commission, the Board furnished him with tubs, buckets, brushes,
lime, etc. and he recruited a black company, consisting of twenty or thirty,
and entered on his office. Every house, in which he could get access, where
people had died, he purified. While he left some of these people in one house,
to see how others came on elsewhere, they broke open and robbed the store
belonging to it, of a quantity of goods, the property of the late house of
Richard and James Smith, the former of whom had died. Here Mr. Smith had new
trouble on his hands, in pursuing, with constables, this sable, light-fingered
groupe, and in arraigning them before Hilary Baker, our Mayor; whose name we
cannot pass over, without signifying to distant readers, that he did not flinch
from his station; but daily evinced himself to be that mild arbiter, which, in
more tranquil hours, was a conspicuous trait in his character. Mr. Smith
requested that no address or application on the subject of his office should be
sent to his house, that his family might not feel uneasy apprehensions for his
personal safety.

Mr. Thomas Annesly undertook to cleanse several houses in Southwark, where
people died, free of expense, except what actually accrued to him.

Mr. Samuel M. Fox, President of the Bank of Pennsylvania, wrote a letter to
the Board of Health, on the 22d of August, offering to lend them any sum of
money that (...) might want. This offer, which is like other instances (...)
(...)berality that has distinguished the Directors, was ac(...)ed; and they
obtained from them 12,000 dollars.

At the close of the fever, the Board of Health appointed "a committee to
purchase and transfer to Dr. Edward Stevens, to Dr. John Church, to the heirs
of Dr. Benger Dobel, to the heirs of Dr. Samuel Pleasants, to Dr. John Redman
Coxe, to Dr. Michael Lieb, and to the heirs of Dr. William Annan, each one
share of the stock of the Bank of Pennsylvania, and that the transfers so made
express, that they are in consideration of the high sense the Board of Health
entertain of the service of those gentlemen, during the calamity of 1797."

Dr. Stephens wrote a letter to the Board, politely declining the acceptance of
the bank share granted to him.

The Board, on the 10th of November, resolved, That their thanks should be
presented to Dr. John Duffield, for his services, and that, as an
acknowledgment for them, he should be presented with a share in the bank of
Pennsylvania, transferred as those to the other physicians.

On the 23 November, they also "resolved, that their thanks should be presented
to Mr. James Smith, late of New York, for his voluntary, disinterested and
benevolent services during the late contagious fever, and that the same be
published."

The Chairman of the Board, in notifying to the Governor certain resolutions,
expressed to him, that the Board are so strongly impressed with the
extraordinary labor and attention of Dr. John Church and Dr. Benger Dobel, in
consequence of their being seated where the disorder raged with most violence,
that they would (...) have voted for each of these physicians a further
compliment of a bank share, had their funds warranted such an appropriation.

The Board of Health estimated their expenses at about two hundred and fifteen
dollars and forty-four cents per day; and, during the whole calamity, their
aggregate disbursements were 19,100 dollars.

Physicians to the Hospital.
Samuel Duffield, Edward Stephens.


Assistant Physicians.
Michael Lieb, Benger Dobel, William Annan, John Redman Coxe, John Church,
Samuel Pleasants.


Resident Physician, John Duffield.

The impropriety practiced by the drivers of the carriages that conveyed the
dead to the burying-grounds should be noticed; so that, in case any such
calamity might visit us hereafter, we may learn to improve by the blunders of
others. Those particularly who conveyed the dead from Southwark, frequently
drove the carriage along the most central parts of the city, in conveying them
to the Hospital burying ground, instead of taking a direction toward the
Commons.

While this is issuing from the press, the river is frozen over, wood is dear,
and trade is almost stagnant. The necessaries of life, are, generally speaking,
at a higher rate than in 1793. Bankruptcies are as numerous as they were at the
close of the American revolution. When links to a chain are thus broken, we
are, literally, on a boisterous sea. Thousands suffer by the failure of
hundreds. Our trade, being long cramped by the aggressions of two opposite
powers, has rendered money scarce, and increased the number of poor to an
unexampled amount. Hence, though Death has not snatched away from us more than
one-quarter so many souls as in '93, yet we cannot, on a cursory view, find
much contrast in the picture of the two periods. The following letter will
afford an idea of the sufferings of some of the poor of the City of
Philadelphia:

"Sir, -- Once more I find myself called upon to give you a few lines on as
disagreeable a subject as ever occurred in human life. My situation is such,
that, without relief, I shall perish. As Mrs. S -- has given me no relief, by
wood or any thing else, and perhaps will not, as she is a hard-hearted woman, I
would still hope to find others that would cheerfully act a contrary part. My
situation is of a peculiar kind. -- I have got work to do: -- I am both able
and willing, nay, anxious to do it -- but daily prevented for some




(...) LIST OF BURIALS In the several Grave-Yards of the City and Liberties of
PHILADELPHIA, During the Months of August, September, and October, 1797.
From the Records of Clergymen, Clerks, Sextons, etc.

CHRIST-CHURCH BURIAL GROUND.
Aug. 7. Alexander Allaire. 8. A child of Jacob Vanseyver. 10. Wife of William
Colt. 13. James Campbell. A child of William Mason. 15. A child of Thomas
Smith. A child of John Cloer. 18. A child of William Bond. 19. A child of Peter
Fritz. 22. Robert Dickson. A child of James Wilson. A child of Thomas Amos. 24.
Wife of James Ash. Joseph C. Fisher. Sept. 1. A child of Peter Grining. 3. A
child of William King. 4. John Harrison. 7. A child of Thomas Millard. Joseph
Reed. 9. Wife of Charles Williams. 1^. A child of Richard Marlowe. Sept. 14.
Thomas Noy Oswald. 18. Elizabeth Oswald. 19. Hannah Marshall. 22. A child of
Joseph Reed. 23. A child of David Hayfield Cunningham. 24. Cristiana Cormick.
Abraham Penrose. 27. William Heysham. Oct. 2. Wife of Eli Vallette. 6. Dr.
Benger Dobel. A child of John Cloer. 10. Susannah Hopkins. 11. William Dunwick.
13. William Sheerof. A child of Jacob Earnest. 25. A son of Andrew Bonner.
William Cox. 26. John Wit, Printer. 27. Robert Feariss. 30. Thomas Leaming.
Total 41.

ST. PETER's CHURCH BURIAL GROUND.
Aug. 3 Mrs. Smith, widow of Mr. Thomas Smith -- yellow fever. 4. John Brusher
-- y. fever. A still born. 5. A boy of Capt. Croch's -- said to be the scurvy.
Elizabeth Murry, daughter of Alexander Murry -- said to be the hives. 6.
Nathaniel Lewis -- yellow fever. Aug 8. James Searle-decoy Aug. 8 An infant son
of Mr. Hartly. 10. James Sennett -- yellow fever. A boy named Stuart. 13.
William Mason, from Edward Thomson's, Vernon-street -- yellow fever. 14. Capt.
Staunton -- from the g^ol. Richard Peter Smith -- yellow fever. Aug. 16. Mary
Ruston -- decay. 17. A son of Mr. Smith, porter -- flux. 19. Hannah Stackhouse
-- yellow fever. 21. A still born 22. Catharine Much, wife of Jeremiah Much --
childbirth. 24. A son of Anthony Cuthbert -- yellow fever. 25. George Harris; a
lad -- yellow fever. 26. Robert Watson, son of Samuel Watson -- yellow fever.
27. Elizabeth Pollard -- old age. James M'Dugan -- yellow fever. 30. A son of
Daniel Smith -- flux. Samuel Cummings -- yellow fever. Sept. 2. Mrs. Waln,
mother of John Waln -- y. fever. 3. Catharine Mason, daughter of Philip Mason
-- decay. Sept. 4. A child of Jeremiah Much -- 12 days. 5. A son of Peter Cook
-- hives 7. Clementine Loyons, wife of Patrick Loyons -- decay. 10. Elizabeth
Cole -- y. fever. 13. Robert Biddison -- y. fever 18. Mrs. Buster, wife of
Henry Buster -- yellow fever. 22. A widow, daughter of Col. Nichola -- yellow
fever. 30. A daughter of Captain West -- yellow fever. Oct. 2. Benjamin Smith,
son of James B. Smith -- yellow fever. 4. Arthur Steward -- y fever. 10. John
Wilcocks -- dropsy. 14. John Morgan -- y. fever. 18. Dr. John Hunt -- y. fever.
29. George M'Key -- y. fever. A still-born A daughter of John Harland.
Total 43

ST. PAUL's CHURCH BURIAL GROUND.
From August 9 to October 28.

AUGUST.
Edward Drase. James Ferguson's wife. Francis Duchamp's child. Conrad Eckard.
John Kollock. A son of Thomas Bowen. Dr. Jacob Thompson.


SEPTEMBER.
Mrs. Thompson. Thomas Bowen. James Smithers, jun. Daughter of Anthony Fannen.
Dr. Samuel Shober. Matthew Parks's child. Mr. Burk.


OCTOBER.
William Colly's child. Hannah Woodin. Capt. Thomas Kenney's child.


Total 17.

FIRST PRESBYTERIAN BURIAL GROUND.
Aug. 4. Susanna Savage. 5. Elisha H Hall. 6. Joseph Taggart. 7. William Patton
-- a child. 17. Ana Wilson. 18. John Ashmead -- a child. 20. Caroline Valance;
a child. Aug 22. Martha Campbell; a child. 23. John M'Pharland -- a child.
Elizabeth Sutter. 25. Capt. John Mease, jun. 27. Catharine Alexander. 31.
Martha Lindze. Sept. 2. John Smith -- a child. 5. Robert Patton -- a child. 9.
Capt. James Ewing. 10. Sarah Gallaway -- a child. Ann Waters. 11. Mary
Alexander -- a child. 12. Edw. Thompson -- a child. 19. Martha Hoover -- a
child. John M'Crea. 21. James Carry. Sept. 27. Stuart Wood. Oct. 2. William
Thompson. 3. Ann Miller -- a child. 8. Ann M'Crea. 9. John Marshall -- aged 10
years. 28. Catharine Ballanton.


Total 29.

Twelve of this number died of the Fever.

SECOND PRESBYTERIAN BURIAL GROUND.
AUGUST.
Elizabeth Robinson, 10 months. Elizabeth Gaw, 19 months, William Watson, 19
months. Sarah Jones, 21 years. Benjamin Smith, 34 years. Mrs. M'Intoch, 34
years. James Wright, 11 years. Thomas Nevil, 76 years.


SEPTEMBER.
Mrs. Morchen, 45 years. Mrs. Morchen's daughter, 9 years. Luke M'G^aw, 40
years. William Kirkpatrick, 37 years. Matthias Slaymaker, 50 years. Margaret
Fenno, 15 years. A child of Thomas Mullin, 11 mo. Ruth Fenno, 19 years. William
Hall, (Stranger) 25 years.


OCTOBER.
Mrs. Smith, 73 years. Joseph Newark, (Stranger) ^4 years. Mrs. Hall,
(Stranger) 23 years. A child of Mrs Larcom, 4 years. Samuel Fenno 49 years.
Hugh Sterling, (Stranger) ^3 years. A child of Mr. Davis, 4 weeks. A child of
James Whithed, 3 years. Thomas Hunter, 9 years. A child of Mr. Buchanan, 6
days. John Clark, 38 years. Joan M'Fail.


Total 29.

THIRD PRESBYTERIAN BURIAL GROUND.
Aug. 1. Wife of Alexander Brady. 2. James Lumsden. 5. Peter Stingbar -- fever.
6. A child of Widow Bellos. 10. William Pinkerton. 11. A child of Samuel
M'Clernan. A child -- named Mary Noble. Wife of Conrad Been. 13. Henry Smith --
fever. 16. Nelly --; from Mr. Latimer's -- fever. A child of Elihu Mee^er. 17.
A daughter of Nelly --; (Mr. Latimer's housekeeper.) Mary M'Culloh. 19. A child
of David Tittermary. Aug. 22 A child of Francis Jack. 23. William Pinkerton,
son of John Pinkerton, ironmonger. Mr. Calpin -- consumption. 26 Mary Ewing --
fever. 29. Margaret Noble. 30. Margaret Scott, widow -- fever. Mr. Smith --
brother to John Smith, Lombard Street. Sept. 5. A daughter of the late Widow
Scott -- fever. 10. Mrs. Thompson -- fever. 13. Paul Barns -- fever. 18. Daniel
Boyd -- fever. 21. John Blair, New Market -- fever. Sept. 21. Murdoch M'Kinsey
-- fever. A child. 28. Conrad Been -- fever. Hannah Donagan -- fever. 24. Son
of Conrad Been -- fever. 25. Wife of John M'Mullin -- fever. Daniel M'Donnold.
A child of Capt. Hughes. 26. A son of David Thomas -- fever. 27. Mrs. Spinlove,
Fifth-str. fever. 28. A child of Capt. Hughes. 29. Andrew Wilson -- fever. 30.
George Thomas -- fever. Oct. 3. Captain Huble -- consumption. Oct. 4. A child
of James Cumings. 6. Wife of Thomas Cochley -- fever. Agnes M'Cr^^^y -- fever.
9. Richard Bee^^^ -- fever. 10. Mary Perkeson. David Thomas -- fever. 14. Wife
of William Causey. 15. Thomas Nilson -- fever. 16. David White -- fever. 17.
Son of Robert Dunlap -- fever. 18. Samuel Davison -- fever. 20. James Cordner.
A child. 21. Wife of John Serah. 23. Sister-in-law to Capt. Robert Shields. 25.
Catharine Skellenger -- fever.


Total 56.

SCOTS PRESBYTERIAN BURIAL GROUND.
Aug. 12. Capt. Bell's wife. 14. Mrs. Duncan. Sept. 11. John Somerville. 16.
Mrs. Boyd. 19. John Somerville's daughter. 20. Michael Somerville. 25. Mr.
Davison. Oct. 1. Thomas Forsyth. 4. Mr. Gibbs's child. Dr. William Annan. 7.
John Logan's wife. 8. A child of John M'Pherson. 12. John M'Pherson's wife. 15.
A child of Hugh Scrachton. 22. John Cowan.


Total 15.

ASSOCIATE CHURCH BURIAL GROUND.
AUGUST.
John Bain, aged 32.


SEPTEMBER.
Mrs. Cooper. Mrs. Jamison, aged 36. Elizabeth Colvil, aged 45.


OCTOBER.
James Patterson, aged about 40. A young man -- name unknown.


Total 6.

ST. MARY'S CHAPEL BURIAL GROUND.
Aug. 1. Catharine Colnan. 3. Terence Flanagan. 4. Philip M'Dede. Geo. Pigott.
5. John E. Clark -- a child. Asselin Dessables. Aug. 8. Adam Haufman. 9. Sarah
Dyer -- a child. 10. Ann Mullowny -- a child. 14. William M'Fee -- a child.
Mary Ramsey 16. Bridget Welsh -- a child. Aug. 17. Owen M'Kervy. John Hurley --
a child. Martha Guinemert -- a child. 18 Catharine Anderson -- a child. 21.
Patrick Boil -- a child. 24. Jame Williams. Jerome Walnut. 26. Cornelius
Rogers. 27. Frances -- a child. Sally M'Cabe. 28. John Conner. 29. Daniel
Steiler. 30. Mary Melun. Sept. 1. Eliz. Sawyer -- a child. William Boil. 2.
Catharine M'Cauly. 3. Hugh M'Cauly. Ann Timony. 4. Valentine Peacan. 7. William
Guiry -- a child. 9. Miles Rourke. 11. Francis Revel. Eliz. Carroll. John
Bethridge. Sarah Robinson. 12. Eliz. Smith. Edward Barry -- a child. 13.
Margaret Burns. 14. Eleanor Riley. Eliza Dunn -- a child. 18. John Victor
Journel. 20. Mary Carroll. Matt. M'Grane -- a child. 23. Patrick Miller. John
Green. 24. Maurice Burns. 25. Susanna Bonell. Henry Snyder. Sept. 26. Eliz.
Hungary. 28. Cath Copia. Michael Gallagher. Cornelius Boil. 29. Patrick
M'Cauley. William Harkins. John Griffin -- a child. Eliza M'Cabe -- a child.
30. John Scully. John M'Enclis. Oct. 2. John Kelly. Lewis Sardon. 3. Isabella
White. Mary Kean. Barney Boil. 4. Florence M'Carthy. 5. Hippolite Anglais. 6.
Ann Stewart. 7. Bridget Ward. Catharine Lynam. 8. Grace Boil. Catharine Ward
-- a child. 9. Mary Sarazen -- a child. Owen M'Anestry. 10. Louisa Myers. Rose
Monday. 11. Mary Mullen. 12. Jane Lawless. 13. Dominick Monday. 14. Sarah
Arnold. 16. William Lawless. Margaret M'Farlane. 19. William Milly -- a child.
Timothy Tamalby. 20. James Kean. Jeremiah Mahony. 21. William Snyder. 26.
Bernard Cassty. Mary Ann M'Carthy.


Total 89.

TRINITY CHURCH BURIAL GROUND.
Aug. 5. John Deip. 7. John Lampau. 19. Francis Galatean. Wm. Burjeley Sermaise
-- a child. Maria Bouvier. 25. Christopher Lambert. 29. John Heedler. Catharina
Vican -- a child. Sept. 1. George Bastian -- a child. Henrichs de Beavois -- a
child. 4. Francis Hamelin -- a child. 9. Jeremi G'evardan. Sept. 10. Catharine
Smeul. 13. Francis Lourniere. 14. Catharine Prenuch. 17. Anthony Basly. Oct. 1.
Nicholas Lering. 4 Clara Mole. Catharine Omelon. 14. John Pardoux. 15. George
Radix 24. John Duval. 29. Charles Morel. Laurens Smith. Catharine Standel.


Total 25.

FRIENDS BURIAL GROUND.
8th Mo. (called August.)
1. A child of Thomas Cowperthwaite. 5. A child of Moetitia Davis. 8 A child of
William Heart. 10. A child of Samuel Bonsal. 12. Widow Lydia Hanlon -- an
ancient woman. 13 A child of Samuel Harmar. 14 A child of John Corbit. 15 A
child of Joseph Justis. 16 A child of William North. A child of James Rowland.
17. A child of Jonathan Willis. 19. Daniel Williams. 24. William Oram's wife.
25. Caleb Ash. [This person was the first of this Society who died of the fever
-- those that follow, in this list, died generally of the same.] 26. Hannah
Howell. A child of Joseph Conro. 27. A child of Morris Dickinson. 28. A child
of John Wilson.


9th Mo. (called September.)
1. A child of Peter Barker. 2. John West. 3. Dr. Nicholas Way. Joseph Allen.
7. John Davis. 11. Mary Hendricks. 14. John Fimester. 15. Patrick Ogilby. 19.
Esther Nuttle. 20. John Stockdale. 22. Joshua Clibborn. 26. A child of Fabius
Brown. 27. A child of Lewis Tailor. 30. Mary Means. Elizabeth Wood.


10th Mo. (called October.)
1. Tamason Clifford. 2. A daughter of Hugh Roberts. 5. Rachel John's. 6.
William Millward. Abigail Wooddrop. 8. Abraham Roberts. 12. A daughter of Wm.
Vaughn. 13. Richard John's. Sarah Moran. Joseph Garwood. 15. Dr. Samuel
Pleasants. 17. Sevus Smith. 18. Capt. Benjamin Loxley. [Died near Darby.] 19. A
child of Samuel Fisher. 29. Hannah Williams.


11th Mo (called November.)
4. Sarah Fennington. 5. Hannah Rhoades. Robert Jordan. 9. A child of Joshua
Tyson.


Total 52.

FREE QUAKERS.
SEPTEMBER.
^. Isaac Wickersham, about 9 or 10 years of age, son of Abraham Wickermam --
of a dysentery.


OCTOBER
John Wetherill, son of Isaac Wetherill, aged 21 years -- died of the malignant
fever. John Goal, architect by profession; a native of Great Britain. -- Died
of the yellow fever James Logan, labourer, aged about 12 years. -- His death
occasioned by suffocation in a well. -- A native of Ireland, but served his
time in Jersey. Peter B^rier, a mariner; a native of Bourdeaux, in France; aged
45 years. Richard Hand, Printer. -- Died of a fever. James Tailor Thomas, son
of Samuel Thomas, aged 14 months. Died of teething. John Laver, son of John
Laver. -- Died of a consumption.


Total. 8

SWEDISH CEMETERY.
Grown Persons.
Aug. 3. A seaman, name not given, 24 years -- bilious fever. 4. Margaret,
widow of David Gonaway, 49 years -- decay, with final diarrhea. 8. William
Bows, 35 years -- decay. 11. Robert Batten, 30 years -- pleurisy, with long
previous debility. 14. John Croshan, 16 years -- fever, said to have arisen
from frequent swimming. 26. Catharine, wife of William Scott, 40 years -- sick
three weeks with a kind of jaundice. 28. Elizabeth widow of Isaac Middleton, 36
years. Sept. 16. Elizabeth, wife of Laurence Justis, p. 40; died in child bed.
17. Mary, wife of James Williams, 28 years -- sick two weeks, from walking too
much on a hot day. 21. Mary, wife of John Fealany, 32 years -- sick 6 days of
the fever; unwell a while before. 22. Wife of Asa Smith, 31 years; sick 5 or 6
days; fever; weakly before. William Stow; sick a few days in a fever; had got
wet in the river. 23. William Hutton, sixteen years; fever. 24. Mary, widow of
John Hutchinson, 62 years. Wife of Doctor Goss, of a long consumption. 29.
Hannah, wife of Nicholas Collin, 48 years; died on the 9th day in the fever.
30. Mary, daughter of the late John Sherwood, 13 years; ailing for 4 years, but
died of a fever in 8 days. Mary, wife of Joseph Pinore, 20 years; died in
childbed. Oct. 2. William Holden, 30 years; sick a year, with delirious
complaint. 4. William Tailor, 21 years; sick a week; came from Ireland two
years ago. John Potter, between 30 and 40 years; sick a few days. 8. Laurence
Justis, 42 years; fever in 5 days. 13. James Bowden, 34 years; sick 7 days;
took cold in the water. Martha, wife of George Cooper, 37 years; sick 6 days.
17. Samuel Howard, near 30 years; sick 7 days. Isabella, daughter of David
Witel, 22 years; died of fever. 18. Henry Miller, 25 years. 29. David Witel,
father of Isabella, 60 yeas; sick 8 days in fever. This family from Ireland 2
or 3 years ago. 30. Mary, widow of Capt. David Semple, 40 years; decay.


Children.
Aug. 1. A stillborn son of George Cooper. 4. Mary, daughter of John White, 18
months. 6. William, son of Widow Hammil, 19 months. 7. John, son of Hugh
Macbride, 3 months. 8. John, son of -- M'Kare, 4 months. 14. Andrew, son of
Abel Anderson, 2 years. 18. Isaac, stillborn son of Isaac Hozey. 28. A son of
John Selx, 16 m. 30. Thomas Newlin, 8 years; rash fever. A daughter of Nehemiah
Agers, 2 years. 31. A son of James Snell, 1 year Sept. 11. Thomas, son of
William Van Neaman, 3 years. Sept. 12. John, son of -- Basset. 17. Martha,
daughter of Samuel Carpenter, eight years; inflammation in the head. 24. Mary,
daughter of Ezekiel German, 10 years; sick 4 days in the fever. 30. A son of
Robert Little, 2 months. Sept. 30. A child of -- Poulnot, 5 weeks.


Children of Capt. Francis Grice.
Sept. 23. George, 3 years. 28. Rebecca, 10 months Oct. 6. Elizabeth, 8 years;
died in fever.


Total 49

GERMAN LUTHERAN BURIAL GROUND.
AUGUST.
Balthazar Ernrick's child. Peter Kuhn's child. Jacob Hantz's child. Widow
Best's child. Gottlieb Myer's child. Conrad C. Timanus's child. John Norton's
child. Stephen Lippincott's child. Henry Keel's child. Isaac Keller's child.
Peter Rose's child. John Hutz's child. John War's child. Lewis Treichel's wife.
William Buckius's child. Widow Rittleson. John Hess's child. John Diamond's
child. Peter Miller. Adam West. Widow Young. Henry Deemer. Widow Roth. Daniel
Burkhart's child. Jacob Senderling's child. John Fisler's child. Martin Trost's
child. Caspar Wall's wife. Godfrey Lentz's child. George Reiche's child. Widow
Ott. William Mudgeon's child. George Bantlion's child. Lewis Uber -- drowned at
Frankford. Christopher Hartranse's child. Widow Buck. John Ubel's child. George
Schneider's child. Adam Mitts.


SEPTEMBER.
Godfrey Zargebel. John Frysmuth. Elivan Dickinson's wife. A servant girl of
Mr. Loxley. James Baker's child. Abraham Stewart's child. John Peck's mother.
Godfrey Rapp's daughter's child. George Will, butcher. John Plum's child.
Frederick Kessler's mother. Baltus Grove's mother. Adam Weaver's child. Martin
Will, butcher. Nicholas Day's child. Conrad Deal. John Kerr's child. Peter
Grove. Baltus Kantzler. -- Ran over by a cart. Nicklain Gracey. John Griner's
child John Lingcor's child. Jacob Louden's child. Henry Roorman's child. John
Dobelbower, Printer; son of Frederick Dobelbower. Baltus Clymer.


OCTOBER.
Mrs. Clymer. William Really, blacksmith. Widow Sansfelter. Peter Hetz. Jacob
Schisler's child. John Garrison. -- Mockberger. Adam Foulke, blacksmith. Widow
Plum. Jesse Friend. John Miller, blacksmith. Michael Lutz. John Griner's child.
Jesse Turner's child. Barbary Sent. Ludwick Clouse's child. Frederick Gash.
Jacob Greor's child. Ludwick Clouse's child. Elias Keel's child. John Peck's
child. Widow Mouse, (Harrowgate.) Peter Dick's child.


Total 88.

German Reformed Presbyterian Burial Ground.
August, September, and October.
Jacob Neip's wife, George Freytag, Ludwick Hiesp, Robert Macfield, Susanna
Paul, Peter Deal's daughter, Daniel Walter, Widow Werner, Christian Fiss's
daughter, Mr. Baker's child, Jacob Shermer's child, Widow Wind, Nicholas
Knauff, George Heans's child, Michael Kinsinger's child, Mr. Dealman's child,
Widow Knauff, Christina Murdick, David Maesser, John Murdick, Widow Hosh,
Michael Kinsinger's child, Widow Smith, Anthony Balte's child, Anthony Balte's
wife, Jeremiah Deal's child, Jacob Gaerdner's child, Anthony Balte's child,
William Christi, John Stubert, John Stup's child.


Total 31.

UNITED BRETHREN, (known also by the name MORAVIANS.)
AUGUST.
John Meerwein, a child.


SEPTEMBER.
Sibylla Claus, a married woman. Sarah Payran, a married woman.


OCTOBER.
Eleonora Sibylla Claus, a child 6 weeks old.


Total 4.

BAPTISTS BURIAL GROUND.
Aug. 5. Esther Jones. 15. Nathaniel Dickeson. 17. Hannah Spong. Sept. 3.
Margaret Jackway -- a child. 11. Wife of John Grigery -- fever. 12. Son of
Widow Basset -- a child. Peter Briler -- fever. 15. Son of Thomas Steward a
child -- fever. Sept. 17. Dr. Samuel Jones -- fever. 19. William Davis --
fever. 24. William Robenson. 29. John S. Holmes; a child -- fever. 30.
Elizabeth Holmes -- fever: Oct. 4. Widow Penrose's child. 5. Samuel Burkalow,
jun. -- fever. 8 John Merriam -- a child. 20. Martha Davis. 24. Stephen Engel.
Oct. 24. Jonathan Rose. 25. Catharine Miles, wife of Colonel Samuel Miles, of
Cheltenham township -- formerly Mayor of this city.


Total 20.

METHODISTS BURIAL GROUND.
AUGUST.
Daniel Reese's child. William Stubbs's child. Mrs. Williams's son. Abigail
Adams's son; a young man. Abisha Chattin's child. James Gates's child. Isaac
Jackson, sexton of Ebenezar, the Methodist Church In Second-street, Southwark.


SEPTEMBER.
Isaac Gordon. Elizabeth Burns. John Davison. Elizabeth Bradley. Alley Mills.


OCTOBER.
David Landreth's child. Catharine Burk's son; a young man. James Wallace.
James Wallace was buried on the 7th of October; his wife followed his remains
to the place of its interment; on the 11th of the same month (four days after)
she was a corpse and buried.
Ann Wallace. Sarah Carrel's child. Jacob Knouse's servant girl.


Total 18.

UNIVERSALISTS BURIAL GROUND.
Capt. Drisdale -- fever. The wife of Mr. Webb. A child of Mr. Bangor. Widow
Van Ness.


Total 4.

AFRICAN CHURCH (St. Thomas's) BURIAL GROUND.
Elizabeth Jackson. John Richman. Cuffe Jordan.


Total 3.

AFRICAN EPISCOPAL CHURCH (Bethel) BURIAL GROUND.
Grown Persons.
Grace Nuby -- consumption. Catharine Lancaster -- fever.


Adult.
A child of Charles Stewart.


Total 3.

JEWS BURIAL GROUND.
Myer Heart. Nathan Barnett.


Total 2.

POTTERS' FIELD.
The names are not mentioned, as they were not taken at the time the persons
died.

Whites. Blacks. August 19 20 September 13 8 October 9 6 41 34 -- Total 75.

KENSINGTON BURIAL GROUND.
AUGUST.
Joseph Bowers, shipwright. Jacob Stiner. Peggy Lins. George Washington, of
North Carolina. John Fry's child. Mr. Baker. Capt. Frankling's wife. Andrew
Himes's child. Mr. Wilson. Thomas Rile.


SEPTEMBER.
Mrs. Bowers's son. A Man, (name unknown) by trade a blue-dyer. Enoch Morgan's
child. Charles Mathews. Polly Himes. Jonathan Eaton's child. John Keays's
child. John King. Peter Kene. A poor Woman. [Name not mentioned.] James
Johnson's wife. George M'Donnald. Charles Fleming's son. George Bakoven. Henry
Apt. Henry Apt's wife. John Haron's child. Jacob Peasrer's wife. Nelly Langue's
child. Yolington Sork. Lewis Garlinger's child. Mr. Broomfield's child. Sophia
Shripe. Charles Renseimer. Mr. Andrews. Christopher Painter. John Brown's
child. Elizabeth Tailor. John Carey. Isaac Matlock. John Jessy's child. John
Rile. Matthias Sheets. Mr. Pennel's wife. Christian Frail. Isaac Starr. Joseph
Bamont. John Shepherd's child.


OCTOBER.
Kitty Siders. Andrew Heysinger's wife. William Dougherty's child. Edward
Sutton. Matthew Cramer. Daniel Freehouse's wife. John Murel. Mrs. Hitner.
Samuel Penick's child. John Douglass. Benjamin Robinson, Hannah Hager.


Total 60.

COAT's BURIAL GROUND.
Mrs. Dennis, widow of Richard Dennis, dec. of Southwark. Jacob Miller,
shipwright, of Kensington.


Total 2.

PFEIFFER's BURIAL GROUND, in Poplar-Lane, Northern-Liberties; belonging to the
Family of Dr. Pfeiffer.
A grandchild of Dr. Pfeiffer.


Total 1.

CITY HOSPITAL BURIAL GROUND.
AUGUST.
Patrick Thomas, John Foulth, Andrew Caldwell, Henry Philips, Patrick M'Gahy,
Christiner Sutherland, Joseph White, James Steward, Maurice Wurts, Daniel
Packer, Mary Tate, John T. Woods, John Scharlot, John Fleetwood, John
M'Laughlin, Mary Fercheson, John Wiggins, Charles Malone, Robert Rattoon,
William Hubbs, Mary Chatham, William Aulhorn.


Report from the 31st of August to the 1st of September, Christian Honn, John
Corris, James Simpson.


From the 1st to the 2d of September, in the morning, Dead -- None.

From the 2d to the 3d of September, in the morning, Robert Parks, George
Trimble, Susanna -- Mr. M'Cleod's Negro.


From the 3d to the 4th of September, in the morning, Margaret M'Cleod.


From the 4th to the 5th of September, in the morning, William Henderson, Jacob
Shoemaker, Robert M'Gowan.


From the 5th to the 6th of September, in the morning, Nathaniel Foster, Mary
Ellis -- aged 16 months.


From the 6th to the 7th of September, in the morning, James Mecklin, John Toy,
Thomas Butt, John Brown.


From the 7th to the 8th of September, in the morning, Henry Hamilton, Mary W.
Farland, Adam Gaslinger, William Collins.


From the 8th to the 9th of September, in the morning, James Reynolds, Francis
Dougherty, Peggy Silcox.


From the 9th to the 10th of September, in the morning, Elizabeth Ellis, Nelly
Corrall, Samuel Peoples, Stufil Ryenfult.


From the 10th to the 11th of September, in the morning, William M'Donald, Paul
Long, Catharine Turner, Hugh Parry, Joseph Azani.


From the 11th to the 12th of September, in the morning, Daniel Rourke, Peter
Smith, William Silby, Leonard Brown, William Robertson, Sarah Black, Abner
Cartwright.


From the 12th to the 13th of September, in the morning, Thomas Lesly, John
Chapman, Joseph Wood, Israel Vanlieur.


From the 13th to the 14th of September, in the morning, Jane M'Farland, Hannah
Jackson, Samuel Bell, Ann Jane Fottrill.


From the 14th to the 15th of September, in the morning, William Hartran,
Patrick Row, Lyman Cady, Luke Williams, Elizabeth Hitner, Elizabeth Boyd,
Henry Fit.


From the 15th to the 16th of September, in the morning, Christian Schultz,
Henry Snyder, John Lindon, Eliza Gibson, Thomas Marshall, Ben -- a Negro,
George Wilkins.


From the 16th to the 17th of September, in the morning, James Field, Alexander
Fowler, John Cowans, Andrew Prenhou, Mary Kisney, John M'Farland.


From the 17th to the 18th of September, in the morning, Elisha Vagur.


From the 18th to the 19th of September, in the morning, John Dally, Elizabeth
Schryht, Mary Maglone, Benjamin Johnson.


From the 19th to the 20th of September, in the morning, Arnold Craigh, John
Fletcher, Patrick Dougherty, Daniel M'Carter, James Johnson, Mary -- a Negro.


From the 20th to the 21st of September, in the morning, Died -- None.

From the 21st to the 22d of September, in the morning, Died -- None.

From the 22d to the 23d of September, in the morning, Elizabeth Smith,
Elizabeth Cotter, Caty Culinel, Barney O'Neal, Richard Davis, James Sutton,
Edward Mager.


From the 23d to the 24th of September, in the morning, George Speice, Robert
Shaw, Andrew M'Kew, Anthony Jose.


From the 24th to the 25th of September, in the morning, Cuffe Jordan, Patrick
Fleming, Rachel Tennet, Nelly Duncan, Ann M'Laughlin, Thomas Rosseter,
Elizabeth Miller.


From the 25th to the 26th of September, in the morning, Laurence Huddlestone,
John Chapman, William Hamilton.


From the 26th to the 27th of September, in the morning, Mary Dennis, Richard
Jones -- a Negro.


From the 27th to the 28th of September, in the morning, Elizabeth Dickey,
Francis Ward, Cannon Massey, Peter Poliston, William Charles.


From the 28th to the 29th of September, in the morning, Mary Carwell, Mary
Neal, Letty Smith.


From the 29th to the 30th of September, in the morning, Guy Blakely, Tabitha
Walton, Rebecca Hubbard, -- Modestienne -- a Frenchman.


From the 30th of Sept. to the 1st of October, in the morning, Michael Kenner,
Theobald M'Mahon, Hugh Dougherty, Mary Patterson, Thomas Morrison, William
Norris.


From the 1st to the 2d of October, in the morning, Andrew Ridsley, William
M'Crerey.


From the 2d to the 3d of October, in the morning, Jane Montgomery --
consumptive. James Moore, Clarissa Graham. Margaret Gueron.


From the 3d to the 4th of October, in the morning, David Smith -- a Negro.
Susanna Reily -- a child. Neal Gallaspie.


From the 4th to the 5th of October, in the morning, Herman Schas.


From the 5th to the 6th of October, in the morning, Died -- None.

From the 6th to the 7th of October, in the morning, Christian Overstag,
William Cosgrave, Sarah Ross, Elizabeth Morgan, M. Vanteville, Mary Read, H.
Campbell.


From the 7th to the 8th of October, in the morning, Died -- None.

From the 8th to the 9th of October, in the morning, Jane Rusk, Michael Toy.


From the 9th to the 10th of October, in the morning, Died -- None.

From the 10th to the 11th of October, in the morning, Elizabeth Row, Donald
M'Kenzie, Benjamin Charles -- an Indian.


From the 11th to the 12th of October, in the morning, Elizabeth O'Neal, Maria
Franks.


From the 12th to the 13th of October, in the morning, James Colhoun.


From the 13th to the 14th of October, in the morning, Died -- None.

From the 14th to the 15th of October, in the morning, Died -- None.

From the 15th to the 16th of October, in the morning, Daniel Ross, Henry -- a
Negro, Ann Reilley.


From the 16th to the 17th of October, in the morning, Catharine Cooley, Daniel
Ross.


From the 17th to the 18th of October, in the morning, James Fairchild.


From the 18th to the 19th of October, in the morning, John Row, Mary Ellis,


From the 19th to the 20th of October, in the morning, John Curran.


From the 20th to the 21st of October, in the morning, Hugh M'Mullin, Laetitia
Hall, Catharine Buchanan, Peggy M'Donnald, Daniel M'Kenzie.


From the 21st to the 22d of October, in the morning, Elizabeth White.


From the 22d to the 23d of October, in the morning, Dead -- None.

From the 23d to the 24th of October, in the morning, Edward Edwards.


From the 24th to the 25th of October, in the morning, Died -- None.

October 26 -- the Board of Health did not meet this forenoon.

From the 26th to the 27th of October, in the morning, James Wood. Jacob Side.


Total 184.

DIED in the MARINE HOSPITAL, on State-Island.
Sept. 4. Patrick Cassidey, ship Hind, at the Fort. 5. William Brown,
Philadelphia. 6. William Hornsby, ship Johanna, Lisbon. French girl, Mr.
Riault, New Jersey. 7. Joseph Mattis Stoppih, ship America, Philadelphia. 8.
Joseph Unsworth, brig Peggy, bound out. 15. John Brown, Philadelphia. 22.
Thomas Elliot, ship Columbus, Havanna. 23. Alexander Sutherland, brig
Welcome-Return, Savanna. 26. Henry Miller, schooner Nancy, George-Town,
South Carolina. Oct. 2. James Rogers, ship Commerce, St. Bartholomew's. 6.
Erich Strombourge, Barque Gustavus Adolphus, Philadelphia. 8. Peter Sundstrum,
do. do. 13. Frederick Tailor, brig Concordia, Italy. 17. Thomas Scott, schooner
Peggy, Savanna.


Total 15.

DEATHS not mentioned in any of the foregoing Lists.
Aug. Mr. M'Dowell. Sept. 5. Archibald Cumming Craig. 8. Lewis List, Messenger
of the War-Office of the United States. 9. A man (to all appearance a a
seafaring man) died suddenly in a sit in the street. Timothy Russel, Printer.
10. Nathaniel Barnett. George Dormon, of the Custom-House. Sept. 11. John
Turner; a native of England. 12. Mr. Lockwood, sailing-master of the U. States
Frigate. In the Pennsylvania Hospital, Manus M'Gee. 21. At Bordentown, Robert
Carry, of this city. 22. At Cheltenham, Ann Carmick, of this city. At
Social-Hall, Alexander Watt. Oct. 4. Charles Davies. 7. At Haddonfield, Dr.
Evan Clement, Druggist. John Potter, of this city, late of London. Oct. 11.
William Gould. John Horn. Mr. Fleming, of Lamberton, New Jersey.


Total 19.

Total of the Burials in the several Grave-Yards of the City and Liberties of
Philadelphia.
Christ Church 41 St. Peter's Church 43 St. Paul's Church 17 First Presbyterian
29 Second Presbyterian 29 Third Presbyterian 56 Scots Presbyterian 15 Associate
Church 6 St. Mary's Chapel 89 Trinity Church 25 Friends 52 Free Quakers 8
Swedes 49 German Lutheran 88 German Reformed Presbyterian 31 United Brethren,
(known also by the name Moravians) 4 Total carried forward 582 Total brought
forward 582 Baptists 20 Methodists 18 Universalists 4 St. Thomas's African
Church 3 African Episcopal Church, Bethel 3 Jews 2 Potters' Field 75 Kensington
60 Coats's 2 Pfeiffer's 1 City Hospital 184 Marine Hospital, on State-Island 15
Deaths not mentioned in any of the foregoing lists 19 Aggregate Total 988

The List of DEATHS, during the months of August, September, and October, the
period within which the Fever was more or less violent, we have been careful to
obtain, from the records of Ministers, Sextons, etc. and though we have lists
from some graveyards not noticed, through hurry, in the public papers, still we
do not find so many victims to the contagion, as appeared to be the aggregate
reported by the public papers. -- We refer to the different sources from which
we obtained our information, for the authenticity of ours, in preference to
others. Not, however, without liberally admitting, that it was owing to the
confused state of the people who rendered lists -- the vast trouble and time
necessary for daily receiving them -- and blunders of grave-diggers,
particularly their reporting that bodies would be buried at one time that
perhaps would not be interred for several hours afterward; and so, perhaps,
were enumerated twice. These observations we make, as a justification for our
accuracy, that naturally, by comparison, might be called in question.

DONATIONS RECEIVED By the Commissioners appointed to alleviate the Distresses
OF THE CITIZEN OF PHILADELPHIA, etc. 1797.
Dols. Cts. Mordecai Lewis 100 Thomas M'Euen 100 Thomas Hale 20 William Buckley
40 John Nixon 20 Robert Bridges 20 Joseph Crukshank 50 Jonathan Dawes, etc. 11
William Bingham 300 Dr. Luff 8 Cash 5 Samuel Blodget 200 William Davidson 20
Josiah Hewes 100 Dr. Heylin 8 William Dawson and Son 30 James Wills 10 Cash 20
Clerks of the Bank of N. America 50 Henry Toland 50 James Yard 100 John Miller,
stone cutter 50 Clerks of the Bank of N. America 3 Joshua Byron 50 Benjamin
Wilson 20 Thomas M. Willing 100 Daniel Hartung 25 Hannah Pemberton 40 Robert
Dawson 20 Stephen Girard 100 Thomas Moore 100 Montgomery and New-bold 50
Abraham Kintsing, junr. 10 Charles Wharton 100 James Sawyer 10 James Martin 20
Cash 10 Joseph D. Drinker 20 Charles Bitters 20 Nathan Shepherd 35 Dr. Adam
Kuhn 100 George Davis 20 Clerks of the Bank of the United States 130 John Nixon
(additional) 100 Stephen Beasley (Southwark) 20 Archibald M'Call 100 Cash 20
William Rawle 50 William Bell (a labourer) 50 Sarah Lea 30 Edward Burd 50
Curtis Clay 20 William M'Mutrie 20 George Irwine 10 Cash from a friend (per Mr.
Dawson) 30 Nathan Baker 10 Samuel Merrick 10 Dr. John Redman 20 From the
Vicinity of Frankford. Dols. Cts. Isaac Wharton 100 Pattison Hartshorne 100
Robert Smith 100 Robert Waln 100 Nicholas Waln 100 Godfrey Haga 50 Conyngham,
Nesbitt and Co. 100 Miers Fisher 50 Samuel Howell 50 Samuel M. Fox 50 David
Lewis 50 Jesse Waln 50 William Bell 50 Thomas Greaves 50 Samuel Breck 50 James
Ash 50 Benjamin R. Morgan 50 George Roberts 50 Ebenezer Large 50 Daniel Smith
30 Abraham Van Beuren 20 John Waddington 20 John Barry 20 Abijah Dawes 15 Isaac
Austin 5 Joseph P. Norris 50 DARBY. George Latimer 50 Jesse Sharples 30
Benjamin Say 50 Isaac Lloyd 40 S. York 20 H. Sparks, junr. 20 Captain Williams
5 H. Sparks, sen, 5 Isaac Price 30 David Rawn 10 James Strawbridge 50 James S.
Coxe 20 Peter Brown 100 Robert Revetts 10 Thomas Randall 5 William Bell 20
James Read 50 John Simpson 30 Cash 14 1 Matthew M'Connel 15 Alexander Fullerton
15 Peter Wykoff 50 George Weed 10 John D. G. Wachsmuth 50 Leopold Nottnagell 50
John M. Soullier 10 Thomas Leiper 25 Jacob G. Koch 100 Ann Bartram 5 William I.
Smith 50 John Palmer, junr. 5 Jacob Beninghove, junr. 10 Simeon Reynolds 5 Zeba
Barton 5 John Dougherty 5 Jacob Carver 5 Benjamin Paschall 10 James Millegan 10
Francis Markoe 20 Cash 10 William Levis 20 Cash 23 Curtis Lewis 3 George Ashton
20 Josiah Matlack 5 James Humphreys 8 Samuel Williams 10 William Sargeant 50
William Crammond 100 Charles Minifie 50 George Emlen 50 Cash from 3 Persons 45
Cash 5 Cash 30 Abraham Markoe 100 Eliza Powell 100 Ambrose Vasse 50 United
Society of Dunkers in and about Germantown. 83 The African Episcopal Church of
St. Thomas 43 91 Benjamin Fuller 50 Cash 10 Samuel Wetherill 50 John B.
Boardley 100 Jonathan T. Mifflin 20 Inhabitants of Mount Holly, and Citizens of
Philadelphia, then in and about there 300 Conrad Hanse 20 Elisha Gordon 10 Cash
3 Isaac Austin (additional) 20 John Coburn, rigger 20 George Schlosser 50
Thomas and John Clifford 50 Christopher Marshall (additional) 60 John Ross 100
Cash 5 Cash (per William Moulder) 5 18 Asheton and George Humphreys 50 Bickham
and Reese 60 Edmund Burns 25 Thomas Biggs 20 David Jackson 20 Sharp Delany 100
William Sansom 200 Elliston and John Perot 100 The Charity Sermons preached at
Germantown of Dr. Blair and Mr. Abercrombie (per Robert Hare and P. F.
Glentworth) 422 91 Thomas W. Francis 100 Elizabeth Dawson, Vine-street 2
William Sheaff 100 Levi Hollingsworth and Son 50 Committee of Northern
Liberties, Donations received by them. 50 Certain Citizens in and about
Trenton, viz. William Innes 30 Joseph Higbee 50 Robert Rainey 20 John Harrison
20 Joseph Brown 25 D. C. Claypoole 20 Michael Roberts 20 Samuel Baker 20 David
Jackson, junr. 10 William Innes, junr. 10 Philip M'Laughlin 8 John Lindsay 4
John Patten 2 Cash 2 Esther Cox 24 Ebenezer Cowell 2 Mary Cowell 3 Joseph
Habersham 15 Cash 5 James Thorn 1 Cash 3 Olivia Sproat 5 Timothy Pickering 25
Samuel Boys 10 Inhabitants of Trenton (per James Ewing) 370 The Indian Corn
gevin by C. Marshall, sold 24 Ebenezer Hazard 20 Cash 10 Dr. William Rogers 10
Clerks of the Bank of the United States (additional) 3 Certain Inhabitants of
Cheltenham. 61 35 Thomas H. Leuffer 25 Cash 10 Robert Coleman, Lancaster County
100 From Adam Lechler, and Workmen upon the Roads, under him, viz. Adam Lechler
1 Archibald Curry 1 Samuel Shaw 1 Hugh Roy 50 James Carr 50 Philip Ankerman 1
James Reily 50 Casper Sheffmeyer 50 Christopher Diel 50 Hilary Baker (Mayor) 20
Thomas Snowden's wife 10 George Nelson 60 Inhabitants of Haddonfield and
Citizens of Philadelphia there (per Thomas Redman) 409 55 From said T. Redman,
a Balance of money subscribed in 1793, and not then received 20 21 Inhabitants
of Wilmington and Brandywine, received in a letter from Joseph Warner, and John
White 411 38 John Guillemard, Esquire. (per P. Nicklin and Co.) 100 Certain
Citizens of Philadelphia, residing in Montgomery County, viz. James Pemberton
50 Samuel Morris 50 Isaac Parrish 20 James Cresson 20 Thomas Morgan 30 Andrew
Lenau 5 Frederick Haylor 2 John E. Cresson 8 John Care 6 Luke W. Morris 20
Thomas Shoemaker 20 William Pritchett 10 Israel Morris, junr. 20 Alexander
Wilcocks 40 From Citizens of Carlisle, viz. John Montgomery 10 James Hamilton
15 T. Duncan 15 D. Watts 10 William Lion 10 Robert Davidson 10 James Duncan 10
John Creigh 10 Robert Miller 10 Samuel A. M'Cosky 10 Dr. C. Nisbet 6 George
Kline 4 Samuel Postlethwaite 6 60 Charles Cooper 3 30 John Hughes 6 James
Armstrong 10 Ephraim Steel 4 Thomas Foster 2 20 George Logue 3 Samuel Lord 4
James Given 2 John Douglas 3 William Miller 3 30 Edward Magauran 3 Hugh Wilson
3 Charles Bovard 2 20 Joseph Hays 3 30 John Holmes 6 Charles M'Clure 6 David
Irvine 4 Samuel Gustine 5 Jacob Crever 1 James Lamberton 4 John Noble 1 William
Levis 2 William Irvine 10 Cash 2 From Radnor (per Simeon Matlack) 10 32 Henry
Hill 50 In a letter, signed a Negro 5 Huizinga Nesschett 40 Collection for Wood
(per T. Wistar and G. Pennock) 1104 10 Inhabitants of Abington and Citizens of
Philadelphia there. William Sitgreaves 30 James Whitehead 30 Ralph Peacock 30
Leeson and Joseph Simmons 30 John Maybin 30 Isaac Potts 30 John Sitgreaves 20
John R. Smith 20 James Gibson 20 William Flentham 20 William Redwood 20 Lydia
Gilpin 20 Robinson and Paul 20 Samuel Noble 15 Cash (from a Lady) 10 Thomas
Barnes, junr. 10 William Shannon 10 Isaac Rich 10 Abraham Colladay 10 Richard
Noble 10 William and Jonathan Leedom 10 Samuel Jones 10 Robert Hiltzheimer 5
Thomas Baker 5 Richard Robinson 5 Jonathan Tyson, junr. 5 Samuel Scholfield 5
Joseph Shoemaker 5 William Jones 4 James M'Calla 4 Dominic Sheridan 1 John C.
Wells 10 Cash (by the hands of William M. Smith) 30 Phineas Bond 100 Samuel
Wilcocks 20 Inhabitants of Germantown and Citizens of Philadelphia there, by
the hands of Gideon H. Wells (additional) 480 Citizens of Philadelphia, in
Blockly and Merion townships, and Inhabitants of said townships, as follows.
Charles Biddle 50 Richard Peter's 50 Col. Francis Johnson 20 David Jackson 15
Mrs. Harland 10 Algernon Roberts 15 David Roberts 10 Edward Roberts 10 Hugh
Knox 10 John Heaton 10 Thomas and Hugh Cooper 10 Mary Roberts 50 Thomas George
20 Jonathan Jones 20 Rachael Wharton 20 Jacob Jones 10 James Jones 10 Charles
Jervis 8 Jacob Zell 6 William Govett 6 William Roberts 6 Thomas Cochran 5 Enoch
Thomas 5 William Huzey 5 George Helmbold 5 Robert Roberts 5 John Price 5
Rebecca George 5 Richard Crane 5 William Jones 4 Joseph Price 4 Abel Thomas 4
Jesse Thomas 4 Henry Helmbold 4 John Thomas 4 Mary Streper 3 George Hirts 3
Isaac Bond 3 Thomas Goucher 4 20 David Zell 2 50 Phineas Roberts 2 Benjamin
Tunis 2 Jacob Latch 2 Mrs. Sheets 2 Jonathan Walton 2 John Thomas 2 Jacob
Morris 2 John Frailey 2 Lewis Thomas 2 Mary Gamble 2 Alexander Hoffman 1 55
Jacob Johnson 1 10 George Marshall 1 David Latch 1 John Rowland 1 George Grove
1 Frederick Grove 1 Isaac Hayn 1 Hannah Moore 1 Jacob Huffman 1 Christopher
Leech 1 Cash from sundry persons 18 James M'Henry, Secretary of War 50 Jacob
Beninghove 10 Robert Haydock (additional) 12 Benjamin Price 20 Certain
Inhabitants of Abington, by Thomas Barnes, junr. 11 70 Inhabitants of the
Borough of Lancaster, by Paul Zantzinger 720 4 From a number of Citizens then
at Lancaster, as follows. Philip Wager 50 Samuel Hayes 50 Aaron Levy 50 Michael
Keppele 50 W. Barton 20 Hyman Marks 20 George Lauman 20 Henry Miller 20
Benjamin S. Barton 10 Aaron Joseph 5 John Carrell 14 S. Gottshalkson 9 Isaac
Roush 5 Elizabeth Helm 20 Mrs. Rhea 10 Josiah H. Anthony 20 James Furze 5 Mark
Kaennel 5 Cash 3 10 Cash 15 Christopher Marshall (additional) 20 Joseph
Hutchins 10 John Singer 20 Cash (by Col. James Read) 20 Jonathan B. Smith 30
Israel Pleasants 25 Cash (from Manheim, Lancaster County) 4 71 Owen Jones 20
Caleb Carmalt 20 Jonathan Carmalt 20 Richard Rundle 100 Crook Stevenson 20 John
Barnes 10 Cash (by said Barnes) 20 Cash (additional from Cheltenham) 9 67 Cash
(additional from Germantown) 50 Cash (by Israel Israel) 20 Alexander J. Dallas
20 Joseph Reed 20 Inhabitants of Middletown, New Castle county, by John Merit
and Robert Maxwell 120 87 P.W. Gallaudet, omitted in the list from Trenton, 25
Zaccheus Collins 50 Sundry inhabitants of Monmouth county, New Jersey, by M. J.
Rhees, 68 Benjamin Loxley 20 Morgan J. Rhees 12 Rachael Richards, (by S.
Bettle) 50 Cash from West Nantmill township 10 58 Do. from Plymouth, Montgomery
county 35 Do. from Charlestown township, Chester county 45 William Tilghman 50
Capt. Billis 2 M. Lankanaye 2 Mrs. Brown 2 Dr. Ulmo 2 M. Rayner 2 M. Brockman 4
M. Sevene 2 Capt. Russel 2 Capt. Roliff 2 Capt. Mason 3 Capt. Whelan 2 Robert
Corry 40 Ann Corry 10 William Smith 25 Cash from Horsham and part of Bucks
county, by said Smith 65 52 Do. from Cocolico, Lancaster county 15 Do. from
upper Springfield, by J. Sansom 100 Do. from whitemarsh, etc. by Jos. Potts 104
40 Daniel Broadhead 20 Cash from Strasburg, by G. Duffield 56 15 From Abington,
collected by T. Fletcher, O. Hallowell, and W. Doughty 153 85 Cash, by the
chairman 2 From citizens of Philadelphia at Chester, and inhabitants of that
place: William Martin 3 30 And for Chester Lodge 10 Seth Willis 5 Joseph
Russell 20 Mary Norris 5 Joseph Ashbridge 5 John Wall 10 Edward Russell 10 Cash
2 Jonas Air 5 John Harrison 5 Isaac Fitzrandolph 5 Abraham Dicks 2 John Scully
1 Cash 1 Edward Engle 1 Peter Stimble 1 Capt. M'Giddis 5 William Budden 5 John
Odenheimer, jun. 2 Raper Hoskins 20 Cash 2 Do. 20 M. Harris 5 W. Anderson 5
Jonas Sharples 2 Capt. Shotten 1 From Charlestown township, Chester county,
sent per Matthias Pennebecker 7 From West Nantmel, Chester county, received by
Michael Graham 4 81 Doctor Robert Davidson, the contributions of the
Presbyterian congregation at Carlisle 130 40 David Lapsley 20 Henry Helmuth 20
By the hands of Thomas Wistar 12 Additional from Columbia, Lancaster county,
forwarded by Joseph Smith 86 A donation was received from John Young, attorney
at law in Greensburgh by the hands of Nicholas Collin 30 A donation was
received from Dromore township, Lancaster county, by the hands of Philip Wager
46 13 Inhabitants of Upper Dublin Township, Montgomery county, by Joseph Lukens
62 34 Cash by the hands of Robert Wharton, 200


