A CHARGE, DELIVERED TO THE AFRICAN LODGE, JUNE 24, 1797, AT MENOTOMY.

BY THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL PRINCE HALL.

Published by the Desire of the Members of said Lodge.

1797.

A CHARGE.
Beloved Brethren of the African Lodge,
IT IS now five years since I delivered a Charge to you on some parts and points
of Masonry. As one branch or superstructure on the foundation; when I
endeavored to show you the duty of a Mason to a Mason, and charity or love to
all mankind, as the mark and image of the great God, and the Father of the
human race.

I shall now attempt to show you, that it is our duty to sympathise with our
fellow men under their troubles: the families of our brethren who are gone: we
hope to the Grand Lodge above, here to return no more. But the cheerfulness
that you have ever had to relieve them, and ease their burdens, under their
sorrows, will never be forgotten by them; and in this manner you will never be
weary in doing good.

But my brethren, although we are to begin here, we must not end here; for only
look around you and you will see and hear of numbers of our fellow men crying
out with holy Job, Have pity on me, O my friends, for the hand of the Lord has
touched me. And this is not to be confined to parties or colors; not to towns
or states; not to a kingdom, but to the kingdoms of the whole earth, over whom
Christ the king is head and grand master.

Among these numerous sons and daughters of distress, I shall begin with our
friends and brethren; and first, let us see them dragged from their native
country, by the iron hand of tyranny and oppression, from their dear friends
and connections, with weeping eyes and aching hearts, to a strange land and
strange people, whose tender mercies are cruel; and there to bear the iron yoke
of slavery and cruelty till death as a friend shall relieve them. And must not
the unhappy condition of these our fellow men draw forth our hearty prayer and
wishes for their deliverance from these merchants and traders, whose characters
you have in the x^iii chap. of the Revelations, 11, 12, and 13 verses, and who
knows but these same sort of traders may in a short time, in the like manner,
bewail the loss of the African traffic, to their shame and confusion: and if I
mistake not, it now begins to dawn in some of the West India islands; which
puts me in mind of a nation (that I have somewhere read of) called Ethiopeans,
that cannot change their skin: But God can and will change their conditions,
and their hearts too; and let Boston and the world know, that He has no
respect of persons; and that that bulwark of envy, pride, scorn and contempt;
which is so visible to be seen in some and felt, shall fall, to rise no more.

When we hear of the bloody wars which are now in the world, and thousands of
our fellow men slain; fathers and mothers bewailing the loss of their sons;
wives for the loss of their husbands; towns and cities burnt and destroyed;
what must be the heartfelt sorrow and distress of these poor and unhappy
people! Though we cannot help them, the distance being so great, yet we may
sympathize with them in their troubles, and mingle a tear of sorrow with them,
and do as we are exhorted to -- weep with those that weep.

Thus my brethren we see what a chequered world we live in. Sometimes happy in
having our wives and children like olive-branches about our tables; receiving
the bounties of our great Benefactor. The next year, or month, or week, we may
be deprived of some of them, and we go mourning about the streets: so in
societies; we are this day to celebrate this Feast of St. John's, and the next
week we might be called upon to attend a funeral of some one here, as we have
experienced since our last in this Lodge. So in the common affairs of life we
sometimes enjoy health and prosperity; at another time sickness and adversity,
crosses and disappointments.

So in states and kingdoms; sometimes in tranquillity; then wars and tumults;
rich to day, and poor tomorrow; which shows that there is not an independent
mortal on earth; but dependent one upon the other, from* the king to the beggar.

The great lawgiver, Moses, who instructed by his father-in-law, Jethro, an
Ethiopean, how to regulate his courts of justice, and what sort of men to
choose for the different offices; hear now my words, said he, I will give you
counsel, and God shall be with you; be thou for the people to Godward, that
thou may bring the causes unto God, and thou shall teach them ordinances and
laws, and shall show the way wherein they must walk; and the work that they
must do: moreover thou shall provide out of all the people, able men, such as
fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness, and place such over them, to be
rulers of thousands, of hundreds and of tens.

So Moses hearkened to the voice of his father-in-law, and did all that he
said. -- Exodus xviii. 22 -- 24.

This is the first and grandest lecture that Moses ever received from the mouth
of man; for Jethro understood geometry as well as laws, that a Mason may
plainly see: so a little captive servant maid by whose advice Nomen, the great
general of Syria's army was healed of his leprosy; and by a servant his proud
spirit was brought down: 2 Kings, v. 3 -- 14. The feelings of this little
captive, for this great man, her captor, was so great, that she forgot her
state of captivity, and felt for the distress of her enemy. Would to God (said
she to her mistress) my lord were with the prophets in Samaria, he should be
healed of his leprosy: So after he went to the prophet, his proud host was so
haughty that he not only disdained the prophet's direction, but derided the
good old prophet; and had it not been for his servant, he would have gone to
his grave, with a double leprosy, the outward and the inward, in the heart,
which is the worst of leprosies; a black heart is worse than a white leprosy.

How unlike was this great general's behavior to that of as grand a character,
and as well beloved by his prince as he was; I mean Obadiah, to a like prophet.
See for this 1st Kings, xviii. from 7 to the 16th.

And as Obadiah was in the way, behold Elijah met him, and he knew him, and
fell on his face, and said, Art not thou, my Lord, Elijah, and he told him,
Yea, go and tell thy Lord, behold Elijah is here: and so on to the 16th verse.
Thus we see, that great and good men have, and always will have, a respect for
ministers and servants of God. Another instance of this is in Acts viii. 27 to
31, of the European Eunuch, a man of great authority, to Philip, the apostle:
here is mutual love and friendship between them. This minister of Jesus Christ
did not think himself too good to receive the hand, and ride in a chariot with
a black man in the face of day; neither did this great monarch (for so he was)
think it beneath him to take a poor servant of the Lord by the hand, and invite
him into his carriage, though but with a staff, one coat and no money in his
pocket. So our Grand Master, Solomon, was not ashamed to take the Queen of
Sheba by the hand, and lead her into his court, at the hour of high twelve, and
there converse with her on points of masonry (for if ever there was a female
mason in the world she was one) and other curious matters; and gratified her,
by showing her all his riches and curious pieces of architecture in the temple,
and in his house: After some time staying with her, he loaded her with much
rich presents: he gave her the right hand of affection and parted in love.

I hope that no one will dare openly (though in fact the behavior of some
implies as much) to say, as our Lord said on another occasion. Behold a greater
than Solomon is here. But yet let them consider that our Grand Master Solomon
did not divide the living child, whatever he might do with the dead one,
neither did he pretend to make a law, to forbid the parties from having free
intercourse with one another without the fear of censure, or be turned out of
the synagogue.

Now my brethren, as we see and experience, that all things hear are frail and
changeable and nothing here to be depended upon: Let us seek those things which
are above, which are sure and steadfast, and unchangeable, and at the same time
let us pray to Almighty God, while we remain in the tabernacle, that he would
give us the grace of patience and strength to bear up under all our troubles,
which at this day God knows we have our share. Patience I say, for were we not
possessed of a great measure of it you could not bear up under the daily
insults you meet with in the streets of Boston; much more on public days of
recreation, how are you shamefully abused, and that at such a degree, that you
may truly be said to carry your lives in your hands; and the arrows of death
are flying about your heads; helpless old women have their clothes torn off
their backs, even to the exposing of their nakedness; and by whom are these
disgraceful and abusive actions committed, not by the men born and bred in
Boston, for they are better bred; but by a mob or horde of shameless,
low-lived, envious, spiteful persons, some of them not long since, servants in
gentlemen's kitchings, scouring knives, tending horses, and driving chaise.
'Twas said by a gentleman who saw that filthy behavior in the common, that in
all the places he had been in, he never saw so cruel behavior in all his life,
and that a slave in the West Indies, on Sunday or holidays enjoys himself and
friends without any molestation. Not only this man, but many in town who has
seen their behavior to you, and that without any provocations, twenty or
thirty cowards fall upon one man, have wondered at the patience of the Blacks:
it is not for want of courage in you, for they know that they dare not face you
man for man, but in a mob, which we despise, and had rather suffer wrong than
to do wrong, to the disturbance of the community and the disgrace of our
reputation: for every good citizen does honor to the laws of the State where he
resides.

My brethren, let us not be cast down under these and many other abuses we at
present labor under: for the darkest is before the break of day: My brethren,
let us remember what a dark day it was with our African brethren six years ago,
in the French West Indies. Nothing but the snap of the whip was heard from
morning to evening; hanging, broken on the wheel, burning, and all manner of
tortures inflicted on those unhappy people, for nothing else but to gratify
their masters pride, wantonness and cruelty: but blessed be God, the scene is
changed; they now confess that God has no respect of persons, and therefore
receive them as their friends, and treat them as brothers. Thus does Ethiopia
begin to stretch forth her hand, from a sink of slavery to freedom and equality.

Although you are deprived of the means of education; yet you are not deprived
of the means of meditation; by which I mean thinking, hearing and weighing
matters, men and things in your own mind, and making that judgment of them as
you think reasonable to satisfy your minds and give an answer to those who may
ask you a question. This nature has furnished you with, without letter
learning; and some have made great progress therein, some of those I have heard
repeat psalms and hymns, and a great part of a sermon, only by hearing it read
or preached and why not in other things in nature: how many of this class of
our brethren that follow the seas; can foretell a storm some days before it
comes; whether it will be a heavy or light, a long or short one; foretell a
hurricane whether it will be destructive or moderate; without any other means
than observation and consideration.

So in the observation of the heavenly bodies, this same class without a
tellescope or other apparatus have through a smoked glass observed the eclipse
of the sun: One being asked what he saw through his smoaked glass? said, Saw,
saw, de clipsey, or de clipseys; -- and what do you think of it? -- stop, de^e
be two; -- right, and what do they look like? -- Look like, why if I tell you,
they look like, two ships sailing one bigger than ^other; so they sail by one
another, and make no noise. As simple as the answers are they have a meaning,
and show, that God can out of the mouth of babes and Africans show forth his
glory; let us then love and adore him as the God who defends us and supports us
and will support us under our pressures, let them be ever so heavy and
pressing. Let us by the blessing of God, in whatsoever state we are, or may be
in, to be content; for clouds and darkness are about him; but justice and truth
is his habitation; who has said, Vengeance is mine and I will repay it,
therefore let us kiss the rod and be still, and see the works of the Lord.

Another thing I would warn you against, is the slavish fear of man, which
bring a snare, faith Solomon. This passion of fear, like pride and envy,
has slain its thousands. -- What but this makes so many perjure themselves;
for fear of offending them at home they are a little depending on, for some
trifles: A man that is under a panic of fear, is afraid to be alone; you
cannot hear of a robbery or house broke open or set on fire, but he has an
accomplice with him, who must share the spoil with him, whereas if he was truly
bold, and void of fear, he would keep the whole plunder to himself: so when
either of them is detected and not the other, he may be called to oath to keep
it secret, but through fear, (and that passion is so strong) he will not
confess, till the fatal cord is put on his neck; then death will deliver him
from the fear of man, and he will confess the truth when it will not be of any
good to himself or the community: nor is this passion of fear only to be found
in this class of men, but among the great.

What was the reason that our African kings and princes have plunged themselves
and their peaceable kingdoms into bloody wars, to the destoying of towns and
kingdoms, but the fear of the report of a great gun or the glittering of arms
and swords, which struck these kings near the seaports with such a panic of
fear, as not only to destroy the peace and happiness of their inland brethren,
but plunged millions of their fellow countrymen into slavery and cruel bondage.

So in other countries: see Felix trembling on his throne. How many Emperors
and kings have left their kingdoms and best friends, at the sight of a handful
of men in arms: how many have we seen that have left their estates and their
friends and ran over to the stronger side as they thought: all through the fear
of men; who is but a worm, and has no more power to hurt his fellow worm,
without the permission of God, than a real worm.

Thus we see my brethren, what a miserable condition it is to be under the
slavish fear of men; it is of such a destructive nature to mankind, that the
scriptures every where from Genesis to the Revelations warns us against it; and
even our blessed Savior himself forbids us from this slavish fear of man, in
his sermon on the mount; and the only way to avoid it is to be in the fear of
God: let a man consider the greatness of his power, as the maker and upholder
of all things here below, and that in Him we live, and move, and have our
being, the giver of the mercies we enjoy here from day to day, and that our
lives are in his hands, and that he made the heavens, the sun, moon and stars
to move in their various orders; let us thus view the greatness of God, and
then turn our eyes on mortal man, a worm, a sh^le, a water, and see whether he
is an object of fear or not; on the contrary, you will think him in his best
estate, to be but vanity, feeble and a dependent mortal, and stands in need of
your help, and cannot do without your assistance, in some way or other; and yet
some of these* poor mortals will try to make you believe they are Gods, but
worship them not. My brethren let us pay all due respect to all whom God has
put in places of honor over us: do justly and be faithful to them that hire
you, and treat them with that respect they may deserve; but worship no man.
Worship God, this much is your duty as christians and as masons.

We see then how becoming and necessary it is to have a fellow feeling for our
distressed brethren of the human race, in their troubles, both spiritual and
temporal -- How refreshing it is to a sick man, to see his sympathising friends
around his bed, ready to administer all the relief in their power; although
they cannot relieve his bodily pain yet they may ease his mind by good
instructions and cheer his heart by their company.

How does it cheer up the heart of a man when his house is on fire, to see a
number of friends coming to his relief; he is so transported that he almost
forgets his loss and his danger, and fills him with love and gratitude* and
their joys and sorrows are mutual.

So a man wrecked at sea, how must it revive his drooping heart to see a ship
bearing down for his relief.

How does it rejoice the heart of a stranger in a strange land to see the
people cheerful and pleasant and are ready to help him.

How did it, think you, cheer the heart of those our poor unhappy African
brethren, to see a ship commissioned from God, and from a nation that without
flattery faith, that all men are free and are brethren; I say to see them in an
instant deliver such a number from their cruel bolts and galling chains, and to
be fed like men, and treated like brethren. Where is the man that has the least
spark of humanity, that will not rejoice with them; and bless a righteous God
who knows how and when to relieve the oppressed, as we see he did in the
deliverance of the captives among the Algerines; how sudden were they delivered
by the sympathising members of the Congress of the United States, who now enjoy
the free air of peace and liberty, to their great joy and surprise, to them and
their friends. Here we see the hand of God in various ways, bringing about his
own glory for the good of mankind, by the mutual help of their fellow men;
which ought to teach us in all our straits, be they what they may, to put our
trust in Him, firmly believing, that he is able and will deliver us and defend
us against all our enemies; and that no weapon formed against us shall prosper;
only let us be steady and uniform in our walks, speech and behavior; always
doing to all men as we wish and desire they would do to us in the like cases
and circumstances.

Live and act as Masons, that you may die as Masons; let those despisers see,
although many of us cannot read, yet by our searches and researches into men and
things, we have supplied that defect, and if they will let us we shall call
ourselves a charter'd lodge, of just and lawful Masons; be always ready to give
an answer to those that ask you a question; give the right hand of affection
and fellowship to whom it justly belongs let their color and complexion be
what it will: let their nation be what it may, for they are your brethren, and
it is your indispensible duty so to do; let them as Masons deny this, and we
and the world know what to think of them be they ever so grand: for we know
this was Solomon's creed, Solomon's creed did I say, it is the decree of the
Almighty, and all Masons have learnt it: it is plain market language and plain
and true facts need no apologies.

I shall now conclude with an old pem which I found among some papers: -- Let
blind admirers handsome faces praise,
And graceful features to great honor raise,
The glories of the red and white express,
I know no beauty but in holiness;
If God of beauty be the uncreate
Perfect idea, in this lower state,
The greatest beauties of an human mould
Who most resemble Him we justly hold;
Whom we resemble not in flesh and blood,
But being pure and holy, just and good:
May such a beauty fall but to my share,
For curious shape or face I Will never care.



