Surgeon General's Office LIBRARY.

HISTORY OF THE YELLOW FEVER, AS IT APPEARED IN THE CITY OF NEW YORK, IN 1795.

By ALEXANDER HOSACK, Jun. M. D. OF NEW YORK.

PHILADELPHIA; PRINTED BY THOMAS DOBSON, AT THE STONE-HOUSE, No 41, SOUTH
SECOND-STREET. 1797.

THE FOLLOWING PAGES ARE INSCR^^^D TO Doctor JOHN BARD, AS A TESTIMONY OF
SINCERE RESPECT FOR A MEDICAL PRACTITIONER WHO UNITES THE CHARACTER OF A
LEARNED PHYSICIAN AND AN ELEGANT SCHOLAR TO THAT OF AN ACCOMPLISHED GENTLEMAN;
AND AS A TRIBUTE OF PERFECT ESTEEM, BY HIS VERY OBLIGED AND HUMBLE SERVANT, THE
AUTHOR.

PREFACE.
BEFORE the reader peruses the following dissertation, I must beg leave to
inform him, that this is the first attempt of a young man, inexperienced in
writing, and is done only in compliance with the regulations of this College
for conferring the degree of Doctor of Medicine.

I have purposely avoided any inquiry as to the origin of the disease, or the
chemical composition of the matter or poison producing it; referring the reader
for particulars upon these subjects to the more complete history of the
disease, as published by Doctor BAYLEY, Mr. WEBSTER, and others; and have
confined myself to a plain detail of the symptoms, causes, and cure of the
disease, as far as fell under my own observation, in my attendance at the New
York Hospital, and upon the private practice of Doctor SAMUEL BARD, and my
brother Doctor DAVID HOSACK.

If a single fact, either new or useful, shall be communicated, I shall feel
myself much gratified in having undertaken the task.

THE following history of the Yellow Fever was published in New York as the
inaugural dissertation of the author upon his receiving the degree of Doctor of
Physic, May the 3d, 1797.

It contains, as appears by the preface, a detail of the symptoms, causes, and
cure of the disease, as it occurred under his observation, in the New York
Hospital, and in the course of his attendance upon the private practice of
Doctor Samuel Bard and his brother Doctor David Hosack.

As it has acquired much reputation, and contains a mode of treating that
disease, which is different from what is usually practiced -- the present
republication of it requires no apology from

THE EDITOR.
Philadelphia Aug. 23, 1797.
HISTORY OF THE YELLOW FEVER.
HISTORY.
THE Yellow Fever is known by a variety of names. By the French it has been
denominated La Malady de Siam, from a country of that name in the East Indies,
where it is supposed to have had its origin, and from thence to have been
conveyed to distant parts of the world. Sometimes they call it La fievre
matelotte, from its attacking seafaring people and foreigners more readily than
the natives of the country in which it prevails. The Spaniards have given it
the name of vomito preto, or the black vomit, which is one of its most
malignant and characteristic symptoms. Some have called it the malignant fever
-- others the putrid bilious, and bilious remitting fever, etc. This disease
first appeared in this city about the year 1740; and, as I am informed by
Doctor JOHN BARD, who was at that time a practitioner, it manifested the same
malignant symptoms which characterised the late mortal epidemic. -- In some of
the southern states it has been known to prevail at a much earlier period. See
Dr. Lining.
In 1791 it appeared again in New York, and has been described in a
dissertation published by Doctor ADDOMS.

THE epidemic I am now about to describe, and which has universally received
the name of yellow fever, first appeared about the middle of July, and
continued until the weather became cold. The season, during its prevalence, was
very hot and moist. It raged with most violence in those parts of the town
adjacent to the eastern shore, where the air is less pure, and the ground lower
than in any other part of the city; which, consequently, must, in some degree,
serve as a reservoir for the filth of the upper parts of the city. It attacked
persons of all ages, adults more frequently than children, and males than
females -- foreigners more than the natives, or such of our inhabitants as had
lived in warm climates. The same has been remarked in the West Indies, and in
the other parts of the United States, viz. that foreigners from northern
climates were more susceptible of the disease than the natives. In support of
this opinion, I beg leave to introduce the following extract of a letter from
Doctor GEORGE DAVIDSON to Doctor DAVID HOSACK, dated Fort-Royal, Martinique,
September 23, 1796; in which he offers the following ingenious explanation of
this fact: "I have already mentioned the experiments made upon the atmospheric
air here, with a view to ascertain the composition of it. Those experiments
have been frequently repeated, in the presence of the late Doctor CHARLES
WEBSTER, of Edinburgh, Doctor SAUNDERSON, of London, and Doctor CHISHOLME,
lately. The result has shown a much greater proportion of oxygene than what I
could have conceived -- no less than 67/100 of oxygene gas. It may, perhaps,
tend to explain some difficulties which we meet with in the phenomena attending
upon yellow fever, viz. why Europeans, or those from cold climates, of tense,
rigid fibers, and in the prime of life, are the subjects of its attack. I
suppose, what you will admit, that Europeans or Americans, from cold climates,
have a more tense and firmer texture of fibers than Creoles, or those who have
long resided here -- cold tending to brace the habit and invigorate the body,
and whilst it does so, increasing the appetite and digestive powers. Besides
this connection between the stomach and surface, we also observe a remarkable
sympathy between the stomach and lungs: whatever tends to invigorate the
stomach, remarkably increases the action of the lungs, as we may perceive from
what follows after a full meal and a few glasses of generous wine. Inspiration
and respiration are increased; a greater quantity of atmospheric air is taken
into the lungs, and a greater quantity of oxygene fixed in the blood: hence the
irritability; a glow of genial heat diffused; and the circulation becomes more
rapid. But as the atmospheric air in Europe contains a less proportion of
oxygene, the quantity of it fixed will be proportioned to the necessities and
calls of the system. It is, however, far different in those climates: before
the appetite and digestive faculties are impaired, whilst the tone and vigor
of the system still continue, and also the corresponding action of the lungs, a
much greater proportion of oxygene being contained in the atmospheric air, will
be fixed, and the irritability of the system increased; or, in other words, the
system surcharged with oxygene. Hence the predisposition to fever."
Frenchmen and blacks who had lately arrived from the West Indies, were rarely
the subjects of this disease, as they appeared to have been inured, and thence
rendered insensible to the operation of its cause; but their exemption is, no
doubt, more particularly to the ascribed to their temperate mode of life, and
especially their freer use of vegetables; for it is certain, that those who
most indulge in the use of animal food and spirituous drinks were most
susceptible of the disease.

THE symptoms which marked the yellow fever in its first stage were, a general
langour and heaviness -- depression of the spirits, sometimes approaching to
stupor -- disinclination to motion -- a sense of cold, and shivering -- acute
pain in the head, especially above the eyes -- pains in the back, and
frequently extending down the extremities -- the skin was hot, dry, and much
flushed, not unlike the scarlet blush of an erysipelatous inflammation -- the
eyes were suffused with water, and the vessels of the tunica adnata much
distended with blood: so constant were these last symptoms, that they may, in a
certain degree, be considered as characteristic of the disease. The pulse was,
for the most part, frequent, full, and hard -- respiration was proportionably
quickened, attended with much anxiety, stricture, soreness, and frequently
intense heat about the precordia -- the tongue was foul, the appetite depraved,
with nausea, vomiting, and not unfrequently pain about the region of the
stomach: these were among the first symptoms of the disease. The bowels were
constipated, unless the patient labored under a diarrhoea at the commencement
of the fever -- the urine, in this stage of the disease, appeared, for the most
part, as in the first stage of the fevers in general, viz. high-colored, and
small in quantity; in the last stage, when the fever had continued for some
days with violence, and the general mass of fluids became changed, this
excretion manifested the same alterations, becoming sometimes turbid, and at
others yellow, as if tinged with bile. -- Such are the symptoms which generally
appeared at the commencement of the disease, constituting what I would call the
inflammatory stage, but differing from any inflammatory disease, inasmuch as in
the former there was no particular part of the body which appeared to be
exclusively the seat of inflammation. Where the disease terminated favorably,
there was, for the most part, an evident abatement of the above symptoms in
forty-eight hours; and in the course of five days the patients were generally
freed from fever, but were left greatly debilitated by the violent operation of
the poison producing the disease, and the evacuations which became necessary
for the removal of the fever: even in those instances where blood-letting, the
most debilitating of all evacuations, was not employed, the patient was so
reduced as to require all the resources, both of nature and of art, for his
support. This stage of the disease was rather marked by symptoms of debility,
yet accompanied with great irritability, so much so, that the least imprudence
in diet, clothing, bodily exertion, or indulgence in conversation and company,
would frequently induce a return of fever. But where this abatement of the
disease did not take place within the first three days, a very different and
more malignant train of symptoms appeared, partaking more of the symptoms of
the last stage of putrid fever, as described by HUXHAM and CULLEN.

IN the last stage of the disease, the pulses sunk, became more frequent,
irregular, and sometimes intermittent: the person would lie continually on the
back, with the knees drawn up, and the body sinking toward the bottom or foot
of the bed; the breathing became proportionably more difficult; and the crust
which had formed on the tongue became of a black color, which change also took
place on the lips and teeth; the yellowness became more general over the body,
attended with cold clammy sweats; the vomiting now became more frequent and
copious; in some instances patients have vomited incessantly, and in
astonishing quantities; and what was brought up resembled the grounds of
coffee: this, for the most part, was considered as a fatal symptom: there were,
however, several instances of recovery after this had taken place to a
considerable degree. The opinions, as to the nature and origin of the black
matter vomited up, are very numerous and different. Some have supposed it to be
part of the stomach; but we must entirely reject this idea, when we consider
the enorm^^s quantities which patients sometimes throw up. The most probable
opinion is, that it is bile imperfectly form^d. [ See Saunders on the liver.]
Here I beg leave to quote the words of Doctor JACKSON, who, from diffection,
has formed the same opinion: after opening the abdomen, etc. and noticing the
appearance of the viscera, he says, "The liver and spleen were generally
enlarged in size; the color of the liver was often of a deeper yellow than
that of any other of the abdominal viscera; while the texture of the spleen was
frequently less firm than it is found to be in its natural state. The
gallbladder, for the most part, was moderately full, but the bile it contained
was black and thick. The biliary ducts were likewise enlarged, and moderately
filled with the same sort of bile which was found in the gallbladder; while the
very blood vessels of the liver bore the marks of uncommon distention. In the
cavity of the stomach, likewise, there was usually more or less of a dark
colored liquor, similar to what had been thrown up in the last stage of the
disease."
It is worthy of remark, that when the vomited liquor acquired this black
color, a diarrhoea sometimes followed, in which there was a discharge of a
similar sort of black matter, but more resembling tar or molasses. The florid
color now left the eyes, and they became yellow and sunk. The functions of the
brain and nervous system were also very much deranged: the patient was attacked
with delirium, attended with subsultus tendinum, and sometimes a perfect
stupor, with a convulsive kind of sighing. The speech began to faulter and
tremble. The patient appeared very uneasy, and showed a disposition to leave
the bed. Sometimes a deceitful tranquillity appeared, and by some was supposed
to be a favorable symptom; but the patient, upon getting asleep, was much
agitated. The stools and urine became black, very offensive, and discharged
involuntarily: in some instances there was an entire suppression of urine: the
extremities became cold, but the heat still continued about the stomach: blood
was discharged from the mouth, nose, ears, and eyes, and from those parts of
the skin where blisters had been applied. Sometimes blood was effused in the
cellular membrane, appearing in the form of mortification -- petechiae appeared
about the neck and breast -- vibices, or livid spots, came out upon the body,
particularly upon the abdomen -- the perspiration became very foetid -- the
eyes shone like glass -- hiccough and muttering came on, and were followed by
death.

Doctor RUSH, in his history of the yellow fever as it prevailed in
Philadelphia, has taken notice of buboes and carbuncles as among its symptoms.
I do not now a single instance where these symptoms have occurred in this
disease in New York. In the West Indies these symptoms are not uncommon, as
would appear from the following extract of the beforementioned letter, which I
have introduced, as it serves to establish the similarity of the yellow fever
to the plague. -- "We have had a return of the yellow fever during the months
of July, August, and September, much more violent than I ever recollect seeing.
The rainy season set in very late, and the weather proved, during these three
months, remarkably warm and sultry. The disease commenced early in July, and
was not only contagious, but attended with pestilential symptoms. Buboes
appeared in several patients, who, however, recovered; and I have seen several
instances of the anthrax and pestilential carbuncle. One patient evidently sunk
from a carbuncle on his elbow, the haemorrhage from which could scarcely be
suppressed by pledgits dipped in diluted vitriolic acid; and two others also
appeared upon the foot and ankle of the same patient. I am at present attending
a medical gentleman who has above fifty carbuncles upon his body. The discharge
has reduced him, but he is recovering. The appearance was first a red unequal
erysipelatous appearance upon the skin; in the center appeared an elevated
spot, which gradually changed to black, burst, and discharged a blackish bloody
ichor, and left behind it a deep pit. Upon other parts a white pustule
appeared, which, after bursting, discharged pus and bloody serum, and pitted in
the same manner. The back, loins, and upper part of the thighs were principally
affected."

PREDISPOSING CAUSE.
PREDISPOSITION is that state of the body not of itself capable of producing
the disease, but rendering the body more susceptible of the exciting cause. In
order to produce yellow fever, it is necessary that the body should be in such
a state as to receive the action of the exciting cause. This state appears to
be a peculiar irritability in the system, by whatever means induced. Upon no
other principle can we explain the reason why the contagion does not affect
every person within its atmosphere, and why the attendants of the sick are not
always attacked. The causes which produce predisposition in the body, for the
most part, are,

1st. Fear, which possesses great power in debilitating the body, and hence
rendering it more irritable. Upon this principle we may account for the good
effects of the different preventives which many were in the habit of using;
such as the wearing a small quantity of camphor, vinegar, etc. constantly about
the body, inspiring them with a certain degree of courage. The use of tobacco
was supposed to have a good effect in counteracting the disease, probably from
its possessing more stimulus than the matter of contagion.

2d. Heat. especially exposure to the direct rays of the sun, was a common
cause, as it assisted the stimulus of contagion in bringing on indirect
debility. Fire also rendered the contagion more active. To prove this we
notice, that a great majority of those that were infected were such as, from
the nature of their occupations, were much exposed to the heat of the sun and
fire.

3d. Fatigue, whether induced upon the mind or body, and from whatever source.

4th. Grief. Persons who attended friends or relatives in this disease were not
unfrequently seized during their attendance.

5th. Excess in venery, and other evacuations, such as bleeding and purging,
aided by fear, which caused some persons to adopt these means in order to
prevent the operation of contagion.

6th. Cold; accordingly such as had been previously much heated, upon getting
themselves wet, drinking largely of cold water, or exposing themselves to a
stream of cool air, were readily attacked with the disease.

7th. Intemperance in eating or drinking: taking either too large or small
quantity of improper food; or a scantity allowance of common diet.

EXCITING CAUSE.
DISEASE is brought on by the action of the exciting cause, after the body is
rendered capable of receiving the contagion by the action of the predisposing
cause. The yellow fever being a contagious disease, it must undoubtedly depend
upon the action of a poison either generated or introduced into the body. This
matter, or poison, is generally acknowledged to be exhaled from animal and
vegetable substances in a state of putrefaction: but, as there is a great
contrariety of opinion upon this subject, I shall purposely pass it over,
referring the reader to the works of LAVOISIER and others. -- There are also
many different opinions as to the mode in which this contagion acts upon the
body in producing the disease. Some have supposed that it enters the system by
the stomach -- some that it enters by the lungs -- and others, that the body
receives it by the pores of the skin. All these opinions have their advocates;
but by whichever passage it is communicated to the system, whether by the
stomach, the lungs, or the pores of the skin, it is certain, that, in common
with the matter of smallpox, measles, lues venerea, the venom of the
rattle-snake, etc. it produces a violent irritation throughout the whole
system. Its first operation I consider to be upon the nervous system: hence the
violent pains of the head, back, and extremities of the body -- hence the
sickness of stomach and vomiting -- hence the sensation of cold and
constriction upon the secreting and excreting vessels. Such an irritation upon
the nervous system, with an interruption to the secretions and excretions, are
necessarily followed with a quickened circulation. The irritating matter of
itself is sufficient to produce this effect; but the suppression of
perspiration, the confined state of the bowels, and especially the retention of
bile of an uncommonly acrid quality, must also unquestionably have a share in
adding to this irritation and increased action.

CURE.
HAVING stated the symptoms and causes of the disease, we are next to consider
the indications of cure, which appear to be,

First, To prevent the further operation of the poison producing the disease.

Secondly, to procure a solution of the inflammatory stage of the fever.

Thirdly, To counteract the putrescent state of the body, as described in the
second stage of the disease. And,

Lastly, to restore the tone of the system when the preceding indications are
accomplished.

First, To prevent the further operation of the poison producing the disease.
To this end it is necessary that the patient be removed from the atmosphere in
which he took the disease, and placed in a situation where he may enjoy a pure,
free air: all articles capable of conveying the contagion should be immediately
removed from the body, such as clothing, etc. in place of which there should be
clean dry clothing, bedding, etc.

Secondly, To procure a solution of the inflammatory stage of the fever. It is
necessary to moderate the increased action of the system, and to remove, as far
as possible, every other source of irritation. To evacuate immediately the
poison from the body, when one introduced, is as impossible as to eradicate the
matter of smallpox, measles, or any other disease produced by specific
contagion. In the treatment of yellow fever, as in that of the smallpox, if
the analogy be a just one, t(...)sness of the physician appears to be, to
moderate the action of the poison producing the disease, and, at the same time,
to remove every circumstance which can aggravate its operation upon the body.
With a view to diminish the increased action of the system, evacuations of
different kinds were employed. Some practitioners had recourse to
blood-letting, followed by purging and sweating; and others trusted entirely to
the two latter. With respect to blood-letting, my observation has been, that
the promiscuous use of the lancet was very injurious and unsuccessful. In the
New York hospital it was frequently employed, but in the majority of cases the
disease terminated fatally; yet, in some few instances, where the constitution
was uncommonly plethoric, and the determination to the head more violent than
usual, I have observed good effects follow the loss of a moderate quantity of
blood. But, generally speaking, blood-letting was attended with pernicious
consequences. The same has been confirmed by the observations of several of our
most respectable practitioners. The more common and successful practice was,

1. To procure a free evacuation from the bowels. The purgative medicines which
were employed were many and various. By some, calomel and jalap were
prescribed, and, in the beginning of the disease, with good effect. Others
administered a mixture of rhubarb and magnesia with cinnamon or mint-water.
This also answered well in many cases, where the stomach was irritable, and
rejected the former medicines. But the medicine which was the most successful,
and acquired the greatest reputation, was the Glauber's salts, given in warm
diluting drinks. The dose was generally from one to two ounces, dissolved in a
pint of gruel made of Indian meal, and given in divided doses until it operated
freely; the patient at the same time drinking freely of gruel or chicken water,
to promote its operation. Salts, exhibited in this form, for the most part sat
well on the stomach: they were expeditious in their operation, and, in many
instances, possessed the additional advantage of relaxing the skin and inducing
perspiration, especially where the patient drank largely during their
operation. But when the stomach was so much irritated as immediately to reject
every thing taken into it, recourse was then had to glysters, composed of
vinegar and water, quickened by the addition of a small quantity of molasses:
these scarcely ever failed to produce the intended effect.

2. Having procured copious and free evacuations from the bowels, the next
object appeared to be to relax the surface of the body, and induce free
perspiration. In some instances this salutary discharge came on immediately
after the bowels had been emptied, and was readily continued by taking
plentifully of warm drinks; but, for the most part the febrile symptoms
continued violent, the skin remained hot and dry, the pains still distressing,
and it became necessary to have recourse to more active means to induce
sweating. For this purpose many sudorific medicines were employed. Some
practitioners used emetics, and others small doses of James's powders, and the
different preparations of antimony. Vomiting, in this disease, I have generally
observed to be of dangerous tendency. It may, perhaps, not be amiss, when the
disease first discovers itself, and is attended with much sickness and
vomiting, to empty the stomach freely, by means of an infusion of chamomile
flowers: but the exhibition of emetics I consider to be highly dangerous and
improper. I believe I have seen some cases in which the death of the patients
could be ascribed to no other cause than the incessant vomiting brought on by
an emetic given in the commencement of the disease. But the most certain and
successful means were, to wash the whole surface of the body with cold vinegar
and water, and immediately after covering the patient with blankets -- to
administer such medicines as possess the effect of bringing on sweating: of
these the spiritus mindereri and saline draughts of RIVERIUS succeeded well,
more especially if the warm drinks were continued, such as the infusion of
snake-root, gruel, toast water, tamarind water, lemonade, etc. These were much
aided by applying to the feet of the patient a warm brick, steeped in vinegar
and covered in a flannel cloth wet with vinegar or spirits: the steam, thus
emitted and diffused through the bed, had a wonderful effect in softening the
skin and exciting sweat, especially where the cold washing had been previously
employed. -- Some practitioners have preferred the practice of plunging the
patient several times in a cold bath, and violently dashing the body with cold
water. But simply washing the patient with cloths dipped in cold vinegar and
water, was found much preferable to immersion, both because it more effectually
diminished the heat of the system, and was less fatiguing to the patient.
Experiments have proved, that repeatedly wiping and washing with water, in the
ordinary way in which the operation is performed, diminishes the heat seven or
eight degrees more than simple immersion, or dashing it over the body with
pails.

THE practice of cold bathing in fevers of this type is not a new one, but was
very commonly employed at Breslaw, in Silesia; See DE HAEN's Ratio Medendi.
and of late years has been very successfully applied in the West Indies,
Doctor JACKSON on the Diseases of Jamaica.
as well as in different parts of Europe, where diseases of this type prevail.

PROFESSOR GREGORY, of Edinburgh, and Doctor CURRIE, an eminent physician at
Liverpool, have also prescribed it with great advantage in the low typhus
fevers of those cities. But its great success in the New York hospital, as
employed by Doctor SAMUEL BARD, and in the private practice of my brother, have
fully convinced me of the propriety of its use. It is also proper to remark,
that where the physician was not called to the patient in the first stage of
the disease, and putrid symptoms had appeared, and the patient had become much
debilitated, the cold bath was injurious; and from the abuse of cold bathing,
by employing it in the last stage of the disease, it has fallen into disrepute
with some practitioners. But as the abuse of a thing is no argument against its
use, I repeat my observation, that in the first or inflammatory stage of the
disease, it was one of the most useful remedies that was employed. When the
cold bath had been thus made use of, and immediately after followed by the
spiritus mindereri or saline mixture, with plentiful dilution, it rarely failed
to produce sweating in the course of fifteen minutes; and when once induced, it
was easily continued by the repetition of the sudorific medicines and drinks,
until a solution of the fever was obtained. In some instances where the patient
refused his drink and medicines, or, from the carelessness of the nurses, they
had not been supplied as frequently as was proper, and the perspiration had
been suppressed, it became necessary to repeat the cold bathing, which seldom
failed to procure a return of the sweating. By the continuance of this
discharge an abatement of all the symptoms took place: it appeared to operate
as a specific in the disease; the pulse in a short time became moderate; the
heat of the skin diminished; the pain in the head and back, before so
distressing, was also relieved; the sickness of stomach and vomiting were
removed; and, in the course of two or three days from the attack, the patient
had little else to contend with but mere debility.

Thirdly, In those cases where the physician was not called in the early stage
of the disease, where the bowels were not freely emptied, and perspiration had
remained suppressed, with a continuance of the fever, a more distressing train
of symptoms appeared, as described in the second stage of the disease, and
required a different mode of practice: few patients, however, recovered from
this stage of the disease.

WHERE the stomach was much disturbed with sickness and vomiting, which was one
of the most dangerous symptoms, the saline draught was exhibited in the
effervescing state; and, in some instances, yeast was employed with advantage,
followed with nourishing antiseptic drinks, as milk-punch, lemonade, porter
diluted with water, etc. Snake-root-tea, where it sat well upon the stomach,
appeared to possess most advantages in this stage of the disease, inasmuch as
it procured a free determination to the surface of the body, independent of its
antiseptic properties; but where the stomach rejected every thing, recourse was
had to blisters, applied immediately over the region of the stomach, and, in
some instances, with the most happy effects. Spirituous fomentations, applied
to the lower extremities, especially where they were followed with
perspiration, in many instances gave relief to the stomach, and rendered it
more retentive.

WHERE the bowels were in a costive state, purgative medicines were given to
the patient; at the same time injections were employed, composed of vinegar and
water, with the addition of molasses and repeated every hour until they
produced the desired effect.

WHEN the functions of the brain and nervous system were much disturbed, as
indicated by delirium, subsultus tendinum, restlessness, etc. sinapisms,
composed of rye-meal, vinegar, and mustard, applied to the soles of the feet,
blisters to the ankles, to the inside of the thighs, and to the head, in some
few instances procured relief. -- In this stage of the disease some
practitioners had recourse to bark, wine, and the tonic treatment in general;
but the plan I have observed to be attended with most success in addition to
the medicines and treatment related above, was to support the patient's
strength, by the mildest nourishment, and such as was the least stimulating to
the system, viz. soups, composed of a great proportion of vegetables, sago,
milk punch, with a small quantity of spirits or brandy, merely sufficient to
render it grateful to the stomach. In addition to this mode of treatment, great
attention was paid to the removal of every external source of irritation, by
frequent changes of linen and bedding, by frequently wiping the body with
cloths dipped in spirits or vinegar, removing every offensive matter from the
room, and by correcting the atmosphere around him, by the explosion of
gunpowder, sprinkling vinegar over his bed, and through the room, and
procuring a free circulation of fresh air.

Fourthly, Having, by the means above enumerated, procured an entire solution
of the fever, it remains to restore the strength of the system. In the stage of
the disease alluded to under the last indication, while a degree of fever
remained, an active tonic or stimulating plan of treatment was found injurious;
but, when a perfect solution of the disease was obtained, and the patient
labored under mere debility of body, this mode of treatment was not only
admissible, but, in many instances, the patient's strength was so completely
exhausted, that the most restorative medicines and diet became necessary. In
this state of body recourse was had to the bark, serpentaria, the different
bitters, mineral acids, and the usual medicines prescribed with this intention,
viz. wine, porter, milk-punch, etc. The diet employed with most advantage
consisted chiefly of vegetables: sago, tapioca, indian and oat-meal gruel,
rendered palatable by the addition of wine, were, for the most part, grateful
to the patients -- were sufficily nourishing, and, being of a more antiseptic
quality, were found less hazardous than the use of animal food. When animal
food was employed, it was in the form of soups, with a large proportion of
vegetables, or calves-feet jelly, with the addition of wine: in this form it
became less exceptionable. But solid animal food was very commonly injurious,
retarding the recovery of the patient, and in many instances producing a return
of the disease; it was therefore very generally prohibited during the
convalescent state of the patient.

THE drinks employed with most benefit, and which were found most grateful to
the sick, were wine and water, milk-punch, porter, etc. Such was the disease,
and such the mode of treatment, as far as has come within my knowledge.

THE END

