AN ORATION.

THE following Oration, being a very hasty production, it is with reluctance
that a Copy is given for the Press; but the importunity of the Hearers, has
constrained me to submit it, with deference, to the candor of the Public.

The AUTHOR.

AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT THE MEETING HOUSE, IN THE FIRST PARISH IN AMHERST,
(NEW HAMPSHIRE) ON THE ANNIVERSARY, OF THE AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE, JULY 4, 1796.

BY JOSHUA HEYWOOD, A. B.

FROM THE Chronicle Press, AT BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS: BY ADAMS and LARKIN,
COURT-STREET, M, DCC, XCVI.

AN ORATION.
FELLOW-CITIZENS,
IT is with the greatest reluctance that I address you on this very important
occasion. I feel conscious of my inability to perform any thing equal to what
might be expected on a day like the present: And I should not have so mistaken
my abilities, as to undertake a part to which I feel inadequate, had it not
been for an invitation from gentlemen, whose stations and characters demand my
utmost attention: But the benevolence of those worthy characters assures me of
their candor, and that, the veil of humanity will be spread upon my
imperfections: And I doubt not but I shall have the indulgence of this
respectable, and very numerous assembly, while I attempt to speak briefly upon
those things, which are important and interesting.

IN almost every age, events have taken place, which have had effect upon the
political world; but in the present, scenes are before us, presenting to view
prospects, pleasing and happy, of which, history affords us no example.

WHEN the productions of time thus swell the thoughts with imaginations, they,
who are of a patriotic spirit, will naturally suffer their attention to be
engaged by those things, that are most interesting to themselves and posterity.
-- And when we attend to those happy events, and the pleasing prospects that
now brighten up to our view, they not only add luster to our eyes, but fill our
hearts with raptures; nor can we resist their charms, unless we are to an awful
degree insensible.

WE have been delivered from scenes of bloodshed, from dissolution, and from
the direful clangors of war. And our ears have been happily saluted with the
agreeable sounds of peace and harmony. We have since established a
Constitution, which unites the wisdom of ages; guarding, at the same time,
against tyranny on the one hand, and anarchy on the other; and secures us from
those shackles, which had been almost the overthrow of this rising Empire. And
the illustrious WASHINGTON, who led us through a long and tedious war, and
conducted us safe to the port of Peace, is placed at the head of our public
affairs; at whose name, haughty tyrants tremble, and under whose mild
administration, the distressed of all nations find protection and relief.

HE, who was able to resist the power of Great Britain, has since at various
periods, sustained all the blasting storms of calumny, and under the most
difficult situations, has been able to transact the business of the nation
unmoved.

OUR increase of power has been great -- our prosperity has exceeded the most
sanguine expectations -- it indicates a series of prosperous days, and presages
to us such national glory, as is beyond the power of language to describe.
Having sprung into Empire, we have, in the course of a few years, gained that
height of national dignity and grandeur, which can be known and understood,
only by comparing it with the state of nature.

MEN in the state of nature, and unconnected by social obligations, were
abhorrent to the idea of dependence; and being actuated by immediate and
necessary exigencies, they displayed, without constraint, the most criminal
brutality in their manners. Their selfish and uncultivated minds, impelled them
to acts of injustice, violence, and murder. Such was the wretched and miserable
state of man, when unconnected by society! Involved in the dark mazes of
anarchy and confusion, they proclaimed eternal war upon their own species. --
But, being pressed with the evil, and expiring under the weight of their own
folly and wickedness, they were led, probably, to devise the best methods of
relief, and stop the current of outrageous enormities. Doubtless they were
driven by necessity to afford such reciprocal aids and supports, as eventually
terminated in established Government. And the wisdom of all ages has been
employed, and the genius of man has been put to the utmost stretch of
imagination, to invent means to stem the current of passion, and avoid the
calamities that are consequent upon their wickedness.

THE method hitherto adopted, is, to unite the strength of a whole community,
to secure necessary rights to each individual. And, as this great power of the
whole, cannot be exercised by the public at large, it is invested in one, or a
few individuals. This communicated power, well administered, has been
productive of good to mankind -- it has restrained the violence of passion --
it has soothed and softened the native ferocity of the mind, and rendered man,
social, agreeable, and benevolent to man.

POLITICAL establishment has been considered the greatest blessing enjoyed by
community -- it is so essential that no society whatever can subsist without
it. And it is necessary that some be invested with power, in order to an equal
distribution of justice among the whole -- that man may be protected from the
violence and cruelty of man, and that all those rights destined by the GOD of
nature may be secured inviolate to man.

BUT alas! what a wretched use has been made of this power! Those, who have
been invested with it, have held it independent and in defiance of their
subjects. Rulers have thirsted for domination -- they have invaded the rights
of man -- they have violated the laws of nature; and, to awe the patrons of
liberty to submission, they have plied all the engines of despotism -- they
have wrecked and tortured them; and, had it been possible, would have
ex^inguished the last spark of patriotism from the bosom of man. And being
fired with ambition, and grasping at universal empire, they have warred, despot
against despot, till they have filled the world with devastation and murder.

IT is observed by a celebrated politician, that, when we read the history of
monarchs, we do but read the history of human devils; and they, as though
driven by fate, instead of justice and safety, have administered injustice,
cruelty and death. Such has been their ambition, that they have subjected the
greater part of mankind to an almost entire submission to slavery. And the love
of freedom, which nature planted in every breast, has been so far extinguished,
that the innocent subject has been led tamely to prostrate himself before the
Dagon of tyranny. And being thus dejected and weakened by cruelty and
oppression, the emissaries of darkness have used every artifice, that could be
invented by their depraved minds, to chain down mankind in ignorance and
superstition.

THE Court of Great Britain, notwithstanding their state of refinement, and
their professed love to freedom and liberty, have shown themselves champions in
the cause of tyranny. The Monarch of that Island is ever embroiling the nations
of Europe; and being perpetually involved in war, he has, at length, by a
series of conquests, gained the empire of the ocean. And were he possessed with
the depravity of a nation, we could not conceive of his perverting his power to
viler purposes. He has attempted to deprive mankind of those rights, which are
unalienable, and which the GOD of nature destined to be inviolate. -- He has
assumed prerogatives over the rights and the consciences of men, which become
none but the Supreme LORD and Governor of the universe.

AT a time when Great Britain was overspread with persecution and oppression,
our pious and worthy ancestors, then denominated Puritans, were the objects of
their persecuting vengeance; and being worn out with suing for redress, they
quitted their native country -- ventured their lives upon the vast ocean, to
seek an asylum on the uncultivated shores of America. Here they passed through
diverse scenes of sufferings and hardships, and were for a long time grieviously
annoyed by the barbarous savages, who occupied the whole extent of so vast a
territory. But, when they had gained a permanent settlement for their colonies,
it was thought the happy fugitives were free -- it was thought that they had
escaped the grasp of tyranny, and, that the British Annoyers of human liberty,
would never trace out this far distant retreat. But, envying the happiness of
mankind, how soon did the tyrants pursue, and fix their standard upon our
shores! Armies were sent to enforce their unrighteous decrees -- our laws were
abolished -- our shipping and our stores were taken and destroyed -- our cities
were laid in ruins by fire -- the best of our citizens were insulted and
murder^d; and to awe us into slavery the mercenary Germans were hired against
us to the trade of death! And he, whose heart is filled with pride and his hand
ever stained with the blood of the innocent, point^d the arrows of death at
every one, who breathed the celestial f^ame of liberty, or dared to oppose his
enormous wickedness!

WRETCHED state of our country! To us there was but one alternative; either we
must be free and independent, or the worst of slaves, and vilely submit to be
tortured by him, whose tender mercies are cruelty. We were, at this time,
without government; we were destitute of stores, of arms and ammunition; our
colonies were new and small, and unskilled in the art of war -- and tyranny had
already laid its deadly grasp upon us! In this deplorable situation, had not
our countrym^n been inspired with patriotism more than human, we must have sunk
down under the cruel hand of oppression.

BUT Heaven interposed, and inspired the patrons of liberty with heroism, and a
love of freedom unequalled in any age or nation. And on that ever memorable
day, the Fourth of July, 1776, each one put his life in his hand, and resolved
on liberty or death. Congress assembled to declare the States Independent --
the citizens assembled in various parts to publish the declaration, and gave
energy to the bold attempt. In this place was the day solemn and joyful --
Heroism sat on every brow -- fear was dispeled by virtue, and every heart aimed
the fatal blow. And from the pious, prayers were offered up to God for success.
Heaven heard their cries, and was attentive to the unequal combat; and all
nature stood trembling for the event!

THE sentence was pronounced. America is free! Heaven caught the sound, and
mixed with celestial fire, it reverberated back, and pierced the very soul of
tyranny; and unable to sustain the mighty shock, the frightful demon fell
prostrate before the standard of liberty. At the disaster, the emissaries of
tyranny stood amazed, and the vanquished demon, for the last time, reared his
ghastly visage to see thrones totter, and his empire of cruelty and oppression
tremble to its lowest basis.

SUCH, my brethren, and fellow-citizens, was the mighty effect of the
Declaration of Independence, on JULY the 4th, of which this Day is the
twentieth anniversary. The transactions of that memorable day, gave an
important turn to the affairs of the whole political world. The achievements
of that day, blew into a flame the celestial spark, which the God of nature had
made sacred in every breast. What an important turn was there in the affairs of
America! While the British armies stood amazed at the dreadful overthrow of
their Idol, the Sons of Freedom ran to arms; and, as if one soul had moved them
all, around their heads they flashed their flaming swords -- in martial pomp
they fast advanced, and expelled those hostile legions from our shores. Nor did
this complete the mighty scene, for the sacred fire pursued them over the vast
Atlantic, and kindling in France, flamed through that vast country -- broke off
the tyrant's yoke, and set free more than twenty-five million souls. It has
since shone conspicuously in various parts of Europe, and will ever long
illuminate the world with its meridian splendor.

DOUBTLESS there are present, many of our Fathers and Brethren, who will
recollect the solemn and important day, and the sacred love of liberty, which
then glowed in every breast, and inspired them with courage and resolution to
break asunder those bands of slavery, which were quick fastening upon
themselves and posterity.

WILL not the hearts of those patrons of liberty swell to see us worthy of the
freedom, which they purchased at so dear a rate? Will they not exult to see us
possess their own spirit, and hail the happy day? Yea, what joy will possess
their patriotic souls, while they behold us celebrating the day of their mighty
achievements?

LET us, my Brethren, perpetuate the happy day that gave birth to the American
Empire, and laid a foundation for an universal republicanism through the whole
political world. Let us show ourselves worthy of that liberty, which cost such
an immense treasure of blood and wealth -- that liberty, for which so many of
our Fathers and Brethren bled and died. And in military maneuvers this day,
let us imitate those patriots, who gave the deadly wound to tyranny, and by one
blow broke asunder the bands of slavery.


