A SERMON PREACHED AT HADDAM, JUNE 14, 1797. ON THE DAY OF THE EXECUTION OF
THOMAS STARR, CONDEMNED FOR THE MURDER OF HIS KINSMAN, SAMUEL CORNWELL, BY
SEVEN WOUNDS GIVEN HIM, BY A PENKNIFE, IN THE TRUNK OF HIS BODY, JULY 26th,
1796, OF WHICH HE LANGUISHED A FEW DAYS AND DIED: WITH A SKETCH OF THE LIFE AND
CHARACTER OF SAID STARR.

BY ENOCH HUNTINGTON, A. M. Pastor of the first Church in Middletown.

Genesis 9.6. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed.

Prove. 28.17. A man that does violence to the blood of any person, shall flee
to (...), let no man stay him.

MIDDLETOWN PRINTED BY MOSES H. WOODWARD.

LUKE, xxiii.39 to 43. And one of the malefactors which were hanged railed on
him, saying, If thou be Christ, save thyself and us.

But the other answering, rebuked him, saying, Do not thou fear God, seeing
thou art in the same condemnation?

And we indeed justly; for we receive the due reward of our deeds; but this man
has done nothing amiss.

And he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou come into thy kingdom.

And Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, Today shall thou be with me
in Paradise.


THIS passage of the evangelical history, to a condemned, dying criminal, near,
and in the closing scene of final execution, contains matter of inexpressible
importance. A most amazing instance of stupidity and wickedness, in the one
malefactor, acted out amidst his expiring struggles, and the tortures of
crucifixion; and a most surprising instance of the sudden and saying conversion
of the other, with the wonderful, infinite grace and power of the suffering
Savior, himself expiring on the cross -- yet then amidst all the ignominy and
anguish of it, giving immortal life, and ensuring a seat that day with himself
in paradise, to a guilty, but penitent sinner, then crucified and dying with
him. -- These things are exhibited, in a manner, and with circumstances the
most affecting and instructive.

The enraged Jews, with their rulers at their head, having with unaccountable
malice and zeal sought the death of Jesus, and obtained an unjust sentence from
Pilate, and offered him every indignity and cruel insult, and now following him
to the place of his crucifixion, the sacred history informs us, "And there were
also two others, malefactors, led with him to be put to death. And when they
were come to the place which is called Calvary, there they crucified him, and
the malefactors; one on the right hand, and the other on the left. Then said
Jesus, Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do. And they parted
his raiment, and cast lots. And the people stood beholding: and the rulers also
with them derided him, saying, He saved others; let him save himself, if he be
Christ, the chosen of God. And the soldiers also mocked him, coming to him, and
offering him vinegar, And saying, if thou be the king of the Jews, save
thyself. And a superscription also was written over him in letters of Greek,
and Latin, and Hebrew, THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS. And one of the malefactors
which were hanged railed on him, saying, If thou be Christ, save thyself and
us. But the other answering, rebuked him, saying, Do not thou fear God,
seeing thou art in the same condemnation? And we indeed justly; for we receive
the due reward of our deeds: but this man has done nothing amiss. And he said
unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou come into thy kingdom. And Jesus said
unto him, Verily I say unto thee, Today shall thou be with me in paradise."
The ill temper of the Jews and of the soldiers toward the divine Savior, on
this tragical occasion, certainly exceeded in malignity, what is common to
mankind, against their worst enemies, when they behold them in such suffering,
dying scenes. Few, very few, can be disposed to mockery and derision in such
dreadful extremities. But the one of the malefactors which were hanged,
"railing on him, saying, if thou be Christ, save thyself and us," argues a
hardened, wicked heart, a mixture of stupidity and malignity of soul, hardly to
be conceived; and to the sensibility of human, christian feelings, most awful
to contemplate. He impiously scoffs, he mocks at death, and when he himself is
hanging and dying on the cross: he scoffs, he mocks at the innocent, blessed
expiring Savior: he scoffs, he mocks at his Judge, on the verge of eternity,
and when going immediately to appear before his dread tribunal. But what a
contrast of character to this appears in the other malefactor? "The other
answering, rebuked him, saying, do thou not fear God, seeing thou art in the
same condemnation? And we indeed justly; for we receive the due reward of our
deeds, but this man has done nothing amiss. And he said unto Jesus, Lord;
remember me, when thou come into thy kingdom." What sentiments are these? how
suited to the occasion? to his own circumstances? to the state of the other
malefactor? and to the true character of the crucified Jesus? A genuine
thorough conversion, a sincere, unfeigned repentance, a true faith, vigorous
and active in the divine Redeemer, appears in a most conspicuous manner, the
fruits of it unequivocal, exercised and acted out, in the most evident and
eminent degrees, in the most trying circumstances. He most humbly acknowledges
his guilt, most justly rebukes the dreadful impiety of the other malefactor,
who railed on Christ, without any fear of God, in his own awful circumstances,
and when he himself was in the suburbs of Hell, launching into Eternity. And
while he acknowledges that they both suffer justly, and receive the due reward
of their deeds, he asserts the entire innocence of the suffering Savior, and
assents, with undoubting assurance, with hearty affiance and recumbency of
soul, to the character he had assumed, as the Savior of his people, the King
of Israel, the King of Zion. "This man, says he, has done nothing amiss. Lord,
remember me when thou come into thy kingdom." He saw through all the darkness
of the tragical scene, through all the contradictions and railings of sinners,
through all the tortures and ignominy of the cross; he saw through all these
things, through all surrounding circumstances, however hardening to others, and
made a subject for mocking and railing; he saw, enlightened by the divine
spirit, and renewed and changed by the power of divine grace; he saw, he
believed in the glorious, wonderful character of Immanuel, the design of his
coming into the world, and that he, and he alone, was "able to save to the
uttermost all them that come unto God by him." He had just views of his
"kingdom" as not "of this world," but leading and advancing all his faithful
followers and subjects to immortal life, happiness and glory, in a future
world. He asks no relief from temporal sufferings, he asks not for temporal
life, though doubtless, he knew that Christ was able, if he pleased, to grant
it to him; and to come down from the cross himself, and confound and destroy
all his enemies in a moment. He owns the justice of his own punishment in the
article of death, and meekly resigns himself; only praying, and pouring out his
soul, in penitence and faith, "Lord, remember me, when thou come into thy
kingdom," q. d. 'Blessed Jesus, interest me in thy divine love, and graciously
remember me, and number me amongst thy redeemed, in that glorious and eternal
kingdom, which thou do purchase for them, and in which thou will make them
blessed and happy forever, at an infinite remove from all the sins and
sufferings of the present state.' With a christian spirit he was willing to
"suffer with him," that he might "also reign with him." He owned, he honored
Christ -- he committed himself, his immortal soul to his care, when others, his
friends, and his own disciples forsook him and fled. "I cannot, therefore,
(says one Doddridge -- note upon this passage.
) but look on this happy man, (for such, amidst all the ignominy and torture of
the cross, he surely was) as a glorious instance of the power, as well as
sovereignty of divine grace, which (as many have observed) perhaps taking the
first occasion from the preternatural darkness, wrought so powerfully, as to
produce, by a sudden and astonishing growth in his last moments, all the
virtues that could be crowded into so small a space, and which were eminently
manifested in his confessing his own guilt, in his admonishing his companion
for a crime, which he feared would prove fatal to him, in his vindicating the
character of Christ, and reposing his confidence in him, as the Lord of a
Kingdom beyond the grave, when his enemies were triumphing over him, and he
himself, abandoned by most of his friends, was expiring on the cross."

And the blessed Jesus, who seems to have taken no other notice of his cruel
murderers than to pray for them "Father, forgive them; for they know not what
they do," no sooner hears the meek, the humble, fervent petition of this dying
penitent, than he returns a most gracious answer. "He said unto Jesus, Lord,
remember me when thou come into thy kingdom. And Jesus said unto him, verily
I say unto thee, Today shall thou be with me in Paradise." What love and
Grace! What dignity and power? What proof of his Divine mission and Gospel!
What encouragement! What sure ground of Hope to every humble penitent, dying
Sinner, appears here in the depth of the abasement and sufferings of the Son of
God! in his own dying moments, giving immortal life to a dying sinner, and
assuring the believing penitent that he should be with him that very day in
Paradise! That notwithstanding the crucifixion and death of the body,
immediately upon his mortal dissolution, his immortal spirit should be with
him, in another life and world, happy, completely happy in his presence, and in
the joys of the Paradise of God!

To comprize the ideas suggested in the text in a short compass, and one
connected view, and impress them the more strongly upon the mind, I subjoin the
paraphrase of Dr. Doddridge. "And one of the malefactors also, who hung on the
cross with him, regardless of that innocence and dignity which Jesus manifested
under all his sufferings, and unaffected with a sense of his own aggravated
guilt, upbraided him with the same reproach, and scornfully blasphemed him as
an impostor, saying, if thou art the Messiah, why do thou not save thyself
and us, who are now dying with thee? But the other awakened to a sense of his
sin, and convinced in his heart that Jesus was indeed the promised Messiah,
answered his companion, and rebuked him, saying, do thou not fear God, even
now when thou thyself art in the same condemnation? In such an awful
circumstance as this do thou dare to increase thy crimes with thy dying
breath, and to behave thyself so insolently in the immediate view of God's
righteous tribunal? And we indeed are justly thus condemned; for we receive no
more than what is due for the notorious crimes we have committed: but this man
has done nothing by any means amiss, nor is there the least insolence, or
absurdity in that high claim which he has made, though appearances be for the
present so much against it. And having thus rebuked his companion, and
testified his full persuasion of the innocence of Jesus, he then directed his
discourse to him, and said to Jesus, looking upon him with the humblest and the
most contrite regard. Lord, though this wretch derides thy mission, I firmly
believe it; and I beg, that though would graciously remember me, when thou
come into that thy kingdom, to which I doubt not but God will raise thee in
spite of death and hell. And Jesus turning toward him, said to him with a
mixture of the greatest dignity and mercy, Verily I say unto thee, and solemnly
assure thee of it as a most certain truth, that this very day thou shall be
with me in Paradise, sharing the entertainments of that garden of God, the
abode of happy spirits when separate from the body; and there shall thy
departing soul, as soon as thou have breathed thy last, immediately begin to
reap the fruits of that faith, which breaks through so dark a cloud, and
honors me, in the midst of this infamy and distress."

A man, a fellow mortal, an acquaintance, a relation, who has by his crimes
forfeited his life, and by the laws of God and man, must have his life taken
from him, and die a violent death by the sword of civil justice, affords a very
awful spectacle; a spectacle, heart affecting, and affecting in proportion as
we have feeling hearts, and are connected by any special ties of friendship or
kindred with the suffering criminal. Yet such an one, (neither murderers, nor
any other the vilest sinners of mankind are excluded) may have recourse to the
mercies of God through Jesus Christ, and by faith and repentance obtain
forgiveness and acceptance with God, and on the day of his execution upon
earth, be translated from an ignominious death to be with Christ in Paradise:
while the least sin, however unknown and irreprehensible by men, unrepented of,
and unforgiven, will sink the impenitent and unbelieving into everlasting
darkness and despair. Alarming thought! Let formalists and hypocrites, whose
chief concern is to make a fair show in the flesh, and appear well in the eyes
of their fellow men, hear, fear and tremble; repent and believe and obey the
gospel, lest while a penitent malefactor, expiring on a cross or a gallows, is
immediately received to be with his blessed Redeemer, they themselves, though
they die a natural death, and have a burial honorable in the sight of men, lift
up their eyes in torments, and can only see such penitent redeemed ones afar
off in mansions of bliss, but must forever despair of joining them there. How?
where? in what horror and debasement must such hypocritical sinners appear, who
are so fitly compared by our Lord, "to whited sepulchers, which indeed appear
beautiful outward, but within are full of dead mens' bones, and of all
uncleanness." So they appear outwardly righteous in the sight of men, but their
hearts are full of all manner of iniquity and wickedness. "For (says our
Savior, ye are as graves which appear not, and the men that walk over them,
are not aware of them." Not any kinds or degrees of sin and guilt, sinners of
no sort, nation, or character are excluded from mercy, except they exclude
themselves by an obstinate refusal of mercy, and by wilful, malignant
perseverance in impenitence and unbelief. The great God proclaims his name,
Exodus 34.5, etc. "The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long
suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, forgiving iniquity*
transgression and sin;" and that will by no means clear the guilty, i. e.
obstinate offenders who will not be reclaimed.

Thomas Starr, to you my discourse is directed, to you applied, and on your
attention and improvement, your all depends. You have had, to my personal
knowledge, a fair, a candid trial before man; you have had the assistance of
most able counselors and advocates, who in managing your cause appeared to
adduce every argument and motive that might possibly operate in your favor.

Your case was such as by the laws of God, as well as those of your country,
could not be otherwise justly decided by an earthly tribunal. Though the
merciful God and Father of us all can and will pardon murder, as well as other
sins, with respect to the penitent and believing, yet he has restricted human
judicatories, and given us special direction, that whosoever sheddeth man's
blood, by man shall his blood be shed. But as the Heavens are high above the
Earth, so, says the blessed God, are my ways above your ways, and my thoughts
above your thoughts. You are indeed in a great strait, but in the article of
death, and of mortal execution, bless God, that though you are falling under,
yet, you will no longer fall into, the hands of men, but fall into the hand of
the Lord; for his mercies are great. Serious, inexpressible serious, are your
present circumstances; your last hour, your last moment is this day hastening
upon you. You are condemned, and to be cut off from the land of the living. You
are going from a temporal to an eternal sentence, from a human to a divine
tribunal, from the execution of a sentence which respects only your body and
mortal life, to stand before the judgment seat of Christ, and receive a
sentence from him for soul and body to all eternity. And what awful attention
do the words of the blessed. Savior to his disciples in the days of his flesh
demand from you in your present condition? Luke 12.4, 5. "Be not afraid of them
that kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do. But I will
forewarn you whom ye shall fear: fear him which, after he has killed, has
power to cast into hell; yea, I say unto you, fear him."

You are justly under a sentence of condemnation: The execution of it must fall
upon you. No way of escape remains for you. The plain and awful words of holy
scripture, shut you up in absolute despair, with respect to the least ray of
hope to prolong your life to another day. You will never see the light of
another sun. "A man that does violence to the blood of any person, shall flee
to the pit, let no man stay him." You have not only done violence to the blood
of a fellow mortal -- you have shed kindred blood. You have wounded the
feelings of your dearest friends, in the tenderest manner. You will be soon in
the place of execution, and suffer the punishment you justly deserve from the
laws of your country. A just and proper sense of your sin, deep repentance,
faith in Jesus Christ, in short, a temper like that of the dying penitent in my
text, you must now have, as you would wish for pardon and acceptance with God.
You have the same blessed, almighty, most merciful Savior, to look to, that he
had. A new heart, and a new spirit you want; May the God of mercy give it to
you. Pray, pray for it, while life, and any moment of life, before you are
launched into eternity, shall remain to you: let your whole soul, in all the
ardency of importunity, be going forth to Jesus, the Savior, in language like
that in the text, "Lord, remember me in thy kingdom." And know, that though
Jesus is absent now, in bodily presence from you, yet from his exalted throne
his eyes are upon you, and in his divine spirit he is present with you, and if
you have but the temper, and make the petition of the dying penitent who was
executed with his crucified Savior, a like answer will be applied to you, as
the Savior made to him, and verily, this day shall thou be with him in
Paradise. Every humane spectator is tenderly moved, the hearts of your friends
are bleeding for you. Can yours be less affected for yourself? The officers of
justice surround you -- the fatal machine from which you are to be launched
into eternity is erected -- the awful apparatus of the death before you made
ready -- your coffin is built -- your grave is dug, it is open, and is waiting
for your mortel remains to swallow them up. "Then shall the dust return to the
earth as it was; and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it." Not as the
funerals of other mortals are attended when dead and gone, and the last
respects paid them at their graves by a solemn mourning train, -- the concourse
collected, on the awful occasion, the multitude that follow you, follow and
lament and bewail you living, and follow you, but to see your certain death and
burial together, cut off in the midst of your days by the sword of justice, and
sent to your long home -- to your final doom. Our souls plead for mercy, mercy
to be granted to you, that your soul with ours may be bound up in the bundle of
life, and saved in the day of the Lord. Your concerns with this world are at an
end: but you have infinitely more important concerns in Eternity into which you
are entering. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses from all sin, the blood of
Jesus speaks better things than the blood of Abel, it calls, not for vengeance,
but for mercy. He prayed for his murderers on his cross, "Father, forgive them,
for they know not what they do:" Oh! how precious is that blood! how prevalent
his intercession! how infinitely valuable to you. He is an advocate that never
pleads in vain: for him the Father hears always. He has arguments to plead,
merits of his own to produce for sinners, blood infinitely more precious than
the blood of sinful mortals, which they shed in murdering one another, and by
which he washes us from our sins, -- Such arguments, such merits, such precious
blood he presents in the court of Heaven, where he appears in the presence of
God for us as a Lamb slain from the foundation of the world.: "He that spared
not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him
also freely give us all things? Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's
elect? It is God that justifies; who is he that condemns? It is Christ that
died: yea, rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God,
who also makes intercession for us." -- Fall down before him, acknowledge the
justice of your sentence, and of the punishment you are now to suffer from men,
and the far more dreadful sentence you deserve from him; meekly submit yourself
to him, adore and trust in his love and mercy, and may you be made an eternal
trophy of the victories of his cross, and be removed from the ignominy of a
shameful death, to the enjoyment of a crown of everlasting life with him in
Paradise.

My Brethren and Hearers,

Late repeated instances of murder, in one part of the land, and another, are
matter of humiliation to us as a people, and should excite in us all an awful
concern, and the most fervent prayer, that God, the God of our salvation would
deliver us, and our land from blood-guiltiness. And may all hear, and fear, and
take warning from this example, that none may do so wickedly: and let this
solemn thought sink deep into every heart, that though the greatest of
criminals, who must be cut off from the land of the living by the sword of
civil justice, may by faith and repentance obtain forgiveness of God, and a
seat in Paradise; every impenitent, unconverted sinner, however unexceptionable
or even commendable in the sight of man, or honored and dignified in human
life, must be condemned at the bar of the great supreme Judge. "Repent ye,
therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out when the times
of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, and he shall send Jesus
Christ, who before was preached unto you, whom the heavens must receive until
the times of restitution of all things, when he shall be revealed from heaven
in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that knew not God, and obey not the
gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power,
when he shall come to be admired in his saints, and glorified in all them that
believe."

Human judicatories, and the judgments and executions dependent upon them, may
be erroneous; the righteous and innocent may be condemned and suffer
irreparably by them, while the most vile transgressors and bold offenders are
spared; and their power extends no farther than this life, and the time we are
in the body. When they have killed the body they have no more that they can do.
But there is ONE who is able to destroy both soul and body in bell forever;
before HIM we must all shortly appear. "We must all stand before the judgment
seat of Christ." How soon, and how suddenly the time will come we know not, but
we are assured that "the coming of the Lord draws nigh." Was the time fixed
to a day and an hour to our knowledge, as the execution before us this day is
fixed, and did we know this was the day, and the hour appointed, such a
particular hour of this very day, when we should be summoned away to death and
judgment, how should we be affected? But the very day and hour "is appointed
unto all," though unknown to us, and is every moment drawing nearer and nearer.
How ought we then to be affected, and watch and pray for we know not when the
time is? far the day and hour will soon be as near to us, as this day, and any
hour of the day -- it will be upon us, and none can escape the ^^erring
decisions and perfect retributions of the final Judge, and the execution of his
sentence, of which there can be no reversion, and from which there ^^es no
appeal. The Lord grant that we may all find mercy of the Lord in that day* Amen.

LIFE AND CHARACTER OF THOMAS STARR, WHO WAS EXECUTED AT HADDAM, ON WEDNESDAY
JUNE 14, 1797, FOR THE MURDER OF SAMUEL CORNWELL.
THOMAS STARR was born in Middletown, April 23, 1753. His parents and family,
and their connections were reputable. His youthful genius was promising. His
improvements under the common advantages of schooling were uncommon. He
manifested a taste for books. In writing and penmanship he excelled. In music
and psalmody be made laudable proficiency, and was an approved leader in that
part of public worship in the place where the Providence of God cast his
residence in early manhood. His manners and deportment were conciliating, and
attracted the favorable notice of his acquaintance, whether of elder or
younger, or of equal age with himself. Thus promising was the young man, when
an unhappy step CHANGED ALL THE COLOR OF HIS FATE. Connected with a worthy
family, and contracted in matrimonial engagements with an amiable and only
daughter of it, by ungentlemanly and capricious conduct he lost that affection
of which he thought himself, in his vain confidence, too sure, and met with a
(...) ^^om which his after misconduct and wretchedness takes its first date.
Conscious, no doubt, of his ill behavior to the friend of his choice, and
feeling the strong operation of that affection his heart bore her, and which
before he knew not how properly to estimate -- stung with shame and remorse --
from being sociable and conversible with his friends, he shunned society,
especially that society which was once his choice and his honor, sunk by
degrees into the various stages of intemperance and debauchery; and chose for
his companions such as were addicted to the same indulgencies, and with them in
gloomy retirement, and with a manifest aversion to the company of the virtuous
and reputable, and especially of those of the fairer sex, he spent most of his
social hours, and particularly the Holy Sabbath, and Saturday and Sabbath
Evenings. This abandonment of moral virtuous character paved the way, and was
very conspicuous immediately previous to his doing, in a most tragical manner,
violence to innocent and kindred blood, for which awful Crime, by the Laws of
God and his Country, he suffered a violent and untimely Death.


