A FEW OBSERVATIONS ON SOME LATE PUBLIC TRANSACTIONS IN AND OUT OF CONGRESS.
PARTICULARLY, ON THE DANGEROUS AND SEEMINGLY UNCONSTITUTIONAL MANNER THE LATE
ELECTION FOR A CHIEF MAGISTRATE WAS CONDUCTED THROUGHOUT THE STATES OF THE
UNION. MOST RESPECTFULLY RECOMMENDED TO THE SERIOUS CONSIDERATION OF THE
CITIZENS OF ALL THE UNITED STATES.

BY A MEMBER OF THE CONGRESS ON THE STAMP ACT, Held at NEW YORK in 1765, and of
the two first as PHILADELPHIA, in 1774 and 1775.

OBSTA PRINCIPIIS. CHARLESTON: Printed by FRENEAU and PAIN, No. 46, BAY.
MDCCXCVII.

A FEW OBSERVATIONS, etc.
Much Respected and Worthy Fellow Citizens of all the United States,
THOSE who call to mind the dismal, gloomy state of despondency we were all in
at the very time (and for a year or two before) our deputies were framing our
now constitution; the then very small hopes, from a variety of symptoms, that
when met, any would be fixed upon, so as to be generally agree to; the very
long and warm disputes and opposite opinions that happened amongst themselves
upon that most important occasion; the turn, notwithstanding, as it were all at
once, of all the states present, unanimously to consent to recommend the
federal form we have; that the states also should separately debate as warmly
on the acceptance of this form; that at last all the states of the union should
universally adopt it; and above all, that this form should contain in itself,
extracted from the democratical, the aristocratical, and the absolute systems,
whatever is worth having from each, clear of, and guarded from, all the
shocking and pernicious tendencies each of those systems are exposed to, and
have at times been woefully felt by the subjects of either: I say, those who
weigh these occurrences alone, (many more as extraordinary might be adduced)
and do not perceive a kind fostering hand of Providence leading the United
States to the formation and universal adoption at last, of our therefore
excellent, and let me add, almost miraculously-made constitution, must, I
think, be looked upon, if possible, as great unbelievers as Mr. Pain seems to
make himself to be. And here let me notice, en passant, a clause in a letter of
this Mr. Pain to our President, dated at Paris but in July last, in which he
styles himself an Anti-Constitutionalist, not wishing to be called an
Anti-Federalist -- It was only (says he) the absolute necessity of some federal
authority extending equally over all the states, that an instrument so
inconsistent as the federal constitution is, obtained a suffrage. By this, it is
plain, he seems to think our constitution ought now to be kicked out, being in
itself so "inconsistent" and not worth "a suffrage." Whatever may have been Mr.
Paine's private thoughts, as he well knew what was brewed and brewing in July
last in Paris against us, this passage carries more the appearance of the
malevolence of an insidious enemy wishing to stir up divisions amongst us to
favor the views of France, than any glimpse of the feeling, sympathizing
affection of a cordial citizen, what he affects still to call himself.

An idea of perfection seems to be implanted in our nature, far beyond what the
best man can attain to in practice: our works are like ourselves; in the most
correct, imperfections may be spied.

"Whoever thinks a faultless piece to see,
"Thinks what never was, nor is, nor ever shall be."
POPE. Some men of a strange turn, fond of laying hold of the least slips, even
in the best plans, to overset them, seem always for pulling down whatever may
be proposed, without ever attempting, themselves, to substitute any thing in
its place, however absolutely necessary that something should be done. Mr.
Pain seems to be one of these pull-down politicians. His Common Sense is a
capital work of this cast, acknowledged to have been well-timed, and of very
great service to us all in our struggle with Great Britain; but, still, not so
necessary by any means, that we should not have succeeded without it: however,
for this we were much obliged to his pull-down qualities. But has he not now
entirely cancelled all this obligation, by endeavoring to pull down our
constitution, and by that means throw us back again into the same gloomy,
desponding state we were in before it existed? Happy for us, he was not here to
be concerned in the building it, his talents not laying that way. Pulling down
is his forte; here, in my opinion, while he kept to quid valiant humeri, his
true political line, none exceeded him: but his Age of Reason has run his bark
bump ashore, and made him appear in as odd a character there, as the bear in
the boat, turned sailor.

I confess I should be glad to see something built up by a man so long employed
only in pulling down: it must, I think, be a curiosity indeed: any strong arm,
with (I had almost said without) any head, may be sufficient to pull down a
fine building; but, to erect a tolerably convenient one, that may be
indispensably necessary, in its room, a nice hand, guided by a head furnished
with many data in the building way, that Mr. Pain has never hitherto appeared
possessed of, seems not to be dispensed with.

Hitherto, in Mr. Paine's various political works of pulling down, he has
offered reasons; but his bare ipse dixit he seems to think sufficient to make
us ashamed of our constitution. But my worthy fellow citizens, under this "so
inconsistent" a constitution, not worth "a suffrage," according to Mr. Pain,
we have been more happy and flourishing since its existence, now eight years,
than any of the best and most tranquil powers in Europe have been for ten times
as long. Let us, therefore, be thankful for it; and such as it is, a work made
by men, not by angels, be contented with it, and join shoulder to shoulder in
its support: not doubting that the same overruling Providence that has
favored us under it hitherto, will not fail us in future, if we do not fail
ourselves.

The closer, my friends, you keep to this our heaven-bestowed constitution,
(for, let Mr. Pain think what he will, I confess I think it so) and the more
you watch over it, the better and safer situation will you and your posterity
find yourselves in.

"Still with itself compared, its text peruse,
"And let your comment be --
The farewell legacy of our long tried, true and trusty friend President
Washington. For, be persuaded, you will find his fatherly recommendation as
good a comment to our constitution, as "The Mantuan Muse," so much recommended
by Pope, can be to old Homer.

This intrusion, my friends, on your patience, is occasioned by three late
public occurrences appearing to me much to affect our constitution, and, if not
properly and timely noticed, their consequences may be very distressing, if not
fatal. That I might not appear a party man, I kept designedly silent till all
our elections were over.

They are, first, an assertion in the last session of congress, very
pertinaciously maintained by a number of members, that congress had no right
"to enquire into the merits of a foreign treaty."

2dly. The manner our last election for a chief magistrate has been carried on.

3dly. The attempt of a foreign minister to appeal to the people at large.

With regard to the first of these, it will be fully sufficient, in my opinion,
to contrast the power given by the constitution to the president and senate
united, with the general power, given by the same constitution, to the
congress, (of which the representatives are a part) to see, not only the
danger, but the weak foundation of that assertion. However, a few remarks shall
be added.

The president shall have power, by and with the consent of the senate, to make
treaties; provided 2-3ds of the senate present concur.

The congress shall have power to provide for the general welfare of the United
States.

Nothing appears to me easier than that each of these powers may do the duty
enjoined, without clashing or interfering in the least with each other. Let the
president and senate make a treaty as directed, without the congress
interfering. Let the congress, when a treaty is made, provide for it, if they
think it not contrary to the welfare of the United States. Here we find the
congress have nothing to do with the making of a treaty, (and very rightly,
from the delay and variety of obstructions that would probably happen in so
numerous a body) but, when made by the president and senate, and application is
had to them to provide for it, can any person then think his business excluded
entirely from the direction given them, "to provide for the general welfare of
the United States;" but that they are still obliged to make such provision,
even if they are persuaded that it is extremely dangerous to, if not
destructive of that general welfare?

Many good reasons may be given for their not being concerned in the making of
a treaty; but not one, I imagine, that when made, at all events, whether they
think it for, or not, for the general welfare of the United States, they ought
still to provide for it. This appears to me so plain a case, that there does
not seem occasion to call in the spirit of our constitution as an arbitrator;
but yet let us call it in, in settling this point, allowed to be of the utmost
importance. We are all made to believe that the three departments of our
government, are mutual checks on each other, and that in those checks lies our
great security. This is what I call the spirit of our constitution, and
accordingly, even in this business of treaty-making, the senate is a check on
the president. But where is the check upon the president and senate united,
should they combine and act treacherously, if this new doctrine should take
place? Is there no danger here? No need for any father check? A treaty, when
made, is a supreme law of the land. Some trading nations would very probably,
to bring about a treaty to their liking with the United States, give very large
douceurs. I hope our president and senate will always be an uncorruptible body;
but history tells us that consuls and senates have had clammy fingers: what has
been, may be again. Thank heaven, our constitution does not desert us even
here. We must be all rogues, all rotten, before we can be ruined: when that
indeed is the case, there is no help for us; the body politic, like the natural
body, must be soon after entirely dissolved. They are both past cure.

Here let me declare my concern, that the congress sent for the papers relative
to the making of the British treaty. This step appears to me to have been
unnecessary, as the treaty itself was before them, a sufficient ground to form
their judgment upon. But the astonishment to hear it asserted, that they had no
right to enquire into its merits, must have irritated many. Heat begets heat;
and one part overstretching one way, often fires the other to do the like their
way. This is human nature collectively, as well as individually.

I confess myself one, though no favourer of the British treaty while pending,
made very happy, at hearing that so many members, who had expressed themselves
against it in the house, had sacrificed their private opinions to the peace of
the public. But, indeed, I never at any time thought that treaty of such
moment, that it should be refused to be provided for by our representatives.

Farther, what is here said, is intended to prove the constitutional right the
congress have to consider the merits of a treaty; not by any means to
insinuate, that upon every bad bargain, they should deny to provide for a
treaty. No! But upon the most glaring, trying occasions, like the British
parliament (fas est et ab host doceri) to exercise that right: this causes no
interruption amongst them in making their treaties with foreign nations, who
know they claim such a right, and will exercise it when they find it absolutely
necessary. What reasonable objection can they then have to our doing it only on
such occasions?

I am aware that foreign nations, as well as bad presidents and senates, would
wish to see no possibility of any after reckoning; but that the representatives
of the people should be obliged to provide for any treaty laid before them,
whatever may be its merits, duration or tendency. But our constitution provides
an ample remedy in such cases, if the people but do their parts. Send honest,
firm men, of good sound common sense, that can judge when it will be absolutely
necessary to apply that remedy; when not.

Still pardon me, my worthy friends, for thinking the manner of carrying on the
last election for our chief magistrate, very objectionable, and, if continued,
seems in its tendency, not only calculated to foment and keep up heats and
animosities amongst us, but in no long time, I am afraid, to overset our union,
or split and shiver us into many different governments; and if we once begin to
divide, no one can foresee the end of it.

Our constitution says, Each state shall appoint, in such manner as the
legislature thereof may direct, a number of electors, equal to the whole number
of senators and representatives to which the state may be entitled in the
congress: but no senator, or representative, or person holding an office of
trust or profit under the United States, shall be appointed an elector.

The electors shall meet in their respective states, and [shall] vote by ballot
for two persons, one of whom, at least, shall not be an inhabitant of the same
state with themselves; and they shall make a list of all the persons voted for,
and of the number of votes for each; which list they shall sign and certify,
and transmit, sealed, to the seat of the government of the United States,
directed to the president of the senate. The president of the senate shall, in
the presence of the senate and house of representatives, open all the
certificates, and the votes shall then be counted. The person having the
greatest number of votes shall be the president, if such number be a majority
of the whole number of electors appointed; and if there be more than one who
have such majority, and have an equal number of votes, then the house of
representatives shall immediately choose, by ballot, one of them for president;
and if no person have a majority, then, from the five highest on the list, the
said house shall, in like manner, choose the president. But in choosing the
president, the votes shall be taken by states, the representatives from each
state having one vote; a quorum for this purpose shall consist of a member or
members from two-thirds of the states: and a majority of all the states shall
be necessary to a choice. In every case, after the choice of the president, the
person having the greatest number of votes of the electors, shall be the
vice president; but if there should remain two or more, who have equal votes,
the senate shall choose from them, by ballot, the vice president.

The congress may determine the time of choosing the electors, and the day on
which they shall give their votes; which day shall be THE SAME throughout the
United States.

No person, except a natural born citizen, or a citizen of the United States at
the time of the adoption of this constitution, shall be eligible to the office
of president; neither shall any person be eligible to that office, who shall
not have attained the age of thirty-five years, and been fourteen years a
resident within the United States.

Now, my fellow citizens, suppose we read the latter part of the first of these
clauses, thus: But NO PERSON holding an office of trust or profit under the
United States, shall be appointed an elector. Do not the words, "no person," in
themselves, as completely include the senator and representative, without their
being particularly named, as with? Therefore, unless these words, "senator or
representative," are taken distinctly and separately, as the characteristic of
a legislative capacity, they are altogether nugatory and superfluous. Whoever
attends to the style of the constitution, will, I believe, find no where else
in it, such an unnecessary redundancy. Therefore, as it appears to me, senator
and representative being to be understood in the legislative character of each,
and ONLY so, they are both excluded, by the intention of the constitution
itself, from being electors; for, had it been designed that any assembly should
have appointed the electors from among themselves, precision required that the
words from among themselves, or others of like signification, should have been
inserted: as no such are, when they seem so necessary, no claim, especially one
of such moment, ought to be assumed from an, at least, equivocal expression.
Besides, to a public body appointed to fix upon another public body, upon a
business of the greatest importance, surely it must seem awkward and
indelicate, for the first public body to choose out of themselves, the whole, or
7-8ths of the other, upon an authority so doubtful and disputable, as not
precisely and clearly giving them leave to appoint a single one.

Again; the electors for a president being equal, in every state, to all the
members in each of those states, (senators and representatives) taken together,
the electors seem to be left to be appointed by the representatives ONLY, (they
being peculiarly the public's vicegerents) in order that our three departments
of government, the president, senate, and representative, might be ALL of a
piece, ALL the choice of the people; and, therefore, such electors, when thus
chosen to fix upon a president, ought to be as free, unshackled, and
independent, as the members of the assemblies themselves, who are chosen in
each state, to represent their respective citizens at large. This, I think,
cannot be denied; and, therefore, the elector, who, antecedent to his
appointment, has engaged to vote for any particular person, sins, in my
opinion, against the spirit and vitals of the constitution; and, as far as in
him lies, is sapping it, and introducing precedents of the most pestilential
nature; preventing the choice of the chief magistrate from being as free, and
as equally the people's choice, as that of the senate and representatives, when
they ought, all the three departments, to be so, as nearly as the peace and
safety of the whole United States will admit. If, in any state, it has
unavoidably happened, through accident, their assembly's meeting, or other
unpremeditated circumstances, that they have been obliged to strain upon the
meaning of the constitution, and to choose electors from among themselves; such
obstacles ought to be removed against the next election, that so dangerous a
practice may not be sanctioned by custom; and any particular state, not wishing
to be suspected as unfriendly to the union, will cheerfully conform its
actions, so as, if possible, not to interfere with the expectations of the
constitution.

Mankind are, generally, so unwilling to submit to restraints or rules, that
even such as are made by themselves, are strangely perverted, to gratify the
present moment; or essential parts of them often neglected, through mere
laziness, or inattention: for instance, the constitution plainly expects a
number of candidates for the president's place; or why the following
injunction? If no person have a majority, then, from THE FIVE HIGHEST on the
list, the said house, shall, in like manner, choose the president. Or why permit
each state to take one of the two persons to be chosen, from themselves? It is
owing to mere laziness, perverseness, or the arts of intriguing, designing men,
played upon you, that you have been diverted from attending to, and pursuing
this excellent, salutary provision? Are you infatuated to your own destruction?
I wish with all my heart, no state of the union would ever, in future, neglect
complying with this important constitutional right. Had they done this, in the
last election, there would have been sixteen candidates from among themselves;
and, if each state had, besides, chosen the other citizen a different one from
the choice of any of the other states, there would have been at least sixteen
more: What then? We should have mortified the sly emissaries, behind the
scenes, foreign and domestic, to see their deep plan, to set us all by the ears
with one another, effectually defeated. But our delusion this year, (I cannot
help calling it so) may have been permitted, my friends, to happen so early in
our national career, as a warning to us in future presidential elections, to be
more cautious, and tenacious of sticking as close as possible to the plain
meaning and expectation of our constitution, and not take upon us again, to be
wise above what is written. Such a true republican procedure, will not
occasion, in my opinion, much, if any more trouble to congress, or to any
particular state. But supposing it does; let us not again be persuaded out of
our senses, to shrink from it. Our happiness, our independence, our existence
as a nation, depends greatly on our peaceable, but firm, collective exertions
in this respect, for the time to come.

Some of the good effects probably will be,

First, greatly to diminish, if not to banish entirely, that too prevailing
spirit of jealousy and party, from among us: those most formidable weapons,
which we have so madly put into our enemies hands against ourselves; and
dexterously do they know, we clearly see, when and how to wield them against
us, to their own advantage. How distressing is it to perceive a number of our
back citizens, too unhappily possessed with an opinion, that the citizens on
the sea coast, or near it, having the opportunity, from their situation, to be
soonest and best informed, take advantage of them, to deceive and blind them
into the choice of men best suitable to themselves, and their purposes of trade
and speculation. Whilst too many of these, on the other hand, as weakly and
groundlessly, seem to distress themselves that the back country want to cram
down their throats, by their numbers, whatever measures of government they may
think proper. To banish this dreadful demon, by taking the sting, if possible,
out of those sly, ambitious, mischief-making go-betweens, of both town and
country, that raise and foment these jealousies, is the ardent wish of the
writer of this paper. It Is a necessary, but Herculean task; and without your
strong exertions, my friends, cannot be effectually done. For these men,
deficient in no arts of effrontery or cajolement, can transform themselves,
occasionally, into any characters; traveling up and down, backwards and
forwards, like Satan, seeking whom they may deceive and pervert, to aid their
treacherous or ambitious purposes. What mischief have they done in almost every
state! But so far, happy for us, one wholesome, skilfully applied catholicon,
will operate alike in all the states, and undoubtedly effect a radical cure.
It Is this -- Only let us all resolve to entertain no ungenerous sentiments of
each other, (at least, not so as to affect the public at large) remembering
that we are all citizens of one and the same great government; have one great
COMMON interest, and that nothing but such unnatural, shocking, impolitic
mistrusts among one another, can keep us from being as great a government as
ever the sun shined on. Away, then, with these jealousies among ourselves; turn
all your resentment, my fellow citizens, against these sly, political,
pretending, bettering gents; these suspicious zealots for reformation; these
mischievous propagators of innovation! It warms me beyond measure, when I think
of their impositions; especially, when I see how easily you swallow them. Can
you avoid seeing how these gents start themselves into consequence, merely by
striving, underhandedly, to set us all in a flame? Their first step, after
feeling their power of delusion, is generally to riggle themselves into our
state assemblies: success here, prompts them, by means of their fluent tongues
and pliant consciences, assisted by your own most unaccountable infatuation, to
look up to a seat in congress; and often do they gain their ends. After so many
instances of their treading the same beaten path, one after another, is it not
astonishing that you still continue to countenance the breed? At least, if
possible, in future, prevent their going to congress to spread their mischief
there. That body hitherto, upon the whole, has given great satisfaction; too
many of these ambitious dividers among them, will, if not prevented in time,
probably overset us all. Here act like true, generous federalists; prefer the
general, to your particular good, and keep them at home, though you dislike
their company, if you can do no better, by all the means in your power. If each
state would only so far baulk such inimical citizens in their ambitious career,
we should soon not only get rid of them, but demonstrate to all the world, that
for a man to rise in the United States, was only by noble, manly, virtuous
means; by sincerely and steadily promoting the general welfare; by overlooking
small inconveniences; by treating small errors with tenderness, and by
disinterestedly endeavoring to heal those of consequence, by fair, friendly
and candid reasoning. But reasoning will have no effect upon the men just
hinted at; they are callous to every noble, generous, tender feeling; self is
their all. But our keeping close to the expectations of the constitution, will
much lessen even their power of doing mischief, in many respects.

Another advantage is this: that no foreign nation would hardly attempt, again,
to interfere in our elections, from the little prospect of success in
corrupting sixteen states, choosing their chief magistrate at one and the same
time. And suppose the found means to tamper with three or four, the rest would
be fully sufficient to shelter us from the bad effects of their corruption.
But, could our enemies, themselves, have wished for a finer opportunity, than
that given them at our last election, to choose a chief magistrate for us;
having then to maneuver with the parties of only two men, pitted against one
another by ourselves. This certainly was making fine sport for, and costing
them less daubing, and less trouble.

Again; out of the thirty-two citizens to be chosen by the electors of the
sixteen states, only two, by the constitution, could be approved. This, far
from occasioning any heart-burnings to the other thirty citizens, they would
rather think it an honor (as it certainly would be) to have been so far
distinguished by their fellow citizens in their different states, and held up
as worthy of the most important offices; and though kept back for the present,
would be like a corpse of reserve against the next election, with this advantage
to the public in general, that in the interim, we may all grow better
acquainted with the real merit of each; and if elected again by their own
citizens, it would be a high sign of their fixed reputation.

Another advantage of this strict adherence to the constitution, would be, that
the nation in general, the United States themselves, could not be reflected on,
as carrying even the appearance of countenancing parties; whereas, in the last
election, the nation seemed to split itself into two parties, through
predilection for two citizens; a long noted, dreadful rock, a Caesar and
Pompey, a Scylla and Charybdis. We ought to have no predilection for any
citizen. It Is of no consequence to the nation, what citizen, from one end of it
to the other, is at our head, so that he is rightly chosen; an honest man, a
steady, firm federalist, no party man, of good sound common sense, and
otherwise constitutionally qualified. And here, I hope, I shall be pardoned for
saying, I always looked upon those as very weak friends, or artful, insidious,
undermining enemies, who made the execution of our president's office so
difficult, as requiring such extraordinary, uncommon talents. Plain failing
suits our constitution best: tricks, twistings, jostlings, and deep laid,
equivocal subterfuges in treaty-making, let European powers divert each other
with, and welcome. Our thousand league distance from these cunning, double
refined politicians, (with whom, the less we have to do, the better) is not
among the least of the blessings we have to thank a kind Providence for --
Capitulations or treaties, with either Great Britain or France, we have
experienced already, mean any thing, every thing, or nothing, at times, as may
suit either. But let us mind our own business; take as much care as we can of
ourselves; be a party in none of their wars; what treaties we may find it
necessary to make with them, let them not be of long duration, and let us, on
our parts, keep them faithfully. Honesty is the best and truest policy -- I
think we have hitherto observed this rule, and hope we shall always. Our
president, in treaty making, has the senate to consult; without two-thirds of
the members present, agreeing and advising him to make a treaty, he cannot do
it. What great difficulty then, can arise to an honest man, qualified as just
mentioned, with such assistance, that he can scruple to encounter?

No state, or number of states should, in my opinion, give the least reason to
suspect, that they wish to set up or name, upon these occasions, directly or
indirectly, any man or men, in a manner that may carry the most distant reason
to suspect they wish to push him or them through the rest of the states; the
more delicacy shown, the better; let every state be left entirely to itself.
Such a cautious, unmeddling behavior in each state, will naturally promote
harmony, and discard every degree of suspicion and jealousy amongst ourselves
as separate states. Now, added to this, if men, ready at their pen, wedded to
the constitution, of true, vital philanthropy, would, from the time the
election notice to choose another president is given out, 'till the very day of
election arrived, be as pressing as their powers of language will permit them,
to enforce to the constitutional electors of each state, the importance and
duty of their appointment; the great dependence the public had on their
faithfully (without predilection, favor or affection)discharging their trust,
he himself not mentioning a single name, this might be of the greatest
importance, and convince the errantest skeptic, that the republicans of the
United States had nothing more at heart, than to find out and obtain, in the
most direct and peaceable manner, the man (no matter of what particular state)
for their president, that the majority of the people at large had, by their
constitutional electors, made choice of.

Finding that the import of the few minutes I had made, with regard to the
insulting appeal of the French minister to the people at large, has been laid
before you by much better pens, in the public prints; I shall now content
myself with observing, that a stranger phenomenon has hardly been hard of in
the political world, than that an absolute monarch over one and the same
people, should, for the manifest interest of that nation, assist another people
to recover their liberties, and become republicans; that that very nation, but
a few years thereafter should guillotine that monarch, in order to become
republicans themselves; and, when hardly fixed as such, should, regardless of a
solemn treaty with the people they had assisted, like free-booters, suddenly
and unjustifiably fall upon their trade, and intermeddle with their government,
in a manner they, themselves, have shown all the world they would not suffer
the least glimpse of an attempt. What can this proceed from, but a romantic
giddiness of a restless power, setting itself no bounds; or, not unlikely,
prompted besides, by a jealousy of our rising importance among the trading
nations of the world, and wishing to check it? And here, by the bye, we shall
much deceive ourselves, if we imagine the other trading nations of Europe, are
without the like jealousy; for, however they may differ in other respects, they
seem not far from being unanimous in this. I only wish we were as firmly
agreed, in pursuing our own common interest and supporting our constitution and
government; harboring no mistrusts of either of its departments; Their
management, for eight years past, having shown them, upon the whole, not
unworthy or incapable of their trust. We had it not in our power to send
angels; as men, they have acquitted themselves to the admiration of all the
world. Any political differences that may arise in particular states, should,
like family variances, be kept within those states. Congress ought not to be
affected by them; and, indeed, will not, I think, if our elections are managed
strictly, according to the letter and spirit of the constitution.

No foreign minister whatever, I think, has a right to make appeals to the
people at large; but the French minister has done this. On such occasions
particularly, my friends, every respectful mark of confidential affection,
ought to be shown to all our three departments of government, that it may be
seen how ready the people are to give them every support in their power; and
all foreign ministers be convinced, that any little, indirect artifices of that
sort, only serve to unite the people, if possible, more firmly among
themselves, to oppose all such attempts, and to show, in the strongest manner,
their strict attention to their own rulers.

I cannot laugh at my fellow citizens, I am sure, for their zealous, uncommon
attachment to the French nation, on account of their aid in our struggle with
Great Britain; for, I believe, few have been more so than myself. That their
interest, as a nation, induced them to exert themselves to make the diversion
they did, I never had the least doubt of: their not doing it before Burgoyne's
defeat, that capital turn of the war in our favor, showed their cautious
resolve to be on the sure side. Yet, still, they had a right to our gratitude,
but, not that we should involve ourselves in ruin, or neglect our own pressing
affairs as a nation. But now, my friends, we must have eyes surely that see
not, if their very great love and friendship do not appear to us in their
genuine colors, every atom, self-interested to the extreme; craftily intended
to make us merely their puppets; to move by, and only by their wire. But, my
fellow citizens, be afraid of only their intrigues, against which, by what we
have already seen, we must be well assured, we cannot be too much on our guard;
their long, well-trained emissaries are but every where amongst us. Quiet
resignation to the resolves of the government we, ourselves, have set up, is my
uppermost political maxim. But, exclusive of this, I never thought I should
have been brought to like the British treaty, half so well as I do now:
Providence seems to have thrown it in our way, as the means to bring about our
being weaned, in time, from our over-ardent, too rapturous French love-sit. But
do not, my friends, surmise from hence, that I mean, indirectly, to persuade
you to a relapse to your former flame; by no means: we cannot but, by this
time, know them both right well; to divide you is equally their aim.
Corruption, we all know, is the most powerful wedge of division: watch,
therefore, all those subjects which seem to have a crack ready to receive this
wedge; keep a strict look out here, and your political peace and happiness
will, in all probability, be lastingly secured. On our sea coasts they may
scratch us; but not much, even there, if our country and other friends are
alert to assist us. But, in the end, I am fully persuaded, they will deeply
wound themselves. For what can the French, THEMSELVES ALONE, bring very
formidable against the United States? In what a number of ships and transports?
And, while bringing, to how many accidents exposed, in crossing the Atlantic?
And for what national purpose to them, cui bono? We have been obliged to fight,
and though all of us deprecate being reduced to that unnatural necessity again;
yet, if compelled, there is not the least doubt that our citizens, from one end
of the union to the other, will turn out again with the like spirit, and
advantaged by some experience, against any invaders, however giddily and
romanticly impelled; relying on the same providential assistance that has never
failed us hitherto.

Numbers freely allow, theoretically at least, that all governmental power
ought to spring from the people at large. But most of these very men again say,
that practically, they, the people, have from all ages shown, that they know
not how to use power when they have it, or to be contented long, under
constitutions that have sprung entirely from themselves. Our's is of this sort,
in the amplest manner: it has not only sprung, but, IN EVERY STEP, proceeded
under the people's auspices; and, at last, has solemnly received their consent.

You may, perhaps, think me, my fellow citizens, a very great enthusiast to our
constitution, when I give it as my sincere opinion, that the world never had so
good a one manufactured by man. Let all of us, therefore, join heart and hand
to make it as lasting as possible, and have the honor to superannuate such
assertions, so extremely derogatory, disgraceful and mortifying to human
nature. To countenance no tamperers with it, will much forward such an
animating resolution. As the Israelites were ordered to have the words which
Moses commanded them, in their hearts, and to write them on the posts of their
houses, and on their gates; so let us imitate this injunction with our
constitution, that excellent, (I think) heavenly gift also, by having it hung
up in the most conspicuous places in our houses; and, if the farewell legacy of
our worthy friend, President Washington, was joined with it, our rising
generation, in my opinion, would want nothing farther, completely to
understand, admire and love it. I always was, and very early, in congress,
showed myself against any irregular predilection of a citizen to any office
whatever; but, when regularly elected, and he has served with reputation to
himself, and done the public every service that could be expected from him in
his station; we thus have had value received, and ought, in our turn, from
gratitude, as good policy, to show him, in his retirement, all the respect and
honor we can, suitable to the station he has held. The thus joining President
Washington's farewell address, to our constitution, which he has so long, so
honestly, and firmly supported, will have a particular propriety in it, and, I
think, be a greater mark of honor to him, than if his statue was set up in
every state.

Like true republicans, my friends, whatever is once constitutionally carried,
whether by a single, or number of votes, the very nature, the foundation-spring
of our constitution, call upon you to submit quietly to, and to support it, if
necessary; otherwise, as far as is with you, you seem to turn tyrants,
determined to carry, at all events, your own opinion, joined with the fewest,
against the constitutional resolve, though attended with the greatest number of
votes. Is not this a strong imitation of the sic volo, sic jubeo, of a tyrant?
Will you not, by thus acting, lessen your right of being a republic? And, if
you still indulge such an overbearing spirit, can it be long before you lose it
altogether? The congress, unless an extreme bad choice is made, if wrong, will
soon rectify their error themselves. Publications in the papers too, decently
managed, often have, and may again, by giving useful hints, be of great
service; but, tumultuous opposition answers no end, but to disgrace the
promoters, to cause us to be laughed at by anti-republicans, to create
confusion, and to make ill-blood amongst ourselves.

The calling conventions of the people, on general governmental affairs, I
confess, I am now no friend to. During our struggle with Great Britain, they
were sometimes unavoidable. The least objectionable instance, seems to me, is,
when the president, after having duly consulted the senate about a treaty,
still appears to be (as it were) at bay, and therefore defers putting his fiat
thereto, as if wishing to know the general opinion without; here, if conducted
with propriety and decency, they may, perhaps, be sometimes of use.

Members, sent from each particular state, when met in congress, belong,
certainly, to the whole nation at large, to consult for their general welfare,
as one body. They ought, therefore, to go unfettered. That member who will
suffer himself to be fettered, in my opinion, is not worthy of his seat. He
cannot be a true, firm, staunch federalist at heart: for, as the poet says,
truly, "Man, like the generous vine, SUPPORTED lives,
"The strength he gains, is from THE EMBRACE he gives.


So a single state, the more strongly it embraces the whole general interest
united, the more it will find, in the end, its own real importance promoted and
strengthened, and on the most solid basis. And the particular member, who
uniformly acts on this principle, will find his own reputation, not only in the
state that sent him, among men of true worth, fixed upon the most reputable and
lasting footing; but, among the rest of the states, he will always be mentioned
with the highest esteem.

No man has more heartfelt joy than myself, to find our young nation, but of
yesterday, already become the asylum from tyranny, wherever showing itself. Let
our fellow men come and welcome, from any where and in any numbers, we have
room enough for them all. The only dread to be apprehended to them, as well as
to ourselves, is the mischievous use, artful, wicked men, (and too many such we
have) may make of the long fixed habits and biases they may bring with them; by
cunningly playing and practicing upon them these habits, to pervert them to
their own diabolical purposes, before we have time to get thoroughly acquainted
with each other.

Men devoted to particular, ancient families, having had famous names, from
their infancy, sounded in their ears, and applauded like demigods, in the
sports and songs of their native country; I say, men of this cast, are too apt
to be taken in by designing, watchful way-layers. In the beginning of our
struggle with Great Britain, we had a formidable number of Scotch, in
North Carolina, so infatuated to the race of Stuart, as to cause much trouble
to themselves and us. From some items, not very long since in the papers, with
regard to suspect, there may be some dust attempted to be kicked up amongst
those of that nation, to put them upon that, or some other family track. But,
my Irish friends, be on your guard: I take the liberty to give you this hint,
as being of Irish extract myself, by the mother's side, whose father was a
native of Ireland, whom I am named after.

Your open, manly, generous, unsuspecting spirit, is well known; so is the
tincture of credulity, naturally springing therefrom, as well known. Here you
have often been, here you will still often be played upon, and your greatest
caution is necessary to prevent it. Your distresses in Ireland, we have heard
of; have felt and sympathized with you on that occasion. We are happy to know
our country can relieve you; and you will soon find yourselves, in all
probability, actually relieved, if you do not suffer yourselves to be cajoled
into parties to distress us, and, in the end, distress and disappoint
yourselves of that assistance you wish for. You are now in a land, that with
half the industry and prudence you were obliged to use Ireland, you may gain a
landed property, all really your own, sufficient to support yourselves and
families decently and independently. Let this very heart-chearing prospect add
spurs to your industry; strive to rise gradually, peaceably and honestly, and
pay no attention to foreign emissaries, emissaries, or to restless, designing,
ambitious men, amongst ourselves, wishing to come country or family over you,
or, in some other artful manner, to draw our now COMMON country into confusion,
for their selfish ends. Take this in good part, my worthy, unsuspicious
friends, however impertinent and officious you may think it; in whatever light
it may appear, or be made to appear to you, I am conscious it comes from an
undesigning breast, that loves you, and wishes for nothing more than to see
peace, harmony, and universal philanthropy promoted, not only from one end of
the United States, but from one end of the world to the other.

I am persuaded, from what I have seen, that more than half the misfortunes of
any consequence, that have happened amongst us, has been caused from the
precipitation of honest men, not aware of, or giving themselves time to guard
against the secret, deep-laid, round-about ambushes of crafty knaves,
indefatigably laboring to have no body credited but themselves; and most of
these men, so deceived, have been convinced too late, as well for their's, as
the public's peace, of their own hasty, infatuated credulity, being the sole
occasion of all the mischief.

My reader, still permit an old man one small digression. Little things, mere
names and sounds, have sometimes considerable effects. I have often wished the
name of our nation was Columbia; and, more than once, took, when I had a right,
some pains to have it so. One of our citizens calling himself a Columbian,
would sound, I confess, more honestly in my ear, than now, as in common,
calling himself an American, and, I am sure, more harmoniously than an United
States man; or than, by an awkward periphrase, (that few, if any, can bring
themselves to) a man of the United States. From hence, it seems to me, the word
American, is so, continually, by foreigners as well as by ourselves, applied to
our persons, trade, customs, etc. as, the American trade, an American ship,
etc. scarcely ever, I believe, an United States ship, etc. Again; the word
American, (citizen being understood, seldom expressed) stands alone, which,
every time I hear it named, methinks I hear the shade of the great Columbus
reproaching us for abetting and continuing the cheat upon him, who, though like
Horace, he might say exegi monumentum oere perennius; yet, that republicans
seem to wish, and even to take pains to destroy it: for, is it not full as easy
for one of our citizens to say abroad, I am a Columbian; which, too, if
adopted, would be peculiar and precise, than to say, as they do, indistinctly,
I am an American; merely to avoid, as it seems to me, this uncouth expression,
I am a United States man; or, this round-about one, I am a citizen of the
United States. This shows what pains is taken amongst us, and how much out of
the common road, to countenance injustice. Pardon this sensibility in favor of
the fame of a man, dead several hundred years since.

The writer of this paper is an old public servant. No citizen, high or low, in
or out of office, from one end of the United States to the other, was earlier
than he, in the British struggle. He, like the widow with her mite, put his all
into that cause, his person; his services to the utmost of his power; his
property of town and country, were all, from the first to the last of that
struggle, at the public service, and made by them, at times, very free with,
for which he never demanded, or wished to demand, one farthing compensation;
excepting in the three first congresses, to which he had the honor,
unsolicited, to be called out by his fellow citizens; of the provision for that
service, he partook.

Besides, indeed, when his country property was sequestered, and his town,
though under protection of a capitulation, taken from him, was in very little
better situation; himself sent and made a close prisoner at Augustine; his
family shipped off to Philadelphia, and in distress there; he then shared part
of some public assistance, which he afterward repaid to our public treasurer,
with interest. Not improbably, it may be said, vanity is the impulse here; be
it so, my reader. But I entreat you to believe it forced out from a wish to
procure attention to the VERY IMPORTANT HINTS in this paper, as coming from a
well-known, independent, friendly fellow citizen, devoted to our constitutional
union, and therefore,

A STEADY FEDERALIST.
Charleston, January 30, 1797. P. S. I am glad to hear the President has
recommended a national university; I am persuaded it will tend to what we want
most, a complete union and general acquaintance with each other, throughout the
United States.




