REV. BROTHER HARRIS's SERMON BEFORE THE FREE MASONS AT GROTON.

IGNORANCE AND PREJUDICE SHOWN TO BE THE ONLY ENEMIES TO FREE MASONRY... THEIR
OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED AND ANSWERED...AND THE TRUE DESCRIPTION OF THE SOCIETY
GIVEN IN A SERMON AT THE Consecration OF Saint Paul's Lodge IN GROTON, AND THE
Installation of its Officers IN DUE FORM, AUGUST 9th, A. L. 5797.

By the Rev. Brother THADDEUS M. HARRIS, CHAPLAIN TO THE GRAND LODGE OF
MASSACHUSETTS.

"Holding fast the faithful word -- that he may be able both to exhort the
Brethren and to convince gain savers." LEOMINSTER, MASS. PRINTED BY BROTHER
CHARLES PRINTISS. A. L. 5797.

GRAND LODGE, AT GROTON, AUGUST 9th, A. L. 5797.
VOTED, That the R. W. Brothers, WILLIAM DUNN, Esquire ISAIAH THOMAS, Esquire and JAMES
BRAZER, be a Committee, to wait on the Rev. Brother THADDEUS MASON HARRIS, and
return him the thanks of the Lodge, for his ingenious and animating Discourse,
delivered this day before the Lodge, and request a copy for the press.

Attest, ISAAC HURD, G. Sec. Pro. Tem.

"Hearing the reason of the case with patience and unprejudicedness is an
equity which men owe to every truth that can in any manner concern them; and
which is necessary to the discovery of every error."

CLARKE'S DEMONSTRATION, etc. EXODUS XVI. 15. "And when the children of Israel
saw it they said one to another, it is MANNA, for they wist not what it was.
And Moses said unto them, this is the bread which the Lord has given you to
eat."


THE children of Israel, in their travels through the deserts of Arabia toward
the land of Canaan, murmured against Moses and against the Lord because the
scanty stores they brought from Egypt were nearly exhausted, and they were
ignorant of the means for a new recruit. In particular they wanted bread. They
were gratified by a miraculous providential supply. Bread was granted them --
BREAD FROM HEAVEN! mysterious in its origin and character, but highly agreeable
in its relish, salutary in its nature and nutritive in its qualities.

THERE are circumstances, connected with its bestowment and reception,
deserving our particular notice; and the subject will lead to some reflections
applicable to the society on whose account we assemble. With this view I
propose the following method.

1st. TO consider what notice was taken by the Israelites of the provision and
refreshment, divinely furnished them; 2dly. SHOW what it really was; and 3dly.
APPLY the subject to the present occasion, by enquiring what is said of Free
Masonry by those who know not what it is, and by describing its real nature and
character.
WE are, first then to consider what notice was taken by the Israelites of the
provision and refreshment furnished them by a special divine providence in the
deserts of Arabia.

NO sooner did they see it than they cried out one to another "it is manna, it
it manna, for they knew not what it was." Whether this was an exclamation of
surprise, a question of curiosity, or an expression of contempt, we shall not
decide. Critics and commentators seem at a loss how to understand it. One says
it is this and another that, for they know not what it is. Vide POLI synops.
criticorum, in loc.
However, it is plain enough that manna, let it mean what it will, was not the
proper definition nor description of the admirable provision. The derivation of
the word manna is variously given by learned men. PHILO JUDAUS and JOSEPHUS
make it to signify? what is this? and so do the ixx. and R. SOLOMON, R.
MINACHEN, and others. Accordingly it is thus translated in MATTHEW'S, the
GENEVA, and DOWAY versions. It is so rendered, also, by the celebrated Dr.
GEDDES. But COVERDALE renders it "this is man's;" our translation, "it is
manna," and others; "it is a portion," -- The declaration that "they knew not
what it was, and the reply of MOSES, would lead one to suppose that the phrase
before was a question. Our only surprise is that it should afterward pass into
a descriptive name. Thus we used a very vulgar phrase in speaking of some thing
of which we have forgotten the name, and say "the what do you call it."
And so Moses informed them by telling them, "this is the bread which the Lord
has given you to eat." Notwithstanding, they persisted in giving their own
opinion of it, tho they were unacquainted both with its name and nature.
Compare Deuteronomy. viii. 3. where Moses expressly asserts their entire ignorance of
it.
! What a strange contradiction! But not stranger than all are likely to fall
into who pretend to decide upon matters which they do not understand. "They
said one to another it is manna;" and manna it has been called ever since. It
is no easy matter to alter names. When people misjudge at first, it is very
difficult to rectify their opinion. Ignorance is blind and perverse; prejudice
is positive and obstinate. What is misconceived and misapplied seldom
afterward retrieves its real estimation. Men are apt to judge at large,
reflect at random and condemn at a venture; without waiting for patient
examination or satisfactory evidence. Now, nothing can be more contrary both to
equity and sound reason than such precipitate judgments. Those who build
opinions upon conjectures must often be in the wrong. They may make gross
blunders, and do great injustice. The apostle Jude gives such a rebuke: "These,
says he, speak evil of the things they know not." -- It has been the practice
of vulgar ignorance to abuse what it could not comprehend; and to assert that
there must be faults, where it had not the sagacity to discover excellence.

I. BUT I proceed to enquire what this wonderful provision really was, about
which they were so ignorant. -- That there should no doubt remain in the minds
of those to whom it was sent, Moses informed them that it was the bread which
the Lord had given them to cat. In like manner David calls it "the corn of
heaven," and "angels food." Psalm. lxxviii. 24, 25. See also its true name in
Nehemiah ix. 15.
The Scripture describes particularly its appearance and properties, and
mentions its coming down with the dew; alike the gift of refreshment from
above. And it retains still its fame in the East, being called "celestial
sweetmeat." Les orientaux appellent la manne qui tomba aux Hebreux dans le
Desert, la Dragee ou Consiture de la Tours Puissance, ce que les Arabes
signifient par Haluat al Kodrat, et les Turcs par Kodret Kalvasi." HERBELOT,
biblioth. Orientale. The Greeks called it acromeli, acrial honey. ATHRN. l. 11.
and DIOS. lib. 2. cap. 101.
Nor can there be any propriety in denying to the gift its real character and
intrinsic value, because its appearance was not prepossessing. It is sufficient
that its origin was divine, and its uses excellent. If this could not recommend
it, we may expect that the best things and richest blessings will be treated
with neglect or spurned with contempt.

THAT it possessed remarkably palatable and nutritive qualities is evident both
from the divine design of its bestowment, and from its use. The author of the
book of Wisdom says that it so accommodated itself to every one's taste as to
prove agreeable to all. His words are, "thou feddest thine own people with
angels food, and did send them from heaven bread prepared without their
labor; able to content every man's delight, and agreeing to every taste. For
thy sustenance declared thy sweetness unto thy children, and, serving to the
appetite of the eater and tempered itself to every man's liking." Wisdom xvi.
20.21.


FROM modern samples of this substance, as it is gathered in the East, we
perceive that it has the appearance of condensed honey, and a taste of
agreeable sweetness. A late celebrated traveller into Arabia says, "it is used
now as sugar in several dishes -- it is nourishing -- and when newly gathered
has no purgative qualities." NICBUHR, v 2. p. 362 of the translation -- and
Father PINOLO, describing that of California which falls as is supposed with
the dew, says, that, without the whiteness of refined sugar, it has all its
sweetness.
Its medicinal effects are probably occasioned by its being left some time; in
consequence of which it foments in a degree, becomes candyed, and loses its
relishing taste and nutritive properties. -- To the Israelites, who were
obliged to consume, each day, their given portion, it afforded an agreeable,
nourishing, wholesome repast; and was their principal aliment during a period
of forty years. -- Though liable to corruption, it did not become bad unless
improperly used or unlawfully abused. Exodus xvi. 20.
And the best things are perverted and debased by ill usage.

IT is also worthy of remark that it had moral tendencies. It was granted in
daily showers, that they might be kept in a continual thankful dependence upon
divine providence. It was in such small grains, and was so scattered, that they
were obliged early and seasonably to begin their work of collecting it, or they
would fail of a supply. Thus were they taught industry; and learned that their
own endeavors were to be united to the assistance and to cooperate with the
grace of GOD. And a double portion on the last day of the week, and its
nonappearance on the sabbath, gave them a very striking intimation that the
institution of a day of actual rest from labor was to be religiously and
devoutly observed.

THE manner too in which it was distributed was admirably calculated to excite
and encourage a spirit of liberality and generosity, a willingness to impart to
those whose industry had been less successful, or who were unable to gather for
their selves: for in measuring their respective gatherings before they went to
their tents, those who had collected a greater quantity than sufficed for their
immediate need or use freely gave the overplus to those who had not enough. "So
that he who gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered little had no
lack." In this sense the words are understood by the Apostle, 2 Cor. viii. 14,
15. who uses the passage as an apt illustration of his most excellent argument
for that happy equality, in the distribution of the good things of this life,
which our mutual relation to each other and particular exigencies may requires;
that he who abounds should willingly impart of his superfluity, so that he who
is destitute may obtain a competent supply.

IT would be easy to point out the very striking resemblance which FREE MASONRY
bears to the moral qualities and purposes here enumerated; but it is too
obvious to need a more particular reference. I shall, therefore, go on to make
one more remark, in which the analogy is also apparent.

AFTER all, there were some things in the nature of this heavenly provision
which could not easily be accounted for. Where it was prepared, and how it was
made, they could not tell. There they were in the dark. -- Why the same
substance which melted and evaporated in the heat of the sun when it was left
exposed in the field, should, only upon being brought into the tent, become of
so condensed a consistence that it might be beaten to powder in a mortar or
ground in a mill, and baked in an oven, Numb. xi. 9.
was beyond their comprehension. And why it should be endued with such a
religious reference to the observations of the sabbath that none fell on that
day, and a double quantity the day before was a circumstance that excited their
surprise. Surprise sometimes degenerates into stupidity. Oftener than once they
despised and loathed this miraculous and delicious provision.

SUCH is the pride of the human understanding that it has no great opinion of
that which it cannot fully comprehend. Whatever has any thing of mystery in it
is very likely to be slighted. Though it possess all the characters of
excellence, and all the recommendations of utility, yet if it elude
investigation and have some secret qualities "past finding out," doubt will be
immediately entertained whether it be "worthy of all acceptance;" And opinions
propogated tending to lessen its character and deny its importance. -- This was
the case with regard to the heavenly refreshment furnished in the wilderness to
the Israelites. They valued it not because they lacked "the onions, the leeks,
and garlicks of Egypt." iHear their discontented sneers.! "But now our soul is
dried away; there is nothing at all, besides this manna, before our eyes."
Numb. xvi. 6.
-- A like spirit of disapprobation and rejection the same nation discovered of
GOD's most precious gift. They murmured at JESUS because he said, your fathers
did eat manna in the wilderness and are dead. I am that bread of life which
comes down from Heaven, of which if a man eat he shall live forever." John vi.
41, 51.
They rejected the Messiah before they adverted to the divine authority of his
credentials. This, and the former circumstance with which it was compared,
could be only from PREJUDICE: for prejudice is a judgment formed before hand
without examination. How unreasonable and unjust must such a judgment be! "Qui
statuit aliquid, part inaudita altera,
Aequum licet statuerit, haud aequus erit."
Seneca in Medea.
And how great a bar to all after information! For, if the mind be warped by
prepossessions, free enquiry into the merits of a cause is prevented. Prejudice
restrains all candid interpretations of motives or principles. It discolors
every object; or represents it in a false light. It leads to a decision equally
ungenerous and unfair; for it often presumes to consider the most slight and
frivolous circumstances as satisfactory materials for consident assertion and
decisive sentence. It is the immediate and copious source of evil surmises and
unkind suspicions. It gives rise to a caviling censoriousness, mean
insinuations, and sarcastic sneers. -- Wherever there is a secret bias of mind
previously formed, it will catch readily at every little incident and
appearance to increase its own propension: and turn every current of
observation into its own corrupt channel. -- It perverts and misrepresents the
very best things: turns honor into disgrace, merit into mischief, christianity
into superstition, and virtue into vice.

CAUTIONED and instrusted by our subject, and the remarks which it has
suggested, let us not, MY HEARERS, form our opinion either of persons or things
too hastily; and never proceed upon surmises and precarious conjectures. There
is danger in making up a precipitate judgment. Hasty conclusions are the chief
cause of all our mistakes and errors. Let us not forget to examine before we
judge; and to understand before we decide. To ridicule things we never took
pains to enquire into, would be unfair. To condemn practices, the grounds and
foundation of which we never examined and know nothing about. would be unjust
and cruel. A discreet person will avoid being preremptory in his remarks, and
decline hazarding an opinion upon that of which he is either totally ignorant,
or but partially informed. He follows the prudent counsel of the ancient Wise
Man; "blame not before thou have examined the truth. Understand first, and then
rebuke. Answer not before thou have heard the cause; and strive not in a matter
that concerns thee not." -- "He that answers a matter before he hears it,
it is folly and shame unto him." -- Upon the same principle of equity is that
maxim in Common Law, "every man is presumed to be innocent till he is proved to
be guilty." No one is to be arraigned without evidence, nor condemned before he
has made his plea of defense. Verdict is never passed upon a cause unheard.

It is a good rule in all doubtful matters to suspend our opinion, at least
till positive proof is obtained on which to found it. Until we have fully
ascertained the real state of the case, let us always be willing to put the
fairest construction it will admit; and even to hope the best of a thing where
appearances are against it. Where doubt hesitates, let candor prompt; and where
justice balances let mercy prevail. Even where we find ourselves obliged to
blame the principles of a certain sect or party, let us not be so uncharitable
as to confound all its adherents and followers under one general indiscriminate
censure. Especially let us not charge them with such consequences of their
tenets as they disavow.

Lastly: WHERE we know but in part, and see but in part, we will have the
modesty not to presume to decide upon the whole. Carefully will we avoid all
prejudice, and all asperity of opinion. We will be kind and liberal both in
sentiment and conduct; encourage in ourselves and approve in others whatever
tends to promote the interests of mankind and contribute to the refreshment of
life; and will humbly hope by the exercise of amiable dispositions and
beneficent actions toward each other, sanctified and perfected by piety
toward GOD, to become prepared for that glorious society on high, where we
shall be permitted to eat of the HIDDEN MANNA, and honored also with the
possession of the WHITE STONE in which is the new and mysterious name written
which no man knows saving he that receives it. Revel. ii, 17.


I HAVE dwelt the longer upon this part of the subject because from prejudice,
as well as from ignorance, arise most of the objections against FREE MASONRY,
and all the misrepresentations of its principles and practices. As the origin
of such dislike to our institution is so well known, it might be deemed paying
too great respect to its cavils to take any notice of them at all: but, lest it
should be thought that we are desirous of evading an answer from an inability
to vindicate, we shall now condescend, as was proposed.

III, TO inquire what is said of FREE MASONRY by those who "know not what it
is."

THE opinion of the initiated is well known. They all unite in commending the
Society with a warmth that borders upon enthusiasm. They discover an attachment
to it, at which ignorance wonders and prejudice sneers.

ONE of the most frequent objections urged against FREE MASONRY is "the
profound secrecy observed upon certain parts of the institution." It is queried
how it is consistent with those principles of good will we profess, to conceal
any thing from the world. We answer, that, to the wise and virtuous the arcana
of the Craft, under proper sanctions, are freely communicated. But to reveal
them to the ignorant and vicious would be prostituting their purpose and
profaning their sanctity. To divulge them in common would be to annihilate the
society: because they are its distinguishing features, the characterristics of
the order, and the means of its preservation. Without them, therefore, it could
not subsist. -- Besides, were all men acquainted with them, without regard to
selection or desert, the peculiar obligation to good offices arising from the
institution would revert back to the general duty of all mankind, and be
subject to all those deductions it now meets with in the world at large, and
against which it is our first principle to guard. --

HOWEVER, to have secrets is not peculiar to FREE MASONRY. Every trade, every
art, and every occupation, has its secrets, not to be communicated but to such
as have become proficients in the science connected with them, nor then but
with proper caution and restriction; and oftentimes under the guard of heavy
penalties. Charters of incorporation are granted by civil Governments for their
greater security, and patents for their encouragement. -- Nay every Government,
every statesman, and every individvidual, has secrets, which are concealed with
prudent care, and confided only in the trusty and true.

NOTHING more surely, need be said in apology for the mystery and concealment
FREE MASONS profess. -- I will proceed to another objection allied to the
foregoing, which ignorance also has surmised and prejudice propagated.

IT is pretended that "all who are initiated must swear to conceal certain
secrets before they are communicated to them, or they have it in their power to
examine their nature and tendency: and that this practice is unlawful." There
would be some force in this objection were the obligation in itself immoral, or
the communications and requirements compatible with the great laws of religion
or civil society: the very reverse of which is the case.

WHAT the ignorant call "the oath" is simply an obligation, covenant, and
promise, exacted previously to the divulging of our means of recognizing each
other, that they shall be kept from the knowledge of the world, lest their
original intent should be thwarted and their benevolent purport prevented. --
Now? pray what harm is there in this?? Do you not all, when you have any thing
of a private nature which you are willing to confide in a particular friend
before you tell him what it is, demand a solemn promise of secrecy? And,? is
there not the utmost propriety in knowing whether your friend is determined to
conceal your secret before you presume to reveal it? Your answer confutes your
cavil. --

IT is further urged against FREE MASONS that "Their society is not founded on
universal benevolence, because they oblige their selves to be kindest and most
generous to their own members." We admit the truth of the declaration that our
first and choicest services are paid to our brethren: but then we think it
would be the greatest injustice if it were otherwise. Certainly a
discrimination ought to be made between the deserving and the underserving;
those who have a claim upon our assistance and charity, and those who have not.
So the Apostle exhorts the Christians to do good as they have opportunity to
all men; but enjoins their special and distinguishing regards to such as are of
the household of faith. Galat. vi. 10.


YET though we give a decided preference to such as have been tried, and
proved, and found to be worthy; and have, in consequence, been made members of
the masonic family; we are known to profess and practice charity unconfined and
liberality unlimited, and to comprehend in the wide circle of our benevolence
the whole human race.

IT is, also, frequently argued against FREE MASONRY that "some of those who
belong to it are intemperate, profligate, and vicious." But nothing can be more
unfair or unjust than to depreciate or condemn any institution, good in itself,
on account of the faults of those who pretend to adhere to it. The abuse of a
thing is no valid objection to its inherent goodness. Worthless characters are
to be found, occasionally, in the very best institutions upon earth. "If the
unworthiness of a professor casts a reflection upon the profession, it may be
infered, by parity of reason, that the misconduct of a christian is an argument
against christianity. But this, is a conclusion which, I presume, no man will
allow; and yet it is no more than what he must subscribe who is so unreasonable
as to insist on the other." See the excellent sermon of the Rev. Brother
BROCKWELL, preached at Boston, 1749.
Nor is it any evidence that Civil Laws and Political Institutions are hurtful
or unserviceable because there are corrupt citizens and disorderly members of a
community.

THE fact is, the best things may be abused. The bread of heaven grew corrupt
when used indiscretely. The common blessings of life are turned into curses if
misapplied.

WHEN you see base and unworthy men among the FREE MASONS, depend upon it, the
fault is not in the Institution, but in their selves. They have deviated from
the principles of the Craft. They have counteracted their profession: and are
as bad masons as men.

WE do not hesitate to appeal to the world in justification of the purity of
our moral system. Our Constitutions are well known. We have submitted them
freely to general investigation. We solemnly avouch them as the principles by
which we are governed, the foundation on which we build, and the rules by which
we work. We challenge the most severe critic, the most precise moralist, the
most perfect christian, to point out any thing in them inconsistent with good
manners, fair morals, or pure religion. We feel assured that every one who will
take pains to consult the book must be convinced that the institution is
friendly to the best interests of mankind, well calculated to meliorate the
disposition and improve the human character, and to adorn its faithful
adherents with every natural, social and religious virtue.

IV. THIS remark leads me to show as I proposed, in the last place, what FREE
MASONRY really is.

IT is a moral order of enlightened men, founded on a sublime, rational, and
manly PIETY, and pure and active VIRTUE; with the praiseworthy design of
recalling to our remembrance the most interesting truths in the midst of the
most sociable and innocent pleasures, -- "miscuit utile dulci,
-- delectando, pariterque monendo."
Horace,
and of promoting, without ostentation, or hope of reward, the most diffusive
BENEVOLENCE, the most generous and extensive PHILANTHROPY, and the most warm
and affectionate BROTHERLY LOVE. The members are united together by particular
obligations, and acquainted by certain signs and tokens preserved with
inviolable secrecy from remotest ages. These were originally adopted in order
to distinguish one another with ease and certainty from the rest of the world;
that imposters might not intrude upon their confidence and brotherly affection,
nor intercept the fruits of their beneficence. They become an universal
linguage, by which a brother in distress in a foreign country may make his self
understood to such of the Society there as could relieve and protect him. The
decorations and symbols of the Craft which are those of a very common and
useful art, ARCHITECTURE.
and their prase-ology, which is borrowed from its higher orders, serve to
characterize an institution which might justly claim more noble devices; and at
the same time are used either as emblems or indications of the simplest and
most important MORAL TRUTHS.

IT collects men of all nations and opinions into one amiable and permanent
association, and binds them by new and irrefragable obligations to the
discharge of every relative and moral duty: and thus becomes the most effectual
support and brightest ornament of social life, and opens a wider channel for
the current of benevolent affections, and a new source to human happiness.

ITS laws are REASON, EQUITY; its principles, BENEVOLENCE, LOVE; and its
religion, PURITY and TRUTH. Its intention is PEACE ON EARTH; and its
disposition, GOOD WILL TOWARD MEN.

"I THINK (says a fine writer Rev. DR. MILNE, Grand Chaplain, in a sermon
before the Grand Lodge of England, 1788.
) we are warranted in concluding that a Society thus constituted, and which may
be rendered so admirable an engine of improvement, far from meriting any
reproachful or contumelious treatment, deserves highly of the community; and
that the ridicule and affected contempt which it has sometimes experienced can
proceed only from ignorance or from arrogance; from those; in sine, whose
opposition does it honor, whose censure is panegyric, and praise would be
censure."

ASSUREDLY then, my hearers, you will with me congratulate the members of SR.
PAUL's lodge on the agreeable event of this day.

RIGHT WORSHIPFUL MASTER, WORSHIPFUL WARDENS, RESPECTED OFFICERS, AND BELOVED
BRETHREN.

ACCEPT my affectionate salutations -- accept the felicitations of all the
friends of Masonry. We are pleased with your harmony and zeal, and rejoice in
your establishment and prosperity. Your success is connected with the best
interests of humanity.! May the social virtues you cultivate and the heartfelt
pleasures you experience in the lodge, be your companions through life! Their
mild influence, their benignant spirit, will animate every scene of duty,
alleviate every corrosion of care, heighten every sensation of joy, and in the
hour of dissolution shed divine transport on your souls.

LET all my brethren present be willing that I should remind them that in vain
do we attempt the vindication of our most excellent Society, or the
commendatory description of its purposes and requirements, if our conduct
contradict our profession. Let us then be cautious to avoid all those
improprieties and vices which might tarnish the luster of our jewels, or
diminish the credit of the Craft. Masonry will rise to the zenith of its glory
if our lives do justice to its noble principles, and the world see that our
actions hold an uniform and entire correspondence with the incomparable tenets
we profess. Thus we shall "obtain a good report of them that are without:" "and
those who speak evil of us will be ashamed, seeing they falsely accuse our good
conversation" and misrepresent our generous purpose. "For so is the will of GOD
that with well doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men."

REMEMBER that we are THE ASSOCIATED FRIENDS OF HUMANITY; that our sacred union
embraces in its philanthrophy amities of the Gospel; and that charity in its
kindest exercise and largest extent is our distinguishing characteristic.
Others wear the warmth of summer in their face, and the coldness of winter in
their heart; but a Mason's disposition should be mild as the breeze, open as
the air, and genial as the sun -- cheering and blessing all around him: and his
deeds pleasant as the clear shining after the rain; and refreshing, as the dewy
cloud in a harvest day. Isai. XVIII. 4.


MAY the Assembly at large be convinced that prejudicies against FREE MASONRY
are ill founded, and that the Society is worthy of the highest encouragement
and the warmest commendation. "All VOLUNTARY ASSOCIATIONS that are harmless to
the Public, may justly claim the protection -- if beneficial to it, the
encouragement of the Citizens and Laws."

WISHART.


FINALLY; let us all pray that the priveleges of equal right may be widely
extended, and all men become free: that wars and contentions may be forever
terminated: that peace and happiness may be the uninterrupted enjoyment of all
mankind: and to GOD ascend the universal; united; unceasing ascription of love
and joy and praise!

So mote it be!


