LETTERS ON MISSIONS; ADDRESSED TO THE PROTESTANT MINISTERS OF THE BRITISH
CHURCHES.

BY MELVILL HORN, Late CHAPLAIN of Sierra Leone, in Africa.

Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things
are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise,
think on these things.

PHILIP. iv. 8. SCHENECTADY: Printed by C. P. WYCKOFF, in State-Street. 1797.

PREFACE.
TOGETHER with these Letters, I beg leave to lay before my Readers some account
of the steps by which I was induced to write them, and to solicit the exercise
of candor and indulgence to their Author.

I had gone to Sierra Leone with the hope of doing something toward the
establishment of a Mission to the natives; and, after a residence of fourteen
months, I returned to England, from a conviction that I could not effect my
purpose. I am fully of opinion that Missions would succeed in those parts, if
they were taken up with proper spirit, and conducted in a proper manner. The
natives are friendly and tractable, and appear desirous of information in
religion as well as in letters. The lives and properties of Missioners would be
safe* The necessaries of life would be found plentiful and cheap; and European
accomodations (as far as it is compatible with such an undertaking) might be
procured at Free-Town, Bence Island, or from the ships which trade in that
river. Independent of other unpleasant things, which apply pretty generally to
all Missions, I know nothing peculiar as objectionable to African Missions, but
the matter of health. The insalubrity of the climate has indeed been much
exaggerated, but it will ever remain an incontestible truth, that the children
of the North do not generally enjoy health and longevity under the line.
Perhaps the heat of Bengal may be greater than that of Sierra Leone; but until
the last place be brought into the same state of cultivation as the first, it
will not be found so healthy. Great improvements are daily making at Free Town,
and the benefits, which result from them, in respect of health, are already
felt in the Colony. But African Missionaries cannot enjoy the advantages of
Free Town. They must, I conceive, become inhabitants of the native villages,
and as those villages seldom contain more than sixty or eighty adults, I should
suppose, that, to effect the conversion of the natives, Missionaries must
become itinerant, as well as stationary: so that they will be obliged to take
the country as it is. Whether any Gentleman will come forward to countenance
Missions there, or whether Christian Ministers of any denomination will embark
in the undertaking, time must determine.

I said I returned to England from a conviction that I could not effect my
purpose -- this requires explanation. I could not persuade myself to take a
sickly, delicate woman and young children, and place them in an African wood,
where I must leave them for one half of my time, while I was engaged in
rambling from village to village. Acquainted as I am with their health and
habits, I could hardly indulge a rational hope of their being able to support
the hardships of such a life for many months. Had I considered this point well,
I had never gone to Sierra Leone; but, misled by my partial attachments, I
hoped what I wished rather than what I had reason to expect. I hoped I might
unite the Chaplainship of Free Town with my missionary pursuits, and by that
means reconcile the duty I owed to my family, by providing them needful
accomodations, with that duty I owed to God, in propagating his truth* But I
had soon reason to see that my hopes, in that respect were unfounded and
chimerical. -- Whether this reason for my return will be thought satisfactory
by others I don't know; but it is so to my own conscience. This, as far as I
know myself, was my principal reason for relinquishing the undertaking; for
though I had other reasons of considerable weight which concurred to influence
my conduct, yet I believe such is my prediliction for the service, that had I
been a single man, I should have persisted in my purpose notwithstanding all
the remonstrances of my judgment. The reasons I refer to are the following. The
more I considered the nature of a Mission, especially in a country like Africa
wh^re the tribes are thinly scattered, the more I was convinced that very
little was to be done by one man, or even by three or four men. As a minister
of the establishment I did not dare hope to find ministers to act with me. If
in this I have wronged the Church to which I belong I am ready to ask pardon;
and shall rejoice to find facts to disprove my judgment, and to shame my
temerity. Whether other Missionaries would be sent there, with whom I could act
in unison was very problematical. From the small sample I had of the hardships
and sufferings of such an undertaking, I had room to entertain a very serious
doubt whether I had piety and strength of mind for a Mission. The united force
of all these reasons determined my judgment, and, perhaps, ever will determine
it, to decline all personal engagement in the service.

If my readers are curious to know, whether I did nothing in Africa as a
Missionary, I am sorry that a regard for truth obliges me to answer, nothing
but preach one single sermon, by means of an interpreter. If they still enquire
but could you do no more? I confess ingenuously, I might have done more than I
did; but nothing like what those who are unacquainted with my situation there
may expect I ought to have done. I had gone out with a full determination to
spend some months at King Nambanna's town, which is on a small island about ten
miles from Free Town, and I had every reason to promise myself all kindness and
encouragement from that worthy old man. But it was four months before my
Colleague joined me, and set me at liberty from the restraints of the colonial
chaplainship. At this critical time, when I was preparing to go to Robanna, the
king was sinking under a malady which in a few weeks carried him off. His town
then became the seat of bacchanal riot for two or three months, while the
King's Cry, or funeral rites were celebrated; and, not many weeks after, my
Colleague was called to the West Indies, when my duty in the Colony, finally
excluded the possibility of residing any time among the natives. I might have
preached a dozen or twenty sermons in the same way I preached the first, and my
reason for not doing so, is not much to my honor. The truth is, I saw I could
not carry my point -- I felt I had acted precipitately -- I charged myself with
folly and vanity -- I lamented having left my Parish in England -- and having
placed myself in a situation to which I began to think divine providence had
never called me -- I had struggled through much opposition -- suffered some
reproach -- and had staked all I had to stake, on an engagement of which I
could make little or nothing -- and I anticipated every reproach and censure I
was to suffer when I return^^ to England. My spirits were broken, sleep and
appetite forsook me, and my health suffered infinitely more from the exercises
of my mind, than in did from the influence of climate, and from disease. Not
being able to do what I wished rendered me incapable of doing what was really
in my power. It should be observed that preaching four or five time a week in
the Colony, was some labor; and that as in the last few months the rains and a
smart fever impeded my activity, so for the first four months after my arrival,
I could find no place to lay my head ashore, and my confinement on ship board
was not favorable to my missionary pursuit.

Unsuccessful in my own attempts, I could not divest myself of the interest I
took in Missions; nor could I conceive that the failure of a hundred attempts
of the kind ought to discourage Christians from obeying the plain commands of
Christ, and discharging a duty which would be obligatory so long as there were
Heathens in the world. The subject appeared to me to sleep in obscurity. I
perceived there were reasons why Ministers declined calling general attention
to it. One of the first things a man would here, who should write to engage
others in Missions is. Why do you not engage in Missions yourself? He would
find much to censure, and little to commend; and we all know the inevitable
consequence -- retatiation. If he mean reproof should be effectual, he must
press it home; and when that reproof came addressed to the Ministers of Christ,
he could not avoid some appearance of arrogance and self-opinion. Nevertheless,
I thought it ought to be done by some body; and as I had gone so far, I was
willing to go a little farther. I had suffered something, and I determined
whatever the consequences might be of laying the subject before the world, I
would meet them, rather than leave any thing undone which I could do to serve
the Heathens. I therefore wrote these letters before I left Africa, and after
much hesitation, and being often ready to throw them in the fire, they are now
printed. Since they came from the press, I have had an opportunity of
collecting the opinions of several friends, some of which were of a nature so
far from flattering and pleasant to my feelings, that I immediately stopped the
sale of them, and have deliberated earnestly whether I should not consign them
to oblivion. But after continuing some days in a state of painful suspense, I
determined to venture them into the world, only cancelling the first preface
and substituting another, in which I would endeavor to support my claim to be
treated with candor, ingenuously confess what I conceive to be the faul^ of my
book, and promise if I lived to make a second edition, to strike out, or
correct every passage which I can deem as really objectionable.

That I have failed, in some respects, in writing these Letters I can easily
believe. I ventured on no easy task; and it might well have exercised the
humility, meekness, courage, and wisdom of the most aged and experienced
Minister, to have delivered the truths I have done, in such a manner as not to
expose himself to reproach on one or other quarter. What I thought truth in my
secret soul, I have avowed openly on the house top, without reserve, and
without palliation. But accustomed to receive the most mortifying truth myself,
I have not been sufficiently careful to reeommend it to my readers by softening
the severity of her aspect. Occupied wholly with the importance and dignity of
the subject, I have neglected to conciliate that esteem for the writer, which
seems necessary to gain attention to the subject itself. The subject unhappily
called for severe censure, and I was more warmly interested in it than on any
other which could have employed my pen. I feared lenient applications would
defeat my purpose in writing, and in bending all my strength to enforce what I
had to advance, and to be felt as well as read, I may have been betrayed into a
degree of asperity, which carries in it an air of self-importance, and of
disrespect to my Brethern in the ministry. On a favorite subject I may have
played the egotist. Having never before used my pen in this way, I have derived
no aid from those decencies of address, to which he is accustomed, who is
practiced in the habit of writing. That I have been in any degree actuated by
malice I am unconscious; and, for a moment, to degrade and vilify the servants
of Christ, was as far from my intention as to blaspheme Him they serve. If I
have pained any worthy mind, but especially if I have injured religion and her
Ministers, I shall not only lament it as my misfortune, but in the presence of
God confess it as my Sin, with shame and sorrow. Having meant well, shall never
justify me to myself for having expressed my good intentions with improper
language, and in an improper spirit. -- I wish the raphsodical address to
Europe in the Eighth Letter had been exchanged for a few strong facts and plain
arguments. I wish the last few sentences of my censures on the East India
Company had been expunged from my Seventh Letter, as petulent and irritating --
I wish the s^eer of the Infidel in the last Letter, and the manner of
addressing myself to Ministers on the 142 page had been wholly expunged, or so
corrected as not to expose myself to be mistaken. I wish I had softened several
other strong touches of my pen, and that the whole book breathed more
affection, and had less spirit. But were I to write the whole over again, I
fear while I corrected one fault I should commit another. Indeed* if the
heaviest censure that has been passed on my Letters be just, they ought to be
destroyed; for should I write them ten times over, they will always have
stamped upon them the characters of my own mind. If vanity be their prominent
feature, I shall not easily learn to be meek and lowly in heart; and until I
can regenerate myself entirely, whatever I write will have one or other
disgusting feature of the man of sin. But whatever the sentiments of good men
may be of me and my poor performance. I promise to labor to conform to them;
for it will be safer to stand by their opinion than by my own.

I hope the ingenuousness of this preface may claim some indulgence; but, if to
the trifling sorrows I have already experienced in a fruitless attempt to serve
poor heathens, this last effort on their behalf, instead of producing active
commiseration for them, shall only draw upon myself censure and contempt. I
will see the hand of heaven, and if I cannot add to the zeal of my Brethren, I
will endeavor to avail myself of every help they afford me to cultivate my own
humility. But before I take my leave may I not submit to such of my readers as
fear God the following queries? Can a fleeting more* like me, obscure the sun?
Shall my faults call more strongly for your censure than the miseries of
millions call for your pity and relief? Should the cause of Christ be
implicated with the defects of a character like mine? Will gold become dross in
the hand of a shoe-black, or one truth in this book be falsified because it is
written by my pen?

Before I conclude, I beg leave to present my tribute of the general
approbation due to the Rev. Mr. Carey, a Minister of the Particular Baptists,
for publishing two years ago, "An Enquiry into the Obligation of Christians to
use means for the Conversion of the Heathens." I recommend the perusal of this
treatise to my Readers; and, if it may operate as an inducement with them to
comply with my request, I have the pleasure to assure them, that Gentleman has
given to his precepts the force of example, by actually embarking in a Mission
to India.

LETTERS ON MISSIONS.
FIRST LETTER. To the PROTESTANT MINISTERS of the BRITISH CHURCHES.
Fathers and Brethren in the Gospel Ministry,
FROM the pulpit, and from the press, we frequently hear loud calls on
Christians to respect the interests of their several Churches. One while, we of
the Establishment turn the attention of our brethern to the alarming progress
of Dissenters, and exhort each other to a skilful opposition against Sectaries.
Another while, Dissenters rouse the languid zeal of their people, descanting on
the excellence of their own modes of faith and worship, and indulging vehement
invective against the avarice, the sloth, and the lordliness of Episcopalians.
We talk of the Interests of the Establishment, the Dissenting Cause, the
Baptist and Independent Interest, the Methodist Cause, and the like, until we
lose sight of the Christian Cause, the Common Interests of mankind, and the
diligent, peaceable service of our Master. Thus do we forsake the sublime of
religion, sink into the meanness of partisans, and inspire our flocks with a
fierce, sectarian zeal. We first baptize our secular interests and evil tempers
into the name of the disinterested and lowly Jesus; and, then, contend for
them, with as much warmth and per^nacity, as though they involved our salvation.
Is not this to fight for Barabbas, and to crucify Jesus?

While we are engaged after this goodly sort, infidelity increases,
immoralities are multiplied, the spirit of the world domineers in the Church;
and its pomps and vanities insult the standard of the cross. While the
Ministers of Christ sleep, and indulge their ease; while they sacrifice to the
graces and muses; while they aspire to the reputation of polite learning, or
profound science; while they toil in philosophical research, or in planting and
watering the tree of civil liberty, our Adversary sleeps not. With unwearied
vigilance, he makes head against the kingdom of Christ; and, not content with
possessing his own dominions in peace, he wars on the little territory of
Jesus, makes bold inroads into the heart of Christendom, and strives to
disposess us of what we have won from his empire, by the labor of ages, and
with the blood of an army of martyrs. The present state of France strongly
proves the assertion.


But a few years have elapsed, since a learned Englishman entered upon a
calculation to show, that were the habitable world divided into thirty parts,
nineteen would be claimed by the Heathen, six would fall to the Mohammedan, and
five only would remain to be apportioned among the divided followers of the
catholic Jesus. Whether this calculation be strictly accurate is of trivial
consequence; but we must all be deeply affected by the lamentable view of human
nature which it affords us. Alas! if every sincere Christian may say, with the
Psalmist, My heart teaches me the wickedness of the ungodly; and, if to this,
he may add, as we all allow he may, My own house, my own favorite sect, my own
privileged country, and the Christian Church, give sad testimony to the
extensive sovereignty exercised by the God of this world, To what conclusion
are we led with respect to the religious state of the Heathen and Mohammedan
nations?

The conclusion is obvious: if the nature of man be essentially the same, in
every age and climate; and, if the Christian religion be true, the people, who
have not our advantages, must greatly suffer from the want of them; and bad as
Christendom is, the Heathen world must be much worse, being sunk more deeply
than ourselves in positive ignorance and vice. If this mode of reasoning be
thought exceptionable, I appeal to matter of fact, as far as we are acquainted
with it, by those who have visited (...) is a candid acc^^^t of the (...) of
the^^ in^^^^^s. Should a more elaborate proof be required, it cannot be called
for by any man to whom these letters are addressed. Christian Ministers are too
well acquainted with the grand, exclusive privileges of Christianity, to admit
a doubt of what I assert. Whatever sentiments, Reverend Brethern, may be
entertained by others on this subject, you cannot be ungrateful for the
blessings of revelation; and, whilst you rejoice in those blessings, you must
have a benevolent desire to communicate them to a people, who know not the only
true God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent.

When we consider this deep spiritual poverty of a major part of our
fellow-men, we are admonished, that it becomes us to do something for their
relief. On this we seem agreed; but, I am sorry to remark, that we agree, more
generally, to neglect our duty, than to acknowledge its obligation. Satisfied
with the cold approbation of a duty, which it is impossible for us not to feel,
we dismiss prospects of wretchedness too oppressive for our faith and love; and
console ourselves with the unintelligible hope, that the Almighty will execute,
somehow, and at some time, by worthier hands, a work too great, and too
dangerous, for us little men.

Fathers, Brethren, Ministers of Christ, in the presence of God, I charge you
-- I charge myself, with betraying the grand interests of our Master, by
refusing to propagate his gospel. I charge you with the habitual, open
violation of Christ's command, Go, preach the Gospel to every creature. I
charge you with the unspeakable guilt of burying in a napkin, those
unsearchable riches, which the Apostle St. Paul thought it the honor of his
life to preach to the Gentiles. Lastly, I charge you with doing this without
shame, without remorse, and, almost without an effort to do the contrary.
These, Reverend Brethren, are heavy charges; but I shall not find it difficult
to avoid the punishment of a calumniator, by substantiating them in the
progress of these letters, which have for their object the spread of the
Gospel, and the salvation of the Heathen.

To this object, therefore, I solicit your attention. And, by the mercies of
God, I beseech you -- by the blood of Jesus, and by our common hope, grant me a
patient hearing. Suffer not my obscurity to operate as a prejudice against the
cause I plead. I neither deprecate your censure, nor dare I despise it. But
permit me to hope, that no infelicities of style, nor defect of genius, nor of
judgment, with which the subject is proposed, may be allowed to obscure its
splendour, or detract from its worth. Would to God that some one among you,
whose name is venerable among the Churches, had stepped forward to save me from
the odium of this address! But since You, who have characters to lose, do not
care to hazard them by becoming reprovers in the midst of your brethren, allow
me, who am without a name, to aspire to the honor of incurring censure for
telling truths, which none of us like to hear, or wish to believe; and for
telling them, with that plainness which they require.

When I consider, on the one hand, the promise and faithfulness of God, who
cannot lie, and, on the other, the noble cause I espouse, I am animated with
strong confidence and hope. I come forward, not as a sectary, nor as the leader
of a sect. I am not encumbered with polemic armor, nor heated with polemic
zeal. It is not a question in science, politics, or morals, which I lay before
you. The subject I assert involves the honor of our Religion, the sincerity of
her Ministers, the glory of Christ, and the best interests of men. The
delegation I pretend to is authoritative; and I am justified in speaking, with
all boldness, the truths of the God I serve, in the gospel of his Son. Dispense
then, I beseech you, with all complimentary forms; and allow me to address you,
with ministerial freedom, and to plead the cause I have undertaken, with that
undisguised and generous warmth, which it is calculated to inspire.

He that fears men, when he should speak boldly for God; and timidly dissembles
truths, which, if felt aright, should be told with the strongest tones of
abhorrence, indignation, and contempt, will hardly succeed in writing upon
Missions. The subject calls for enthusiasm. It requires vehemence Those
feelings which carried me across the water, I still cherish in my breast. They
will never forsake me. I rejoice in them. I with to impart them to every
Minister of Christ, and to every child of God. This I cannot hope to do, if I
disguise or palliate them. It would concern me much to incur the censure of
treating my Brethren in the ministry with indecent freedom; but I cannot think
that truth, however severe, will offend the servants of truth: or that any of
my Brethren suppose themselves entitled to use freedoms with the laity, which
they will not bear from the meanest of their own body. No, Brethren. While you
criticize my letters, you will applaud my design. The esteem you entertain for
integrity will give mildness to your censures; and, whatever faults your better
judgment may discover in this performance, your good wishes will accompany it
into the world, and your prayer of faith draw down the divine blessing upon it.

From the mercenaries of the Christian Church, my soul turns with loathing.
Though I could move mountains, they would remain immovable. Though I could
inspire every real Christian with all the sensations of my own heart, the
unprincipled wretch; who sees nothing in the gospel ministry but an affluent
and genteel profession, is vulnerable to no sentiment contained in these
letters. Like Simon Magus, he, has neither part nor lot in this matter -- Nor
have I any thing to do with mere moralists. The waters flow no higher than
their springs. The spirit of these letters is. I flatter myself, the spirit of
Christ -- a spirit which they have not received, and, with the things of which,
they are unacquainted. In their good opinion, I shall, therefore, think myself
to stand high, if I may pass for a well-meaning enthusiast. Under God, Reverend
Brethren, my hopes rest on You, who are what you are called, Christian
Ministers -- on you who were indeed moved to engage in the Ministry by the Holy
Ghost, and are animated by a sincere love of the Savior who so greatly loved
you, and by a real regard for the lost sheep, for whom our great Shepherd died.
You feel your character. You have bowels and mercies. You are the disinterested
benefactors of mankind, and whatever concerns the kingdom of your Lord you call
your own. For you these letters are written, and to you they belong. But, in
them your pious flocks will, also, claim a part, as large as that interest,
which they have in the Son of David.

As the elect of God, holy and beloved, let us, then, mind the things of
Christ, to whom we are set apart as a peculiar people; and revolve all possible
means of advancing that glorious kingdom, for the coming of which we daily
pray. Such meditations will dispose our hearts to peace. They will beat down
many controverted subjects, of apparent magnitude, to the humble level of their
real importance. As we muse the fire will kindle; and our Churches and public
Meetings, our families and closets shall attest the animated devotion, with
which one Spirit shall teach us to cry, Let the people praise thee, O God, yea,
let all the people praise thee! On a subject like this, we cannot think long
without feeling its attractions. It will teach us to make our requests to the
Inspirer of every great design; and, then, to rest on his grace, his power, and
his faithfulness, to accomplish the purposes of our hearts. As we advance,
discouragements will vanish. Obstacles will be overcome, when we learn to think
them surmountable. Difficulties will be subdued, as we acquire courage to cope
with them. And, when the honor, glory, and immortality of our inestimable
reward, are set full in our view, no forms of death and suffering will affright
us. Instead of that despondency, which has long frozen our benevolent wishes,
hope, like the returning sun, will bring an early spring and fruitful summer on
our souls. The spirit of our religion, lulled to lethargic slumbers, will
revive with the energies of the apostolic age; and the Church will again become
illustrious, by her victories over the kingdoms of this world.

And Thou, Lord Jesus, afflicted Father of the Christian Name, blessed Martyr
of Humanity, blameless Pattern, universal Priest, unerring Teacher, omnipotent
King of Truth, of Righteousness, and of peace, deign from thy glorious throne
to smile on this weak attempt, and to accept this poor offering! It is a
tribute I present, for the life thou have given, for the blood thou have shed,
and for the joyous hopes thou have inspired, to cheer, and to direct my mortal
pilgrimage. Meek Spring of heavenly Wisdom, boundless Ocean of universal,
ardent, unprovoked, and undiscouraged Charity, pour thy Spirit into my breast,
and into the breasts of all thy servants whom I here address. Teach me and them
to interest ourselves in this blessed work, as becomes men, who are
distinguished by thy venerable name, and honored by the ministration of thy
glorious gospel! Baptize us with the fire of that love which is stronger than
death! Delightfully oppress our gratitude with the everlasting mountains of thy
benefits, until every sentiment of frail mortality be suppressed -- until faith
give us the victory over the world -- over life and death, until love compel us
to exclaim, Yea, doubtless, and I count all things but dross that I may win
Christ; and I am willing not only to suffer bonds, but to die for the sake of
my Lord Jesus Christ, by whom I am crucified unto the world and the world to me.

Commending you, Reverend Brethern, the Christian Church, and the benighted
nations, as well as their unworthy advocate, to his protection, who takes the
tenderest part in all our concerns, and is able to secure and to advance them
to the utmost, I remain, in the honored bonds of his Religion.

Your humble, but affectionate Brother, M. H.

SECOND LETTER.
Fathers and Brethern,
THE genius and spirit of our religion, the characters ascribed to our Lord of
the Second Adam, of the High Priest after the order of Melchizedeck, and of a
Savior to all people, with many others of similar significance; the various
scriptures, which speak of the benefits of his death and intercession, of his
kingdom and reign; the prophecies and promises, loudly declare the intention of
God, that this last and most perfect dispensation of the everlasting gospel
should be the religion of every tribe, and kindred, and tongue. Nay, we are
repeatedly assured, in the most explicit language, that it shall be so -- that
the truth and mercy, the peace and righteousness of our Messiah's kingdom,
whatever temporary checks they may suffer, shall, in the end, overcome all
opposition; and that although the river of God may, for a time, be discolored and
polluted, by the pernicious soil over which it has rolled it is tide, yet it
shall, at last, free itself from every foreign mixture, and send forth it is ten
thousand pure streams, to gladden all the nations of the globe.

How ought our minds to be affected by these prospects? May we not infer from
each article of this enumeration, and, much more, from the aggregate force of
them all, that it is our obvious, bounden duty, as servants of God, as soldiers
of Christ, and as friends of suffering humanity, to exert all our strength in
disseminating the gospel? Is it not in our power to do, or, at least, to
attempt something worthy of the cause? Have we not ships, which visit every
part of the world? Have we not money -- money in abundance, if we were
satisfied to live with Christian simplicity, and could be prevailed upon to
part with it, as men should do, who have a better treasure in heaven? Have we
not ministers who prefer this line of service, and would gladly embark for the
most barbarous clime, if they were assured of spirited support, and had reason
to hope, that the fruits of their labor would not die with themselves? And, if
we really have it in our power thus to serve mankind, and to spread our
Redeemer's glory, Is it not criminal, base, infamous to neglect it? Is not this
infatuated negligence an open violation of the precepts of both tables of the
law? Do we love God, revere his majesty, approve his precepts, and conceive
ourselves bound, by every tie, to serve him, with all our talents, and with all
our strength? How does this love, this reverence, this approbation, this
conviction, accord with the astonishing coldness, with which we look upon a
world, full of cruel habitations; where virtue and piety skulk in corners;
where sin is universal, uncontrolled and almost unchecked; where the Eternal
Majesty is affronted by the abominable idols of the Heathen, and the beastly
image of a corrupt Christianity.

We say, that to love our neighbor as ourselves, and to do unto all men as we
would they should do unto us, is the consentaneous voice of the Prophets and
Apostles, of the law and gospel. We say well; but do we do as we say, and
practice as we believe? Do we love in word and in tongue only, or in deed and
in truth? Speak ye desolate shores of Africa; declare ye bloody fields of
Indostan; bear your impartial testimony, ye numerous islands of the Western and
Pacific oceans! Alas! my Brethern, we dare not abide the issue of the appeal.
We have not done unto them, as we would, were circumstances changed, that they
should have done unto us. The richest fruit of our philanthropy has been a
cold, ineffective pity. We have said, Be ye free, be ye civilized, be ye
converted; but we have eaten as heartily, slept as soundly, dressed as
expensively, and enjoyed every good thing within our grasp as freely, as though
they had been as happy as ourselves. We have had no fellowship with the Savior
in his agony and bloody sweat, in his prayers and tears for the salvation of
mankind. Provided we may live in peace and comfort, do a little good in
England, accumulate fortunes, marry wives, take care of our children, and creep
into heaven at last, we appear satisfied to leave our Masster to propagate his
own gospel in the world.

To these considerations, which must have weight on ingenuous minds, permit me
to remind you of the solemn sanction of divine command. The following are some
of the last emphatic words of Jesus, as they stand recorded by St. Mark and St
Mat-thew: -- Go into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature;
and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things, which I have
commanded you; and, lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world.

Shall we say, these injunctions were laid on the Apostles only? Impossible!
The genius of Christianity, and the spirit of the precept, forbid, such an
interpretation. Let it be observed, 1st. The Apostles did not preach the gospel
in many countries beyond the limits of the Roman empire; and it was, in the
nature of things, impossible that they should preach it to all nations. 2. Had
our Lord meant the command to oblige the Apostles only, it would have been
sufficient to promise his protection and blessing to the end of their lives and
ministry, without adding that grand amplification, Lo! I am with you always,
even unto the end of the world. 3. The same reasons, why the Apostles should
preach the gospel to every creature, exist in all their force at this day; and
so far from being antiquated and obsolete, gain new strength with the lapse of
ages. 4. Whatever exclusive privileges the Apostles enjoyed, as the first
promulgators of Christianity, yet the office and duty of every minister of the
gospel is, in spirit and substance, the same as theirs. From all these
considerations, it appears, that when our Lord spoke these authoritative words,
he had in contemplation all his ministers of every age and nation, as well as
his immediate disciples; and that we cannot refuse engaging in missions,
without contempt of his authority, and a shameful derilection of our duty to
God and men.

I made bold to charge you, Honorable Brethern, (implicating myself in the same
charge) with betraying the grand interests of our Master, with the habitual,
open violation of his commands, and with burying in a napkin the sacred
depositum of the gospel. I think it unnecessary to enter into a formal proof of
criminations, which the whole tenor of these letters is intended to
substantiate. But, after adducing, from the Scriptures, the commission under
which we act, and justify our ministry in Britain, am I not authorized to
appeal to your consciences, and ask you, Whether you are not guilty of what I
lay to your charge? What moneys have we subscribed, what associations have we
formed, what prayers have we offered up, what animated exhortations have we
given to our stocks and to one another on the subject of missions? How shall we
exonerate ourselves from the enormous crime of which we are guilty? Shall we
say, we were ignorant of our duty? The world will reclaim, How dare you teach
us our duty as Christians, while you continue so grossly ignorant of your own
duty as Ministers? If we plead, that we had not sufficiently considered our
duty, is not every man justified in retorting, And why did you not consider it,
before you entered upon the gospel ministry? In truth, we have no excuse; and
it will best become us, to blush and weep in secret places, to abhor ourselves,
and to repent in dust and ashes.

Were I ever so much disposed, it would hardly be in my power to exaggerate our
fin and shame. You know, better than I can tell you, that the ultimate reason
of any, and of all the commandments, is the will and precept of God; and that
we evince the same contempt of his authority, by the wilful neglect of one
clear, positive duty, as though we neglected them all. According to the
spirituality of the commandment we are chargeable with the perdition of all the
poor Heathens whom our diligence might have saved: and assuredly, their souls
will the Lord require at our hands. Contrast the infamy of our conduct with the
grandeur of our calling, and the powers of language fail to give just coloring
to our sin!

Had the Apostles of our Lord, conducted themselves toward us, as we conduct
ourselves to the Heathen world, not all the refinements of the eighteenth
century, would have emancipated us from the worship of Thor and Woden. But
blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, their religion was of a
different temper. Having received the commission of their Sovereign, they
declined not to engage in this warfare. Having counted the cost, they entered
into the combat, like men determined to conquer or to die. Confident of the
superlative excellence of the cause, for which they had drawn the sword, they
threw away the scabbard, and disdained capitulation with the world. The love of
Christ, which we coldly talk of, they warmly felt. They had beheld his glory,
were witnesses of his holy life and blessed death, his victory over the grave,
and his ascension to heaven. Their faith was a commanding evidence of things
unseen, and gave a present subsistence to things hoped for, they knew,
emphatically, by the witness of that Spirit in their hearts, which was at once
tho seal of their adoption, and the earnest of their inheritance, the immense
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. His poverty had made them rich -- rich in
grace, rich in faith, rich in the promise and veracity of God who cannot lie;
nor would they have bartered these riches for all the kingdoms of the world,
and all their glory. Possessed of a lively hope, they purified themselves as
God is pure; and, enriched by the liberality of Christ, they sold their
possessions and gave them to the poor, seeking for themselves better riches. As
strangers and pilgrims they expected to be hated by the world; and determining
faithfully to discharge the ministry they had received, they knew they must
suffer persecution; and that men, who hated to be reformed, would pursue to the
death those bold reformers, who obtruded the holy light of truth, and forcibly
dispelled the darkness congenial to their crimes. To suffer for Christ was
their glory and their joy. Stripes, chains, and death were considered as the
highest honors of the kingdom of that Jesus who expired on a cross; bestowed as
the prize of valor, and the reward of extensive services and of the most
approved integrity. Unawed by those terrors which shake our breasts, as far as
reason would permit, they aspired after these honors; lived in hope of the
crown of martyrdom; and envied the felicity of their fellows, who received it
before them. The cross of Christ had crucified them to the world and the world
to them. In the strong light which flowed from it, they beheld poverty and
riches, ease and torture, honor and infamy, life and death, with a placid mind;
and the great world, and all that it contained, was contracted to a point of
vanity, before the faded luster of that eye, which wept over its sins and
miseries. Before that object of endless astonishment, adoration and love, they
died to themselves and revived again to live to him. They were not their own
but his. His blood had bought them, and his love constrained them to do and
suffer all things for his sake. They had no reserves, no drawbacks on their
faith; but, having given in their names to Christ, they would have judged
themselves worthy of the fate of Annanias and Saphira, if they defrauded him of
their lives and fortunes. With them, all was sacred. It was their meat and
drink to do the will of God, and to finish the work he had given them. The
Apostles led the way and other Ministers followed, from province to province,
and from kingdom to kingdom. Their King was in the midst of them, and they saw,
by faith, that standard, with that inscription, which was afterward feigned to
have been seen by the polity Constantine. The world fell before such
combatants; and its pomps and vanities, its riches and honors, its science and
learning, its arts and arms, its potentates and gods, were subdued by the
doctrine of the Cross.

In this manner did the first Christians propagate their religion, being
mighty, in deed and word; and, living rather than speaking great things, they
put to flight all the armies of the aliens. Their conquests were marked, not
with the blood of their enemies, but with their own. Truth and righteousness
where their arms; and patient suffering, and the doctrine of a crucified
Savior, above all miraculous gifts, were the true grounds of the astonishing
success which attended their preaching. But the tide of conquest was checked
too soon; and although, for a few centuries, some illustrious names supported
the honor of the Christian arms, yet the mystery of iniquity, which began to
work in the days of the Apostles, quickly spread, withering the rose of the
Church, subverting its faith, and corrupting its morals, until it begat a race
of men more desperately wicked than Heathenism ever bred, and such alone as
could be produced by the Corruptions of Christianity.

Brethren, I will not now demand your attention to the melancholy desolations
of the Church: nor is it my intention to soil, with a detail of the
transactions of a corrupt Christianity, this letter in which I have endeavored
to rouse you from your slumbers, by enforcing the command of Christ; and, to
provoke you to emulation, by exhibiting the labors and triumphs of the first
believers. They have done greatly; and, though dead, they still live and speak
to the followers of their faith. It is our part to record their actions, and to
give them the applause they have earned so well. But we must do more. We must
tread in their steps, and derive encouragement from their example. We must
prove ourselves their successors, by occupying the extensive field they
cultivated. If we refuse to do this, the praises we lavish on them, will be, as
were the sepulchers built for the old prophets by the pharisaic Jews, the
monuments of our hypocrisy and guilt. Surely, our Lord, his Apostles, his
Martyrs and Confessors, lived and died not for the benefit of England nor of
Christendom alone. -- O my God incline us to call a fast, to proclaim a solemn
assembly, to bathe our altars with our tears, to confess our sins and
treachery, to sound an alarm in God's holy mountain, and to animate each other
to the glorious warfare to which we are pledged!

The night is far spent, and the day is at hand. The latter ends of the world
are fallen upon us, and we have many considerations to excite us, if it were
possible, to more than apostolic labors. The East, from which the day springs
from on high first vsited us, has long been lost to Christ; and the crescent of
Mahomet still usurps the places where the cross once triumphed. In the West,
the Roman Antichrist, accursed of God and man, is sinking under the reiterated
strokes of divine vengeance. The God of the Christians is baring his arm, and
exposing the nakedness of the Scarlet Whore with whom the nations of the earth
have committed spiritual fornication. The prayers of the spirits under the
altar are heard; and a righteous God is avenging the blood of his saints, by
giving her to drink of the blood of her children. Yet a little while, and we
shall hear the cry, Babylon the Great is fallen; and see the Almighty burning
her, as with fire from heaven, by the very hands which erected and supported
her hierarchy. The shouts of triumphant atheism, and the scoffs of a vain
philosophy invade our ears. Unheard of prodigies meet our eyes, and suspend our
souls with astonishment and horror. The same spirit and principles, which have
regenerated one Christian nation to atheism, are working in others, and will,
probably, produce the same effect. We shall soon see kindling upon Spain,
Portugal and Italy, that conflagration, which nothing but the pure streams of
the Reformation can extinguish. Even in this blessed land of civil and
religious liberty, where religion has reared her most august temple, we have
much to fear; and no human wisdom can determine, whether the Almighty may not
purge our tin and dross, with the same fire, which consumes the wood, the hay
and the stubble of Churches more corrupted than our own. Vain are all the
admonitions of our Master, if we do not understand the signs of the day, and
put forth those exertions to which they call us.

It is not for the Potentates of Europe to guarantee the welfare of Religion.
She disdains all soreign aids. She calls not for the succor, but commands the
obedience of earthly Kings. We, the Ministers of Christ, are called upon to
give the only aids of which she can admit; and she demands our talents, our
labors, our fortunes, our influence, and our lives. Let us fly to the succor of
our best mother, the afflicted Church of Christ. O let us no more fall out by
the way. Let liberal Churchmen and conscientious Dissenters, pious Calvinists
and pious Arminians, embrace with fraternal arms. Let the press groan no longer
with our controversies; and let the remembrance of the petty interests we have
contended for be buried in everlasting oblivion. Let us vote that Minister, who
turns one sinner from the error of his life, a wiser man than he, who
demonstrates the being of a God; and study to live and preach like St. Paul,
rather than to speak and write with Cicero. Let us for ever forsake the
Schools; and build our religion on facts, and not on arguments; on the power of
God, and not on the wisdom of man. Christianity addresses herself to the heart.
To the heart, then, which is the great strong hold of Satan, and the
inexhaustible magazine of infidel sophistry, let us direct our war. Let us be
frequent in our pulpits, and from thence boldly denounce the menaces and
promises of Heaven. Let the crucified Jesus be the prominent figure of our
gospel; and be held forth, for what he really is, our strength, our glory and
our salvation. Let us not visit and converse as other men; but always intent on
the object of our commission, (...) guardian angels among our people, advise,
exhort, reprove with all long sufferance and sound doctrine. Let us not dare to
bury our light for six days out of seven; but on every proper occasion, when
our flocks can be convened, approve our faithful diligence in declaring God's
word. Let us beware of what the world calls Prudence; and see that we do not
shun the cross of Christ, and enervate his noble religion, by over anxious
endeavors to render it respectable to men of corrupt minds, destitute of the
truth, and whose opposition to the gospel, does not originate in the defect and
obscurity of its evidences, but in inveterate hatred of its holiness and
heavenly-mindedness.

But let not our zeal, piety, and benevolence stop here. Let us cast our eyes
upon the Continent. Let us extend our views to the ends of the earth. Let us,
henceforth, consider it as our indispensible duty to do all that lies in our
power, to preach the gospel to every creature. Let Missions be treated no more
with cold neglect, or be vilified with charges of enthusiasm. But in public and
private, from the pulpit and from the press, let us speak of them as becomes
their dignity; and recommend them, with that forcible and persuasive eloquence,
with which the love of God and man should inspire us.

If we do this, with becoming diligence and zeal, we shall soon have it in our
power to confute a plausible objection, with which infidels blaspheme our
religion. The partial diffussion of Christianity will then be seen to have
originated, not with God, but men. The philanthropy of God our Savior will
shine forth in its proper amplitude, as extending to all men; and we, the
Ministers of Christ, shall be made to confess, with honest impartiality and
ingenuous shame, that the wretched ignorance and abominable vices of the
Heathen are chargeable on our wicked disobedience to our Master's commands. O
let us no longer give place to unbelief, idly affecting commiseration to that
wretchedness, which we have it in our power to relieve; but arise and assert
our integrity and manhood. We have the key of promise in our hands; let us use
it with courage, and bring to light those prisoners of many generations.

I remain, Reverend Brethren, Your servent in the patience and kingdom of
Christ, M. H.

THIRD LETTER.
Fathers and Brethren,
IN my last letter, I made free to put the question. What moneys have to
subscribed, what associations have we formed, what prayers have we offered up,
what animated exhortations have we given to our stocks, and to one another, on
the subject of Missions? In reply, I shall be told, that the Church of England
has long established a Society for foreign Missions; that the Unitas Fratrum
have done worthily in the cause; that the We^lean Methodists have had, of late
years, great success in the West India islands; that the Particular Baptists
have taken up the matter with spirit; that Elliott, Brainard and others have
acquired immortality by their labors among the North American Indians; that the
Danes and Hollanders have their Missions in the East; and, that the Jesuits,
and other religious Orders of the Roman Communion, have shed much blood for
Christ, in South America, China, and Japan.

Of these transactions I am not altogether ignorant. God forbid I should
depreciate their worth! The benevolent promoters of Missions merit my warmest
praise; and the missionaries, who have acted up to the spirit of their
engagements, are superior to all human approbation. Their record is on h^gh,
and they will shine, as the sun in the firmament, for ever and ever. Considered
in the abstract, what has been done deserves the highest commendation. But when
we reflect on the subject, in all its extent, we must see our labors in a very
diminutive point of view. Were our Prophet the bloody Mahomet, were our
religion a mere moral system, were its sanctions of less consideration than
they are, were our own sincerity and the welfare of the world not connected so
intimately as they are, in the propagation of Christianity, I would celebrate
our good deeds in the most jubilant strains. But, when I look on the myriads of
men who lie in darkness and in the shadow of death; when heaven and hell open
on my soul, and cast their light upon our labors; or when I stand by the side
of the suffering Savior of the Heathen, and my bible tells me, that He whom I
see expiring in agony, is GOD MANIFEST IN THE FLESH, shame, grief, and
indignation oppress my feelings. I cast up the sum of our labors, and, amidst
such objects, mark it with a cipher. Alas! it is evident, we are still in the
infancy of things; and that the missionary spirit has not yet warmed the bosom
of the Church. Contemplate these objects, Reverend Brethern, which I have set
before you; and say, Whether I can with truth and modesty compliment you on our
achievements? Or can merit censure, for repeating the question, What moneys
have we subscribed, what associations have we formed, what prayers have we
offered up, what animated exhortations have we given to our flocks and to one
another on the subject of Missions? Greenland is, perhaps the only Heathen
Country, in which the genuine religion of Christ has gained a firm footing for
several centuries.

Neither a history of Missions, nor even a review of them, can have place in
the narrow limits of my plan. A few observations on the views, with which they
have been set on foot; the manner, in which they have been conducted; and the
success, which has attended them, is all that I shall offer to your attention
in this letter.

Missions have sometimes been set on foot with very improper views. Such were
the Missions of the Jesuits in Paraguay, California, and other parts of Spanish
America. Their end was the subjugation of the poor savages to the dominion of
Spain; and Christianity was a mere state engine, by which it was hoped the
minds of freemen might with more facility, be bowed to the yoke of slavery.
Whether those good Fathers were more honest than their employers, and were
really desirous to consult the happiness of their converts, or were stimulated
only by ambitious and lucrative motives, as they stand charged by their
enemies, I will not presume to say. But we know well what was the end of those
Missions. In one day, all the Jesuits in South America were seized, their Order
abolished, and the ultima ratio regum -- cannon and muskets, applied with such
good success to the miserable Guaranis, that, if they were not made good
Christians, they were, at least, converted into what the Court of Spain had
much more at heart -- passive, spiritless slaves. The Missions among the
Canadian Indians, while that country made a part of the French dominions,
appear to have originated in similar motives. Happily, their catastrophe was
less bloody. The missionaries, indeed, fell by the hands of the untractable
savages they would have converted to slavery and christianized superstition.
They themselves still remain to be exterminated, as tribes of their brethern
have been, by the English bayonet and American riflemen. The Missions of the
Portuguese in Angola, Abyssinia, and India, had very different things in view
than the salvation of men's souls. The same may be said, I fear, of many other
Catholic Missions. In this respect, Protestants are not so blameable:
nevertheless, we are not, altogether, without having been actuated by unworthy
views. Protestant powers have not made religion the pretext for conquest; for
they have, in general, valued it so little, that provided they might carry on
their commerce in peace, and cut the throats of the Heathens, whenever they
resisted their encroachments, they have left them to take care of their own
souls; as if it was thought Christianity could do them no good, and the
injuries they suffered from us merited no compensation. But, to quicken the
slow movements of piety, even among English Protestants, some patrons of
Missions have not disdained to apply the stimulus of interest. Missions would
civilize the savage -- He would soon be taught to value European luxuries --
Furs would purchase our coarse goods. Thus were Missions connected with
manufactures and commerce, and gain became a pedestal for godliness to stand
upon. If this mode of reasoning be thought allowable with those, who are not to
be influenced by more appropriate motives, I affirm, from certain knowledge,
that it brings a slur on all undertakings of the kind. I add, that if such an
argument should engage men of improper characters to act in associations for
Missions, and to have any weight in the conduct of them, Missions will suffer
more injury from their counsels, than they can derive benefit from their
liberality. The giving glory to God in the highest, and the spreading of peace
and good will among men upon earth are the only motives, which should influence
these attempts; and, if we think to promote the cause of God, by arguments
addressed to the corrupt principles of man, we shall cut off our legs, before
we set out in the race.

The manner, in which Missions have been conducted, has been as different, as
the views i^ which they originated, and the characters of those who acted in
them.

In South America, the ambition and avarice of the Jesuits, or their piety (God
knows which) were subservient to the politics of the Court of Mad^id; and this
cooperation, so long as it continued, gave an astonishing momentum to their
labors. The Pope, the King of Spain, and zealous Catholics enriched their
funds; and, that the immoral lives of the Spaniards might not perjudice the
Indians against the faith of Christ, they were prohibited from any intercourse
with the Nations, who were to be converted. The Jesuits, on their part,
embarked in the undertaking in great numbers. They conducted the enterprise
with wisdom, courage, and perseverance, Many of them were the victims of their
zeal; falling by the hands of the Indians, or in consequence of the hardships
they endured. The members of that learned Order were metamorphised into masons,
carpenters, and smiths, and at once, instructed their converts in the arts of
life and in the truths of religion, They prevailed; and collected the wandering
tribes into villages, where they appear to have lived happy under their lenient
government. But the question was, Whom these poor creatures should acknowledge
for their master, the Jesuits, or the King of Spain? Hence those jealousies,
which terminated in the ruin of the Missions, and the abolition of the Order of
Jesuits.

In Japan and China, we have memorable documents of the prowess of that
celebrated Order. Francis Xavier was himself a host. His labors were wonderful;
and through every unhappy medium that we are to contemplate his character, he
appears a man of the first magnitude. An eulogium, superior to the questionable
miracles, with which his biographers adorn his life, may be collected from the
reverence in which he was held by the Japanese, and the hatred with which he
was persecuted by his companions from Portugal. He seems to have been too good
for their purposes. The men, who have since borne witness to his worth, were
those on whom his death is chargeable. It is well known, that this Apostle of
the Indies expired in the Island of Sanchian, deserted by all his countrymen,
at the time he was endeavoring to penetrate into China. -- But the
indefatigable Sons of Loyala soon trod in the steps of this famous leader.
After surmounting innumerable obstacles, which were thrown in their way from
the policy of the Chinese, and the contempt and jealousy in which they held
Europeans, they sound means to recommend themselves to the Emperor and the
Mandarins of his Court; and obtained many privileges and indulgencies for their
Order. Their skill in the Mathematics, Astronomy, and other sciences, and their
elegant and expensive presents of curious pieces of mechanism, gave them great
influence in a kingdom, whose Monarchs have given the most distinguished
patronage to men of letters and science. Their converts in Japan and China soon
amounted to several hundred thousands; numerous churches were built; books of
religion were translated into the native languages; and their affair wore an
aspect, so favorable, as to promise a permanent and extensive establishment of
the Roman religion, in both those empires. But the Missionaries themselves
sapped the foundations of the fab^ie they had erected. Intoxicated with
success, they affected too much notoriety. Laying aside that ^un^ ^^y which had
at first recommended them to notice, they betrayed a lofty and imperious
spirit. They supposed the savor of the Sovereign the best security for their
labors; and soon became accomplished courtiers. The nobility, offended at the
interest which a few obscure strangers had acquired with the Prince, united to
destroy them. The Dominicans, who had been associated in their labors,
quarrelled with the Jesuits; and their mutual ill offices rendered the Emperor
suspicious of the consequences of introducing the papal power over the
consciences of his subjects. Persecution l^wered. Banishment, imprisonment, and
death soon followed. Great numbers of the Jesuits and of their converts
suffered with invincible fortitude; and, in their last moments, approved a hope
full of immortality. Christianity may be considered as exterminated in both
those great Empires; except, that in the last, a few disguised priests still
find means to conceal themselves in Can^on, to keep alive the dying embers of
the mighty flame they had kindled. The Jesuits stand convicted of granting to
their proselytes large indulgence of heathenish superstition; but I see not why
Protestants should be surprised at their conduct, and much less, why Papists
should criminate it. Men, who offered saint worship to that Moloch, Dominick,
and other illustrious villains of the papal calendar, could not deal rigorously
with the Chinese, for similar honors they paid to the benevolent Confucius and
the spirits of their progenitors. Nor do I see, why we should think so meanly
of their converts. Thousands of them died for their religion and if, amidst all
the trumpery of antichristian superstition, we can discover spirits so pure and
elevated as those of a Fenelon and Paschal, I think there is great reason to
believe, that the commanding features of revealed religion, rendered doubly
impressive from their novelty, might produce the most salutary effects on the
converts of China and Japan.

Of the attempts which have been made by the Society for Foreign Missions, I
wish to speak in handsome terms. But, I am sorry to observe, that there is
nothing on the face of the accounts of their proceedings, which have been laid,
from time to time, before the Public, upon which I can ground a compliment.
Their money and their labors have been extremely unproductive; and, I fear very
little is to be expected from that quarter, until a considerable alteration
takes place in the spirit of the Church of England, and in the manner in which
her missions are conducted. We seem almost destitute of the zeal and courage
required for these engagements. I believe the Society are frequently at a loss
to find missionaries; and, under this discouragement, are often obliged to take
up with improper characters. We have no discipline. We have no common habits to
unite our missionaries. They are thinly scattered in Missions, and not enjoying
the advantages of numbers equal to their attempts, nor acting with united
strength and counsels, they cannot have great success. Let cause and effect be
compared together, and it will appear that these attempts have been as
fruitful, as was to be expected from the manner in which they were conducted.
The Society in Scotland for propagating Christian Knowledge have deserved well
of their country; and have made many attempts to convert and civilize the
North-American Savages. Some of their missionaries have been apostolic men, and
God has blessed their labors with considerable success. They have evinced a
true spirit of Missions, by exposing their persons to all the dangers and
hardships of living among savages. If this Society has erred in any thing, it
is in exposing these excellent men singly and alone, to contend with all the
discouragements of such undertakings. This must have thrown a great damp on
their activity, depressing their spirits, injuring their health, and
accelerating their death. No human mind can at all times support itself under
diversified suffering and disappointment. If any man on earth needs the support
of a few kindred spirits to cheer his heart, invigorate his zeal and support
his patience and fortitude, it is a missionary to Heathens. David Brainerd, and
a few superior minds, may have walked through life, without the consolation of
a friend and comforter. But the conversion of Heathens will never be effected
by a few such characters. Common men must be employed, and Missions, to be
successful, must be rendered, as much as possible, common things. Perhaps, we
are hardly justifiable in exposing insulated individuals in such circumstances
of trial; and let them answer our expectations ever so well, their success will
always be inadequate to the object of Missions, which is an extensive spread of
Christ's religion. I know not that the Dutch have merited commendation by their
missionary labors. I am equally ignorant of what has been done by the Swedes.
The Danes are entitled to the approbation of their fellow Christians for their
labors of love in Greenland and in the East; but as I can speak of them only in
general terms, and my principal intention is to confine my observations to what
has been done among ourselves, I dare form no estimate of their services.

The Moravian Brethren, have been among us, what the Jesuits were in the Roman
Church. They have labored, and suffered, and effected more than all of us.
Their motives have been pure; their missionaries unblameable; their self
denial, courage, hardihood and perseverance admirable; and their success such
as to give general encouragement. They have never provoked persecution among
the Heathens, nor incurred reproach among Europeans, by a secular, sordid,
turbulent spirit. Their success cannot be referred to the learning of their
Ministers, the richness of their funds, or the names and influence of great
patrons. The case was for otherwise: in all these respects they have lain under
heavy discouragements. We must then account for their success upon other
principles; and they are, I think, very obvious. Their missionaries have been
men of ardent piety. The Brethren had it in their power to hold out no improper
inducements to them. They are all of them volunteers; for it is an inviolable
maxim, with the Moravians, to persuade no man to engage in missions. They
seldom make an attempt where there are not half a dozen of them in the Mission.
They live together in one family, and, where they find it necessary, labor with
their own hands. Hence their Missions are less expensive, than those of any
other people; they can engage in more Missions, than they would otherwise be
able to support; and their missionaries are enabled to subsist, where those of
other denominations would starve. Their missionaries are entirely of one mind,
as to the doctrines they teach, their mode of inculcating them, and the
discipline they exercise over their flocks. Their habits are congenial; and,
accustomed for a course of years to give scrupulous attention to every rule of
their Church, few cases can occur to produce diversity of judgments among them.
They live together with the regularity of a monastic institution; and the
frequent stated returns of devotional exercises keep up the spirit of piety.
They have each of them their proper department in the family, and occupied as
they are, with study, private and public devotion, preaching, and the various
exercises of the pastoral care, they have no time to be idle. If any of their
missionaries are carried off by sickness or casuality, men of the same stamp
are ready to supply their place; and the office of a missionary does not go
about knocking at a hundred door; doomed to be rejected by them all, as too
often happens in the Church of England Missions. Th^^^ mutually supporting and
inspiring one another, they are sheltered from those tempests, which discharge
their fury on a few solitary beings, badly united together, and placed in
circumstances, where the zeal and abilities of an individual, however great,
can effect little.

The Methodists have lately entered upon this career, and bid fair to run it
with the same success. The character of their ministers, the nature of their
discipline, and the integrity of their views, are similar, in many respects, to
those of the Moravians. But there are also some features, in which they are
strongly contrasted; and they will, probably, produce a considerable difference
in the nature and success of their missionary warfare, both of a favorable and
unfavorable kind. The zeal o the Moravian is calm, steady, persevering. He
would reform the world, but is careful how he quarrels with it. He carries his
point by address, and the insinuations of modesty and mildness, which commend
themselves to all men, and give offense to none. The habits of silence,
quietness, and decent reserve, mark his character. The zeal of the Methodist
blazes, and burns every thing before it. He is open, active, bold, and ardent.
He sees himself in a pushing world, and pushes with the foremost. He cannot
brook the general coldness; and, fearless of conseque^ces, censures with
severity what he deems censurable. He mixes in the world; makes a hundred
different attempts to effect his purpose; and, if bas^ed in them all, directs
his labors to some other ^u^rt, which affords full scope to his activity. He
lives in action; and is dejected and uncomfortable, if he wants active
employment. The Methodists are know chiefly for what they have done at home;
the Moravians for what they have done abroad. The Moravian discipline is more
severe and complicate, and requires a submission and docility in their people,
again which the high idea of personal liberty that prevails in Europe, strongly
militates. The Methodist discipline is more lax and liberal: and while it is
sufficiently strict, in guarding men's, morals, it carries nothing in it to
repel proselytes. Itinerancy is the Palladium of Methodism. Fixing on some
favorable post, they revolve in a circle round it, perpetually making
incursions in the neighboring country, and multiplying their circuits and their
preachers in proportion to their success. If they do not split of themselves,
their is hardly any thing in the missionary line, which they may not attempt
and succeed in. But they will not. I fear, be able to steer clear of
persecution, as the Moravians have done; nor do I conceive, that they have
patience and perseverence for a Greenland Mission. A Methodist preacher would
think his life thrown away, in spending twenty or thirty years upon a few
converts. And, I starter myself, the Methodists are too well acquainted with
themselves, to engage in such undertakings, while so many large and populous
kingdoms are accessible to their labors.

When we come to make a general estimate of the success of Missions, both in
the Roman and Protestant Communions, I fear, I should be too liberal were I to
say, that there are in the whole Heathen world, one hundred thousand genuine
converts to Christianity. And, if this be all we can show for our labor, from
the Reformation of Luther to the present day, I think it invincible
demonstration, that we have not taken up the matter with a proper spirit, nor
conducted it in a proper manner.

From the foregoing observations, I come to the following conclusions. First,
that if we continue to go on with Missions as we have done, we can hope for no
better success; and the day of judgment will surprise us quarrelling with each
other in Europe, where we have earthly interests to engage our passions, and
doing nothing in the rest of the world, where all the interests of Christ are
neglected. Secondly, it will be more manly and ingenuous to renounce all our
Missions, to deny the obligation of acting in them, and to acknowledge that we
are mercenaries, who must be paid for our pater noster, than thus to go on
shamefully deceiving ourselves, and endeavoring to impose on God and men, by a
show of zeal for religion, which has no real place in our hearts and conduct.
Thirdly, missionaries must be united perfectly, in common principles and
habits, and act with that energy which results from u^ited counsels and
actions; and, it is with the view of showing the necessity of it, that I have
expatiated so freely on the Jesuits, Moravians, and Methodists. Fourthly,
missionaries must be sound in larger numbers, and suitable funds must be
established for the work. An enquiry into the best way of conducting Missions,
and the consideration of what steps it is incumbent on us to take in this
business, will furnish matter for my next Letter.

I remain, Reverend Brethren, Your affectionate, humble servant, M. H.

FOURTH LETTER.
Fathers and Brethern,
IN writing upon Missions, I proposed only to call general attention to the
subject, and to satisfy myself with a few hints on the manner of conducting
them. But, at the request of some friends, whom I have consulted, and to whose
judgment I owe much deference. I am now prevailed upon to say, specifically,
what is it I expect from my Brethren in the ministry respecting Missions; and
to obtrude my own particular views of the most eligible way of carrying them
into effect.

Of you, Reverend Brethren, I require, that you will set to heart the salvation
of the Heathen, meditate on the subject with the most solemn and affectionate
feelings, and cultivate your zeal and philanthropy by earnest prayer to God,
that he would give you toward them bowels and mercies. I would have you
suppose it possible, that it may be your duty to take a more active part in
Missions than you have imagined; and consequently, I with you to divest
yourselves of every prejudice which might bias your judgment, and preclude the
convictions of duty. I expect, that you will not treat the subject with levity,
and, much less with contempt; but speak of (...) with respect and approbat^^n.
I think, you should take opportunities of setting the importance of these
undertaking, before your flocks from the pulpit; and, by your exhortations and
liberality, give them examples of zeal and benevolence. I add, that if your
convictions of duty lead that way, you should come forward with all boldness,
and take your p^r^ in the business, and take your part in the business,
whatever it may be, in serving Missions, by your pen, your influence, your
advice, or your personal labors, either at home or abroad.

From Ministers, as connected with each other, I expect, that they mutually
communicate their views as to the most effectual methods of spreading the
gospel, and exhort each other to a generous and noble exertion of ministerial
zeal. I require them to form Associations, for collecting money, obtaining
information, procuring missionaries, and transacting the variety of concerns,
which fall under the consideration of Missions. In these Associations, I wish
those Ministers to come forward, whose character and services give them most
respectability, and will enable them to promote effectually the cause they
undertake. Last of all, having once engaged, I would have the Association to be
actuated by a true spirit of Missions. They should be zealous, active,
indefatigable. Any Minister who is not warmly affected to Missions, should be
excluded from the acting Committee. What these Gentlemen are, their missions
will be. Having in their power the choice of missionaries, and the management
of the Mission, they will not fail to give to the whole undertaking the
features and complexion of their own characters. -- This is the sum of my
requisitions; and I slatter myself that there is in it, nothing irrational,
nothing, to the performance of which our calling does not oblige us.

The small success which has attended Missions should incline us to suspect,
that they have not been conducted in the most eligible way; and dispose us to
examine with candor any new method, which may be proposed. I will, therefore,
show my opini^^. But as I do not presume to dictate to any man on the subject;
so I am aware that no one plan can be formed, which will equally apply to
Nations, who differ in their degree of civilivation, their police, their
religion, and the face of their country. Whoever, therefore, are entrusted with
the execution of our plans, should have the discretionary power, of deviating
in their application, as the reason of the case shall demand. This observation
premised, a general view of the nature of Missions, and of the state of the
Heathen Nations, may enable us to infer something as to the line of conduct
most likely to ensure success.

Before we can justify sanguine hopes, a considerable alteration in favor of
religion must take place among ourselves. We cannot give to others, what we do
not possess; and before our zeal will acquire sufficient momentum to effect
great things for the salvation of the Heathens, it is necessary that a more
general and serious care should prevail about the salvation of our own souls.
While we look for this desirable change, we cannot do better than renew our
missionary engagements; which will have the most favorable operation in
bringing it about. Great designs and great undertakings form great men. They
call forth the talents, of which we never supposed ourselves to be possessed;
and give an exhibition of splendid virtues, which do not frequent the common
paths of life. Courage provokes c^^rage, and zeal enkindles zeal. Considerable
success, in any one mission, would encourage many undertakings; and the
activity exerted in favor of the Heathens, would naturally call attention to
the ways and means of doing good among our own countrymen.

Want of success is the most fatal objection which lies against Missions. We
have not taken proper st^^s to insure success. We have hardly dared to ho^e for
it. A few hundred converts have been considered, as a great thing; and a sew
thousand have been the he plus ultra of our hope. A revolution must take place
in our id^as on the subject. We must hope for great things. We must attempt
great things. Until this is done, tolerable success is not to be expected.
There is a proportion between the object we embrace, and the zeal and exertion
we show in accomplishing it. Such limited views as these preclude exertion.
Whereas, where great advantages are proposed, men are forward to incur great
expenses, and to run great risks. Let us, then, determine to give a fair trial
to Missions, and undertake something which will help us to form a reasonable
judgment of what is, or is not to be expected from them. Let our object be to
evangelize the Islands of the South Sea, or to obtain for Christianity a firm
footing and extensive spread in India, China, Tibet, Borneo, Persia, Tartary,
and other great kingdoms.

The preparations we make must be answerable to the views we adopt. Men and
money are the nerves of war. A few scattered missionaries, and paltry funds,
are inadequate to such conquests. But, as our strength is small, and our forces
new levies, unpractised to these perilous encounters, I would recommend to no
Denomination of Christians to engage in a second Mission, until experience has
convinced them that they are more than equal to the first. We must also be
resolved to take the field in the very boldest line of service. A Mission,
especially such a Mission as I propose, is one of those enterprises where the
measures which, at first sight, appear the most hazardous and desperate, are
the most deliberate and successful. Men, who are not disposed to run all
chances, and to undergo sufferings, which on the relation might freeze the
blood of those who hear them quietly by their fire sides, have no business in
Missions. And, if missionaries of this cast are not to be bad, we may, without
any great detriment to the Christian Cause, wait with patience until such
characters appear in the world. Men of other dispositions will do, as little as
has been done: and if a few individuals of a peculiar turn of mind are willing
to relinquish a large sphere of usefulness in Europe for the hope of converting
a handful of people in India, they will not have many followers: But they will
furnish for us, at home, a pretext for talking about greater things, than we
have godliness or courage to perform.

I give my advice that no Mission, of the description I have pointed out, be
undertaken with a smaller number than ten or twelve missionaries; and that
number should be increased in a treble or quadruple proportion, as the success
attending the Mission may require. To procure a large supply of missionaries, I
propose that an equal number of pious lay brethren should be employed in every
Mission, as schoolmasters, transcribers, exhorters, and to assist in all the
emergencies of the Mission, to which missionaries may not be able to give
attention. Young men of twenty, or one and twenty years of age would easily be
found among every Christian people, who have good natural talents and zeal for
God, which would make them rejoice to be associated in our labors. Their youth
and inexperience would derive instruction and support from their elder
Brethren, and, after a few years trial, they might be promoted to the honorable
station of missionaries. Such an establishment would be the best seminary of
education for missions, and, with occasional helps from Europe, be sufficient
for all demands. Nor is this idea, altogether novel: the Unitas ^ratum, in
their Missions, have availed themselves greatly of the piety of their lay
brethren.

As the expense of supporting so large a number of missionaries would be very
great, and far beyond the strength of any funds, which can, at this time, be
set on foot, I propose that no missionary be received until he has acquainted
himself with one or other art, by which he may do something toward his own
maintenance. This is, I think, a matter of indispensible necessity. The
Apostles of our Lord, the Jesuits, and the Moravians, have experienced the
advantage of practicing these honest arts. I have elsewhere given my reasons
for discharging ^arried ministers from this warfare; nevertheless, if such are
to be found, as are desirous of engaging under all the discouragements of their
situation, let them go. With God's blessing, both they and their wives may be
very useful in a missionary family.

With such difficulties and dangers before them, it would be ungenerous and
unfeeling not to give to missionaries every comfort and accommodation we can
afford; but a stated salary is, in my idea of it, unnecessary and improper. A
few books, and clothes, with the proper implements of their respective arts, is
all they can need, and all they could retain with safety in an uncivilized
country.

Suppose twenty missionaries and lay-brethren safely landed in Otaheite, they
must recommend themselves by liberality, and purchase a few acres of land for
cultivation, as well as a competent stock of the necessaries of the country.
They will build a large house for their establishment, and erect a church for
divine worship. After they begin to be acquainted with the people and country,
they may, if it be thought advisable, make two or three more establishments in
different parts of the Island. They will form vocabularies, and reduce the
language to rule; make observation on all they see and hear, write it down, and
commit it to memory; they will acquaint themselves with the religion,
government, and manner of the natives; begin to instruct youth, communicate all
the knowledge they possess, learn to cultivate their lands, and, to do every
thing else needful for their support. During this time they may also give the
natives some historical accounts of Christianity, and the leading principles of
our morals. But their grand labor will be the acquisition of the language, and
the improvement of their piety, as well as the giving of an example to the
islanders, by the regular and frequent returns of all the exercises of piety
and benevolence. In two years time I suppose (...) tolerably well acquainted
with the language, and those who speak it, their affairs in good train, and the
plan of operation laid down with mutual consent. They may now proceed to
business, and open their commission with due solemnity.

If they did not before multiply their establishments, it will now be necessary
to do it. In each department, they will open a school for youth, rather than
children; and others of them may be employed in traveling through the country
in a regular itinerancy, preaching every night and morning; and after a circuit
of a fortnight, return to the establishment. And in this manner must they
continue to act, increasing their labor in proportion to their success, and to
their numbers. If, instead of Otaheite, they make their attempt in India, they
may conduct themselves in much the same way. It may be needful to say that they
should form their establishments in all the great cities of the empire, after
the example of the Apostles, who soon formed Churches in Alexandria, Antioch,
and Rome.

In missionary establishments, the greatest care should be taken in giving to
every man his proper department, and in preserving (...) general cooperation
in all their efforts. If absolute ruin be not the consequence of their acting
independantly of each other, yet their strength will be so diminished by
division, as to produce no fruit worthy of their soil. If there be any
conclusiveness in this reasoning, it will show the absolute necessity of each
missionary's guarding against pertinacity of opinion, and the encouraging of
those habits of fastidious delicacy which grow upon men who are accustomed in
all things to consult only their private feelings. -- Unless we can resolve on
this sacrifice, we are not qualified to act in Missions.

Under the consideration of the most eligible way of conducting Missions, it
may not be improper to add a few observations on the manner of preaching, ^^d
the behavior with respect to some important points which will be most likely to
give success to missionaries. His doctrine and the way of proposing it are the
first things I shall notice. He should remember, that he is a preacher of the
gospel, and that it is not so much moral truths, as gospel principles and
motives that he is to instill into his auditors. The morality of Christ is the
most perfect and admirable system which ever appeared, or can be conceived of,
as applicable to the state and situation of mankind. Considered in its due
extent, it embraces our whole duty to God and men; it regulates not only every
action of our external conduct, but also forms every disposition of the mind,
controls every faculty of the soul, and exercises a sovereign authority over
every secret of the heart. It is always beautiful, and harmonizes with itself
in all its parts. In no case, and to no man does it grant indulgence of
unrightcousness. But to preach this moral rule in all its extent is not to
preach the gospel. So far from it, that they, who have insisted upon it, so, as
to obtain the name of Moral preachers, have in fact subverted the gospel, and
broken the moral law into a thousand pieces, a few of which are gathered up, by
those who mean to go to heaven by the merit of their works, and they consider
themselves as enriched by their partial acquisitions. Archimedes, exulting in
the success of an experiment in mechanics, exclaimed, Find me a place to stand
upon, and I will move the earth! These Moral Preachers, are in the very dilemma
of the Philosopher. -- Could their engine move the earth, they want a solid
spot to fix it upon. Unless they supply this defect, their boasted morals are
good for nothing; and their zeal to do good a mere beating the air. The Gospel
Preacher supplies their defect, and both magnifies and establishes the law in
all its extent, and spirituality, by placing it on the glorious, everlasting
foundation, of Christ crucified. Justice, mercy, truth, however we may differ
in the application of the terms, are things, in which Heathens will think
themselves as well informed as ourfelves: But the original rectitude and
subsequent depravity of man, the incarnation and death of the Son of God for
our redemption, a free justification by the grace of God, a regeneration of the
whole man, consistent universal holiness, enforced on the ground that we are
not our own, but Christ's, the supernatural succors of the Divine Spirit, and
the commanding doctrines of eternal judgment, are things of which they have no
conception. These grand, forcible truths, with the varied apparatus which
belong to them, are those on which missionaries are called to insist; and the
crucified Jesus is the central point from which all the lines of our divinity
must be drawn. In a word our missionaries must be gospel ministers, and not
merely moral ones.

He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, said the blessed Jesus, and
he that believes not shall be damned. This should be insisted on with becoming
firmness; but I incline to think, that we should not abroad, and especially in
the early stages of our Mission, deal so freely in the figure anathema, as we
do at home. In England every man professes Christianity, and is sufficiently
acquainted with the leading principles of our faith to criminate his
disobedience. We may argue with him from his own data, and assume with him a
tone of authority, which will not be justifiable with poor Heathens. The
progress of the human mind in the investigation of truth is not rapid,
especially when it is clouded with inveterate prejudices. We should, therefore,
be careful how we bring in our damnatory clauses prematurely, against a people,
who are not acquainted with our principles, and can form no estimate of the
consequences of rejecting them. This observation might, perhaps, have been
spared; although I hope to meet with indulgence for inserting it.

I have before said, that in another place I should give my reasons for wishing
to discharge married men, and fathers of families, from this warfare. Single
men will be exposed from the infirmity of their nature to think of entering
into the conjugal state. This is a propensity which it would be well to
discourage as much as possible, without advancing so far as to criminate men
for complying with the imperious will of heaven. But much attention should be
paid to the manner in which missionaries ally themselves. Upon this head no
certain rules can be given. Among politer nations fewer opportunities will
occur of marrying into noble families, and among more savage tribes I fear it
is hardly to be wished. A heathen woman would be a very degrading companion for
a Christian Missionary; and the example would have a fatal tendency on our
converts.

The preaching of the gospel, with fidelity and boldness, implies a
considerable share of publicity; but nothing should be guarded against with
more attention than an ostentatious display of Christianity. While our converts
are few, persecution is not to be feared; but as truth prevails the enemy of
our salvation will stir up his emissaries. While, therefore, we shun no
discovery of ourselves, as far as the prosperity of the gospel is concerned, we
should be careful how we give a handle to the Devil and his Children, by
counting numbers and boasting of noble converts. In all things, it becomes
Christians to carry their faculties with meekness; but in nothing should we
give stronger demonstrations of humility, gentleness, and unassuming modesty,
than in the introduction of our religion among a foreign people.

There are two ranks of men whom our missionaries should manage with peculiar
caution and address -- I mean the Priests and Chiefs of a Heathen people,
especially the King, if their labors should fall within the sphere of royalty.
Let them remember, that, in every country, Priests have a strong hold on the
sentiments of mankind. If they are not sincere, humble, pious and benevolent,
the opposite qualities may be expected to predominate in them, more strongly
than in other men. In most, perhaps all systems of Heathenism, there is not
only much superstition, but also a large share of imposture. As public
deceivers, Heathen Priests must be bad men. Priests live by their religion;
hence they are the bloodiest, and most malignant persecutors. The persecutions
of the laity are affairs of policy and fanaticism, and are not inflamed with
personal rancor. The Priest contends, at once, for his honors, his gains, and
his Gods. Here we have to cope with three of the strongest principles of human
corruption, fanaticism, covetousness, and pride; all which are driven to
madness by the secret guilt of unprincipled falsehood. It is equally the
interest of these men to withstand our words, as it is in their power to do so.
Their friendship will, therefore, be suspicious; their association undesirable.
An obsequious, but distant, and guarded respect will be all they merit at our
hands. Fair appearances and hasty overtures should not be credited from men of
their character. Nor will the mind, inclining to conversion, and characterized
by humility and earnestness, be discouraged by a prudent reserve in his
instructor. Religious conviction is a principle too forcibly operative to be
long concealed; and until it developes itself by unquestionable testimony, we
should not commit ourselves to the dangers of an easy faith. If God should
indeed touch their hearts, they will be the most potent auxilliaries, and worth
a hundred of their countrymen.

With respect to Chiefs, we know that power, affluence and honor deprave the
heart. They are an order of men, who do not, in general affect religion. As
wicked men, they despise and hate it; and, as wordly politicians, they fear it.
Accustomed to command in civil matters, which they understand, and in which
they have a natural claim to take the lead, they are forward to usurp authority
in things sacred, over which, as God has given them no jurisdiction, so it is
in the power of man to give them none. Did not truth compel the confession, I
should wish not to say, that even Christian Priests, by bold inroads on the
secular power, have strengthened this propensity in the great, who cannot now
think themselves in safety, while religion is free. Hence the bold attempts to
bind this celestial stranger with the fetters of human laws. Without
expatiating farther on this topic, it may suffice to say, that, on a smaller
scale, religion and her ministers must expect to meet, in Otaheite,
obstructions similar to those under which she labors in Europe. To assert the
freedom of religion and her ministers calls for actions and not for words. The
missionary must prove by his conduct, and ministry, that his religion is a
heavenly thing, and himself a heavenly man. He must show that government has
every thing to hope, and nothing to fear from religion. He must inviolably
adhere to his principles; for the moment he deserts them, and treads on
unhallowed ground; that moment he stretches out his hand to receive the chain,
and betrays religion to the secular power. By affecting the favor of the great
we degrade our ministry, endanger our own salvation, and render the men we
flatter and fawn upon worse than they were before. Any extraordinary zeal to
make noble proselytes indicates mercenary and ambitious views. The rich are no
less sagacious than the poor in discovering the motive of our conduct. They
accept our adulation, and despise us for it. Had the Roman Missionaries kept at
an awful distance from the imperial thrones of China and Japan, they and their
converts might, perhaps, have lived in peace to this day. And the imitation of
their conduct, even in Otaheite, might overwhelm Protestant Missionaries in
similar ruin. Piety and benevolence will command esteem, and give us all the
influence we can want. Let Christian Missionaries, and their converts, show
themselves the most peaceable, loyal, and affectionate of subjects, and this
not from policy, but for conscience sake.

The last thing I shall guard missionaries against, is the usurpation of
dominion over their flocks, and particularly dominions of a secular kind. Such
a conduct will merit the abhorrence of God and men: and must draw persecution
on themselves. The state of those Islands might induce men of enterprise, under
the specious pretext of civilization, to advance farther than they intended
without being aware of the consequences; and the ignorance, confidence, and
docility of their converts may be expected to throw into their hands a degree
of power and influence, which are liable to the vilest abuse. Let them,
therefore, meditate on the history of the Church, reflect on their own
weakness, and remember, that they, who succeed to their labors, will have a
greater love of command, as they may not have their piety, and at the same time
will be in circumstances more favorable to the usurpation of dominion, than
they themselves now are.

If Christianity is no better served by our Missions, than she has been for
centuries past, all these admonitions may be spared; for they will have no
occasion to be applied; but if Missions should be taken up in the way I
propose, and meet with the success, which I am sanguine enough to flatter
myself they would do from that way of conducting them, especially in the South
Sea Islands, they are necessary, and merit all attention.

I remain, Reverend Brethren, Your affectionate, humble servant, M. H.

FIFTH LETTER.
Fathers and Brethern,
THE qualifications of the missionary enter so deeply into my subject, that I
cannot pass them by, without offering you my opinion. But on this point, as
well as on many others, which I have discussed, I certainly do not mean to
speak as ex cathedra. Different opinions will prevail on what I have to offer;
and they, who are above others interested in it, as being willing themselves to
engage in Missions, will certainly do well to abide by their own.

Piety is the only basis of the missionary character. Every attempt to convert
others, while we ourselves are unconverted, is absurd and nugatory, On this it
is unnecessary to insist. They, who are destitute of the faith and hope of the
gospel, are never likely to volunteer in this service. Gold, which has
transformed so many Apostles of the Devil into the Ministers of Christ, might
also make them missionaries; but it is our business to preclude the possibility
of such inducement. Let godliness, and not gain, be the only object proposed to
their choice, and we shall effectually shut the door against all mercenaries.

But in the qualification of the missionary, we must enquire not only into the
sincerity of his piety, but also into the power of it. We should injure many by
questioning their piety, who are yet not possessed of that vigorous and
steadfast faith, that joyous hope, and that servent love, which are absolutery
necessary to support a man under all the sacrifices, dangers, hardships, and
discouragements of a missionary warfare. The tree, that is green, flourishing,
and fruitful, while it stands in a rich soil, and is theltered by a surrounding
wood, might wither and die, or be torn up by its roots, if removed to a heath,
where it enjoys-none of the same advantages. It is not impossible, that a man,
whose piety would have saved himself and his neighbor, in England, might, in
India or Otaheite, lose his own soul, and become a stumbling block to others.
This is an awful consideration; and, if attended to, would prevent all
rashness, either in engaging ourselves, or in persuading others to engage, in
Missions. A tolerable strength and maturity of religion, will, therefore, be as
needful as the sincerity of it.

Zeal is a qualification for Missions of a nature inferior only to piety. It is
in a considerable degree its inseparable concomitant; and that man will hardly
be defective in it, who enters upon Missions sua sponte, and in compliance with
the bent of his own inclination. The great matter will be to determine, whether
this zeal be the pure flame of piety, and has heavenly oil to feed its fire, or
is the result of an ardent temperament and a splendid imagination. When there
is evidently a mixture, which I suspect is generally the case, we must
discover, by a moral analysis, what may be referred to nature, and what to
grace; and determine on a man's qualification in this respect, as there is the
larger share of valuable bullion, or of base alloy.

Here I cannot but indulge an observation, which strikes me as being of
considerable weight. A Mission is an undertaking so extremely remote from the
common concerns of life, and carries in it so much to revolt the heart, that
when men of reputed piety, freely offer themselves for it, there is a strong
presumption, that, in following the bent of their own inclinations, they do not
altogether mistake their proper object. We should be extremely fearful in
counteracting the Holy Ghost, who, if we would submit to his wisdom, would not
fail to set apart proper instruments for the work. Should, therefore, one or
other missionary qualification, not exist so eminently as we could wish, in the
man who offers himself; yet this noble volunteering, in a cause, where every
principle of nature must be laid on the cross, seems to imply so very much,
that our objections must be palpable indeed, before we are justifiable in
rejecting him. God sees not as man sees; and, if David's youth and unwarlike
appearance had been more regarded, than the honest indignation and noble
confidence, with which he came forward to assert the honor of the Lord of
hosts, Israel had wanted the only champion capable of upholding his glory.

It is to be wished that the missionary's zeal should not have been lately
kindled, but such as having burned for years promises to continue in its beat.
But his zeal may be too hot, as well as too cold. His fire should be moderated,
by some experience in the ministry. Zeal and conrage will be likely to
precipitate an unexperienced young man into rash measures and intemperance of
mind; and he may fall the victim of impatience and disappointment. It is,
therefore, necessary that he should have been taught to exercise a good degree
of gentleness, patience, and long sufferance; by being accustomed to wrestle
with the unruly will of men, by seeing many of his well meant efforts
frustrated through invincible depravity, and by observing the failure of some
of his most sanguine and reasonable expectations. Add to this, there is an art
in managing men's minds, which nothing but experience can teach him, and that
man will have little skill in ruling the tempest of the human passions, who has
not learned to moderate the ardor of his own feelings; and who does not know
when to press his point and when to decline it, when to command and when to
entreat; and how to avail himself of all the molla tempora fandi.

There are some worthy, -- some pious men, who are capable of every thing, and
yet do very little in life. They are disorderly in all their habits and
versatile in all their pursuits. Superior to fear, they are, unhappily,
ductile, and receive the impression of minds inferior to their own. Capable of
vast exertions, they are naturally indolent. With a vivacity, which often
sparkles and charms, they unite a morbid melancholy which preys upon the heart.
They are amiable, but not venerable. Such men may engage in Missions, but will
hardly succeed in them. The missionary should possess much self denial, and be
regular in all his habits. He needs not have the raizor's edge; but he must be
as the blade of a well tempered knife. He must be a man of discipline and self
command.

His character should be divested of sloth, effeminacy and indulgence. Perhaps,
he should rather be capable of becoming a man of letters, than actually be so.
All his habits should be active rather than sedentary. A disposition favorable
to the feelings of ardent and sublime devotion, and a delight in the exercises
of the pulpit and the pastoral care, superior to what he receives from the
studies of eloquence, languages, and all things sabsidiary to his ministry,
should preponderate in his character. In a word, he should be more the active
man, than the contemplative one. A sound constitution, hardened to the
vicissitude of the seasons, and capable of supporting the extremes of
sufferance is greatly to be desired: but a mind superior to suffering is a
consideration of far more importance, than that corporeal vigor and hardiness
which is invulnerable to fatigue and want.

We require in our missionary a disinterested, generous way of thinking and
acting, above low cunning, servile compliance, and a presumptuous invasion of
powers to which his character does not entitle him. We would have him sincere,
open, and affectionate. Instead of authoritative commands we would arm him with
prayers, entreaties, and tears. We expect that he should have learned to bear
and forbear. We think that ignorance should excite his pity, and not rouse his
contempt. We would not have him shun the association of the poor savages he
would convert; but we should be sorry to see him sink into indolent
familiarity, and indiscriminating communicativeness, which betray a relaxed
mind that has no guard over itself. Silence he should have learned to esteem as
a grand partof ministerial prudence. He must be an extempore preacher, and
possess a facility of conveying to the mind his ideas clear and strong,
independent of those modes of speech which originate in the laws and manners of
Europe. He must be far removed from narrow bigotry, and possess a spirit truly
catholic. It is not Calvinism, it is not Arminianism, but Christianity, that he
is to teach. It is not the hierarchy of the Church of England; it is not the
prinicples of Protestant Dissenters, that he has in view to propagate. His
object is to serve the Church Universal. It is not latitudinarianism of
principles, but largeness of affection, which I recommend to the missionary. I
would not have him indifferent to his own peculiarities, whether they respect
the doctrines he receives as truth, or the points of ecclesiastical polity he
considers as most friendly to religion; but I would have him thoroughly
sensible, that the success of his ministry rests not on the points of
separation, but on those wherein all godly men are united. He should know to
what place in the grand scale of truth he is to refer cach article of his
creed; and be infinitely more concerned to make men Christians than to make
them Church of England men, Dissenters, or Methodists. Would to God this were
more attended to among us! and then, instead of observing with jealousy the
prosperity of any other Denomination of Christians, and considering it as an
obstruction to the success of our own party, we shall rejoice in hearing that
Christ is preached, and souls are saved.

Much more might be said on the qualifications of the missionary; but I shall
finish this subject by observing, that his character cannot be too perfect, nor
his talents too great, nor too highly cultivated for this calling. But in
addition to what is included in the idea of a godly man, there is a vast
progression of ability, between the extremes of talents, so limited as to
exclude a man from Missions or so great as to give him a lead in them. We may
err by requiring too much, and by being satisfied with too little. What a
missionary is expected to do and to suffer should always enter into the
estimate we make of his qualifications.

The man who reads the English language and has good sense enough to make use
of Henry's commentary on the Scriptures, may be of inestimable benefit to the
lower orders of people in England, though he be unfit to instruct the
intelligent, and should torture the ears of the polite. Such a man may be a
very proper missionary to the Negro Slaves in our West India Islands. No
compass of talents is required for such a situation; nor do I conceive that
such an engagement, will require one jot more piety, or bind him over to suffer
more hardship, than he will have occasion to exercise in England, Such a
Mission is rather nominal than real; as the missionary will preach the gospel
in those Islands with every advantage he could enjoy in his own country.

Where a language is to be learned, European comforts to be relinquished, and a
Mission is to be taken up under all the discouragements which usually attend
the undertaking, we require more experienced piety, warmer zeal, and better
talents. The missionary should at least, be furnished with the rudiments of
grammar, and some general knowledge of men and things* as well as possessed of
an understanding capable of improvement, and a spirit of application to improve
it. For China and other nations in an improved state of civilization, he should
have those talents, and that information, which render him respectable in
England. But, even in China, the bulk of the people are on the same par of
information with the common people in our own land, and many missionaries of
inferior talents might very well be associated with a few of greater ability.

In the establishment, I believe the sentiment has prevailed pretty generally,
that missionares should be men of learning; and under the influence of this
idea some worthy candidates for Missions have been rejected for insufficiency.
The Methodists and some Protestant Dissenters, I am apprehensive, incline too
much to the opposite extreme. For I have heard it suggested among them, that
their weakest ministers, who can be of little service in Europe, are very
proper for missionaries. In this sentiment there is some truth; but we form
very erroneous ideas of Missions, if we suppose such men only are wanting for
the service. We must have men to lead as well as to follow; and even in the
West India Islands, where I have supposed pious missionaries of the smallest
gifts to be sufficient instructors for the Negroes, there are many Europeans of
intelligence who will attend their ministry; and if we wish our Missionaries to
be respectable, there should be some of better talents amongst them. In every
place, but the West Indies, a Missionary will require good talents, as well as
the most exemplary piety. Under shelter of the opinion that men of the best
talents must be kept at home, we shall give too much encouragement to that self
complacency which cleaves to men of talents, and grant them a dismission from
the service, which they will be glad to avail themselves of. But I cannot
believe those Gentlemen think soberly of themselves, as they ought to do, who
suppose themselves too great and too considerable to engage in Missions. One
would think that considering the nature of the work, and the disadvantages we
lie under from the want of Apostolic credentials, we should wish as much as
possible to supply their place by talents and learning. Piety is better than
learning, and learning with piety has great advanage over piety alone. Every
thing else being equal in our Missions, that Mission will certainly be most
productive which claims the most learned missionaries. As a man of no learning
myself I cannot but feel it a little contemptuous for me and my poor Brethren,
who are like myself illeterate men, to be shoved with so much good will into
the hottest front of the battle, by men who are fitter for the work, but who
claim that very fitness, as the apology for their sitting still. On the other
hand could I boast of talents and of letters, and consider myself as a leading
man in the Church, I should blush to see a few subalterns generously exposing
themselves in a warfare which I shunned.

Let us then endeavor to preserve a mean between these dangerous extremes. Let
no worthy volunteer be rejected for incompetence of learning; nor let us allow
of any man's pleading his literature and popular elocution as a discharge from
the war. As bringing our gifts to the Lord's treasury, let us give largely and
freely, and, after all, learn to know that we are unprofitable servants. But
though we could cast in our ten thousand talents, let us beware of treating
with contempt our poor brother, who after the example of the widow, who was
blessed in her deed, shall offer his two mites for the service of the
sanctuary. He may, for ought we know, have presented a richer offering than us
all. Our Lord, instead of throwing back the widow's mites with contempt, gave
high commendation to her faith and liberality. -- May I never be in the place
of those who reject the pious candidate for Missions, and vilify his zeal with
charges of enthusiasm and spiritual pride -- for what? Because he wants Latin
and Greek! Because he has the insolence to offer his mite to the gracious Lord
of charity! Because, that believing the race is not to the swift, nor the
battle to the strong, he has courage and confidence in his God, to go forth
with a sling and a stone to encounter a Philistine, whose gigantic stature and
formidable arms appal all the armies of our Israel!

Somewhat similar to the question between learned and unlearned missionaries,
is another between married and single men, which of them we should consider
most eligible for Missions. But these questions seem to proceed, both of them,
on a false ground. They suppose that Ministers learned and unlearned, married
and single, are so very zealous of preferment in this way, that our choice is
puzzled, and we need great deliberation on whom we shall confer the obsolete
honors of hunger, thirst, heat, cold, nakedness, sickness, poverty, contempt,
persecutions, and death. But the case is altogether different. We wish for some
learning in our missionaries; but we must be content, for one man of letters,
to receive twenty, who have no pretension to learning. It will be the same with
men, who have wives and families, should we prefer them. They will not
generally be prevailed upon to look Missions in the face. And as I am more
disposed to reason from facts, than from preconceived theories, and much
inclined to believe that men's minds, like waters, finds their own level, I
conceive that, from the invincible aversion which men of learning and fathers
of families show to this business, we may arrive at the conclusion, that they
are not, generally speaking, proper persons for Missions. A few great leaders
appear absolutely necessary; and if learned men were equally willing to become
missionaries, they would claim a preference; but as they are not equally
willing, and as they will probably never be so, we not only may, but must give
them the discharge they require. We must do the same with married men. I cannot
persuade myself that the relations of husband and father considered simply in
themselves, absolutely prohibit the engagement; but I am fully of opinion that
there is a wide difference between the case of learned and married men
inlisting for this war. If there be equal piety in the learned, learning must
give them great advantage over the unlearned. With respect to the married, as
they must be greater sufferers in Missions than the single, they should have
more zeal and piety than single men to engage them to suffer; and, even with
this advantage, the encumbrances of a wife and family must lay insuperable
obstacles in the way of their acting, with that energy and decision we may
expect from single men. As I find public opinion leaning much in favor of the
claims of married men, it may be worth our while to state the reasons urged on
both sides, and to examine on which they are the most conclusive.

In favor of the married, it is urged, that their wives would be extremely
serviceable in a missionary establishment -- that they would be very useful
among their own sex, especially in the East where women are secluded and the
sanctity of the Haram would be polluted by the presence of any but female
missionaries; and that they would be a safeguard to the characters of their
husbands, which might otherwise suffer from a ministerial intercourse with
female converts. To enforce these arguments, is adduced the example of the
Unitas Fratrum, who in their Missions generally make use of married men.

It is granted a pious, active, healthy woman, might be serviceable in a
missionary institution: but it should be remembered that the sex in general are
not calculated to support hardship; that young women, who are bearing children,
more frequently require to be waited upon, than are able to wait on others; and
that the care of a young family will leave them little time to aid their
husbands missionary labors. And if it be considered that the men who will
engage in Missions are generally such as are in the prime of their years, our
missionary establishments may soon be expected to be very populous. With
respect to the service hoped from them of introducing Christianity into Asiatic
Harams, I fear they will not effect much. Husbands have, in general, more
influence in forming the religious principles of their wives, than wives have
on those of their husbands. If the men are converted, they will carry their
religion home to their wives; and if they can once be prevailed on to embrace
our religion, it is not unreasonable to think, that they will soon adopt our
manners, and give us as free an intercourse in their families as is to be
wished. The protection they may afford to their husbands morals, as well as
their characters, I shall not affect to despise; but it cannot be weighed
against the disadvantages they would lay them under in their work. Nor is the
example of the Moravians to the point. They are in this, and many other
respects, a singular people. And, if it might not give offense to the wives of
ministers of other Denominations, I should say that their women are educated in
a way which render them fitter companions for missionaries than any other women
in the world. But, in addition to what I have here advanced, much more is to be
said. I have recommended Missions to be taken up on a larger scale, and with a
bolder spirit of enterprise, than that in which they have been hitherto
conducted. If, therefore, a sew women and their families might be settled in
some situations, were accommodations are to be had for them, nevertheless they
will be unfit companions for the larger part of missionaries, who will be
engaged in perpetual travels and labors among a Heathen Nation, where they must
undergo all possible hardships. I propose to send forth missionaries in large
numbers, and I suppose that the fruit of their labors, the humanity of the
natives, and the largest supplies which can be sent from Europe, will
altogether form a fund very inadequate to the support of women and children. I
expect, if they have the souls of missionaries in them, that they will often,
between their charity and their zeal, be placed in circumstance; similar to
those of St. Paul, in nakedness, in want, in perils by land, in perils by sea,
and in all the varieties of suffering. And are these men to have wives and
children? Will men of a spirit like this be likely to pine for the indulgence
of a lady's lap?

If I am thought to have lost myself in the regions of romance and to be
conjuring up enchanted castles which never did exist, for the ideal pleasure of
killing giants, chaining lions, dissolving spells, and freeing captive dames, I
must persist, like the Knight of La Mancha, to vindicate the sanity of my
intellect, and to affirm that the things I talk of have existed, and will exist
again, and that until they are made to do so, I am a sober man, and read my
book accurately. The soundness of their intellect may rather be suspected, who
think of sending half a dozen married missionaries and their families to India,
to give them snug births and good salaries at Calcutta, or other European
Settlements, where they are to superintend a school, and preach to a few
luxurious Europeans, and such Natives as care to come into their Churches. And
for what purpose all this astonishing apparatus? To convert the Natives of
Indostan to Christianity! And by what year of our Lord may we expect that the
Gospel will be spread through that Empire? As soon might one hope to empty the
sea by lading it out with buckets, or think of giving light to the world by the
glimmering rays of half a dozen wax tapers! Surely gentlemen who will only
patronize Missions conducted on this scale, and gravely talk to the would of
their wish to spread the gospel, cannot reproach me for credulity and
enthusiasm. I am not weak enough to suppose an Apostolic work, such as the
conversion of the Heathen Nations is, can be effected in any but an Apostolic
way. Had the Apostles themselves set down in India to teach Schools, and to act
as parochial Ministers, not all their miraculous credentials would have spread
the gospel there. The Reverend Mr. Swartz, a Danish Missionary, and one of the
most respectable and successful men, who has appeared under that character in
Indostan, has so and it necessary to travel a good deal about in preaching the
gospel; and a few others, possibly imitate his example -- I do not mean to
represent that Gentleman as properly an itinerant preacher; but only to insist,
that he is sensible, that he must go after the lost sheep, and not leave them
to seek a faithful shepherd. He therefore preaches out of doors, and lays hold
of every opportunity of going among them. But, I fear his example meets not
with general imitation; and, if it did, as married men cannot do what ought to
be done in that way, so the number of missionaries employed there is inadequate
to the work. Whatever difficulties, therefore, there may be in finding a
sufficient number of missionaries for such an attempt, it must be done, or
nothing will be done worthy of our religion -- worthy of God manifest in the
flesh. And, if this is to be done, I believe few people will think it
advisable to carry wives and children into so hot a war. For whatever
missionaries are willing to fusser in their own persons, they will expect, and
will have a right to expect, such a support for their wives and families, as an
undertaking so circumstanced could not afford them.

Single men are then the proper persons for this work. They have no ties.
Private charities will not counteract public ones. They can live cheap, fare
hard, and are ready for every service. If after acquainting themselves with a
country and its inhabitants, they think it advise^ble to marry, I see no reason
why they should think their European blood contaminated by an alliance with the
women of the country; and if they make any converts, there will certainly be
females enough whom they may marry. They will be the properest wives for them
who are born in the country, speak its language, are inured to the climate, and
accustomed to the manners of the inhabitants. Such women may be able to take a
share in the hardships of a missionary life, and by their labor, as well as
their connections, do something for the support of their Husbands. None of
these advantages can be hoped from an European woman. If they are true
converts, they will be animated by the zeal which attends so blessed a change;
and that patriot love and warm attachment to our native land, which glows, more
or less, in every human breast, will cooperate with it, to make them zealous
auxiliaries in converting their countrymen. They will attach their husbands to
the country, and keep them steady to the work. Their children educated in
Christianity, and endeared to the country in which they are born, and have many
relatives, will some of them tread in the steps of their fathers; and, though
they should not, they will, in other respects, countenance and support the
religion in which they were brought up -- a religion which though they should
not choose to practice, they will hardly forsake for the deformed systems of
Heathen Superstition. Whereas, the men who carry out with them European women
and their children, will always have it in contemplation one day to return to
England; they will be looking out with anxiety for ways and means to accomplish
that end; and if they see no hope of effecting it, their lives and their deaths
will be embittered by the idea of leaving the women and little ones, whom they
love dearer than life, destitute and friendless in a foreign land. To say, they
ought to put their trust in God, is nothing to the purpose: for we are not
enquiring what men ought to do, but what considering the weakness of nature
they will be most exposed to do. For my own part, I confess ingenuously, that
this is a feature in Missions which I have never looked at, without feeling a
horror which has chilled my blood; and if I, who am so far gone in them, do not
care to make such a sacrifice, I star sew are to be found who will make it.
Notwithstanding, as there are among the Ministers of Christ, thousands who have
more faith than I dare claim, as well as more apathy than I wish to be
possessed of, I have no doubt that some fathers of families will give an
example, which must excite admiration, though it should not invite many to
imitate them.

I remain, Reverend Brethren, Your affectionate, humble servant, M. H.

SIXTH LETTER.
Fathers and Brethren,
AN enquiry into what may constitute a call to missions will merit serious
discussion. Some incline to treat this question with contempt, as one species
of enthusiastic jargon, by which religion has been discredited in the world:
and, I am forry to say, it has been, at times, so managed, as to give color to
their censures. Nevertheless, you will be of opinion with me, that much solid
sense and sober piety are contained in it; and when we consider that every
thing valuable to man is staked ea its determination, they must be strangers to
the sentiments of the human heart, and evince a want of reason and
ingenuousness, which they charge on others, who suppose men of sense will
embark on the sea of trouble, without having first viewed the question on every
side, and obtained that well grounded satisfaction in the propriety of their
conduct, which may hereafter support and comfort them under all its possible
consequences.

The general duty of Ministers and their flocks with respect to Missions, we
ground on the command of our Lord, the characters of his religion, the example
of his Apostles, the declarations of his Prophets, the common principles of
humanity, and the whole aggregate of argument, which arises from the nature of
the undertaking. But unhappily, as in many other cases, so in this, what is
acknowleged as of common obligation is not felt as the particular duty of
individuals. In this respect, our Lord and his household may be compared to the
family of an opulent, indulgent Master of many servants, who commanding some
unpleasant business to be performed, but intimating his pleasure in general
terms, not addressed to any particular domestic, his servants instead of
readily obeying his commands, are all of them disputing from his Lordship's
Chaplain to the skullion in his kitchen, which of them is obliged to perform
his will. The Chaplain is a gentleman, and is above such menial offices. His
Lord certainly understands too well the dignity of his character to address
such orders to him. The Steward declares his engagements bind him no farther
than to use his pen, and to overlook his Master's rents and disbursements with
fidelity. The Butler protests he was not hired to be a footman; and the
underlings of the house with many professions of good will, plead they are not
qualified for doing their Lord's will. In a word, the business is either left
undone, or a few poor honest fellows, who love their Master and are jealous for
his honor, go forth and do their best; but not receiving from their fellow
servants that assistance which each ought to have afforded them, the business
is done in a bungling way at last; and my Lord's Chaplain, Steward, Butler, and
other servants, instead of feeling that it has miscarried principally through
their fault -- instead of being ashamed into exertion, say some of them, that
their Lord "never gave such a command." others, "that the time for obeying it
is not come," others, "that the bad success of their fellows discourages
farther attempts," and while some are provoked that the menials of the house
should presume to engage in the business, others, "declare it is vile dirty
work and fit only for skullions and shoe-boys." This has been precisely our
conduct in Missions.

But how may an individual know that this general duty determines on him? This
enquiry will be made with views as different, as are the characters of the men
who make it: some to find a plausible excuse for declining their duty; and
others from a sincere desire to know and to do it. To the first sort, it will
be impossible to give satisfaction. Their first principle, I will not be a
missionary, precludes all conviction. Their second principle, I will justify my
disobedience, determines them to demand such reasons, for the absolute
certainty of their call, as they know, or ought to know, cannot be given them.
They demand their call to be demonstrated with intuitive evidence; and while
there remains a possibility of their deceiving themselves, prudently determine
to run no hazards. Be it so gentlemen. We dismiss you from the service until
you have acquired more ingenuous minds. Your swords may remain quietly in their
scabbards, for this is not a war in which lath will supply the place of steel.
You are your own demonstrations that God does not call you to missions; and
whatever sins you may stand accountable for in the day of Christ, I think you
will hardly be criminated under that statute of his kingdom, Go preach the
gospel to every creature.

Sincere Israelites, who, like Nathaniel, have ingenuous minds, and worship God
in truth, may on this subject be satisfied, as clearly as on any other, wh^e^
is involved in the truth of the Gospel. In the scriptures, in reason, in
providence, in experience of our own hearts and characters; and in our
relations in private and in public life, there are to be discovered data, from
which we may come by a simple process of reasoning, to a very tolerable
conclusion of what is our duty in this instance.

This call is certainly not of man, nor of the will of man. A sense of the
worthiness of the undertaking, and a general desire to do the will of God, with
the solicitations of friends who think highly of us, and who are of opinion,
that there is a providential opening for us to go to the Heathen, do not
constitute a sufficient warrant for engaging. Much, very much more than all
this is required. The Moravian maxim, "Never to persuade, much less to urge a
man to engage in missions," has been justified to them by experience; and it
will appear perfectly reasonable to suppose, that the levers and pullies of
human persuasion, by which a man indifferent to missions may, sometimes, be
excited to act in them, give no sufficient momentum to the soul to support it
against the immense counterpoise of flesh and blood. He, who appears possessed
of the most lively zeal for missions, may deceive himself by false sire, and
enthusiastic feelings; but the man who wants sire, who is merely prompted by
his friends, and supposes a mission a matter to be managed like a parish in
England, equally deceives himself, though he declaims against enthusiasm, and
would have its understand, that he is following the less fallacious light of
reason. But I exhort every one, whose whole soul is not in the business, to
stand firm against the persuasion of all men. He may be assured that missionary
work is too rough for his ductile nature. If he cannot say no to his friends,
how shall he say no to those manifold temptations which will solicit him to
return? And I beseech all who have claims to reason, to religion, or to
humanity, never to attempt to persuade any one, directly or indirectly, to do
any thing more in missions than he can do with pleasure and unfeigned good
will. It is unreasonable to suppose that our persuasives can operate to change
the character and in a moment to give a man sentiments and feelings he never
had before. It is not agreeable to the economy of religion, for God to leave
the instruments of his will, without inclination, as well as ability for doing
it. Last of all, it is a most inhuman persecution to insist on its being the
will of God that any individual should engage in Missions, or in any degree to
assume the province of heaven in pretending to search the heart, and direct the
conscience. This conduct is the more odious, as it is an instrument of torture,
applied to none but worthy and pious minds, where we have most reason to
believe it unnecessary.

Nor will providence which appear suddenly, and a present willingness to
engage, prove our call. Providence is a mysterious book, not easily legible,
and best understood when read backward; and I shall much suspect that man's
call is shown him by sudden and unexpected openings of Providence, who has
never before made a discovery of it in his Bible, or in his own heart. From a
general analogy of grace as well as nature, we are led to expect, that what is
born and attains maturity in a day, will fade and die in as short a term. In a
missionary we look for strong, permanent, habits, such as are formed by
reiterated acts. We do not mean to limit the Holy One of Israel; but to respect
Him as the God of order, means and ordinances. He has established the
connection of effects with their causes; and though He may and will, when He
sees good, invert the established order of things we must not affect more than
what becomes the fragility of our nature. We must require the horse to be
broken in for the battle. We must expect that the man called to Missions will
experience, successively, all the vicissitudes of hope, fear, desire, aversion,
confidence and despondency, before he dips his foot in the water, or will be
able to contemplate with steady courage the dangers of these depths. If there
be a man, who claims exemption from common rules, and can in a moment engage in
a mission without a disposition previously formed, and, having so engaged, can
conduct the matter aright, he is no precedent for our imitation.

These observations premised, the first thing toward constituting a call to
Missions is ability to comply with it. Let the candidate, therefore, examine
himself, whether he be possessed, in a reasonable degree, of the qualifications
necessary for that station. From what he has done in the ministry in England,
he may form some guess of what he is likely to do abroad. It may also be proper
to take the candid opinion of his ministerial friends, whose favorable
sentiments will support his diffidence, or whose honest censure may check his
temerity. On this subject, if on any, we shall be safe to under rate our
qualifications; and, if we are humble, we shall naturally be led to do so.
This, if it one way operates as a discouragement, will in another produce
different effects. God gives grace to the humble, and mon will give them
honor. An hamble opinion of ourselves will neither damp our zeal for God, nor
our benevolence to men. It will not pervert our understandings, nor make us
dishonor God by disclaiming whatever degree of humble fitness He may give us
for the work. The greater the natural and acquired talents of any man be the
better; but all this is not the great thing, the one thing, the living spirit,
the eye, the ear, the strength and arms of the missionary, CHRISTIAN GODLINESS,
THE MIND OF CHRIST, THE IMAGE OF GOD, -- this is the qualification which a
missionary cannot do without; which he cannot have in too great a degree; and
which if he possess in strength and vigor, his other qualifications, however
small, cannot be deemed defective. Upon this subject, then, he cannot put to
himself too many, or too close questions. His self denial, activity, fortitude,
perseverance, habitual diligence, and conscientious adherence to order and
regularity, throughout his whole conduct, will each of them merit minute
investigation. If the result of this enquiry be satisfactory to himself, he may
be assured that he has, at least, a solid foundation to build upon.

The second head of enquiry is his willingness to engage in missions. Here
something more is required than cold approbation, or that general disposition
to do the will of God, which influences every pious man. We look for a strong,
decided prediliction -- a passion for missions, if I may be allowed the term;
that species of commendable enthusiasm, which enables professional men to
magnify the dignity and importance of their respective arts, and to pursue
their object, under every discouragement, until they have carried their art to
a perfection, which men of colder minds could never have supposed it capable of
receiving. I would have him possessed of that strong passion for missons which
Columbus had for discovery, and which supported him for a long course of years
against the ridicule of the whole world, against the discouragement of having
his services rejected by different princes, against the ingratitude of
Ferdinand and Isabella, and against the repeated mutiny, treachery, and
baseness of his companious. I would have him so enamoured of his object, as to
consider the hardship and danger of the pursuit a pleasure rather than a pain;
and to find in himself a disposition to succeed, or to perish in the attempt.
If he cannot engage without a with to return to Europe, and with a full
determination, God being his helper, to die in the harness, that man has not
the soul of a genuine missionary.

Some of my readers will think I draw a glowing picture, and that my colorings
betray the glare of enthusiasm. They would have their missionary, what they
call, a prudent man, a man of reason and coolness. They will say that he who
engages with so much warmth will soon have his fire damped, and betray as much
cowardice in the conflict, as he showed courage before the battle. I will
entreat such Geatlemen to give a candid interpretation to my terms, and to
eater into the spirit of the writer, as well as into the force of his
expressions. Human language is defective. They who use it are still more
imperfect. I may not have the felicity of expressing the idea I would convey,
exactly such as it is in my own mind; and though I could stamp my ideas on
language as clearly and forcibly, as new coin displays the impression of the
die, yet except my thoughts had the same currency as the Kings coin, my reader
may easily mistake my meaning, where I have made none in expressing it; and in
this manner every man who writes sustains some censures which are due to the
precipitancy and disingenuousness of his reader. In the light of this
observation, I beg leave to remark, that Columbus, Cortez, Caesar, St. Paul,
and all those who have d^ne great things in the world, have possessed a fire,
and energy very uncommon; and that this fire, this energy, was absolutely
essential to what they undertook and what they performed; but certainly this
remark does not suppose that this fire alone effected every thing. They were
men of knowledge, of prudence, and of that coolness which tempered their fire,
and gave it a proper direction. Had they not been supported by these solid
qualities Caesar might have perished like Cataline, and St. Paul would never
have been God's instrument for building the Church. If my missionary therefore,
has more zeal than good sense, more fire than wisdom to command it, he will
soon find that instead of walking in the footsteps of an Apostle, he is flying
on the waxen wings of Icarus, or driving the destructive car of the juvenile
and presumptuous Phaeton. False fire will not dissolve real cold, nor false
courage support the burst of cannon.

But this concession made, I insist upon it, the missionary must not only have
true fire, but a large proportion of it; and I insist upon it so much the more,
as I see very little attention paid to it; as I cannot but think, that too many
good men are forcing Zeno's coat upon the affectionate Jesus; and appear more
afraid of offending men by being too hot, than of displeasing God by being too
cold. Instead of bringing the world over to Christ by the godlike irresistible
charms of truth proposed without false ornaments, we endeavor to accommedate it
to corrupt minds, by proposing it under the garb of reason, and with the
affected sickly air and feeble tottering steps of morality. In this manner we
betray our Master, and lose our own labor. And, however digressive this
observation may appear, I affirm it has much to do with my subject; for until
we learn to dismiss our moral dialect, and high sounding talk of reason, there
will be little right reason or good morals in the Church; until we boldly take
up the Cross of the blessed Jesus, and tell mankind that, in religion, there is
no other reason, no other morals, than that godlike reason, those divine morals
which He brought down to us from his Father's bosom and treasured up for us in
his holy gospel, we shall never be able to carry on a war of missions, nor have
apostolic men to act in it. A mission, contemplated in its true spirit, and in
all its compass of sacrifice and suffering, is not a common thing, and men
whose minds are of a common cast are unfit for it. If, therefore, their
engagement is so remote from the common course of things, why should
missionaries be expected to feel and think in the beaten track? If they are to
live in fire, where is the absurdity of wishing them to be endowed with the
properties of the Salamander? If their work is apostolic, how is reason
violated by expecting they should claim alliance with the blood of St. Paul? --
Thanks be to God, his blessed Son does not treat the soldiers of the cross with
that contempt they suffer from their fellow Christians! No; the choicest
consolations and the most joyous hopes are their portion; and if, the
afflictions of Jesus abound in them, they will be comforted with the most
glorious anticipations of his kingdom and of his joy.

Nor if a young man, in the early prime of life, should mingle with the lambent
flame he has kindled from God's altar, some sparks of wild erratic fir^ (...)
we ^^t^^le^ to treat him with contempt and rejection. If his character be
supported by solid qualities, those sparks will, with a little time and
e^^^^en^^, be absorbed in the parer flame. Nay, should be ^t first betray some
takens of feat and s^^^^ess, we should rather sympathize with his (...) than
dis^^ir of his courage. If we find in him that ^^ied co^^^^e and unrelenting
hardihood which characterize the Veteran, who has waded through many a well
fought field, and endured the various climes of the North and South, we find
much more than we are entitled to hope. St. Paul indeed was at once made a
Christian and the chief of the Apostles. Such power belongs unto God, and
such honor to the man whom He will exalt. But, in spite of the example and
exhortations of the great St. Paul, Mark fled from the work of the apostolic
mission; nevertheless, between the wholesome censures of Paul, and the
consolatory affection of Barnabas, his spirit was, through divine grace, again
excited to the fight of faith, and he redeemed his character, and obtained a
good report among the Apostles. Let the candidate for missions be possessed of
what degree of zeal and courage he may, no doubt the day will come, when with
fears from within and fightings from without, he will be pressed beyond
measure, and feel that nothing but abounding grace and almighty power can
console and support him. But, if we must make some abatement for his courage
when engaged in actual service, and jeopardying his life on the high places of
the field, surely we should require some tolerable degree of ardour before the
sword is drawn and blood is spilt. For if the man, who volunteers, and is borne
on the strong wing of hope, must expect such rude shocks in the evil day, what
are we to expect from him who enters into Missions without zeal or e^^rgy, and
who is, in fact, little better than a pressed man?

The third consideration which I shall notice as essential to a call to
Missions is a freedom from such ties as exclude the engagement; and they will
be either of a domestic or a ministerial nature. I have more than once
expressed my sentiments with respect to the propriety of married men and
fathers of families engaging in Missions. Generally speaking I do not think it
advisable; but I dare not say it is improper. I will not disapprove the man so
situated, who shall engage; and, if he and his family conduct themselves in a
mission as the Reverend Mr. Egede and his household did in Greenland, they
shall have my warmest commendation. Nay, should they through human weakness
fail in fortitude and perseverance, the piety of the attempt will, with me,
cover the weakness of the execution. But the propriety of such an attempt will
in my idea depend on circumstances. The health, strength, and habits of a
mother and her children are to be considered, as well as the degree of
accommodation which can be afforded them in a Mission. Much will depend on the
willingness of a minister's wife to share his toils and perils, and very much
will depend on his own strength of soul to see his wife and family, languishing
and dying, if God should appoint it so, in consequence of his engaging them in
difficulties which they cannot support. If a minister be possessed of this
fortitude, if his wife breathes the same spirit with himself; and if they both
think the venture justifiable, let them go, and give an example to Christendom
which we so greatly want. But if he cannot inspire his wife with his own
sentiments, I am clearly of opinion he has no call to Missions. I reason thus.
If it be said, that the wife of that minister has not piety to engage of her
own free will, I answer Christianity will not justify a divorce by leaving her
behind him, and good sense will not justify him to take her abroad into
circumstances of distress and danger, where all her passions will be armed to
war against his peace and to discredit himself in his ministry. If it be said,
that his wife is a woman of piety, the case stands still more strongly against
him, and a dreadful suspicion will lie against his piety. For if a woman of
piety, his wife, the mother of his children cannot be made to enter into his
call, I must suspect that he carries with him abroad more religion than he
exercises at home; and can entertain very little opinion of his converting
Heathens, who cannot convert a godly woman who loves him to follow him to the
world's end. -- Nor would I recommend the force of strong persuasion, much less
any thing like conjugal authority, with any woman. The man who does this will
find, at last, that he rolls the stone of Sysiphus, and when he thinks he has
got it to the top of the hill, it will return with a double force, acquired by
the velocity of its descent, and crush him to pieces. If a married man wishes
to engage in missions, his first care is to inspire his wife with a portion of
his own zeal; if he can do so, well; if not I advise him to slay at home. It is
a base unmanly thing to complain of our wives; and women were never generally
vicious, base and cowardly, when men did not make them so. Godliness is the
most commanding thing on earth, and women who have the best opportunities of
knowing their husbands piety, and are personally attached to them, will not be
the last to revere it. The man who charges his wife, in nine cases out of ten,
will reproach himself; and I affirm when we dare imitate the Apostles, there is
little fear of our wives lagging in the race of virtue.

A minister's flock should be as dear to him, and in some sense, dearer than
his wife and children; and if we are in posts of uncommon honor and usefulness,
it may well admit an enquiry, How far we are justifiable in relinquishing them?
We are giving up a certainty for an uncertainty. The good we shall do abroad
may bear small proportion with that we leave at home. We may mistake our call,
or we may be called to die, while the honor of conquest is reserved for others.
We may, for ought we know, groan for years under the consequences of a
precipitate conduct, and reproach ourselves for not having better understood
our Shepherd's voice. What the charity of others may, and should, lead them to
excuse as the error of an honest zeal, we shall probably charge on ourselves as
the proud volatile mistake of an unsanctified heart. We may expose ourselves to
be the butt of those cold spirits who never had religion enough to aspire to
excellence; to be admonished with ignorant, but wounding good nature, "I always
told you you, "mistook your call, and would soon be glad to come home;" and to
be held up as a discouragement to those who would do well -- "Look on that man;
he began to build, and "was not able to finish." We may actually grieve God's
spirit; and never recover a post as useful in the ministry as that we
relinquished. And all this may be a very righteous and necessary discipline to
humble the man, who having only the qualification of a sergeant in militia,
shall aspire to the rank of colonel in a regiment for foreign service.

Far be it from me to discourage any man; but I must hold out no false colors.
To have a real call to missions is a great honor and a great felicity; but to
mistake our call is a sad thing both to ourselves and to others. Nor is there
any great danger of my discouraging the man whom God prompts by his spirit to
embrace this calling. But some who are really called may be too hasty; they may
mistake their line of march, or engage before the signal for engaging be given.
I know of no specific rules, for men whose circumstances may be infinitely
va^i^^^. Here every one will reason and judge for himself; here h^ must divest
himself of all prepossessions on either side, and make diligent enquiry of that
God, who has promised to give wisdom to all who seek it.

Supposing the missionary candidate has gone over all this ground to his
satisfaction, the only thing remaining to complete his call will be a
reasonable prospect of success. To have this reasonable prospect of success,
his measures must be well consulted, and he must be provided with every help,
which the nature of the undertaking can require. Let him then ask himself, Have
I funds equal to my undertaking, and are the patrons and conductors of the
mission in England men of zeal and spirit, such as I can make perfectly free
with, who enter into all my views, and in whom I can perfectly confide, for
every encouragement and support? Do they leave me perfectly at liberty to act
abroad as I see occasion, not fettering me with cold theoretical councils, and
prescribing with decision a line of conduct to me, which amuses them by their
fire side to chat over with a friend? Unless he can answer these questions in a
satisfactory manner, his measures are not well taken; and if he is zealous in
his pursuit he may leave every thing and suffer every thing, to go to India or
Japan to sind his hands tied behind his back when he gets there, and to pine
away in vexation and disappointment.

Let him ask farther, Have I fellow soldiers like minded with myself, and is my
mission so connected and conducted, that I can have a supply of as many of them
as my work shall require? Have I such an acquaintance with the country where I
am going, of its climate, geography, police and manners, as I can reasonably
expect to answer upon a trial with those views which have engaged me to go
there? If he goes alone be should be a man of no little statute. Though he
should live and die like David Brainerd, he will in that case only relinquish a
greater good in England to do a smaller one abroad. Where a tolerable number of
Missionaries are wanting a few individuals may be converted; but the gospel
will not be spread -- nothing will be done answerable to the idea of a mission.
And I confess I can see no reason for marching through fire and water to
convert a Bramin in India, when with half the labor ten of our own countrymen
might be converted at home; except it be to keep up the dying flame of
missionary zeal, until Christendom be shamed out of the folly of conducting
Missions in this lazy, absurd way. On the other hand, should our information of
the place we are going to be defective, we shall proceed on false principles,
and when practice is discovered to be so opposite to our theory, we shall be
liable to turn on the heel, and say, this is not the place to which I am called.

When a minister has patiently examined these four topics, his ability, his
willingness, his freedom from those ties which prohibit the engagement, and the
reasonable prospect of succeeding, and finds them all concurring to countenance
the pursuit, he will I think be in possession of every thing which ought to be
desired, or can be obtained to make his call clear. He has nothing then to do,
but to obey the dictates of his conscience, and, casting his care upon the
Lord, to make trial of his apostleship. If he is blessed in his deed, he shall
see of the travail of his Redeemer's soul, and of his own, and be satisfied.
His example will provoke his brethren to jealousy, and his success encourage
our exertions. If he sails, he will discourage no man who does not with to be
discouraged. He may come home, and tell his Brethren ingenuously. I have made
the attempt and find myself inadequate to it. Nevertheless, the foundation
abides firm, the obligation of the duty is the same, and do you who have more
wisdom and piety stand forward as the Champions of Christ and his religion. Let
no man's heart fail on my account; nor suppose because I have done nothing,
that nothing is to be done by the many veterans who fight under the cross. You
censure my rashness, you chide my pusillanimity, and it is of little matter
that my character sink under a weight of reproach which in many respects I have
deserved: but do you arise and be jealous for your God. Conquest hovers over
our banners, if we dare engage with spirit. I am indeed defeated, but not
discouraged; I despair of myself, but not of the cause of Christ. Go, and
redeem the honor I have lost. Wipe away this vile disgrace, this unutterable
shame, which rests upon the Christian name. Let it not be said that in the
eighteenth century, in Britain, among the thousands of ministers of various
denominations who are the glory of the Churches, that men are not to be found
who feel for man, Christians who are not jealous for Christ's glory, ministers
who cherish the noble emulation of following the apostles. If you will not act,
God will raise up stones to reprove and shame you. If you will not act, you
almost justify that temerity and cowardice which you censure. I have been
defeated, but it was in the field, and after receiving many wounds; but you, by
more shameful cowardice, give up the cause for lost without making one generous
effort. I have been rash in thinking of myself more highly than I ought to
think, but you almost provoke the repetition of my rashness by undervaluing
Christ and his religion; for when you are c^^d where you ought to be animated
by the most lively zeal, it is enough to provoke babes and sucklings to take up
a^^s, and if they cannot conquer, at least, teach us to die for the Captain of
our salvation. In this strain may he address his Brethren; for whatever censure
may rest upon his mistake, whatever want of sanctification of heart it may
infer, if this be the grand fault which lies against his character, it is of a
kind, especially when he comes to see and confess it ingenuously, as infers
also something which will support him under its consequences; -- as will, with
God's grace, lead him to real improvement, and render him more the object of
esteem, than of reproach with all who love God.

Next to the inestimable and irreparable loss of his own soul in attempting to
save the souls of others, perhaps the most insupportable shock a missionary can
have to support, far worse than death, is that of total disappointment,
together with a discovery of having mistaken his object. Yet to this total
disappointment, to this dreadful discovery, is every man liable who engages in
Missions. This reflection should guard us against precipitate determination;
and teach us to meet disappointments half way. When we are soaring in the
clouds, we should often bring ourselves to the ground, by saying to ourselves,"
Perhaps I "may be mistaken in my call -- perhaps the most cruel
"disappointments await me." Such thoughts are the more needful as men of fire,
and such missionaries will be, particularly need them. Too often we deceive
ourselves by supposing constitutional vivacity is Christian zeal; and, though
we indulge these humbling considerations to consolidate our spirits, as much as
possible, if disappointment be at last our portion, we shall find it hard
enough to support the dreadful concussion when it comes. Few men of candid
minds are wholly blind to constitutional failings; and if the missionary be
sensible that his defect leans to the side of false fire, it will be doubly
necessary for him to labor after the stronger qualities of gravity, firmness,
and self possession; and to go forth in utramque paratus to win trophies, or to
support the disgrace inevitably consequent on an unsuccessful attempt. Should a
missionary spirit be generally excited, many, who mean well, will be induced to
venture, who, upon the trial, will find their strength insufficient for an
apostolic warfare. They must, then, either relinquish the war, or persist in it
to their own ruin. In this dilemma, the man of feeling, honor, spirit, may find
such a quantum of pride, self confidence, and impatience, in his composition,
as he never before suspected. His feeling, his sense of honor, his spirit,
which, with a share of godliness, were perhaps the secret springs of his
engagement, will now turn their strength upon himself, excruciate him beyond
imagination, and, if God's infinite compassions do not prevent him, and enable
him to sink quietly into his own nothingness at the feet of Jesus, he will
become the prey of that proud sorrow, which, in scripture language, is said to
work death; or, in the phraseology of this world, be will break his heart. The
man who is persuaded to engage in missions is free from this danger; but he
who, with the semblance of apostolic zeal, without deep humility, meekness and
patience, falls into this circumstance, will experience a hurricane of
passions, which beggars all description. Much of this I have known too well;
and I make this confession, that my readers may learn, that I make a re^^ and
important distinction, between a well tempered zeal, and that species of fire
which betrays levity and inconstancy of mind.

One more observation I shall make on this subject. if we would not discourage
Missions, we must beware how we indulge the asperity of censure against those
who fail in their attempts. They have paid the penalty of their rashness, as
fully as any man of humanity could wish. We should remember, it is easier to
attempt great things than to accomplish them; and if to the proud humiliations
of a man's own mind, and those kindlier one's of God's good spirit, this poor
dejected mortal is to be reprehended, ridiculed, or, under the pretense of
pity, to be the object of the vile contempt of base minds, who will engage in
great and perilous undertakings? Let Christians, then, imitate the dignity of a
Roman Senate, and, instead of censuring what thousands can censure, and few
da^e imitate, treat such a one with a generous condescension which may sustain
his mind under affliction, and encourage others to bold attempts to serve a
grateful people.

After all, as real Christians are few and false ones many, he who becomes a
missionary must expect what he will certainly find -- contempt and opposition
all the way through; and though it be our duty to treat him in the way I
recommend, it is evidently his duty to strive after that lowliness of soul,
which setting itself under the eye of God, is neither elated with the praise,
nor dejected by the censure of men. In learning of Jesus to be meek and lowly
in heart, we shall find solid and permanent rest.

I remain, Reverend Brethren, Your affectionate, humble servant, M. H.

SEVENTH LETTER.
Fathers and Brethren,
IF we would see a general spread of the gospel and multitudes of ignorant
Heathen gathered into the sold of Christ, we should endeavor to mend the
missionary road and to remove from it all unnecessary turnpikes: we should
consider the objections, which are made to Missions, and, by giving them
satisfactory answers, shake off those fatal discouragements, which counteract
our exertions. I beg leave to lay before you such of them as have fallen under
my notice, together with such answers as I have made to my several objectors.

The first trite objection thrown in the teeth of the man, who speaks in favor
of Missions, is, We have Heathens enough in England, without crossing the sea
to find them. Convert those we have at home first and then look to those
abroad. -- This objection reminds me of the language of our Lord, when assuming
the cold, severe air of the Pharisee, he made a trial of the faith of the
Syro-phoenicean woman, who requested a cure for her daughter. -- It is not meet
to take the children's brean, and give it to dogs. And I think it may be well
answered by the words of the afflicted mother, Truth, Lord; yet the dogs eat of
the crumbs which fall from the children's table. If our Lord may decide the
point, there was reason, as well as faith, in her plea. That there are Heathens
in England is a melancholy truth; and it will be equally true, when Christ
shall come to judge the world, as it is at this day. So that, if we wait their
conversion, the Heathens abroad will never be the better for our love. But, it
should be remembered, that our European Heathens perish by the abuse of that
knowledge, for the lack of which other Heathens are undone. I add, that the
Ministers who go abroad, so far from being felt as a loss at home, will be the
means of doing more good among us, than if they had continued in England. For
foreign Missions will have the same influence on religion, as foreign commerce
has upon agriculture and manufactures. As Christianity prevails abroad, so it
will flourish at home. Thus, what is alleged against Missions is a substantial
argument for engagin them.

Others object, I know not that God's time for the conversion of the Heathens
be yet come. When St. Paul would have gone into Asia, he was inhibited by the
spirit; and if St. Paul was mistaken in such a point, well may we be so also.
-- I answer if my objector means to prove any thing, he should advance a step
farther, and say I know that God's time is not come; and because St. Paul was
forbidden in the course of his journey to preach the gospel in Asia before he
had visited Macedonia and Greece, (which were riper for receiving the gospel,)
therefore, Christian Ministers must not follow the Apostle's example, le^t,
peradventure, they should act under the inhibitions of the spirit -- But is I
don't know, in the lips of any man, to be opposed to the authoritative command
of Christ, Go, preach the gospel to every creature? And is it come to this,
that eighteen hundred years after the death of Christ, and notwithstanding the
general opinion of the Church evinced, by her engaging, more or less, in
Missions, from that time to this, that we are in doubt about our Master's will
on a subject, which involves the salvation of so large a part of mankind? If
this be the case, how are we to know God's will? What must the Majesty of
Heaven do to satisfy our unreasonable spirits? An evil and adulterous
generation seek for signs. Our scruples stamp our character -- St. Paul's
inhibition proves the very point I contend for -- that we should act under the
warrant of a general commission. St. Paul did so. As a man of sense he made use
of his reason. He had undoubtedly specious reasons for thinking of going first
into Asia; but God, who saw farther than he did, ordered him to take another
route, and after he had fulfilled that ministry, he resumed his design to go
into Asia and spent a considerable time there, his labors being accompanied
with the same success which attended him in other parts. We read of none of the
Apostles looking for particular intimations of the divine will to direct their
labors. Sometimes they had extraordinary intimations, and they obeyed them;
but, in their general course, after prayer and serious deliberation, they did
what appeared to them the most advisable. Lastly, I ask why are we, in
religion, to contravene every principle of common sense, upon which we act in
all other things? Let us do our duty, and cease to move the councils of Heaven
for the knowledge of what the Almighty is determined to conceal. Were St. Paul
on earth, and an angel from heaven were to preach the doctrine contained in the
objection, I am confident, the Apostle would strip him of his luminous apparel,
and lay his doctrine under an anathema, in all the Churches.

An objection, similar to the one I have just answered, is urged in the
following form -- It appears that the order of events we are taught to expect
from the Prophecies, is first the destruction of the Roman Antichrist, then the
conversion of the Jews, and, l^^t of all, the fullness of the Gentiles; in which
work, the converted Jews, it is thought, will be the principal instruments. The
conclusion is, that the time is not yet come for the conversion of the
Heathens, and that all our labor to effect it will be lost. To this reasoning,
I answer first, that prophecies comparatively obscure should not be put in
competition with the obligation of clear and explicit precepts. Secondly, if
all be granted which this objection assumes, it will not follow that we should
look for the grand events we hope to see accomplished, in indolence and
carelessness. If none but Jewish Christians dare signalize their zeal for truth
in the apostolic way, nor are to be honored with apostolic success, much, very
much may yet be done by us, long before we shall see righteousness covering the
earth, as the waters do the face of the deep. How does my object or know,
whether the Lord may not make use of the zeal of sincere Christians in
spreading his Gospel, as one principal means of converting the Jews? And how
many Millions may there not be brought to God, before the fullness of the
Gentiles shall come in? We are told that our religion shall have a general
spread, an universal prevalence in the world, and we are commanded to preach
the Gospel to every creature: but instead of occupying our talent with
faithfulness, we fairly bury it because it is not ten. Because the time may not
yet be come for the grand conversion of mankind, we take it for granted, that
the day is not come for the conversion of any of them; and because we do not
hope for apostolic success, we determine absolutely to do nothing at all. But
shall those servants be pronounced blessed, whom the Lord shall find so doing?

A third objection arises from the difficulty of the undertaking. Missionaries
at this day, it is said, have difficulties to struggle with, which are
altogether insuperable; nor can men and money be raised equal to such extensive
undertakings. I grant, if we put Omnipotence out of the question, we have
little encouragement to engage in this war. But, I also insist, that the
insuperable difficulties spoken of exist only in our own cowardice. The Jesuits
surmounted them all. The Moravians have done the same. And other men, who will
imitate their intrepidity, will be equally successful. Nor are the sums of
money necessary for these undertakings so great as may be imagined.

When we have proper missionaries and have learned to conduct our Missions
aright, the expense attending them will be greatly diminished. Were as large a
sum as fifty thousand pounds per annum expended in Missions, what a trifle
would a single million of money be in the course of twenty years, to be raised
among the Christians of England? And while we pay fourteen or fifteen millions
annually for the advantage of civil government, what a small offering is fifty
thousand pounds to our Immortal Sovereign for all the blessings of his divine
religion? Say thet the sum of thirty five thousand pounds bounded our
benevolence to our Heathen brethren, this would be one million in thirty years.
Certainly this money would be incomparably better spent than the millions
consumed in one year's war! In the last year a subscription of more than twenty
thousand pounds was given to the emigrant ministers of the Gallican Church; and
immense sums are laid out on the support of our poor, every year. I heartily
approve of this way of spending our money; but may I not ask, Is the spread of
Christ's religion a matter of common charity, that we should part with money
for Missions with as much reluctance as we would part with our blood; and think
forty or fifty thousand pounds, which a sew Gentlemen of fortune cane afford to
throw away on their pleasures every year, too large a sum to be applied to the
first, the greatest, and most obligatory charity under heaven? And yet by the
expenditure of the sum I have mentioned might thousands of Heathen, every year,
be brought from darkness into light, and turned from the power of Satan to the
service of God.

The want of men is the last thing to be feared. There exists, at this day, in
England, a greater number of men who wish for this employment, than can well be
imagined. They are to be found among all Denominations. Let us but enquire
after them and they will appear. But so long as Missions are discouraged and
vilified, few of them will brand themselves for enthusiasts, by expressing
great forwardness, and becoming candidates for them.

It will still be objected that, Facts do not justify these sanguine hopes; for
no fruit has yet been derived from Missions, worth the money, and toil, and
valuable lives, which have been expended on them; and which might have been
applied to better purpose in Europe. I answer, the facts alluded to, prove
nothing but that Missions have been very improperly conducted; and, that if
they are not taken up with more spirit, they are by no means likely to answer
their end. But, I insist, that the fruit with which they have been attended,
proves undeniably what may be done, when we exert ourselves as we ought to do.
I insist, farther, that those Missions though unproductive, are very
justifiable, and have answered valuable purposes. They are justisiable; for the
men who have acted in them have done their duty, respected their consciences,
felt for humanity, proved their faith, asserted the honor of their religion,
and glorified the veracity, faithfulness and power of God. It shall not avail
that the world brands their-lives with madness, and esteems their deaths
without honor. Wisdom will justify her children. They have been wise, inasmuch
as they have been faithful; for there is no man, who has left father or
mother, or house or lands, or friends or country, for the sake of Christ, who
shall not receive an hundred fold in the kingdom of God. They have also
answered valuable ends. They will justify the ways of God to men, in the day of
final account, and serve to illustrate his mysterious providence. They will
condemn the Christian world of unbelief. They will have given a great example
to us, as having chosen affliction, not with the people of God, but with poor
Heathens, in preference to all the riches and honors of Egypt. When Christendom
lay asleep, they alone heard the sound of arms, and joined the blessed Captain
of their salvation on the plains of Indostan, and in the frosts and snows of
Greenland and Labrador. Like Abraham they went forth to a far country; and
though the accomplishment of the promise has not been unto them, yet, like that
venerable Patriarch they have seen Christ's day and rejoiced. In the veracity
of the promises, they have seen his seed numerous as the sands on the sea
shore, and resplendent as the stars of heaven. They have obtained a good report
through faith, and their bones, like those of Jacob and Joseph, have taken
possession of the land of our inheritance. They rest in glorious hope; and
though no proud Mausoleum of theirs attracts the eye of man, prone to gaze with
false wonder on earthly pageants, yet Angels in amicable converse will point
out each hallowed spot, and read the general epitaph -- These were men of whom
the world was not worthy! They plead the cause of Christ with us, nor shall
they always plead in vain. Their voices shall be heard, and all Europe shall
obey their call. They are the forerunners of the armies of Emanuel, and their
labors the welcome drops which promise plenteous rain. Until this is brought to
pass, they have the honor to keep alive the spirit of Missions; and will claim
a large share in the victories of those, who shall come after them.

Some pious men can indulge no hope of success in Missions, while the
wickedness of Europeans operates to prejudice the Heathen against the gospel.
We lament the fatal operation of prejudices which arise from that quarter, but
think they are pressed beyond all bounds of truth. No people were more
prejudiced against Christianity, nor had more dreadful cause to be so, than the
poor Indians of California and Paraguay; but their prejudices yielded to the
force of reason, and the persevering benevolence of the Jesuits. Truth is great
and will prevail. No men are so brutish as not to be able to distinguish
between a friend and an enemy; and fierce lions have been subdued by the
blandishments of gentle, human kindness. Beyond all this we must look to the
blessing of the God we serve, and the almighty grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.
To hope the best is pious and wise.

Many Moralists, who, though bred up in the common forms and principles of
Christianity, know not how to value their religion, object, The death of Christ
was a common sacrifice; his good spirit is given to all men; and if the
Heathens obey the admonitions of the Spirit; they will be accepted through the
merits of the Redeemer's death. Why not, then, leave them to their equitable
Judge, who having given them but one talent, will not require from them the
improvement of ten. -- God will certainly judge them equitably, and will not
expect to reap what he has not sown. We grant also, that a Heathen may be saved
without an explicit revelation of the gospel, though not without sanctification
of the spirit and the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus. But this does not
prove, that the gospel is not an inestimable gift; or that it is not out duty
to carry it to them. Farther, I answer question with question; and ask, if a
man in England may be saved, though he cannot read his bible, what need is
there of his being able to read it? If simple reading be sufficient, what need
is there of liberal education? If man may live on bread and water, what need of
a profusion of meats and drinks? If the blind may travel from one part of the
kingdom to another, by the humble helps of his dog and staff, what can there be
desirable in vision, and all the accomodations of i^^s, carriages, and good
roads? Not to press my objector with a hundred more such questions, I affirm,
that Christianity gives a perfection to man which sets him almost on a level
with angels; and, that the spiritual knowledge and piety of a Confucius or a
Socrates, is no more to be compared with the seize of the meanest child
of God under the dispensation of Christ, than the knowledge of a Hottentot is to
be weighed against the cultivated reason of a Newton.

The last objection, I shall notice, is of a more unequivocal nature than all
the rest. Missionaries are a disgrace to any nation. Their attempts are highly
dangerous; for should they succeed in introducing Christianity into the East
and West Indies, it would produce revolt in our Colonies, and subvert the
British empire in Indostan. This objection has in substance been urged in a
British Parliament, in the West India Islands, and in the debates of the India
Directors. I confess, I know not how to meet it in the way of argument. The men
who make it are as unsit judges of Christianity as the blind are of colors; and
are as much disposed to receive conviction from reasoning, as rocks are
disposed to weep over human miseries. As the servant of the Lord however I
shall be told I must be meek. Be it so. The objection is either true or false.
If it be true, -- if the Doctrine of Christ does really tend to produce revolt,
and to subvert empires, let us open our arms to French Atheism. Let us renounce
this religion of blood, which curses the world with everlasting disorders and
contentions; and rejoice that we have lived to a day, when the endless whirl of
elements and atoms has produced such noble discoveries. Let us deify the fieud
Marat; and let us tell all our worthy countrymen, who pick pockets, cut
throats, and delight in such ingenuous arts, that they may dismiss all fears of
vengeance from the crucified man of Nazareth. -- But Christianity never did
produce revolt and subversion of empires. It has no tendency to produce these
dreadful consequences. If indeed it were proposed to send forth booted
Apostles, to convert the nations by fire and sword, the objection would assume
the color of truth, and only the color of truth; for no unprejudiced man, who
ever read the gospel would dignify such missionaries with the epithet of
Christian. If on the other hand the objection be false, it can merit no answer
but that of indignant silence.

Should it be said these apprehensions do not originate in any tendency which
the religion of Christ is supposed to have to operate these effects, but in the
accidental abuse to which it is liable from the ignorant zeal of missionaries,
the implacable resentments of Slaves, and the bigoted superstition of the
inhabitants of India, which would render them jealous of innovations in their
religion, a satisfactory answer may be given on all these heads. Missionaries
can promise themselves no advantage from exciting revolt from the Government
which protects them. None but good men will engage in Missions, and they must
abhor every doctrine which disturbs the peace of society. But a small share of
common sense, and of acquaintance with their bibles, will teach them the
necessity of enforcing on their converts, that salutary doctrine, which St.
Paul taught to the numerous slaves of the Roman empire -- Let as many servants,
as are under the yoke, count their own masters worthy of all honor, that the
name of God and his doctrine be not blasphemed. Had the Apostle preached other
doctrine, he would have armed one half of the world against the other, and
excited insurrections and massacres throughout the empire, in which the slaves
were nearly as numerous as the freemen. But, if any missionary be blind to this
wholesome doctrine of the Scripture, and if he be deaf to the consequences of
preaching otherwise, which he will not fail to hear from every quarter, let the
laws claim the penalty of his rashness. We will not exclaim that religion is
violated by his punishment; and, we expect in return, that the doctrine of God
be not blasphemed, and sober minded missionaries vilified, for the dangerous
folly of a few hot headed men.

I have not heard that any bad consequences have arisen in our Colonies from
the labors of the Moravian and Methodist missionaries; and I am in hopes that
the fears of my West Indian countrymen are now pretty well calmed on that head.
They now begin to feel the advantage of their ministry, and invite them to
labor among their slaves. When once those poor creatures are made real
Christians, they almost forget that they are slaves. They bless God for that
afflictive providence, which tore them from their native land, and all the
charities of life, since it has placed them in circumstances favorable to the
knowledge of Christ, and the salvation of their immortal souls. The awful
prohibitions of Christianity not only wrest the dagger from their hands, but
deprive them of the inclination to use it. Instead of execrating their enemies,
the love of Christ compels them to bless and pray for them. Such are the
effects, with many others highly beneficial, which slow, naturally and
necessarily, from the introduction of genuine Christianity into our colonies.

What has been said of the influence of religion in the West Indies, will
equally apply to the British Empire in India. We grant jealousies may possibly
be excited among the Natives by the introduction of Christianity, especially
among the Mahomedans, whose religion considers it as meritorious to make war on
all misbelievers. But, when I reflect on the general character of the natives
of Indostan, I cannot believe any insurrections on that account very probable.
If the British power there should suffer something in the attempt, the success
of the attempt must give it a stability which it has not yet felt. And if the
ambition and avarice of the India Company do not one day ruin their affairs,
there is no reason to fear that the God, at whose command empires rise and
fall, will overturn their empire for the damnable crimes of countenancing
truth, piety, and benevolence. If India Directors are too far gone in earthly
policy to attend to these reasonings, we need not their services. In Calcutta
we dare assert the liberties of Englishmen, and the right of Christ's servants
to preach the gospel to every creature. If those liberties are refused, and
that right is laughed at, I hope the East will soon be filled with
missionaries, who dare suffer any thing which the Governors of India dare
inflict, and who, under the fiercest fire of persecution, shall spread, on
every side, the light of the Glory of God, in the face of Christ Jesus.

Having run over this string of objections, and, as I hope, given them a
satisfactory answer, I beg leave for a moment to call your attention to a
consideration not irrelevant to the subject of Missions. -- Is nothing to be
done for the millions who groan under the iron rod of Antichrist? Will it be a
sufficient reason for Protestant Ministers to give to Jesus Christ, for not
declaring the truth of the gospel in Italy, Spain, and Portugal, that there are
inquisitions in those countries, and that our lives must be the forfeiture of
doing our duty? Would not the Ministers of the Gospel, in the early ages, have
blushed at such a plea? What is become of the zeal which actuated our
forefathers at the Reformation? Italy abounds with Materialists and Atheists.
Even in Spain and Portugal, the gloomiest regions of hateful superstition,
there is reason to believe that many thousands would give a hearty reception to
the Protestant doctrine. Rome is now defended by British valor. Her Ministers,
who in their turn, fall under the edge of that sword, which they once wielded
until it was drunk with Protestant blood, may have learned moderation from
their sufferings. Fostered in the benevolent bosoms of English Protestants,
witnessing a serious regard to religion in this country, which they could
hardly believe existed among us, and observing the fraternal love which unites
us, and is the happy consequence of mutual toleration, may we not hope that
this is a favorable time for discussing, with candor and benevolence, the grand
truths in dispute between the Roman and Protestant Communions? Christendom is
now weary of the Papal yoke. It has been too long mistaken by many for the easy
yoke of Jesus; and while they revolt from Rome, they at the same time renounce
allegiance to God, and his Christ. Are no means, then, to be used to remedy
these dreadful evils, but that of the exterminating sword? Surely much may be
expected from rational controversy. Our books may be circulated through Europe,
and they will convey the best antidote to those poisonous publications, whereby
French Atheists are overturning religion, morals, and government in the world.
The reasons, which vindicate the propriety of exhorting you to undertake
Missions among Heathens, will evince the necessity of doing the same among the
catholics and the followers of Mahomet. And may we not believe, that God will
take it well at our hands, before his judgments wholly overwhelm Babylon, if we
give a loud and affectionate call to all who fear God, in any degree, among her
sons, to flee from the evil to come, and to relinquish her Communion, before
she sinks in avenging fire?

Earnestly beseeching the God of all mercy, to give us in all these respects,
and in every thing else which involves our duty and faithfulness, as Stewards
of the mysteries of Christ, an honest and enlightened judgment.

I remain, Reverend Brethren, Your affectionate, humble servant* M. H.

EIGHTH LETTER.
Fathers and Brethern,
IN a former letter, I endeavored to excite your zeal by setting before you the
example of the Apostles. In the present letter, I shall attempt to call forth
the sentiments of shame, indignation, and self contempt, by reminding you of
the conduct of the children of this world, whom our Lord pronounces wiser in
their generation than the children of light.

Their superior wisdom is seen in the agreement of their principles and
practices; in the fitness of the means they employ to the ends they would
accomplish; in the boldness and comprehension of their plans; and in the
policy, energy, and perseverance, with which they effect their purposes. Nor is
this to be wondered at. They are children of the world. They live in their own
element; and breathe a congenial air. Familiarly conversant with the objects
around them, they tread a beaten path, and animate each other by their numbers
and their shouts. Their principles originate in their nature, are strengthened
by early habits, sharpened by education, and receive their perfection from that
grand science the knowledge of life, in which they find the major part of all
ranks approving, avowing, vindicating, applauding, and acting upon principles
similar to their own. They discover their leading interest with instinctive
sagacity, and hunt down their prey with the fierceness of the lion, or the
crafty doublings of the fox.

With the children of light, who dwell in the midst of darkness, it is far
otherwise. Their principles, spirit, and manners, have little affinity with
those of the world; and they are naturally despised, hated, and ridiculed by
her children. As strangers, they traverse an unknown country; as pilgrims, they
enjoy few accommodations; and as soldiers, they tread on hostile ground, and
fight their way with difficulty. Too often, discouraged by the severity of
their warfare, and the tediousness of their exile, they wish for the wings of
the dove, that they might flee away, and be at rest. With implacable
resentments the God of this world and his armies pursue them, as the fugitives
of his kingdom; and, what is worst of all, they carry in their own breasts
traitors, who would persuade them to return from the fatigues of the wilderness
to the flesh pots of Egypt. Their old man struggles against the new one,
inveterate habits recur, and the stubborn principles of earthly policy, at one
time, resist the wisdom which comes from above, and, at another, modify and
accommodate it to the interests of the flesh. Hence religion sits aukwardly
upon us. Hence our purposes are broken off, postponed, or executed with a
timidity and supineness, which deprive them of half their effect, and indicate
that they possess but half our hearts.

But, if the children of this world often seduce us to evil, they also afford
us many admirable lessons how to do well. In the present case, we may learn
much from them; and from the monarch to the peasant their conduct in their
respective stations, will shame the cowardice and inactivity of the ministers
of Christ.

Let us first cast our eyes on the mass of men, soldiers, sailors, laborers,
and low mechanics, who are called plebeians, the vulgar, the rabble, the herd.
These poor men toil to extreme lassitude, allay the cravings of hunger with
coarse and scanty diet, shun neither hardship nor danger in their occupations,
accelerate the approach of age and decrepitude, and have their feelings
tortured with the insolence of command, and the varied scenes of domestic
distress attendant on poverty. Thousands of them are continually crushed in
mines, burnt in furnaces, immerged in waters, poisoned, slaughtered, wracked to
death with rheumatism, or pine away in consumption. Ten thousand fatal
casualties are daily hurrying them into eternity. Yet they do not complain, but
are content and cheerful. With manly firmness, they support the load of life,
and calmly tread the path which conducts them to their and. For six pence a
day, the soldier exposes his life, and when the ball penetrates his chest, or
his vitals palpitate on the bayonet, beguiles his anguish with the thought that
he falls on the bed of honor, and dies in the defense of his country. For a
trifling stipend, the mariner encounters all the dangers of the deep, and
braves a war of elements. Amid thick darkness, loud thunder, livid lightening,
and deluging rains, he man's the rocking yards, climbs the reeling mast, or
toils at the laborious pump. Faithful to his shipmates, and obedient to the
master, he declines no service but courageously keeps death at bay until he
sinks beneath a mountain of waters. All this do these poor men risk and suffer,
strange to tell, without one Christian principle to support the soul: While we,
under all the sanctions of religion, boasting patrician minds, enlarged with
science, and superior to vulgar flights, dare not imitate their hardihood. A
morsel of bread which is all they seek, and all they gain, weighs heavier on
the balance than the love of Christ, the glory of God, the salvation of men,
the authority of scripture, the sense of right, the principle of honor, and all
the praise and glory of an immortal crown!! Well might our Lord exhort us to
labor for the bread that perishes not, and to agonize to enter in at the
straight gate!

Consider next the officers of the army and navy. They are born as well,
educated as delicately, and have as large share of the good things of this
world as the ministers of the gospel. They are resined in their ideas, often
effeminate in their manners, and in their persons, not more robust than
ourselves. But when their country calls for their swords, they come forth with
a commendable gallantry; and, without the hardy habits of the private, go
through the same fatigues, and confront the same perils. Not content with
meeting dangers they cannot shun, the principle of honor, and the hope of
preferment, push them on to seek occasions of distinction by achievements of
heroism. Nevertheless, they have parents, wives, and children, as we have, who
depend for a maintenance on the lives of which they are so prodigal.

But how do the officers of the armies of Christ conduct themselves? Little
better, I am sorry to say, than an undisciplined militia, who have covenanted
to fight only pro aris et focis; and who are encouraged to put on a red coat
and parade in military pomp, because they flatter themselves they shall never
be brought to push a bayonet. To see us exercise at home might give a high idea
of our courage and prowess, if it were not too well understood that we had an
invincible dislike to hard blows and long marches. Good God! what flowing
eloquence, what strength of reasoning, what animated declamation, do we hear
from our pulpits! What potent demonstrations of the truths of Christianity,
what confutations of infidelity, what accurate investigation of moral duties,
what vehement recommendation of Christian graces, employ the press! And who
would not think, that among the many who write and speak such things, a
tolerable number might be found to propagate in foreign parts a religion of
which we are so proud at home? Alas! while we have soft pulpits and well
dressed congregations, snug livings and quiet cures, good food and decent
clothes, and may relieve the dry study of the Apostles and Prophets, by
wantoning in the circle of ancient and modern science, we maneuver to
admiration. But to abjure all science except that of the gospel, to compass sea
and land for the love of Christ, to prostitute our eloquence by stammering in a
barbarous tongue, to exchange our polished friends for savage associates, to
break our constitution with hardships in a sickly clime, and to put off the
fine Gentleman, that we may put on the rough garb of Christ's soldiers, are
things hardly mentioned, and never taught in our colleges and universities.

What a pity it is, Reverend Brethren, that men like us so gentle and pacific,
so averse to the alarms of war, so unambitious of martyrdom, and so enamoured
of the sciences, should have enlisted under the banners of a Prince who
affected to be neither philosopher, grammarian, nor rhetorician: who suffered
so much in his own person as to be willing to allow small intervals of repose
to his followers; who, instead of putting pens in our hands, lays crosses on
our backs; and who instead of deceiving us with fair speeches, and alluring
hopes of secular emoluments, declares unceremoniously, that if any man will not
deny himself and follow him, although it be to certain death, he is unworthy of
him! -- Would to God this were a subject in which there was no place for these
biting ironies. But I am sick at heart. I blush for myself and the honor of my
corpse, and must write what I feel. Shall the principle of honor, and the hope
of slow, petty, precarious preferment, advance the children of this world to
the rank of heroes, while the certain, glorious preferments held out to us by
the Son of God have no power to move us, but are trodden under foot, as though
they were husks, or we were swine?

Advance next, ye sons of learning, arts, experiments, and try upon us lagging
racers, the powers of your manly eloquence, and the evidence of your
demonstrations. In the present century, Geography and Astronomy have received
great improvements, at considerable expense, by long, hazardous voyages,
travels full of fatigue and peril, and painful observations taken in the Arctie
Circle, on the summits of the Andes, and in the Islands of the South Seas. By
these undertakings the names of Cook, Wallis, Banks, Ledyard, Haughton,
Maupertius, and others, have been rescued from oblivion, and will be handed
down to posterity, together with the names of the great Kings, whose commands
they executed, as long as the records of science shall subsist. But are
observations of the transit of Venus, the mensuration of a degree of longitude,
the solving the problem of a Southern Continent, objects of such magnitude?
Will they exonerate the Princes who commanded, or the men who performed their
commands, from the imputation of idle curiosity, unjustifiable temerity, and a
waste of treasure and of blood? If they do, and if He who made man in his own
image, and redeemed him by the death of his own Son, be able to appreciate the
value of an immortal soul, are there not inducements to draw the Ministers of
Christ to Africa, Asia, and the South Seas, infinitely more worthy of a noble
mind, than the acquisition of wealth or the improvement of science? Shall
religion refuse to follow, where the love of science leads? Or, have the
ambassadors of God less affiance on his protection, than the naturalist who
explores the dangerous chasms and tremendous crater of a volcano? O God of the
Christians, suffer it no longer! If the great and strong decline the conflict,
let the base and weak again show the world, that thy Majesty condescends to
employ the meanest instruments, and that thy religion prevails not by the
wisdom of man, but by the powers of thy spirit, O Lord!

The mighty acts of Commerce should not be forgotten. What has she not
effected? She navigates every sea, levels mountains, traverses the deserts, and
throughout the world changes the whole face of Nature. She rules the senate,
controls the field, and dispenses peace or war as she pleases. She asserts
universal empire, and calling the nations, peoples, and languages to the plains
of Dura, commands them to fall down and worship the golden image she has set up.

From the time that Columbus led the way to a new world, and De Gama, skirting
the coast of Africa, penetrated to the Indian Ocean, and the treasures of the
East, how amiable, how incorrupt, how sweetened with human kindness, how marked
with every character of our religion, how beneath all praise and recompense,
except such as God can give, has been the conduct of the merchants of Portugal,
Spain, Holland, France, and England! From that blessed era, with what a mighty
tide has their benevolence rolled to the American, the African, and the Asian
shores! What islands has it not peopled? What barbarous country has it not
civilized! What arts and laws acknowledge not its creating power and fostering
care! What emancipated slave does not extend to heaven his unfettered arm, and
bear testimony to it!!!

All hail, Christian Europe! All hail, ye her sceptered Rulers, Defenders of
the Faith, Most Faithful, Most Chatholic, Most Christian Kings! Ye Nobles, and
ye mitred Bishops of her realms! Ye princely Traders, and ye legal Seers! Ye
Leaders of her hosts by land and sea, who rule the storm of war, and bid her
battles bleed! Others have done well; but Thou, CHRISTIAN EUROPE, excellest
them all! The Greek, Roman, Saracen, Turkman, Tartar sword, has thinned the
nations; but Thou, great in arts and arms, Queen of the Earth, and sacred
Mother of Christians, have every where planted the olive, and embraced thy
species with maternal arms! The spirits of the Incas, Montezuma, Asian Rajahs,
Indian Chiefs, African Princes, Kings of Achin and of Crmus, and the myriads of
their murdered subjects, watch over thy peace, and make intercession for thy
prosperity before God! Thy laurelled soldiery, thy triumphant fleets, and the
numerous carriers of thy trade, return to thy blessed kingdoms less richly
fraught with gold and costly merchandise, than laden deep with benediction, and
the grateful acclamations of the tribes of man! Exult ye Martyrs, in sons who
thus perpetuate your fame! Rejoice, Apostles, in these peaceful, righteous
trophies of the cross! And Thou, Father of all, contemplate these fair --
Forgive, God of all mercy, forgive the presumption of this address! For ever,
if it be possible, for ever let these abhorred acts be blotted from the
memorial of thy holiness. But if the earth, bathed with gore, and fattened with
human carcasses, cries loudly for vengeance, and if the sacrifice of thine
immaculate Son may not be prostituted to varnish crimes, and to shield the
murderer and spoiler from thy thunder, grant, that in that day, when thou
make Inquisition for blood, I may not be found guilty of silence where I
ought to have spoken, or be criminated for burying the talent which ought to
have been employed in consoling the mourner, wiping away the fear from his eye,
and alleviating the galling weight of his chain, by dealaring to the captive
the glorious liberty of the children of God, and opening to his ravished soul,
some prospects of a better country, where no Christians thirst for gold, where
the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest!

Do you also, Reverend Brethren, forgive the transports of my feeble mind. But
the transactions I allude to, exceed so far any exertions I have been able to
discover in the frozen regions of the Church that I was seized with the madness
of the multitude, and could not resist the temptation of bowing my knee, and
worshipping at the united altars of Commerce and of Rapine. Your sober minds
will reason where I have only felt; but permit me to hope, that to your
reasonings you will associate a portion of my feelings, and you will then have
such an application of the subject as I could wish.

A sew otter skins at Nootka Sound, soon excited the spirit of adventure in
Europe, and not long after the English and Spaniards were going to cut each
other's throats about them. This, it seems, was perfectly consonant to right
reason. Nobody suspected the nations were mad. And is there a man among all the
Ministers of Christ who will treat me as mad for exhorting my Brethren in the
Gospel Ministry, to propagate religion with as much zeal as the men of the
world trade and fight for otter skins? God forbid!

Thus reviewing all ranks and orders of men, we see that the children of this
world are wiser, bolder, and more successful in their generation than the
children of light. Earnestly beseeching the Lord to give you all to feel how
strongly they reproach us.

I remain, Reverend Brethren, Your affectionate, Brother, M. H.

NINTH LETTER.
Fathers and Brethren,
HAVING traced the general outline of what I have to offer on Missions, I leave
it to be filled up by your private meditations, or by some abler artist, who
may be excited to present you with a finished piece on this interesting
subject. But I cannot persuade myself to lay aside my pen, without again
addressing to you the word of exhortation, and when so many are forward in
calling you into the field of political, or polemic, discussion, certainly I
may be bold in provoking you to love of the most disinterested kind, and to
those good works which are the most acceptable to God, as they originate in the
purest principles.

In the Reverend Mr. Carey's Publication on this subject, I was struck with the
following passage, which I shall request permission to lay before you. A
Christian minister is a person who in a peculiar sense is not his own; he is
the servant of God, and therefore ought to be wholly devoted to him. entering
on that sacred office, he solemnly undertakes to be always engaged, as much as
possible, in the Lord's work, and not to choose his own pleasure or employment,
or pursue the ministry as a thing which is to serve his own ends, or interests,
or as a kind of bye work. He engages to go where God pleases, and to do, or
endure what He sees fit to command, in the exercise of his function, He
virtually bids farewell to friends, pleasures, and comforts, and stands in
readiness to endure the greatest sufferings in the work of his Lord and Master.
-- It is inconsistent with ministers to please themselves with the thoughts of
a numerous auditory, cordial friends, a civilized country, legal protection,
affluence, splendour, or even a competency. The slights and hatred of men, false
friends, gloomy prisons and tortures, the society of barbarians of uncouth
speech, miserable accommodations in wretched wildernesses, hunger and thirst,
nakedness, weariness, and painfulness, hard work, and little worldly
encouragement, should rather be the objects of their expectation. Thus the
Apostles acted in the primitive times, and endured hardiness as good soldiers
of Jesus Christ; and though we, who live in a civilized country, where
Christianity is protected by law, are not called to suffer these things while
we continue here, yet, I question, whether all are justified in staying here,
while so many are perishing without the means of grace in other lands. Sure I
am that it is entirely contrary to the spirit of the gospel, for its ministers
to be actuated by interested motives. On the contrary their commission is a
sufficient call for them to venture all, and, like the first Christians, go
every where preaching the gospel.

These, Reverend Brethren, are sentiments worthy of our character as the
Servants of God. Rejected by mercenary essayists and fashionable declaimers
they find acceptance with you, and are cherished in your breasts: but, alas!
how negligent are we in giving these principles their proper culture!
Principles did I call them? -- To what a dilemma am I reduced? Shall I wound
you, or wrong the truth? Better far, if it be so, to offend men than God. No,
Brethren, I dare not call them principles, otherwise than as they are
principles of a speculative sublime theory, which few of us care to practice.
In the closet we sometimes meditate upon them with delight; in the pulpit we
enforce them with energy; but how soon, how very soon, do we go away, and
forget what manner of men we are?

"Who is he," said the beloved disciple, that overcomes the world, but he that
believes that Jesus is the Son of God? Alas! of the thousands of our Israel,
whether ministers or their flocks, how few are they whose religion will bear
this test? Where are the holy, happy spirits who have overcome the world, and
by a truly glorious victory cast contempt on Macedon and Rome? Where are the
men whose conversation is so in heaven, who so behold the glory of God, as to
be raised above the interests, the hopes, the fears, the pomps and vanities of
our petty system? O how very few there are to whom we can point with our singer
and say, that man is truly apostolic! The great majority of such as, in the
judgment of charity, may be deemed sincere Christians, are, nevertheless, in a
feeble, infantile, unsettled state, halting often, sometimes stumbling,
grieving their friends and affording triumph to their enemies. Notwithstanding
the revival of religion which has taken place in England, in the last fifty
years, what littleness of faith, what coldness of love is there among us? While
we compare ourselves among ourselves we are all disposed to assume praise; but
when we place ourselves in the light of God's countenance, with what difficulty
do we endure the divine splendour? What doubts, what fears, too often repel our
confidence, confound our spirits, stop our mouths and prevent the delightful
accents of Abba Father, which can alone gladden our hearts?

When I consider the state of things among us, I wonder that infidels have not
thought it worth their while to follow, more generally, in the track of
Mandeville, and relinquishing the attacks upon the doctrine and evidences of
Christianity, directed their malice to a more vulnerable art, and stabbed our
Savior through the persons of his followers. Where truth and brotherly kindness
find so much to censure and lament, what havoc might we not expect from
ignorance, falsehood, and malignity? This indeed appears to have been the mode
of attack adopted by Voltaire and other pestiferous spirits on the Continent.
They have prevailed. The religion of Jesus is proscribed, his sabbaths are
changed, his cross trampled upon, and his mediation despised. But could
Voltaire and his nefarious colleagues work such wonders? God forbid! The
Priests, the Priests betrayed their God and their religion. Their bigotry,
superstition, secular and spiritual wickednesses, have made their flocks
infidels and atheists, and a holy, righteous God has delivered them over to be
destroyed and plundered, by the miserable men whom they have provoked to
madness, and caused to blaspheme that venerable name by which they were called.
May we see the rod, and learn instruction from their fall! May we be jealous of
our ministry, and compel men to respect it, by so making the light of our holy
conversation to shine before them, that they may see our good works and glorify
our Father who is in heaven. The ministry has long fallen under great contempt
among us, and the laity too generally consider us as mere secular men, who
declaim for pay and with vile grimace, one day out of seven, hold forth a
language, which if true, condemns ourselves as much as those who hear us.
Instead of blaming them, let us reform ourselves, Instead of talking of the
dignity of our character, let us learn to feel and to support it. Let us show
them that we despise money, are superior to popularity, and have renounced all
meddling with what is foreign to our calling. Let us mark the example of St.
Paul, "Giving," as he says, no offense in any thing that the ministry be not
blamed; but in all things approving ourselves as the ministers of God, in much
patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distressess, in stripes, in
imprisonments, in tumults, in labors, in watchings, in fassings, by pureness,
by knowledge, by long suffering, by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love
unfeigned, by the word of truth, by the power of God, by the armor of
righteousness on the right hand and on the left, by honor and dishonor, by evil
report and good report: as deceivers and yet true; as unknown, and yet well
known; as dying and behold we live; as chastened, and not killed; as sorrowful,
yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet
possessing all things.

Let us do this, and the ministry will hold up its head. And should it be
thought, that the circumstances of our living in a Christian country and
enjoying the protection of equal laws, dispense with our exhibiting some of
those attestations of our ministry which the Apostle enumerates, I beg leave to
observe that as a mere nominal Christianity in our countrymen will never shield
us from contempt, hatred, reproach, and persecution, as far as the laws of the
land will permit, in the faithful discharge of our ministry, so the possession
and exercise of fervent and expansive charity, both to the evil and the good,
would necessarily make us symbolize with the Apostles in labors, watchings,
fastings, affliction, necessities, and distresses of various kinds. An attempt
to do much good is the sure way to suffer much evil. Provided we will let the
world go on as it pleases, and see our fellow creatures posting to perdition
without any, or with only feeble attempts to save them, they will leave us
alone, and perhaps speak well of us; but let us throw ourselves in their way,
let us attempt to stem the torrent, and we shall find religion will receive
little better treatment at this day, than it did eighteen hundred years ago.
Our meeting with so little persecution for righteousness sake, is one
demonstration, that our religion does not over much gall the Devil and his
children. For he and they will certainly fight for their kingdom. But it is
worse^^ that we seem studiously to shun the cross of Christ. How many of us are
quitting some situations, and rejecting others, which promise much usefulness,
merely because we think our learning and talents thrown away on the poor, or
our stipends so small that we cannot live upon them like Gentlemen, or because
our spirits are too high to stoop to owe our maintenance to pious friends; or
because we cannot live by faith on the liberality and faithfulness of Christ,
and endure the prospect of leaving our widows and orphans to his support? How
few of us prefer a poor place to a rich one, and think it a sufficient season
for doing so, that we can be more useful, and more pious, in an humble station.

I flatter myself no^e of you, Brethren, will ask, What has all this to do with
Missions? But if you do, I answer, Evidently very much. While we betray this
secular spirit, are so very polite, and so much like fine Gentlemen, what have
we, or what ought we to have, to do with Missions? To what can it be ascribed,
but to the prevalence of this spirit, and of these manners, that we hardly ever
think of them? Are not Heathens men? Have they not souls to be saved? Dare we
avow other end in our ministry than the salvation of men's souls? Are we not
commanded to go and preach the gospel to them? Are there any discouragements
which stop the children of the world in the pursuit of money; and if we loved
souls as well as they love money would discouragements stop us? Are the
ministers of the gospel the only men born with the souls of women? Have we a
right to talk of dangers and sufferings, who believe the Son of God was
incarnate for our sake, born in a stable, cradled in a manger, lived on alms,
had no place where to lay his head, and expired like a malefac^^on a cross? Let
moralists decline danger and ^^ink at death; but let not us, who call ourselves
emphatically gospel ministers, who rejoice in Christ crucified, who
preach-remission of sin in his name, and speak of a life hidden with him in
God, let us not follow their example; or, if we do, let us heartily confess,
that our wavering faith has no firm hold of Him, who is the resurrection and
the life. And if Heathens are men, have souls, and and the only end of our
ministry is the salvation of men's souls; if we are commanded to preach the
gospel to them, if we love souls as well as the children of this world love
money, if we are not women in the form of men, and if the sufferings of Jesus
prohibit all pusillanimous clamors about sufferings and danger, is not our God
jealous, does he not require cheerful, uniform obedience, and will He hold us
guiltless, if we refuse to obey his pleasure? Say we shall not forfeit Heaven,
though we all lurk at home like sluggards, yet is there nothing in our souls,
which aspires to heavenly praise and glory? With this littleness of soul shall
we not blush to meet the Apostles in their Master's joy? Shall we be content to
be saved as by fire, when we are called each of us to enter into glory like
Elijah in solemn triumph? O where is the Lord God of Elijah! Or where the
spirit of him, who said it becomes me to fulfill all righteousness -- it is my
meat and drink to do the will of Him who sent me, and to finish the work which
He has given me to do?

How long* Brethren, shall we rebel against our Lord? How long, like Jonah,
shall we attempt to flee from his spirit, and refuse to carry glad tidings of
great joy unto all people? Sold some sneering infidel take up this
publication. What would he say on reading it? What can we expect him to say? I
fancy I hear him expressing himself in the following language, What does this
mad fellow mean? Why does he not go to the Heathens himself? Or if he did, can
he imagine his enthusiastical publications will make others as man as himself?
Let him write for ever, our Bishops, Archdeacons, and other church dignitaries,
will not budge an inch. Rectors, Vicars, and Curates, are well disposed to
follow their good example, and will never be prevailed on to turn spiritual
knight-errants. The Dissenters who charge the Establishment as the cider
daughter of Rome and say her ministers preach only for sat livings, have no
more zeal than the men they reprove to encounter their missionary windmills.
Even the Methodists, who consider themselves as the grand Reformers of the day,
and vapor about the hardships of their itinerancy, love to keep in snug
quarters in Old England, o^ have no stomach to venture farther than our West
India Islands, where they live in comfort, and can assume the important name of
missionaries, without experiencing the hardships of the undertaking. The
modest, quiet Moravians, are the only people, who seem to believe the Apostles
and Prophets, and who, whether they do much or little, look the hardships of a
mission in the face like men. This fellow had better think of his own
preferment, and dream of missions on a soft bed, than thus proclaim himself a
fool by supposing his letters can do good in the world.

Churchmen, Dissenters, Methodists, what will you reply to this reproach? Shall
we make a book to confute him? It will be found, I fear on the trial, that it
is easier to make a hundred books, than to engage one man to prove the
sincerity of his love to perishing sinners, by sacrificing himself and his
family to their welfare. Here we are differing from each other in various
points, and contending hard to show that our own Sect, whatever it is, is
lodged in the in the penetralia of the Temple of Truth, and is the foremost in
the race for leaven; but when the question is put, Which of you will forsake
all, deny himself, take up his cross, and, if God pleases, die, for his
religion? It presently appears that Churchmen, Dissenters, and Methodists, are
more closely united in principle and practice than they are aware of. We all
straightway, with one consent, begin to make apologies and to say, I pray have
me excused, while some openly cast contempt on the undertaking, and throw out
evangelical jokes upon the few who consider missions in a serious light. Shall
Churchmen, Dissenters, Methodists, deny these facts, because there are among
each of them a few men whose conduct may be urged as an exception against them?
Surely this is disingenuous.

Many of us complain of an antichristian union between Church and State, and
that religion is fettered, and made, like a child, to walk in leading strings.
We say that religion flourished most when she had to contend with the State,
and had no other support than what she derived from her own native strength.
Let this be granted. It was so once, but it is a little problematical, whether
it would be so now. "Tempora mutautur et nos matamur "in illis." Are we
apostolic Christians? Can we contend with hunger, thirst, cold, nakedness,
perils, and the sword? Can we walk without those leading strings? If we can,
and if we feel them so gulling, so degrading, why do we not do so? Are there
not two thirds of the world, where we shall not be insulted by legal
protection, or be paid, like secular men, for our labor? Have we not full
opportunity of showing the politicians and great men of Europe, that Christ,
his ministers, and people, are able to uphold their religion in the world,
without their support, and that we can multiply now, as in the primitive times,
like the polypus, when he is cut in pieces? And yet the precise reason why we
do not engage in Missions is because we cannot enjoy that secular protection,
and those secular comforts, which we have in England. To follow the Son of God
where he has no place to lay his head, and no other recompense to offer us,
than the cup he drank of and the baptism with which he was baptized, is more I
fear than we are able to do: and until we can do so, it will remain very
questionable, whether we can walk without our leadings strings.

This appears to be the case so evidently, that those who patronize Missions
feel it necessary to secularize them, and to put them, as much as possible, on
the same footing as a parochial Cure in Europe. They are afraid of alarming us
by showing the dark side of things, and hardly conceive that there exists among
us men, whose spirits dare aspire to an apostolic warfare. Hence it is, that
neither they nor we have faith to think of subduing kingdoms; nor are they to
be subdued by a few fair weather soldiers, accompanied by delicate women and
children, educated in fashionable accomplishments, and accustomed to all the
delicacies of life; who are absolutely incapable of exposing themselves to sun,
or wind, or rain, or of exercising those charities which were once the ornament
and praise of Christian matrons. I fear, I fear greatly, that I write to the
winds, and that neither Christian Ministers, nor their wives, have platy enough
for this engagement; and that the Missionaries we are able to send out with the
equipage they require for their camp, will do no more toward subduing India to
the faith of Christ, than a few effeminate Asiatics, with their Harams and
dancing girls, would do in an attempt to bring Great Britain under the yoke of
the Mogul.

If there were absolutely none to encourage the attempt, and nothing existing
at this day in the form of a mission, the conduct of the ministers of Christ
would be more excusable; but it seems, as if the Providence of God had kept
alive some sense of duty, and some examples of zeal, both among laity and
clergy, to be a testimony against us, and to hold us up to infamy to future
generations. What is done, indicates, that we know our duty; and what is left
undone evinces, that we have no inclination to do it. We ministers have no
reason to complain of the laity. They are willing to give us all encouragement;
nay, they invite and solicit us to engage; and freely offer to do all in their
power to make us comfortable; and yet we refuse to stir. I am sorry to say,
that this reproach falls more immediately on myself and other gospel ministers,
in the establishment. The Sierra Leone Chaplainship went a begging pretty far
before it fell into the hands of my Colleague and myself; and now that we have
declined it, it lies neglected, as no man thinks it worth his while to pick it
up. For some years great enquiries were made to procure an Assistant minister
for the Reverend Mr. Johnson, at Port Jackson, and with infinite difficulty,
that post is, at last, silled: but all the enquiries made among gospel
ministers, for three years past, and, which are still making, after an
assistant for the Reverend Mr. Brown, at Calcutta, have hitherto been without
effect. Whether this does us honor, I leave the world to judge. I shall however
contrast these facts with one from Mr. Spangenberg, a Moravian Bishop, who
informs us, that when, at Bethlehem in North America, letters were read in the
Brethren's congregation, stating, that several of their missionaries had been
carried off by sickness in the Island of St. Thomas, in the West Indies, that
very day seven Brethren offered to go and replace them. -- This is just what
things ought to be, and any Church which can produce such men may engage in
Missions.

That our Brethren of the various denominations of English Dissenters have any
cause to rejoice over us in this respect is more than I know. Except the
Reverend Mr. Carey and a friend who accompanies him, I am not informed of any
of their ministers who are engaged in Missions. Would to God they would
undertake something in this way for Christ, which might provoke us to jealousy!
-- The Reverend Dr. Coke has of late years done something in this way in our
West India Islands; and might have done much more, had the Methodist Preachers,
as a body, given him that unequivocal support, to which his zeal in such a
cause should entitle him. -- Hitherto those Missions may be considered as his
missions, rather than those of the Methodists. I am, however, happy to be
informed that his Brethren, begin to enter more heartily into the spirit of
Mistions, and I flatter myself they will now embark in them, with all their
soul, and all their strength. But, whether they do it or not, it is infinitely
to be desired that it should be done by some of us; for however we may suppose
ourselves entitled to reprove each other about mode; of faith and forms of
worship, upon this business, I know not who may throw the first stone. And if I
take the liberty of speaking so freely, I appeal to God, it is not because I
suppose myself entitled to reprove others from any merit of my own; but because
I ingenuously confess my sin, and am willing to come in for a full share of our
common shame.

Our conduct in respect of Missions, evinces beyond every thing the low
degraded state of the Christian ministry, and the ideas which too generally
prevail about it threaten to degrade it still lower. An improper attachment to
secular interests and honors, exerts too much of its baleful influence over
those whose principles teach them better things; but what consequences may not
be expected to flow from the lave of money, and the love of praise, when men of
the first character and influence in the church avow them, as allowable motives
of ministerial conduct. Nevertheless, we have lived to hear them so avowed, and
to the shame of human nature, but to the exemplification of the scripture
declaration, that by wisdom man knew not God, to hear them avowed from the
admirable pen of ARCHDEACON PAIEY. After adducing other reasons to show that a
distinction of orders in the ministry, is most conducive to the general ends of
its institution, he concludes as follows -- And lastly, that the same fund
produces more effect, both as an allurement to men of talents to enter into the
Church, and as a stimulus to the industry of those who are already in it, when
distributed into prizes of different value, than when divided into equal
shares. -- Paley's Moral Philosophy, vol. 2, p. 323.

God of heaven and earth, what a stab is this to the vitals of thy religion! I
appeal to every godly man in England, Whether all the talents, all the
learning, and all the virtues of a Paley, can shield the man who avows these
sentiments from his contempt? And yet this is the man who teaches us morals --
who instructs our young ministers -- whose book is honored and applanded in our
Universities! But who that adopts these sentiments will engage in missions?
Alas, the allurement, the stimulus, the prizes, Mr. Paley talks of, may induce
men to cultivate their talents with as much care as he has done, and to write
as well as he has written; and they may, perhaps, draw from our ecclesiastical
lottery, as rich a prize as he has drawn; but as soon may the carrion crow
beget a dove, as they will induce him to conduct himself in a ministry as
becomes the gospel of Christ.

Thus it is that we are not ashamed to drive insolent bargains with the Son of
God, and tell him we will stoop to assume the contemptible character of his
ambassadors, if he will hold out to us rich and honorable prizes to allure men
of our talents into the Church, and to stimulate our industry when we are in
it. Truth, virtue, religion, God and heavenly glory, are no allurements, no
stimulus, to our aspiring minds, until they receive the currency of this world,
by being attached to the fools cap of human honor, or to that pernicious metal,
which can transform the Apostles of Satan into the ministers of Christ. Others
of us appear ashamed of these simonical practices, and say, Lord I will follow
thee withersoever thou go; only show me a little more indulgence than thou
have showed to thyself. Excuse me from watching and agonizing with thee in
Gethsemane. I will take up my cross; I only deprecate the being crucified upon
it. I am willing to forsake much; but compassionate my weakness, and do not
command me to sell all. I will follow thee any where on land; but O spare me
the horrors of a voyage by sea. I will preach for thee amongst the poorest of
my own nation; but do not send me to a strange country. I acknowledge I am a
miserable sinner, unworthy to be a door keeper in thy house, nevertheless, my
elocution is popular, I am much followed and applauded: Will it not be more for
thy glory for me to stay at home, while any man of inferior talents may go and
preach to the Heathens? I have heard that they offer human sacrifices in
Otaheite, eat men in New-Zealand, are absolutely brutish at Port Jackson, and
that the scorching sun and heavy rains in Africa are inevitably fatal. O let
the life of thy servant be precious in thy sight! Send me not to untameable
barbarians, or to a clime where I cannot be certain of my life for a day.
Besides the difficulties of these undertakings are insuperable. It is probable
I must cultivate the ground for my maintenance, and I have been brought up
delicately from a child. Thy Apostles who were poor fishermen, and never
possessed my extensive learning, elegant manners, and genteel notions, were
well suited to this rough work; yet even they preached to a civilized people,
and being furnished with miraculous powers, their labors were the more
productive; but what shall I do who have not their advantages, and have my mind
so vitiated by false learning, that I cannot stoop to the simplicity of the
gospel? Certainly to engage in missions is to plough on a rock, or to build on
the wave. O let me be any thing but a missionary, for my soul sinks within me
at the mention of it, nor can I derive any considerations from earth, heaven,
or hell to make me willing to die for thy sake. I am not singular in my opinion
of missions, for we are all agreed clergy and laity, churchmen and dissenters,
Indian directors and parliament men, with few exceptions, that they are
impracticable; and that if they were not, yet "missionaries would be a disgrace
to any nation;" that we have no right to interfere in the changing the religion
of a foreign country.' They would certainly destroy the Slave Trade in Africa;
and some well informed, respectable Directors of the India Company, are of
opinion that they would "subvert the British Empire in Indostan," which, they
think, of far greater consequence than the establishment of thy despised
kingdom. A few wretched Pariars might indeed be converted, or rather made
hypocrites by Christian charity; but there is nothing in Thee, or thy gospel,
to influence Chiefs of the noble Casts (whose souls are certainly more valuable
than those of the vile Pariars as is a thousand to one) to forsake the religion
of their ancestors. Good Lord, what is to be done where every thing thus makes
against us? O desist from thy purpose! Thou art the Savior of all men, and God
is a merciful Father to them all; if it please thee, thou can save the
Heathens without the gospel; and, if not, thy will be done. Nevertheless Lord,
if thou will force us to cultivate this unpromising field, do not think of
sending missionaries out immediately, but let lay schoolmasters go to receive
the first sire, and teach the the little children reading and writing; and then
will we go, and enter into their labors: for the experience of ages has taught
us, that where the preaching of the gospel makes one Christian, education makes
ten. Hence instead of preaching first to the parents, and then establishing
schools, for the education of the children, as the Apostles did (who knew that
the sword of the spirit was of heavenly temper -- an instrument into which the
God of Glory had wrought all his attributes, we, having lost the art of using
it, and that vigorous arm which gives it the demonstration of the spirit and of
power) we go to work another way, by educating children first; and many are of
opinion, that the best way of enlightening the Heathens is by putting the moon
in the sun's sphere, and having children to instruct their parents, rather than
parents to teach their children. -- If Lord thou will seriously weigh all these
things, we flatter ourselves thou will be of our way of thinking.

Wild, ludicrous, and even blasphemous, as this soliloquy may be, I am
persuaded, it does not contain a sentiment, which is not the genuine effusion
of the human heart. I have traced some of them in my own heart, and I have
detected others, in the language which has been frequently held to me on
missions. I have only thrown them together, given them a tongue and utterance,
and exposed them without disguise as they walk before God, who searches the
heart. If ministers and Christians will not recognize what exists in their
hearts, and lives in their lives, I have at least done my duty in setting it
before them. If they see themselves in the glass I hold up. I trust, with God's
blessing, it may produce salutary effects, call them into action, and enable
them to stop the mouth of malevolent reproach; that it may no longer be said
the ministers of Christ are, as they have been, for centuries, with
comparatively few exceptions, the most degenerate, the most inconsistent, and
most dastardly race of men who ever existed on earth.

Ought not we to have compassion on our brethren, even as God has compassion
on us? Have we looked into the heart of Jesus Christ, and is it thus we read
it? Do we dwell in God, and God in us, and can we continue thus cold and
obdurate, amidst the everlasting burnings of his love? Olet us prove our faith
by our works, and show men who mistake our doctrine, that in preaching
justification by faith, we do not set aside, but establish the moral law! By
the songs of angels, who proclaimed peace and love at our Redeemer's birth; by
the solemn injunction of Him who said, "Ye are my friends, if ye keep my
commandments;" by the glorious Pentecost, when every language praised God; by
the multitudes who have washed their robes in the blood of the Lamb; by the
acts of the Apostles and the sufferings of the martyrs; by the expiring pangs
of Jesus, and by those sins of of ours which bruised him, and put him to grief;
by their remission, if we have indeed tasted that the Lord is gracious; by the
fearful end of that servant who buried his Lord's talent; by the curses and
execrations which rest upon the Christian name; by the rivers of Heathen blood
which Christians have shed, and which call for expiation at our hands; "if
there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship
of the spirit, if any bowels and mercies," I beseech you honored and beloved
Brethren, have mercy on the Heathens, and so fulfill the joy of your Lord.

And now, Brethren, I throw myself at your feet; and ask pardon for every rash
and wounding expression which may have fallen from my pen. Conscious
inferiority bows me down, and nothing but a sense of duty and the love of truth
could have erected my mind to write with the freedom I have done, and to
admonish thus loudly the ministers of Christ, the least of whom I consider as
my superior. If I have offended, I beseech you to forgive me, even as God for
Christ's sake forgive^^ you. If I have, in any respect, oversteped the
soberness of trath, or violated the meekness of wisdom, I trust I shall find
mercy of the Lord, as having done it ignorantly, from a sincere desire to
promote his glory, the interests of his religion, the happiness of his people,
the salvation of the Heathens, and the honor and dignity of his ministering
servants. I once more submit to your candid attention, as well as to your
judicious correction, the con^ents of these pages. I promise seriously to
review my own obligations to act in the way I recommend to you; and I flatter
myself, that some one will take up the subject where I have laid it down, and
do it that justice, which it cannot receive from my hands.

I have the honor to subscribe myself, with cordial esteem,

Fathers and Brethren, Your fellow servant in the patience and tribulation of
Jesus, M. H.

FINIS.
CORNELIUS P. WYCKOFF. At his BOOK-STORE, corner of State and Washington
Streets, Schenectady. Has for sale, the following BOOKS and STATIONARY, viz.
QUARTO, Octavo, School, and Pocket Bibles, History of the Bible, Testaments,
David's, Watt's. and Dutch Psalms, Pilgrim's Progress, Holy War, Life of
Gardener, Synod's Catechism, Common Prayer Book, Russel's Sermons, Whitfield's
do. Bennet's Discourses on the Credibility of the Scriptures, History of
Redemption, Jenyn's Works, The Power of Religion on the Mind, Westminster
Shorter Catechism, Signs of the Times, Death of Abel and Cain, Edwards on
Concert, Do. Freedom of the Will, Brown's Oracles, Mrs. Rowe's Devout
Exercises, Strong's Inquiry, Melmoth's Essays, Force of Truth, Pulpit and Desk,
Watson's Apology for the Bible, do. for Christianity, Fuller's Letters, in
which the Calvinistic and Socinian Systems are compared, Spalding's Lectures,
Willison's Afflicted Man's Companion, Watts' Miscellanies, Newton's Life,
Trimmer's Knowledge of Nature, Travels of True Godliness and Ungodliness,
Psalter, Brooke's Gazetteer, Nicholson's Philosophy, Helsham's Lectures,
Duncan's Logic, Blair's Rhetoric, French Convert, Religious Courtship,
Franklin's Life, Life of Joseph, Baron Trenck, Morse's and Dwight's
Geographies, Pindar's Works, Art of Speaking, Roman Antiquities, Clarissa
Harlow, Pamela, Evening Amusements, Complete Toilet, or Ladies' Companion,
Ready Reckoner, Simson's Euclid, Young Man's Companion, Saunderson's Algebra,
Hurchinson's Xenophon, Janson's Dutch and English Dictionary, Entick's Latin
and English do, Young's do. Entick's English do. Caesar's Commentaries,
Selectae Profanis, Mair's Introduction to the Latin, Davidson's Virgil, 2 vols.
Cicero's Delphini, Smart's Horace, 2 vols. Schervilli's Lexicon, Selectae
Veteri, Clark's Corderii, Greek and Latin Testaments, Lucian, Rigg's Grammar,
Greek do. Chambaud's French do. Perrin's Fables, Scott's Receuil, Boyer's
French Dictionary, Bingham's Accidence, Fisher's and Pike's Arithmetics,
Clerk's Magazine, Turner's Book-Keeping, Goldsmith's Rome, Grecian States,
Letters on Courtship and Marriage, American Preceptor, Salraon's Grammar,
Ladies' and Gentlemen's Monitor, Family Instructor, Zimmermann on Solitude,
Child's Friend, History of North America, Steuben's Exercise, Popes Essays and
Poems, Progress of Dullness, Brothers' Prophecies, Economy of Human Life,
Sorrows of Werter, Spelling-Books, Webster's second and third Parts, also a
very large collection of Children's Books and Pamphlets.

Blank Books, Writing Paper, Morocco and Leather Pocket-Books, Pewter and
Leather Inkstands, Quills, Sealing-Wax, Wafers, Ink-Powder, etc.

PRINTING,
In all its variety, performed in a neat and correct manner, and on the
shortest notice, at the above place.

The Book-Binding Business carried on at said store. Account Books ruled to any
pattern, and bound in the best manner -- Old Books rebound on the shortest
notice.


