A PLAN WITH PROPOSALS FOR FORMING A COMPANY TO WORK MINES IN THE UNITED
STATES; AND TO SMELT AND REFINE THE ORES WHETHER OF Copper, Lead, Tin, Silver,
or Gold.

BY BENJAMIN HENFREY.

Is it not the interest of every citizen of America to promote the working of
mines; since all that is obtained from the bowels of the earth becomes an
addition to the public stock?

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY SNOWDEN and M'CORKLE, NO. 47, NORTH FOURTH-STREET.
1797.

PREFACE.
I CONCEIVE that it is totally unnecessary for me to make any comment upon the
great advantage it would be to this country to be supplied with all the useful
metals from its own mines; to purchase which, an immense sum, every one knows,
is annually sent to Europe.

Americans are an enlightened people, and very capable of judging of what is
calculated to promote the true interest of their country.

I therefore submit, with much deference, the following plan and proposals to
their consideration. It is a plan that I have taken full time to consider, and
am convinced of its practicability.

The greatest difficulty that I see will attend it is, that mining is a
business that the people in general are afraid of being concerned in.

I must, therefore, beg that my reader will lay aside all that sort of
prejudice, while perusing the following pages; if so, his reason will, I
flatter myself, be convinced, and he will see, that mining is not so dangerous
a business as he may have supposed it to be.

The plan of forming a company with a large capital to work mines of lead,
copper, coals, etc. in the United States, is not a new idea with me.

Every person conversant with business is able to estimate the advantage
arising from an association of capital. Undertakings of great public as well-as
private utility are, by this mode, accomplished with ease; and by it many
valuable sources of wealth have been discovered. I will beg leave to note a few.

The first vessel fitted out in England for a whaling voyage was from the port
of Hull, by a number of adventurers joining in the expense. Their success was
great, and, in a few years, a number of ships were fitted out for that trade;
and there was scarce a huxter, or even a porter, in the town, that was not
concerned.

The plan was the same with regard to the coal-trade. Many vessels have been
fitted out from Newcastle and Whitehaven, on shares even so low as L5. Similar
associations with regard to shipping are very common in this country,
particularly in the eastern states, where we often find, that even the men
before the mast are in part owners. The advantage arising to the community is
great; for these schemes give the industrious poor an opportunity of employing
their little savings to advantage, which might otherwise have been spent in
riot and drunkenness.

I have often, with much satisfaction, contemplated the good effects arising
from the various associations of capital in Britain; and my reason has long
been convinced that they have been, and still are, the principal sources from
whence the amazing wealth of that country flow. I know of no pursuit where an
association of capital is so proper as for the purpose of working mines; for,
in general, the sum required is great, and the risk considerable. Unless the
vein is already discovered, the risk consists in searching for it; but there is
no risk in the mines I am about to recommend, and which I shall prove by the
most unquestionable testimony to be of immense value.

I have now been near six years in America, the greatest part of which time has
been spent in making discoveries in the mineral kingdom, and in which I have
been very successful. I now offer to the public a plan by which they may
benefit from my researches, looking forward only to a moderate compensation for
my time and traveling expenses. It is probable that many grammatical errors
will be discovered by my learned reader; but he will, I am sure, wave
criticism, when he is informed, that the only colleges that I have had an
opportunity of studying in were, mines, smelting works, and manufactories.

GAP COPPER-MINES, LANCASTER COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, March 27, 1797.
PROPOSALS, etc.
THE first mines I would recommend, are situated in Lancaster county,
Pennsylvania, five miles from Strasburgh, thirteen from Lancaster, thirty-five
from Wilmington, fifty from Philadelphia, and only two miles from the turnpike
road.

They were discovered by a German, of the name of Tersey, in or before the year
1732; and in that year, the hon. John Penn, made a grant of the land where the
mine was found, to the following gentlemen, for the express purpose of having
it worked, viz. governor Hamilton, judge Allen, James Logan, James Steel, and
Thomas Schute, esquire And it also appears, that Mr. Penn joined in the expense of
opening the mine, etc. in doing which, they discovered one of those uncommon
vitriolic springs, called by the Germans, ziment wasser, i. e. water strongly
impregnated with the vitriol of copper, or, as some writers have called them,
copper springs; but, notwithstanding this invaluable discovery, it does not
appear that any of the gentlemen were acquainted with the value of the water,
as no attempt appears to have ever been made to turn it to account after the
European manner, which I shall have occasion to describe. But previous, I will,
for the satisfaction of those who may wish to forward my plan, state the proofs
I have obtained of such a spring having been actually discovered, in the Gap
mines, when first opened. These proofs also, fortunately, report the quantity
and value of the water; and, from the great ability as well as respectability
of the men, leave no doubt of the truth of the discovery. The report is as
follows:

An account of the Copper Springs lately discovered in Pennsylvania, by John
Rutty, M. D. of Dublin -- communicated by Mr. Peter Collinson, E. R. S. See
vol. xlix, part 2, page 648.
Read, May 20th, 1756.
IN the province of Pennsylvania is a copper mine, which affords a spring, that
appears to have the same effect as that Irish water lately described by Dr.
William Henry, and Dr. Bond, in the 47th, and 48th volumes of the philosophical
transactions, but is much sharper, for it will dissolve iron in a quarter part
of the time; and we are assured, by the accounts transmitted from the
proprietors of it, of the trials they have made, that it yields the same
copper, mud, or dust, as our cronebaun water, of the county of Wicklow, in this
kingdom, (being the water above mentioned) which, being collected from bars of
iron immersed in it, for the purpose of extracting the copper from the
Pennsylvania water, it produced above half pure copper, on being melted in a
crucible; an experiment that requires to be repeated, in order to ascertain the
proportion of copper contained, with accuracy; our copper spring, of the county
of Wicklow, yielding a proportion considerably larger than this, viz. sixteen
parts of copper out of twenty of the mud.

In the neighborhood is a great abundance of the ores of vitriol and sulphur,
and the spring comes through an immense body of vitriol ore, and the supply of
water is very large; 700 or 800 hogsheads flowing in 24 hours. The water is of
a pale green color, of an acid, sweet, austere, inky, and nauseous taste.

But the genuine quality, as well as large proportion of the impregnating salt,
will further appear by the following analysis of this water, viz. a pint of it
exhaled by a slow fire, left 400 grains of solid contents, which were partly
green, and partly ochre colored, with an intermixture of bluish, and of a
rough sweetish taste, like that of sal martis, and appeared to be chiefly
saline, not leaving above four grains of indissoluble matter, on dissolving 196
grains of it and filtring.

Thus it appears, that the proportion of vitriolic parts in this water is very
large, viz. above six drachms to a pint, or 3200 grains to a gallon; and,
consequently, it is a stronger solution of vitriol than sea water is of marine
salt; and moreover is, truly, considerably the strongest of all the vitriolic
waters that have yet occurred to my observation; for, our Cronebaun water, in
the county of Wicklow, gives but 256 grains from a gallon; Haigh, in
Lancashire, (the strongest in Britain, that I know of) 1920 grains; Shadwell,
1320; Kilbrew, in the county of Mealth, 1530, from the same quantity; so that,
besides the copper to be obtained by immersing bars of iron, as in our county
of Wicklow water, this water offers to its proprietors another peculiar
advantage, viz. an opportunity of erecting a copperas work, or manufacture, of
vitriol; especially, the vast supply of water, and plenty of fuel in the place,
considered.

Certificate of Dr. Logan, respecting the copper springs at the Gap mine,
Lancaster county.
I DO CERTIFY, that Dr. Benj. Franklin, a few weeks before his death, informed
me, that, at the time the Gap copper-mine, in Lancaster county, belonging to
James Logan, and others, was worked, a spring of water was discovered in the
same, highly impregnated with copper. A bottle of the water was sent to him,
with which he frequently made experiments with his knife, which, being for a
short time immersed in the water, would assume the appearance of copper.

Signed, GEORGE LOGAN.
STENTON, March 10th, 1797.
The following is the certificate of some old people who remember the first
opening of the Gap mines, and are still living near them, and who are persons
of good character and in good circumstances.

THIS IS TO CERTIFY, to whom it may concern, that we the subscribers were
frequently at the copper mines in Lancaster county, known by the name of the
Gap mine, during the time the said mine was working by James Logan and Co.;
and, from hearing the people often talking of the water turning iron into
copper, we have very often, when at the mines, put the blade of our knives into
the water as it came from the pumps, which, in a few minutes, would be covered
with copper. A negro, called black Ned, took advantage of this circumstance and
fixed a large trough in such manner that part of the water from the pumps used
to run through the same. In this trough he put pieces of old iron, which the
water (as then understood) turned into copper, of which he used to make
buckles, handles for knives, and other small articles. This negro was a smith
by trade, and was said to be a very ingenious man.

And we further certify, that we have often seen quantities of the ore got in
this mine, and frequently heard the miners say, that it was a very rich mine,
if the water could be kept down so as they could work constantly. At this time,
there were eight pumps working in the pit, which turned out so much water that
it overflowed a meadow, and destroyed the grass so effectually that most of the
places the water used to cover, are barren at this time. The same water was
also supposed to kill the fish, as they were at that time destroyed for several
miles down the creek.

Given under our hands severally, this nineteenth day of November, in the year
one thousand seven hundred and ninetythree. ELIZABETH her mark.
ROCKY. JOHN SHORTS. JOHN BRACKBILL. Witness, ABNER BUFFINGTON. JOHN HOAR.


Clay-Hill, Dec. 27th, 1796. MR. HENFREY. SIR,
I HAVE to lament that the Gap mine cannot be worked upon terms worthy of its
consequence, in my opinion, unless advances larger than my present engagements
permit, can be brought forward. I visited the work, you know, when one of the
shafts was nearly exhausted; and, from the effect of the little water of the
ziment kind then examined, it produced a precipitation which was promising
indeed. From the effect of this kind of water first in Germany, then in Arklow,
and lastly from the artificial ziment water in the Paris mine, I am convinced,
nothing could be more profitable. Could the work proceed upon proper
principles, with a capital equal to erecting an engine to free the works of
water, and saving of the martial vitriol, and sulphur, I believe no estate
could equal it. How different, from pursuing a vein through a stony country, of
uncertain yield, is the process of precipitation, which proceeds with little
labor, whilst we are at rest. That the ore after roasting and catching the
sulphurous quality to a profit, would be an object to the company, I have no
doubt; but I cannot, without aid, pursue the necessary plan, and must therefore
accede to a sale of shares, if partners well disposed to a fair experiment of
public utility and fair and reasonable profits can be procured. I therefore,
Sir, agree to the sale of shares, so as to bring to the test the value of that
work, but without relinquishing all my right, and you will consider this as the
evidence of my assent. What number of shares I shall retain, will depend upon
other circumstances, but I believe, from my known opinion of the prospect, you
will suppose the number will be as great as I can compass.

I am, Sir, Your friend and humble servant, (Signed,) R. HOWELL.

As many of my readers will, I presume, be unacquainted with the value of
copper springs, that have been discovered in Europe, I have concluded that the
following extracts may give them much satisfaction, being from such
unquestionable and respectable authority.

'IN the year 1673, Doctor Brown visited a famous copper mine at Hern Grundt,
about seven English miles from New Sol, in upper Hungary, and he informs us,
that there he saw two springs, called the old and new ziment, which turned iron
into copper, as it is vulgarly said.

'But the case is, that the iron is dissolved by the vitriolic acid of this
spring water, and the copper is precipitated in its metallic form in the place
of the iron.

'It has been the custom in Germany for some centuries, to collect the copper
contained in these waters, by filling with them some pits made purposely for
this operation. Old iron is thrown in; and, being dissolved by the acid, is
suspended in the water while the copper is precipitated; the mud being raked
out, is melted afterward in a furnace, and very fine copper is produced. From
100 tons of iron, 84 and sometimes 90 tons of fine copper is thus produced.

'But although this method of obtaining copper has been long practiced in
Germany, yet it is but of late years, says bishop Watson, ( p. 238 of the first
volume of his essays) that any successful attempts of this kind have been made
either in England or Ireland; in the last, at least, it was quite owing to an
accident. There are the very celebrated copper mines at Arklow, in the county
of Wicklow, in Ireland, and from these mines issue a great quantity of water
strongly impregnated with vitriol of copper. One of the workmen having
accidentally left an iron shovel in the water he found it, some weeks after, so
incrusted with a coat of copper, that it was thought to be changed into copper.

'The proprietors of the mines, in pursuance of this hint, made proper pits and
receptacles for the water; and have obtained, by means of soft iron bars put in
them, such quantities of copper, that these streams are now of as much
consequence as the mines themselves.

'One ton of iron produces near two tons of copper mud, and each ton of mud
produces, when melted, 1600 with. fine copper, which sells for L 10 sterling per
ton more than the copper which is fluxed from the ore.

'There is, in the Isle of Anglesey, on the coast of North Wales, a mountain
called Paris, which abounds in copper ore, the bed of ore being above 40 feet
in thickness. The lesees of this mine, annually raise from six to 700 tons of
merchantable ore, and daily employ above 40 furnaces in smelting it. This ore
contains a great quantity of sulphur, which must be separated by roasting
before it can be fluxed into copper.

'The phlogiston, with part of the vitriolic acid, is dipersed into the air by
the force of the fire. Another part of the acid attacks and dissolves such a
quantity of the copper, that the water in which the roasted ore is washed (by
means of old iron immersed in it according to the German method) produces great
quantities of fine copper, so that the proprietors have there obtained, in one
year, near 100 tons of copper precipitated from this water.

'If this water was afterward evaporated, it would yield green vitriol, at the
rate of nearly 200 tons of vitriol, for each hundred tons of iron.'

I have visited both the above mines, and know that the bishop's statements are
taken from facts, and upon which I founded my calculations, See the Table. When
I was at the Arklow mines in Ireland, one of the proprietors informed me, that
they had then four hundred tons of iron in the different pits and reservoirs,
precipitating the copper fom the water, and that they should increase the
quantity. He also said, that they were buying plates of cast iron, which, if
found to answer, would make a very great saving; and, since I came to America,
I have received information, that the cast iron did answer, and that they use
no other, either at Crone Baun, or in the isle of Anglesey.

Since the discovery of these natural vitriolic waters, the proprietors of
copper mines have taken the hint of trying the ores after roasting, and find
that, where they are highly sulphurous, the waters used to wash them (which is
done before smelting) always become sufficiently impregnated with copper, to
pay them well for their trouble and expense of precipitating it by means of
iron.

In my estimate, I have put only a small value upon the ORE at the Gap mines,
notwithstanding the quantity is immense, and similar to the ore worked in the
isle of Anglesey. I have sunk upon the body in several places, and always found
the ore within a few feet of the surface, but it cannot be got in quantity
until there is a machine erected to pump off the water. The ore may then be
raised with as much ease as the quarrying of stone.

I have treated this ore in the same manner they do the ore at the Anglesey
mines, and have always obtained a proportionate yield of copper from it; and I
now say, that it is my candid opinion, that this body or bed of ore, may be
worked to great and certain profit. But I find that it is a generally received
opinion in this country, that wages are yet too high to carry on any large
works to advantage. That this remark may be well founded, with regard to
manufactures, I admit, but that it applies with equal force to mining I deny.

There is no manufactory in England but what is carried on by constant
opposition of one manufacturer against another, and their first care is to
reduce the poor workmen as low as they possibly can. But the mining business is
carried on in a very different manner; the work is almost all done by bargains.
When a vien of ore is discovered, a miner or gang of miners are offered the
work, and the captain (i. e. the manager) and they settle the price per ton
that shall be paid by the proprietors for raising the ore. These contracts are
generally made for from one to three months, and they are, in fact, a continued
lottery between the miners and proprietors of the mines. If the vein prove
poor, then the miners make only low wages; if rich, they will make from one to
five pounds sterling per day, and that for weeks together. This is a proof,
that a mine can pay great wages, and yet give great fortunes to the owners; for
the managers never let a bargain to the miners but with a certainty of gain to
the proprietors.

The great risk in mining is in searching for the vein of ore and opening the
works. A striking proof of this was exhibited at Schuyler's mines, near Newark,
in New Jersey. Some years after those mines were known to be very productive, a
company in Bristol (in England) to whom some of the ore had been sent, obtained
a lease from the owners of the land on the opposite side of the hill, where
Schuyler was raising ore in great quantities. They sent over a number of
experienced miners and other workmen who continued to search for the vein,
until they had spent their employers L 30,000, who then gave up the pursuit.
All this time, Mr. Schuyler was making a large fortune, which shows that high
wages are not so inimical to the working of mines in any country, if you have a
good vein of ore to work upon. But I will admit that, where wages are low, you
may work a poor mine to advantage, which, in a country where they are high, you
might lose money by.

The fact just stated shows wherein the danger of working mines consists, and I
am ready to admit it is very great. But, at the Gap mines, there is no risk.
The ore, we know, is there in great abundance, and the vitriolic spring, which
is of an incalculable value, I have proved, by repeated trials, to be in those
mines, and the works are now in such a state as to require only the aid of a
machine of sufficient power to raise the water so as to keep the pits clean. A
steam engine, of moderate powers, will be capable of doing this.

But there are many objections to erecting a steam engine in this country. 1
st. The great expense of erecting one; 2d, the consumption of fuel; 3d, the
frequent repairs; and 4th, the high wages you must give to an engineer to
attend the machine. I would, therefore, recommend that a level should be
brought up through a meadow to the mines, by which a fall of from 25 to 30 feet
may be gained, and a water-wheel of 25 feet diameter will be sufficient to
works as many pumps as will clear the mines of the common, and raise the copper
water for use. There are three small streams in the mine lands, that may be
conducted into on reservoir, which would then, I am certain, give as much water
as the machine will require to keep it constantly going.

The machinery, on this plan, will be simple, and such as may be made at the
mines. Nor will it be so liable to get out of order as the works of a steam
engine. Another advantage will be, the saving of fuel, which may be estimated
at between two and three cords per day; and further, if this plan is put in
practice, the mines may be much sooner made productive; for when the level is
brought up, the bed of poor ore, before noted, will be laid dry, and may be
worked to immediate profit much sooner than if we have to wait for the erecting
of a steam engine, and at much less expense to the company. It may be proper to
note another circumstance in favor of the level, which is, that I have
well-founded reason to suppose, that, as much ore may be raised in driving it
as will pay a considerable part, if not all the expense; and, when the works
are completed, the repairs would be but trifling compared with those of a steam
engine, which would be a constant and heavy drawback upon the company's
profits. My candid opinion, therefore, is, after the most mature consideration,
in favor of the level, and a machine to be worked by water.

I will now, for the information of those persons who may be disposed to join
in forwarding the proposed plan, note the

PRESENT STATE OF THE WORKS AT THE GAP MINES.
We have built a saw-mill, made two dams, and cut a head, tail, race, etc.

There is a large log-house for the copperas works, a large lead boiler,
several ley tubs, cisterns, etc.

There are a carpenter's and smith's shops, and two log-houses for workmen.

There is a variety of tools, with pit-ropes, windlasses, buckets, etc.; also,
a complete set of boring rods, one hundred feet long.

The two main shafts have been cleaned out, which was attended with great
trouble and difficulty, as we were obliged to work night and day on account of
the water.

There is a machine to work the pumps which will be of great use in getting the
water out until a more powerful one can be completed; and there are eight tier
of pumps, two tier deep, all in good working order. About fifty tons of are
have been raised, and a great deal of other work done, but which I do not
conceive it necessary for me to describe.

I shall, therefore, only further note, that a small part of the level is
drove, and that two men are now at work upon it.



These various works have cost our company a considerable sum, as will appear
by our books, and the company who first opened the mines must, I am certain,
have expended at least thirty thousand dollars; so that the proposed company
will come in on very advantageous terms, as, by those expenses, the mines have
been put in such a state that they only now require a steam or other engine to
make them pay the profit I have stated, and with probability much greater.

I will now describe the works below:

One of the pits is seven feet square, the other is seven by five. The wide
shaft is only about sixty feet deep; the other is much deeper, the vitriolic
water rises fifteen feet from the bottom of the wide shaft, and there is forty
feet of common water over it; this I have proved many times by my boring rods.

When we had cleared the pits of earth and stones, and had the waters out, I
went down. I found the main shaft in most excellent order; the frame,
consisting of squared logs, laid close upon each other, as in building a house;
in short, I never saw such strong work, and so well secured, in any mine I ever
was in before.

I found that three drifts had been drove from the main shaft. One of them I
suppose to be more than two hundred yards, as it communicates with some shafts
that were sunk upon a small hill. Another extends only about twenty yards, at
the end of which a sump had been sunken, and I found a pump that had been
worked by hand in this sump. An old man, who worked at these mines when first
opened, told me, that he had often heard the miners say, that there was a very
rich vien of ore in the place where the hand pump was fixed, but he said, that
all the contrivances they could think of were not sufficient to keep the water
down.

Several of the old Dutchmen who remember the first opening of and are still
living near the Gap mines, have told me, that they knew for certain, that the
miners frequently met with lumps of gold; and one family has been pointed out
to me, who are now wealthy, and who, my informer said, he knew had bought ore
from the miners several times; and that this man went back to Germany, and that
it was well known, that he took some small barrels of the ore from the Gap
mines with him.

My informer also said, that the man returned, and that he soon after bought a
plantation. He also said, that he knew all his friends in Germany, that they
were all poor, and that he was certain he could not have gotten his money any
other way; that a brother of his father's (then in Germany) wrote to him to
send him some ore from the same mine that the person alluded to got his from,
and that it was very rich in gold.

I do not bring forward this common report with a view to recommend the mines;
nor do I place any dependence on the various stories that have been told me, of
gold having been got in them -- yet it is a common and well-known fact, that
some copper ores are often rich in both gold and silver. The reason with me for
mentioning it is, as proof that an ore of some value has been found in those
mines; and, should it only prove to be rich in copper, I shall not wish for any
thing more valuable. That there was a great deal of ore raised, I have not the
smallest doubt; nor that there is an immense quantity in the mines. But, be
this as it may, my dependence is, and always was, upon the strength of the
vitriolic water. When a spring of this kind is once fortunately discovered,
they have never been known to fail, and the profits arising from them are just
as certain as that two and two make four.

It is now one hundred and twenty-four years since Dr. Brown's report was made
on the copper spring in Hungary, and forty-one since Dr. Rutty's account of
those in Ireland, and both those springs still continue to run, and give great
profits to their owners. The spring at Crone Baun, in Ireland, was purchased
about eight years ago by the Liverpool company, and it was said they gave L.
20,000 sterling for them, and that, at the end of the second year, they had
cleared upwards of L. 40,000 sterling by them.

I now submit to every candid and intelligent person, if there is not, in many
of the common pursuits of man to gain property, as much risk as there will be
in working a mine under such circumstances as I have described. That mining, in
general, may be compared to a lottery I am ready to admit; but, that it may be
reduced to as great a certainty as most other trades and occupations, I must
also insist upon; and, when a fortunate discovery is made, the adventurers
acquire wealth much sooner than by any other business that I am acquainted
with. I will also admit, that many men have been ruined by mining; but this has
been owing to their own folly, by risking too much, which they have been
allured to by the prospect of great gains. But let me ask, is not this also the
case in the merchantile world? Great strokes, as they are called, are sometimes
made by great risks, but the prudent, well-informed merchant, will never
approve them. It is the same in mining. A striking instance, among many that I
could recite, was the case of lord Hopeton, of Scotland. He had spent the
greatest part of his fortune in searching for a vein of lead ore on his estate,
which some miners had reported to him they were certain they could find. But
the chase continued so long, that his lordship's purse began to complain, and
he determined to give up the pursuit; but the miners, being confident of
success, agreed to give their employer a month's work; the consequence was,
that, in the middle of the last week of the month, they came upon the vein,
which was a very rich one. Lord Hopeton died only a few years ago, and was said
to be one of the richest men in Scotland, which he made entirely by those lead
mines, and they still continue to be productive.

It may, probably, be an objection with some to my plan, that the Gap mines
have never been productive; but this, without presuming too much, may I
believe, be accounted for. The original company consisted entirely of men of
great property, but not one of them appears to have had any knowledge of the
mining business; of course, every thing was left to managers, who had no
interest further than their salary. Under such circumstances, great
undertakings have generally failed.

But the failure of those gentlemen, becomes an advantage to those who follow.
They expended a large sum, and proved the mines to be valuable; but, under such
management, had the produce been ever so great, they would, probably, have got
but little of it, and that a mine may be given up, and yet be very rich in ore,
the famous Paris mine, in the isle of Anglesey, is a proof. Several
unsuccessful attempts had been made upon this mine, before the Liverpool
company undertook it; their property is large, and most of them are well
skilled, both in the art of mining and smelting. A number of men were set to
work, and they soon discovered a large body of poor copper ore; and, it
appears, that they have raised from 6 to 7000 tons of ore every year, since the
discovery, and have obtained near 100 tons of fine copper, every year, from the
water, as I have before noted. In order to show that the above mine had been
worked before the Liverpool company got a lease from the proprietor, (lord
Uxbridge) I will mention a curious circumstance that happened respecting this
mine. A Mr. Griffith, a poor Welsh curate, in looking over some old papers
which had come into his hands by the death of his wife's grandfather, found an
old lease, that had been granted by the present lord Uxbridge's father to said
Griffith's wife's grandfather, the term of which was not expired. This
happened when the mines were giving up treasure in the most extraordinary
manner. Mr. Griffith, on this discovery, takes the lease to a Mr. Williams, an
attorney, who informs him, that he thinks his right good, as his wife was the
heir of her grandfather. Mr. Griffith makes this business known to the company
then working the mines; but they were not disposed to admit his claim. He
applies to to his friend, the attorney, again, and entered into an agreement
with him that he should have half of all he gets if he succeeds, but the curate
to be subject to no cost. The business remains in law for a considerable time;
but the company are compelled, at last, to admit the poor curate's claim; by
which, both he and the attorney have become men of large fortunes, and of some
note. Williams was elected a member of parliament seven or eight years ago; and
the curate, I have been told, thinks himself as good a man as any bifhop in
England.

Let us now consider the necessity there is for the people of America to turn
their thoughts to the subject of mining. Copper sells now for three shillings
per pound, and the avarage for six years past may be rated at two shillings and
nine pence. This high price will be attributed to the wars in Europe, and I
admit that they may have operated so as to occasion an advance. But, was there
no other reason, the rise would only have been in proportion to the rise of
insurence. In that case, the advance would only have been about four per cent.;
instead of which we find that the rise avarages about twenty per cent.; a
striking proof that there must be other causes, and, so far as relates to the
mining interest in England, (in particular) they are of a more serious nature
than the present war; for the fact is, that the copper mines in that country
have been declining in produce for the last ten years, and, since the use of
sheathing and copper bolts for ships have come into practice, the demand for
copper has been gradually increasing. The Ecton mine, in Staffordshire,
belonging to the duke of Devonshire, which, for upwards of twenty years,
yielded a profit of from twenty to even L. 30,000 sterling per annum, is
entirely worked out. The mines in Cornwall have become much less productive;
and the famous Paris mine, in the isle of Anglesey, which has given such
immense fortunes to its owners, is apparently working out very fast. Mr.
Williams, who is now the principal man in these mines, has made several tours
through different parts of Scotland within the last six years, entirely for the
purpose of discovering mines; and, it was well known, that the failure of the
Paris mine was the reason.

But, whether it is owing to a failure of the mines, or the increased demand
for copper, the effect here will be the same; and, the rapid increase of
population in the United States, must add greatly to the demand. Let us, for a
moment, look back to the situation of this country, during the revolution, both
with regard to lead and copper. The latter was frequently sold for ten
shillings per pound, hard money, and the quantity to be got, even at that
price, was far short of this demand. But I should be sorry to be understood as
looking forward to deriving any advantage to my plan from the calamities of
war. No, my hopes and prayers are, that this happy country may never experience
it again; but, as the wisdom of men have not yet discovered any mode of
settling national differences, without first having recourse to arms, it
certainly is sound policy in every nation to render itself as independent as
possible of any other. Now, as this is admitted to be sound policy among the
European nations, how much stronger does it apply to remote countries, and, in
particular, to the United States; where population has increased and is
increasing in so rapid a degree!

The origin of commerce must have been from some nation having a surplus of
sundry articles, and offering those articles in exchange to another nation for
something they had to spare; and, probably, for something the other country did
not produce. This must have been the case, for the trade by barter must, of
necessity, have taken place as soon as there was a hundred human beings in the
world, but it was a long time before metal was thought of being used as a
medium for commerce. Trade is still regulated by the same policy, from which it
originated. Ports are opened and shut as the necessity occurs. This, in
general, only relates to grain; but it is only a few years ago that there was
an embargo laid upon copper in Britain, and this may be frequently the case, as
copper is now classed among the articles of naval stores, and as the
consumption is so much increased, in that country. The rise of copper in
England has alarmed the manufacturers, and several companies have been formed
among that useful class of people, for the purpose of working mines and
smelting the ores. In Birmingham, the company, when first formed, consisted of
one hundred shares of L. 500 sterling each; and no man was allowed to have more
than one share. The reason is obvious: it was a new business with them; they
therefore adopted that prudent plan in order to prevent any man from being
ruined by risking too much, which some men are apt to do, and particularly in
mining. This undertaking shows the good sense of those who carried it into
effect. The price of copper, about twenty years ago, was as low as seven-pence
per pound sterling, and continued so for several years. It has since varied
much in price, but I do not remember that it was ever down so low as the price
noted, and it is now at sixteen-pence per pound. I have received information
that this company have been very successful, and that a company, on a similar
plan, has been since formed in the town of Sheffield. Need I remark, that, if
it was thought necessary by the manufacturers in Britain to pay attention to
mining, that there certainly must be a much greater necessity for the
manufacturers in America to do it? I will even extend the idea further, I will
say, that it is the interest of every individual (the importer excepted) in the
United States, to join in any well formed plan for working the mines of this
country; and that the United States abounds with copper, lead, and iron, is
notorious to every one; and I have found, by assay, many of the ores both of
lead and copper are rich in silver, and some of the copper ores hold gold. I
have discovered lead ores in several parts of this state that are much richer
than any I ever assayed in England. Sixty ounces of fine silver from a ton of
lead is considered very rich there, but the ore I allude to, gives two hundred
and forty ounces, which I have proved by repeated trials. Lead, in England, is
refined when only containing twenty ounces; but, in that case, the litharge
must be sold; as there is, by this process, an increase of weight equal to ten
per cent. But, if the litharge is to be reduced to lead again, a loss of near
fifteen per cent. takes place; of course it requires the lead to be richer in
silver when the refiner has not a demand for all his litharge.

Zinc ores are found in great quantities in several states. Some cobalt has
also been discovered, of good quality; but I never have been so fortunate as to
meet with any tin ore. However, I have no doubt but it will be discovered when
mines are more generally sought for. Nature has not been sparing of her
bounties, in this respect, to the United States. The Supreme Being has wisely
ordered it so, that, although he has created every thing for the use of man,
yet he cannot enjoy it without industry, and, in many cases, not without great
exertions, both of mind and body, and in none more so than what relates to the
working of mines. From these observations may we not conclude, that there is
not in society a more useful member than the miner; since all that his industry
produces is adding to the public stock? It must also be remembered, that the
plough cannot go until the miner has first produced the metal.

I have now only to beg leave to recommend my estimate and plan to the serious
consideration of my readers, and to assure them, that the views contemplated by
this scheme are fair and honorable.

Estimate of expense to complete the works at the Gap mines.
Dolls. 1797. To expense of level, 4,000 To a machine to work the pumps, 1,200
To troughs for the copper water, 2,000 To finish the copperas works, 1,000 To
incidental expenses, 500 To manager's salary, 1,000 To clerk's do. 300 Dolls.
The above work is calculated to be completed in six months.
10,000

Note, that, in the above estimate, I have made no charge for erecting the
furnaces, mills, and battery works, that will be required to smelt and refine
the copper, and work it up into bars, bolts, sheets, and bottoms for stills;
and, on that account, I have rated it at only 1 s3 per pound, so that the
copper-mud, and ore may, the first year, if the company choose, be sent to
England, as the copper would, at the price it now sells for there, be worth
from 1 s6 to 1 s8 per pound, this currency. But, as this would be attended with
considerable loss, I shall recommend that the copper-mud and ore be prepared
ready for smelting, and carefully stored, and, when the directors find, by the
monthly returns, that there is a considerable quantity prepared, I should
advise that a committee be appointed to go to the mines and take samples from
the ore and copper-mud, which should be divided into two equal parts and sealed
up; one part to be delivered to the manager of the mines, and the directors to
take the other, which should be sent to the mint to be assayed. By this mode,
the directors will know the true value of the ore and mud, and whether the
manager's report is just. They will also know by the quantity when to order the
smelting and battery works to be erected, which I would advise should be done
in the completest manner.

Estimate of the Expense and probable Profit in working the Gap mines the first
year.
1798. MINES, DR. Dollars. To expenses of first six months, 1797, 10,000 To
cash for 200 tons bar iron, 20,000 To 25 workmen at 200 dollars each, 5,000 To
two smiths at 300 dollars each, 600 To two coopers at do. do. 600 To one clerk,
800 To one manager, 2,500 To incidental expenses, 600 To one-eighth of the nett
profits to be paid to the lessees of the mines, 11,612 To balance by profit,
81,288 Dollars, 133,000 1799. MINES DR. (Second year) To 420 tons bar iron,
42,000 To 50 workmen at 200 dolls. each, 10,000 To two smiths at 300 dolls
each, 600 To two coopers at 300 dolls each, 600 To one clerk, 800 To one chief
manager, 3,000 To one assistant ditto, 1,500 To incidental expenses, 1,000 To
one-eighth part of the nett profits to be paid to the lessees of the mines,
25,062 To balance by profit, 175,438 260,000 1798. CONTRA, CR. Dollars. By 300
tons fine copper, to be precipitated from the ziment water, which I will value
at only 400 dollars per ton, 120,000 By 300 tons of copperas, at 30 dolls. per
ton, 9,000 By ten tons fine copper, precipitated from the ore, at 400 dollars
per ton, 4,000 Dollars, 133,000 1799. CONTRA, CR. By 600 tons fine copper to be
precipitated by 400 tons of iron from the ziment water, at 400 dollars per ton,
240,000 By 400 tons of copperas at 30 dolls. per ton, 12,000 By 20 tons fine
copper from the ore, precipitated by 20 tons iron, at 400 dolls. per ton, 8,000
Dollars, 260,000 By the nett proceeds the first year, 81,288 By do. do. the
second year, 175,438 Nett profit on working the mine ^0 months, 256,726

N. B. These extraordinary profits are estimated from the statements of bishop
Watson, (see page 13) on the European vitriolic water, and the waters of the
Gap mines are much stronger. See Dr. Rutty's report, p. 8.

The following plan, for conducting the copper mine-works, is submitted, to the
consideration of those gentlemen who wish to promote that undertaking.
I. The capital to be -- 50,000 dolls.

II. To be divided into shares of one hundred dollars each, paid by
instalments, and lodged in a bank.

III. Seven, or more, directors, and one secretary, to be chosen annually by
the company.

IV. The directors to frame a code of laws by which the company are to be
governed.

V. The directors to appoint the manager of the mine-works, and clerks,
annually.

VI. The manager to transmit a monthly return to the directors, on the annexed
plan.

VII. The directors to meet once a month, to transact the business of the
company.

VIII. The directors and secretary to be allowed a compensation for their
trouble.

IX. Workmen, and bills against the mines, to be paid off the last week in each
month.

X. The directors to make a dividend of the profits every six months.

XI. A store to be kept at the mines, to supply the workmen. I do not recommend
this as an object of profit, but to prevent the men from losing their time, as
there are no stores nearer than five miles.



If the above plan is carefully attended to, the directors will always know
what is doing at the mines, and also, what profit they are making for the
company.

The proposer of the preceding plan, will attend at No. 126, South
Second-street, to receive the names of such gentlemen as wish to forward this
work, but no money will be required to be advanced, until the company is
organized and directors appointed. He will then lay before them his terms and
title to the Gap mines, also an estimate, in which, he will show that the
company may obtain proofs of the practicability of his scheme, and of the value
of those mines, by an advance of only ten dollars on each share.

(MONTHLY RETURN.)
DATE. Miners. Dressers. Smelters. Laborers. Mechanics. Ore. Mud. Copper.
Sulphur. Copperas Ton cwt. Ton cwt. Ton cwt. Ton cwt. Ton cwt. Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday,

(GENERAL STATEMENT.)
Workmen. (...) Product Quantity Value Dolls. Ct^. Ton cwt. Dollars. Cents.
Miners, Ore. Dressers, Mud. Smelters, Copper. Laborers, Sulphur. Mechanics,
Copperas. Sundries,

(BALANCE ACCOUNT.)
Gap Mines, Dr. Contra Cr. 1797. 1797. Expenses at mines from Jan. 1st to Feb.
1st, Product of mines from Jan. 1st to Feb. 1st, Balance by profit, Dolls.
Dolls. Balance in favor of mines the first month,


