The AUTHOR Relating the HISTORY of his TRAVELS to his Friend.


A HISTORY OF A VOYAGE TO THE COAST OF AFRICA, AND Travels into the Interior of
that Country; CONTAINING Particular descriptions of the Climate and
Inhabitants, and interesting particulars concerning the SLAVE TRADE.

BY JOSEPH HAWKINS. OF NEW YORK, Who has since become Blind; and for whose
benefit it is now published by his Friends.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, BY S. CUSTICK, and CO. 1797.

INTRODUCTION.
THE spirit of adventure which has increased in proportion with the advancement
of commerce, and of which it is perhaps a parent; has contributed much within
the last hundred years, in expanding the human mind, and extending the bonds
which formerly attached a society only, round the whole universe and to each
individual of the human species.

To the aspiring genius of a Columbus we owe our national existence. It is to
him the civilized world must bow with reverence, when the gold and silver of
the New World, together with the immense sources of improvement in natural
history, and other sciences, are laid open to their acquisition by this
discovery. It is to him that commerce owes its second and more vigorous birth,
and the art of navigation that perfection to which it has now arrived; through
this art the remotest nations are united in knowledge, manners, and property,
more intimately than the inhabitants of two provinces of one nation were in the
fifteenth century.

Under what immense obligations are the sciences laid by the republics of Genoa
and Venice, who gave to mankind the discoverer of America and the commerce of
the Indies. Portugal and Spain partake of the glory which belongs to those
mighty enterprises, in being the nations which opened the bosom of the New
Indies, and intrepidly forced a new passage to the Old, round the boisterous
cape of Africa. England, in her gallant Raleigh, Holland, in her scientific
Dampier, and France in a crowd of enterprising navigators, have had the honor
of carrying the sailing art to its present state of excellence.

Happy had it been for the Aborigines of the New World, and of many uncivilized
nations of the Old, had philanthropy followed where science daringly trod, or
had the principles of a humane philosophy kept pace with the intrepidity of
heroic adventure.

But it seems to be the destiny of mankind to arrive at perfection in the
sciences by the slow progression of ages only, and that it is given to the
present period to obtain by experience the desired principles of knowledge,
when men are yet incapable of duly estimating their value, or delay till it is
almost too late to convert them to a proper and immediate use.

Useful lessons are however taught by that species of experience which is
derived from the history of nations and individuals. For the travels of men,
who have visited remote countries and people, whether actuated by the spirit of
curiosity or gain, have signally contributed to the edification of the world at
large, and to the interest of the philosopher, the merchant, and the lover of
adventure.

It is not presumed, however, that in the present work, such great advantages
as have already been derived from the writings of distinguished travelers,
should be extended in an eminent degree; far from it; its claims are but the
humble share of mediocrity; the object and course of travel, which it
describes, is not susceptible of extraordinary novelty, nor of scientific
research; some degree of both, however, we may venture to promise. Besides, the
circumstances under which the voyage was taken, and particularly the condition
of total blindness to which the Author was reduced at the conclusion of it, may
readily be considered as a preventative to the general perfection which the
work would probably possess, if dictated under more favorable and happy
circumstances.

The liberal minded citizens of America, to whom this work is dedicated, will
freely make the few allowances expected in this part of its character. They, we
are convinced, will not be deficient in their characteristic generosity, when
the circumstances of the publication are considered; for little did the Author
suspect, when he made the notes from which this is compiled, that want of
support should ever compel him to submit his remarks to the criticism of the
world.

The style and form of the compilation, with respect to words and expressions,
will likewise perhaps require to be commented on: but the same liberal spirit
of the candid reader will frame an excuse in his mind at any part exposed to
the shafts of criticism; and kindly omit his remarks, when he shall learn that
the work is brought forward by A STUDENT.

A HISTORY, etc. etc.
READERS of Travels like travelers are rarely satisfied, till they know some
particulars of those with whom they are about to embark, in pursuit of
advantage or pleasure: without this knowledge, some dissatisfaction, or doubt,
will frequently take place in their minds. In this view therefore it is that I
think proper to introduce a few particulars concerning myself, which, on any
other occasion, would neither be sufficiently important or interesting to merit
relation: but as the greater part of young men are directed through life more
by accident than choice, and many of their fortunes and misfortunes to be
placed rather at the door of chance than predisposition; so, it will be useful
on this occasion, to mark the course which led me to the Voyage and Travels
which I am about to relate, in order that the reader may carry the remembrance
of my circumstances and situation in life, and the part I acted in some
transactions which I have to describe; that I am not an adventurer of pleasure
nor of choice, but one who started from the humble walks of private life in
search of a competence, and launched into the ocean of the world with no other
pilot than necessity, or other chart than that of a youthful knowledge of the
world, destitute of every stock but that of industry and an active disposition.

My Father's family, although not popular in point of property, were respected
for their industry and probity, in the town of Kingsbury, Washington County,
state of New York, where I was born in 1772. Arrived at the age of eighteen,
bred up with a disposition to an active life in common with my countrymen, I
was encouraged to commence a mercantile pursuit at the Town of Alsburgh, in the
state of Vermont; where having resided, and witnessed the wildly rude and
romantic beauties, that surrounded Lake Champlain, at the end of fourteen
months I found my hopes of success in business disappointed, and that I must
necessarily seek some new pursuit.

Hearing it frequently said that a young man of a moderate education and
industrious habits, with a good recommendation, would be sure of an eligible
and constant employment in the southern states, after advising with my friends
and making the necessary preparations, I determined to proceed for Charleston,
South Carolina. I set out for Boston on horseback, where I arrived without any
very interesting adventure, and soon obtained a passage by sea for Charleston,
where I arrived in 20 days after leaving Boston Harbor, heartily sick of my
first sea voyage -- as I called it.

My circumstances and prospects on arriving in Charleston by no means equalled
my wants or expectations. Disappointed hopes, and the still predominating turn
of my disposition, prompted me to new pursuits, urged on by the more potent
stimulus of necessity, and my efforts were redoubled, but without success.
While in this unsettled state, an offer was made me of a situation on board a
Guinea Trader; the ship had been delayed through the want of a supercargo. I
was sufficiently qualified, and happy did I consider myself in obtaining a
situation reputable in its nature and highly profitable in prospect.

We sailed from Charleston the 1st of Dec. 1793, on board the ship Charleston,
J. Connelly master, burden 400 Tons; and after a passage partly boisterous,
and frequently becalmed for several days, we made the isles of Delos on the
17th January 1794.

These islands are nine in number, and afford harbors and safe anchorage in
deep water for ships of any burden; they are six leagues from the main land of
Africa, in 12 degrees. 30 min. south lat. they are inhabited by French and English
factors, who find their account in living on those islands in preference to the
main, particularly from the circumstances of accommodation for their ships,
which lie here with the greatest safety in all weathers, and that their slaves
cannot easily escape. The slaves are in those islands suffered to go at large,
without chains, contrary to the customs on the continent. The surface of the
islands is barren and rocky, but there is abundance of fine fresh water; and
provisions are procured with facility.

From the factors here we learned that the Ebo and Golo Kings had been at war,
the latter of whom having been defeated, and a great part of his army had
fallen into the hands of the conqueror, they therefore advised us to proceed
for the Reyo-pongo river, about 25 leagues south westward, and from thence the
access to the Ebo nation would be easily secured, by a passage up that river
and from thence by land, about three hundred miles from the mouth of this
river; they furnished us with further directions, and assured us of a certain
and good trade.

Agreeably to this information, we provided ourselves with such necessaries as
the factors could afford us, and proceeded for the Reyo-pongo, which we made on
the 5th of February, and after choosing a proper situation, came to anchor in a
handsome harbor within the northern bank, three leagues from the mouth of the
river, close to the shore, in view of a luxuriant country, low, and thinly
covered with scattered woods and picturesque collections of reed. The opposite
side of the river appearing in perspective, more bold and rising in proportion
to its distance.

The country bore the appearance of being frequently overflowed, which we
afterward learned to be the case; the banks were however covered with the most
exuberant richness, the air was not intensely hot, the clearness of the sky
charming, and the nights delightfully serene and tranquil.

The river abounds with fish, of which we caught several, different in form
from any that I had ever seen; and the crocodiles from numbers and size may be
considered as in their native empire when in the Reyo-pongo; here the number of
beautiful islands formed by the windings and divisions of the river into
branches afford them a secure and peaceful retreat.

The tree most prominent and conspicuous is the palm of various species, but
particularly one which I understood to be peculiar to Africa, which I shall
have occasion subseqently to describe, with a variety of uses to which it is
converted, and which renders its value inestimable to the natives.

On the 6th February we were visited by numbers of the natives, who offered to
barter with us fruit and ivory for our hardwares; but finding after we had
exchanged a few articles, that they belonged to a nation which had been before
represented to us as thinly inhabited, and that we could not accommodate
ourselves here as we wished, we made use of them to obtain information
concerning the country of the Ebo king. We fortunately sound an interpreter
acquainted with that country and the trade, him we engaged, and an expedition
was immediately determined upon by the captain.

After some consultation, no person could be found so suitable for the journey
as myself, and the captain proposed it to me. On viewing the dangers and
difficulties that must be necessarily attendant on a journey of this kind; in
which I was ignorant of the country, and its languages, and without any
knowledge of the duties of the charge, but such as might be derived from
instructions that could not be expected to apply in all cases that might occur,
I was averse to the attempt, and declined in engaging in it; my reasons were
not deemed satisfactory by the captain, whose orders I must obey, and after
obtaining as full an account as the poor negro interpreter could afford me, I
was obliged to provide the necessaries for the journey, arranged my affairs on
board the ship, and prepared for the expedition.

An enterprise so hazardous, will naturally be conceived as undertaken with
considerable anxiety and apprehension. I was not destitute of resolution, nor
unused to hazardous expeditions; and a habit of perseverance acquired on the
borders of the extensive American Lakes, and on the sides of the Green
Mountains, could not be inauspicious to an adventurer so young, and much
possessed of the sanguine confidence peculiar to that period of life: -- I had
but barely entered on the course of a journey, in which the flattering
allurements of profit were too potent to be conquered by sears or forebodings!

I now satisfied myself of the knowledge of my guide, of his acquaintance with
the languages of the people, and with the course of the route which we were to
pursue; and, having taken precautions to cultivate a kind understanding between
my future fellow-traveller and companion, I provided myself with a stock of
ammunition for sport and defense, with a case of pistols in my belt, a fusil on
my shoulder, and a hanger by my side; my friend Hurdee I furnished with a good
fowling piece, a sword, a handsome bow and arrows, purchased in the
neighboring village, some powder, shot, flints, trinkets, and a quantity of
rum. With these we landed and set out on the morning of the fourth of February,
accompanied by a crood of the natives, men, women and children, who appeared
anxious to do us every sort of kindness, and aid us by their good offices. They
assisted us in plucking fruit and passing over the creeks and gulleys across
which this days route lay. They left us, however, about two hours before noon,
and we retired to the covert to avoid the heat of the sun, and to partake of
refreshment for the first time in this expedition.

About 4 o'clock, P. M. we continued our journey nearly S. E. keeping a distant
chain of mountains that appeared like a mist, inclining to our left. The river
lay before us, extending through a tract of country variegated with clusters of
trees, plains, and spacious swamps, covered with lofty and clustering reeds, or
canes. Here we could mark on the sides of the rivulet the traces of the
voracious crocodile, which finds in these recesses a secure retreat. Here,
likewise, the windings of poisonous serpents, of which Africa affords such
multitplied variety, are frequently observed. In the course of this evening my
heart frequently palpitated with alarm, and my apprehensions figured the wide
jaws of the dreadful animal, or the poisoned tooth about to strike me, and
finish, by a miserable death, my journey and my cares. My fellow traveller was
not destitute of vivacity, and being a stranger to fear from this quarter, took
occasion, when he saw me thoughtful as we walked along, to call my mind into
action by explaining some of the African terms, which in the end proved of
great utility.

After about two hours march, we reached a deep ravine; through this it was
necessary to pass, in order to gain the hills which we had to cross the ensuing
day, and at the foot of which we were to take our repose for the night. The
side upon which we stood was marshy, and that opposite to us shaggy, and
covered with thick irregular underwood. We had been searching for a place
convenient to ford, the current appearing too rapid, and too deep, to venture
across with perfect confidence, when, as I was lost in a momentary reflection,
my companion suddenly roared out that there was a crocodile -- I had scarcely
power to move: a sudden rustling in the reeds, with a loud plunge in the water,
left me totally stupefied: Hurdec had pursued the animal and caused his
plunging into the water, and now returning, roused me from my terror by
immoderate laughter. I judged it prudent, however, to conceal as much as
possible my embarrassment, acknowledging that I was in a slight degree alarmed.
We crossed the creek in a place that was fordable, and speedily ascended the
sloping side of the opposite bank, which as we ascended thickened with charming
timber, and led to a long and winding range of beautiful hills, at the feet of
which we could trace the river gradually narrowing to the eye, and receiving
the tribute of a thousand little streams that flowed from the woods, and
declivities that presented themselves in wild but simple grandeur, far as the
sight could reach in an eastwardly direction. -- The approach of night, and the
sun setting behind us, threw an imposing shade over this landscape that is not
capable of description.

We concluded to form our encampment in one of the valleys, and accordingly
proceeded to light a fire, and for the first time guard against the beasts of
prey, the traces of whose feet I marked with lively apprehension in the course
of the day, and to keep clear of the monkeys that I learned to expect in great
numbers, from the accounts my guide had already given me.

We chose a situation somewhat detached from the thickets beneath the rich and
lofty palm tree, and having collected wood sufficient to sustain large fires
during the night, we dressed our plain but delicious repast, composed ourselves
to rest, and passed a tolerably easy night, free from every real danger,
although I was still in some fear of the wild beasts.

Our distance from the villages that we had left I calculated, to be not more
than sixteen miles, having pursued with little deviation the irregular course
of the river. To this we were compelled, in order to avoid the obstructions to
which we might have been subjected by the inhabitants who occasionally reside,
at this season of the year, contiguous to the opposite bank of the river. To
their proximity, Hurdee informed me we might attribute the composure of the
night, and my being released from the terrific howlings of wild beasts.

The opening of the morning was the signal for our rising. Having dressed our
necessary provisions of goats flesh over night, we refreshed as appetite
required, and after bathing in an adjacent rivulet, we proceeded on our
journey. After two hours travel along the skirt of an irregular hill, we
discovered at some distance, several of the natives scattered apart with bows
and arrows: these Hurdee informed me were in pursuit of game. We endeavored to
gain the covert of the wood, but they had also perceived us, and had formed
into two parties, one of which presented themselves in our way, and appeared
disposed to dispute our passage through the path into which we had turned. They
stood for a considerable time with marks of surprise, but without the least
appearance of violent intentions. In the mean time, the other party had
approached us at some distance behind, where they also stood fixed with
admiration.

My unacquaintance with the temper of the people, and judging of their ferocity
by circumstances that belonged to the severe character of the savages of the
American Lakes, I suggested to my companion my fears of their intentions being
hostile: he made answer they were friends, and left me little opportunity for
further consideration, when he advanced toward them in a slow pace; I followed
him in the same manner.

When we had reached the party in front within about twenty paces, Hurdee spoke
to them in their own language; they appeared much pleased, and approached us
without further reserve; the second party soon after joined us likewise.

My companion informed them of the proposed extent of our journey; they
expressed much surprise at our undertaking a journey of such length, with so
few in number, and through countries thickly infested by beasts of prey; this
latter part of their information, however, was concealed from me at that time.
A party of these negroes proposed to accompany us part of our route, to which
we assented, and the whole company partook of refreshment about noon. At 4
o'clock in the evening, as we ascended a hill marked by beaten pathways, the
serenity of the sky and the stillness of the air caused me to notice the
violent agitation of a tree at some distance before us, on the skirt of a shady
cluster: I pointed it out to the guide, and to the negroes; they drew me out of
the path into a more open one, and I learned the following particulars of a
large snake, whose beauteous folds but cumbrous form, I could discern upon
approaching it at a safe distance.

This species of snake grows to the length of 24 feet, being in diameter from
six to eight inches; its back is of a deep green, intermingled with luminous
colors, and its belly of a lighter shade; its motions are slow, therefore not
dangerous if discovered in time by the traveller. It seizes its prey by
stratagem, climbing lofty trees close to the pathways of men and cattle: these
it attacks by winding its tail round the trunk of the tree, and letting its
fore folds fall on the object it means to destroy; after crushing it to death
in the instant of surprise, it devours its victim at leisure. The negroes
complained of some recent mischief committed in that neighborhood, and Hurdee
suggested that the destruction of this snake with our fire arms would be at
once easy to us, and highly agreeable to our good natured fellow-travellers.

We accordingly loaded our guns with two balls each, and having taken a
convenient position so as to fire together, we perceived from the noise, and
the blood flowing down the trunk of the tree, that it was severely wounded. It
presently made a most hideous noise, and vented its rage on the branches of the
tree, which having torn in various directions, gave us a more clear view of his
violent struggles

I was not perfectly satisfied as to our safety from its rage, and prepared to
complete its destruction by another discharge. The negroes who had seen with
astonishment the effect of our arms, had retired to some distance behind us; we
fired a second time, and the monster fell gasping to the ground, where it lay a
few minutes apparently dying; but suddenly collecting the vigor of desparation
and torture, threw itself into various forms; now it collected itself, blood
flowing from its wounds, in knots and circles, crushing and breaking the young
saplings that that grew within his circuit; exhausted by its struggles and the
loss of blood, the negroes approached and helped to complete the catastrophe
with their arrows; Hurdee employed his hanger, and assisted in cutting off such
parts of the animal as they chose, which they did with exultation: they each
took such parts as suited them, and night approaching, we were constrained to
seek a convenient place of rest. Our fellow travelers resolved to spend the
night with us, which gave me considerable pleasure. We encamped, and fires were
kindled in a lovely valley. The negroes fell to dressing their snake with great
glee, and feasted heartily on its slices and rice cake; while I preferred some
dried ship beef, which from prejudice I chose rather than their high flavoured
luxurious banquet.

Free from the anxieties of the previous night, and fatigued by the labor and
exertions of the day, I lay down in the midst of them, and slept undisturbed by
noise or care till the break of day, when I awoke refreshed and cheerful.

The advantage and security derived from our innocent and voluntary fellow
travelers, rendered it painful to me to part with them; I signified my wish
that they would accompany us farther; they expressed some reluctance, but the
promise of a few trinkets which I showed them prevailed, and these children of
nature, agreed to accompany us further on our journey, to the foot of certain
mountains which they called Kailoo.

After bathing, a rule which I resolved to pursue every day when the contiguity
of water afforded me an opportunity, and which I pursued thenceforward; we
breakfasted on our usual simple fare, and set forward.

After a journey direct E. of about fifteen miles, over a beautiful champain
country, we made the banks of the river Dundy, running from the N. E. which
being too rapid and deep to ford, we were obliged to bend our course four miles
along the bank; but the heat of the day growing irksome, we took to the covert
and resolved to construct a raft; we procured timber, and having secured them
by ropes of withy and vine, we crossed at a convenient bending, and set
ourselves over by poles, assisted with great address by our fellow travelers,
with whom we were now become completely familiar.

This river displayed an abundance of various fish, of which our negroes caught
several with peculiar ingenuity for our evening's repast; and after a march of
four hours we gained a rising ground, on the side of which we determined to
spend the night.

The surrounding country in the neighborhood of this river is truly luxuriant;
the soil is soft and loamy, producing a variety of elegant flowering shrubs,
and fruit trees; among which are the wild orange and limes, with tufts of the
rich bannana and pine apple. We provided ourselves with as much as we could
carry of these rich stores, understanding that our next day's route would be
more irksome and fatiguing.

We rose early, and as usual comfortably refreshed; my health was never better
than I had hitherto experienced it in this expedition, and I seemed to feel an
agility of mind and body that was superior both to danger and fatigue.

The accustomed formalities of the broiled and roasted, with the morning
dessert and the simple beverage, being dispatched, we set forward, with a party
of our friendly Africans in front. We had ascended a sloping ground, and wished
to reach by a less-circuitous route the elevated country which our little party
in advance had gained, where we saw and heard them shouting for us to hasten,
as we understood it. We found much difficulty to form a new path, but at length
succeeded, and were exceedingly alarmed to find a youth of about seventeen
bewailing loudly: his father, a robust middle aged* cheerful man, had been
bitten by a large snake which they call the Hoopel Koppel; the animal's head
had been cut off by the boy, and the body lay writhing at his feet, while he
vented his complaints and the bitterness of his resentments, in language that I
could not comprehend otherwise than by the vehemence of his actions, and by his
emphasis. Hurdee acquainted me with the particulars of the honest boy's
imprecations; and I hastened to the old man, whom I found in the most tranquil
manner applying medicine to the wound, which was on the exterior of his left
thigh. The antidote to this most poisonous of snakes is a simple root, which
the Africans always carry about them; they chew it to the consistence of a soft
pulp, and apply it like a poultice to the wound; removing it continually as the
poison discolours the application, until the chewed root remains of its
original color, when they finish the operation by washing the part affected in
clean water, and applying a large portion of the root, which they fasten with a
bandage over the wound, where it remain till the cure is effected. We
necessarily halted till the process was completed, and as it was tedious, were
constrained to prepare for dressing our midday meal earlier than usual.

The animal that had been thus the cause of our delay measured nine feet
without the head, which was flat and somewhat resembling the fore part of the
sole fish, or black flounder; the tongue forked; the body thick; the back of a
dirty yellow and brown, very like the rattlesnake The bite is not always
curable, to which cause must be attributed the grief of the boy; his father,
however, appeared no wise disconcerted, and we had the pleasure to see the
application come from the wound without the least appearance of poison, after
about three hours application. The attention of these innocent people to their
wounded brother, their activity and kindness in procuring the antidote and
encouraging him not fear, was extremely impressive, and such as is not always
to be seen among more polished people.

I examined the head of this snake, and the Africans pointed to me the cavities
in which he conceals his venom of death. It is contained in a sack, at the
roots of the two teeth answering to the canine teeth; the upper and lower jaws,
are likewise armed with each a smaller row of teeth, used as I suppose for
mastication only. The Africans describe the effects of this poison as extremely
sudden and dreadful, if the antidote is not immediately at hand: in this case,
the body is said to swell to an uncommon bulk, with excruciating torture: the
swelling continues till the body bursts, when death follows and closes the
scene.

We had a difficult journey for the next day, it was therefore agreed to gain
the eastern side of the hill, or rather mountain, upon which we now were, and
having set out about 3 o'clock, we reached the summit by an easy march, through
a broken and unequal piece of ground; and at about 7 o'clock, being much
fatigued, we reached an agreeable situation, where we proposed to rest for the
night.

The customary preparations of collecting wood for fire, and arranging our
rations of food, were scarcely made, when one of the Africans signified with
some alarm that he saw a fire at some distance. I had seen a small blaze
myself, a few minutes before; but felt no sense of alarm at it, more than I
should at any other ordinary occurrence, from being unacquainted with the
danger. The distance might be about three leagues, and it was on a mountain
from which we were separated by a deep and gloomy valley; I found that Hurdee
as well as my other companions were extremely uneasy, and signified that it
would be preferable to remove, to a situation where we should be be covered
from the danger of our fire's being seen at a distance. We accordingly bent our
course to the southward round the contiguous hill; and after a march of about a
mile and a half, found a convenient shelter under a lofty cliff of rocks, where
we contrived to dress some venison, caught the preceding day by one of our
Africans, in a snare that he had set for the purpose. We passed the night to a
later hour than usual, in conversation with our companions, who were to part
with us, on their return, in the morning. We slept till the usual hour the next
morning without alarm. The distance from the water we found to be a very severe
inconvenience; so we hastened our dry repast, and having distributed, as I
proposed, a variety of trinkets among our good natured friends, we saw the old
man and his son depart in perfect health and spirits, and with some evidences
of regret at our separation, a sentiment which came home to my bosom with new
and redoubled sensibility.

It was vain to repine, and resolution to persevere and fortitude to bear, were
now the only feelings that could be of use to us. I determined to brave every
apprehension -- and in a critical time, for we were now on the confines of a
nation of whose pacific disposition my guide suggested some fears; a matter the
more alarming to me, as it was not his usual character hitherto to betray
symptoms of alarm.

We pursued our journey, keeping the deepest covert of the woods, occasionally
ascending every prominent ground that could afford a prospect of the country
before us. This day for the first time I saw a Panther; he was discovered by
Hurdee; he came frequently in sight, but hung down his head and retired into
some neighboring thicket whenever we turned round to look at him. My guide,
simply enough, said that the beast was terrified at seeing a white man, and to
this cause it was he attributed his retiring, when I turned round. Such,
however, was the fact; for when I kept advancing and Hurdee remained a few
paces behind, the animal seemed to redouble his pace forward till I turned
round, and he then retreated with equal precipitation.

My companion suggested a fear that he might climb a tree and spring upon us,
as he said it was a common practice with those animals; and being obliged still
to travel through the woods to avoid discovery by the natives, it was no less
dangerous for us to fire our guns. Hurdee feared capture, as he said he should
certainly be destroyed, if taken, and that I should be kept at least a
considerable time a captive, perhaps till ransomed. Night approaching with this
choice of difficulties, we resolved to retire into a thick recess, and there
keep large fires burning all night; to sleep and watch by turns.

Having chosen our lodgment and kindled our fires we supped as usual; I
determined to keep the first watch; Hurdee had lain down to sleep, and I was
parading close to the fire, when Hurdee, who had heard the sound of steps on
the ground suddenly started up and ran to his gun: I directed him not to fire
but at my order, and should I fire, not to discharge his piece, till I should
have loaded. We could hear the trampling of a soft foot, and the rustling of
the bushes close on our left, but could not determine whether it proceeded from
man or beast. We were soon satisfied however that it was our morning visitor,
whom we could see crossing and recrossing an opening in our front where the
fire was low: we therefore renewed our fire, and threw several pieces of the
lighting wood in the track of the animal, who we found retreated snorting, and
growling. Finding ourselves thus successful, we kept our fires alternately well
lighted, and obtained a troubled sleep, but sufficient for a moderate
refreshment.

In the morning we pursued our route rather to the eastward, the mountain side
bending off in that direction. The morning sun shined extremely hot through the
thickets, and we could discern a variety of wild animals, such as I had never
seen before; the monkeys were very numerous, and several leopards beautifully
spotted, passed us affrighted, mostly in pairs.

About noon we had gained higher ground, the woods grew thinner, and we had an
occasional prospect of an open, but mountainous tract of country, extremely
romantic, but dreary in the distant appearance. We loittered through the heat
of the day in a shady ravine or glen, worn through rocks and sands by streams
from springs in the bosom of the mountain; here we enjoyed the pleasure of
bathing, and an agreeable repast of wild fruits.

The course that we had hitherto pursued was tedious, and though not destitute
of pleasures was fatiguing and attended with danger. We had calculated the
distance we had come as well as we could, and concluded that we must be not far
from the little Congo river; we determined to follow the course of the ravine,
to the place into which the water discharges itself; often were we on the verge
of retracing the path we had come up to the summit, the fatigue was so
excessive, and the heat reflected from the rocks and a chalky loam on the sides
of the ravine became intolerable; it became necessary to take up our nights
rest in this glen, where we rested well but with our fires as usual.

Early in the morning we pursued our route downwards: the descent became less
steep, and the water accumulating, gradually formed a deep rivulet. About 10
o'clock, we had the satisfaction of seeing the winding of a beautiful little
river, flowing with gentleness along the skirts of the hills. We concluded it
must fall into the Congo, and accordingly resolved to construct a raft to
cross. After some labor we effected our purpose, and gained the opposite bank
about eight miles down. Here we could perceive the track of human feet: we, in
consequence, determined to change our course directly S. E. though the
champaign lands, and to keep the shade, which was but light, consisting of
trees thinly scattered and of slender growth, interspersed with a tree like the
wild date, and the palm tree in great variety. About 5 o'clock, when we had
walked about an hour and a half after dinner, we came unexpectedly upon a town
of the natives. The huts stood scattered irregularly in our front, and the
appearance of fallow land stretched off contiguous to them on the right and
rear. Fortunately, the village was deserted, but we could observe on an open
elevation the smoke of domestic fires at the dusk of evening, a considerable
way to the eastward. We were obliged once more, with reluctance, to seek the
woods to the southward of us; and encamped that night amid the horrors of the
desert, the roaring of the tiger, and other beasts that haunt the neighborhood
of the innocent savage.

We slept none this night! -- Its horrors are still awake in my memory, and I
shudder when I recall them! -- Our fires appeared scarcely sufficient for our
protection. We heard the step of the heavy breathing tiger, his horrid, broken,
panting aspiration: this, with the thrilling screams of the jackall, the yell
of the wild dog, and the rustling of the leaves and branches, on several sides,
kept us in a state of terror that cannot be conceived, but by those have
experienced such situations, and seen the glaring eyes of the most ferocious
animals rolling within a few paces, and ready to pounce upon and tear the
trembling victim to a thousand pieces.

Thinking it best, when day joyfully broke in upon us, to quit this
neighborhood, where the vacated village already pointed out a warning that we
had neglected, of the dangerous course we were pursuing; we determined to
prefer the risque of exposure to our own species, than to the monsters of the
wood, and again bent our course to the eastward. About 11 o'clock, we were
surprised by two of the natives, armed with bows and arrows, apparently
hunting. A half scream expressed the first emotions of their surprise; our
confusion was no less extreme, perhaps it was more so. They retired softly to
some distance, and immediately ran away with infinite speed, and we soon lost
sight of them.

My perturbation may be conceived. I revolved past, present, and future, with
the rapid glance of regret and apprehension: -- Hurdee, too, was lost in
reflection; but soon collected himself, and endeavored to cheer me. We
lamented that we had not kept the margin of the great river, where our dangers
could not have been greater than they now were; and that our journey could not
be many days longer. I saw the absurdity of this after-wisdom; but it tended to
rouse me. Hurdee could not distinguish of what nation they were: he supposed
they might be of the Ebo country, but they also resembled natives of the Galla,
from which we could not be very distant. If they were of the former, we might
deem ourselves secure; if the latter, there was some danger: we concluded it to
be safest to get out of their way. Hurdee suggested that their surprise was
principally excited by the sight of a white man; and that curiousity, as well
as other motives, might tempt them to follow us with a large body of men. We
made for the adjacent hills, and as we ascended them, could observe a numerous
body of the natives pursuing the course we had taken: we accordingly changed
our course from the S. E. to the N. E. and rather ran than walked.

We had to cross a mountain, and after laboring to its summit, we became
exposed from the want of cover, there being little else of vegetation but a
light herbage and brush wood. We viewed them from an elevated ground as they
crossed open patches, and then crept on our hands and knees, and crouched
behind clusters of the thicket to prevent discovery.

From the different views we had of them, we estimated them at about three
hundred in number: they were armed with clubs, lances, bows and arrows, and
kept their usual order of battle in a very compact body. Hurdee now seemed
satisfied that they were of the Galla nation, and he was certain we must be the
objects of their pursuit.

We resolved to keep them in view, and watch till they should encamp, when we
might take advantage of the night to countermarch them: we did so, and embraced
the cover of the night to return to our former course direct to the eastward.

This whole night we traveled without ceasing, under constant alarm from the
roaring of wild beasts. The night was excessive dark, and we could not discern
any objects at a great distance. I drew the charge from one of my pistols, and
when we heard a rustling among the bushes near us, burned priming, as the only
expedient we could devise beside firing shot, which we would not do, lest we
should alarm our pursuers.

About day break my companion trod upon a small green snake, which bit his
right leg close to the outer ankle. I was much alarmed; but he very coolly took
some of the root out of his pouch, and chewing it as the good old African had
before done; the juice of the root was white like milk, but on applying it to
the wound it changed to a yellow, disagreeable color: having repeatedly
applied it, until the juice was no longer discolored, he tied a bandage round
it, and we pursued our route, happy that he had escaped so well.

This root I have repeatedly seen; but from a neglect of concerns less
important for the time, I unfortunately did not bring it with me. The loss of
my sight would prevent me from knowing it, should it be common in our country;
which I think probable, as the American Indians say they possess the knowledge
of a similar powerful antidote. This root appears to me as acting upon the
poison by decomposing it by some peculiar quality of its own juice. It is
certain that the poison does not remain in the wound; and from the color of
the juice being changed, I suppose it must be by a decomposition of the
constituent parts; for a change in its properties and appearance is certainly
effected A discovery was made a few years ago in the East Indies, by a
physician, that the EAU DE LUCE, commonly used as a restorative, by persons of
a nervous habit, is a sovereign antidote to the poison of the most venomous
reptile. A variety of cases, in which it was tried and found to baffle the
poison of the Couvre Capelle of India, and that of the deadly brown adder, have
been published in the Asiatic Researches. A table spoonful has been found
sufficient: it is taken internally and applied externally with as little loss
of time as possible. This, it is probable, acted by the volat. alk. which is
its chief ingredient, neutralizing the virulence of the poison. -- Might not
the vegetable alkaline principle exist in the juice of our antidote above in a
state either detached or easily separable, so as to neutralize the matter of
poison in a similar manner? This is merely conjecture, but may be well worthy
the further attention of medical men; for if found just, nothing more will be
found necessary to cure the bite of a snake, than the application of a little
pot-ash.
.

Hunger, which we had disregarded in the moments of terror, now came on with
the utmost force; and our dried beef and other provisions growing short, it was
necessary that we should seek for some fresh provisions. We were not
sufficiently remote from the Galla men to trust to our fire arms; but Hurdee
being expert with his bow and arrows, we resolved to use them and spare our
powder and shot.

He accordingly let fly at the first animal we met, and it fell, we could find
no wound but a slight one in the leg. We collected wood, made a fire, and were
about to dress our prey, when lo! it disappeared. We were about to go in search
of some other animal, when we found it rustling in the bushes, and soon retook
it. In shape and color it resembled the Opossum, except that it had no pouch
or false belly; the hair also was much shorter -- However, when dressed, it
tasted deliciously; and after breakfast, for the first time, we lay down to
sleep.

We awoke about 10 o'clock, tolerably refreshed; and having yet to pass a
mountain which we hoped would be the last, we judged it prudent to keep on the
verge of the woods, between that and the top of the ascent. About 4 o'clock we
discovered fires at a distance, and vestiges of population in the pathways
which intersected each other, and appeared newly trodden. The appearances of
population to the northward were very distinguishable; and therefore,
apprehending that we approached some of those numerous nations, that constantly
inhabit the luxurious countries in the neighborhood of the Congo River near
its sources, and the charming valleys at the feet of the Galla mountains on the
south and eastern sides; we determined to be circumspect, and proceed by easy
journies to avoid falling into the hands of either of them.

Night was approaching fast, we had descended the mountain toward the E.
somewhat southwardly, and the sun was already hidden from us by the heights we
had passed, which threw their shadows over the beautiful valleys that we could
just distinguish, expanded to a boundless distance before us. We determined to
proceed slowly toward the low country, and repose once more secure from the
terrors of the forest; to view the country the next day, and to take such steps
as might be most like to ensure our safe arrival, now that we could not be
remote from the place of destination.

A few monkies, whose chattering was no longer deemed an annoyance, after our
acquaintance with sounds so chilling and terrific, were our only disturbers
during the night; -- we slept peaceably, and rose with the dawn.

Having agreed to reconnoitre the country before we should proceed, we made a
kind of festival of this charming morning. We unpacked our powder, and repacked
our flints, and trinkets; we cleaned our arms, and by the time we had partaken
of a plentiful breakfast, the sides of the green hills and plains beneath us,
were disclosed to our view by the opening sun, in a style of verdure and beauty
truly delighting. The light shades of the sloping hill on the northeastern
aspect, contrasted by the dusky hue of the valleys on the southern and western
sides; and the irregularity of the shades cast by the profile of the more
elevated hills, on the plains scattered through the winding valleys, gradually
descending, and the whole prospect vividly brightning without mist or cloud in
the horizon, altogether exhibited, a scene of serene grandeur that warmed my
heart and made me almost forget the inconveniences I had sustained.

The country was thickly peopled, the marks of cultivation were visible on the
sides of the declining plains, and on the level; but no river could be seen. We
considered it however, as at no great distance, and resolved to pass the day as
a time of rest, and to pursue our journey under the protection of night to
avoid discovery, until we should judge that we had gained the country of the
Ebo King.

After a pleasant dinner we went to repose preparatory for the nights travel,
we awoke about sunset, immediately descended to the valley, and set forward;
we continued this course for four nights, frequently meeting with settlements,
and changing our course through the nearest woods to avoid the haunts of men;
living upon cold provisions, or the fruits which we gathered in abundance as we
passed along.

The country we had now gained was once more apparently very fertile and
watered with little rivulets, which promised us the pleasure of speedily
gaining the banks of that river, for which we had long looked with aching eyes.
On the morning of the fifth day before sunrise, we reached the bank, and were
fortunate enough to find means to pass it without difficulty or danger; now we
considered ourselves, as the mariner after a long voyage, arrived at the
destined port.

The paths from the river were now no longer objects to be shunned, we pursued
that which appeared to be the greatest; and about 9 o'clock we entered a
handsome village.

Our appearance alarmed the inhabitants, who fled from their huts, and
collected in considerable numbers, with their simple arms in their hands.
Hurdee, whose countenance lighted up with pleasure, seeing they were friends,
gave his gun to me, and made the usual signal of peace, by sheathing his arrows
and hanging his bow over his shoulders. They then approached near us, and he
delivered to them his bow and knife, telling them we were on our way from the
Congo to the Ebo King to trade, on which they returned his knife and bow, and
told him we were welcome, and should be well received.

I proposed delivering my arms likewise, but Hurdee advised me not, thinking
that as they were very scarce in that country, and consequently highly
valuable, they might be prompted to detain them.

The ease and good humor with which we were received was to me most
consolitary, and I took it to be a most flattering presage of the success to
attend our laborious and dangerous enterprise. We were conducted into one of
their houses, or huts, composed of slight timbers or branches sunk in the
earth, or in an artificial bank of earth raised about a foot above the ordinary
level of the site of the village. The tops of the huts are round, or dome
like, formed very rudely into that shape, by bending the tops of the branches
toward the center, and there tying them with slender saplings to each other.
The broad and fan-like branches of the palm and date tree, tied by their stems
on the outside, and the points downward, form their covering or thatch.
Repeated layers of these materials, and the skins of animals, are further used
to defend these humble habitations from the most severe rains; and as the
domestic offices of cookery, and their rude handicraft works are performed in
the open air, or in the shade of branching trees, which here are never disrobed
of their foliage, their small dwellings are not incommoded by this sort of
family business. The insects so troublesome in warm countries, especially
adjacent to woods or low grounds, are kept aloof by the inartificial expedient
of a thick smoke produced by fires kept constantly lighted, and composed of the
dung of their cattle, or a composition of leaves of trees or reeds and rotted
timber kept in a state of moisture.

These artificial clouds had not yet dissipated in my new habitation, and the
effect on my eyes was considerably painful: through my friend Hurdee care was
taken to ease me on that head, and a repast was soon served up, of which we
partook with minds and appetites that converted the habitation of the savage
into a palace, and gave a relish to the food equal to that enjoyed by the
luxurious. Seated on the floor, on skins and mats spread for us, we feasted on
fresh beef and ears of maize roasted, and for our dessert on the finest
bannanas: our drink was new milk and palm wine.

The people had caught the information, on all sides, of the arrival of one of
those extraordinary animals a white man, and all thronged, eager as it appeared
to discover whether it resembled the men or the monkies of their own country;
for such it appeared were the comparisons they made, and in a manner, as I
afterward understood, no wise flattering to the pride of a fair skin.

The women appear among the Africans to be endowed with the sexual attribute of
curiosity, in common with those of all other colors and countries: they
thronged foremost around me, and so crowded that I found it necessary for the
sake of air, and to gratify curiosity at once, to walk abroad. The children
looked with wonder, and the women according to their age or temper tittered,
roared out in laughter, or clasped their hands, as they were each affected.
Some opened my hair, others examined my jacket and trowsers; my sleeve buttons
amused one, and the frill of my shirt another; my hair, which had by their
curiosity or accident become loose, was the object of admiration to all.

Their familiarity surprised me for a time; but reflecting that it must be the
natural consequence of innocent curiosity excited by novelty, I returned their
freedom with good humor, and sound that they were pleased with my manner of
treating them.

Fatigued with the previous travel, and tired with trifling, I signified to
Hurdee my wish of retiring to rest: he accordingly informed the villagers, and
we were soon left alone. After this we partook of a second repast consisting of
boiled rice, mutton, and palm wine, and agreeing to set out for the residence
of the Ebo king on the morrow, retired to a comfortable and secure repose.

Early in the morning we were awakened by the villagers, fifteen of whom had
been appointed to escort us on our route. They were armed with lances pointed,
some with bone, others with a hard burnt wood, and some with iron. They had
bows and arrows, the former more than three feet long, the arrows of irregular
lengths, from about eighteen inches to two feet, coarsely barbed.

After a slight refreshment of fruit and palm wine, we proceeded to the
southward, it being about 4 o'clock in the morning. A great crowd of the
villagers had collected to view the prodigy once more, and many of them
accompanied us, not tired of gazing, till near midday; when we lay by for
rest, and retired from the heat which was now daily increasing.

We did not reach the next village until after dark: one of our escort had
preceded us about an hour, and had provided a hut much more commodious than
that in which we had last lain: here we had comfortable beds of neatly formed
mats, and here marks of ingenuity were evident in a species of wicker work on
the walls, or rather partitions; refreshments were provided for us in like
manner, without their seeking for recompense of any kind.

We rose early as usual, but our fame was up before us with the villagers; who
here and on the greater part of our course incommoded and sometimes obstructed
our passage by their numbers.

The country through which we now traveled was extremely picturesque, and the
towns thickly scattered displayed to me much more enlarged ideas of their
civilization than I had before conceived. Agriculture seemed to be carried on
with much industry, but not indeed with any appearance of regularity or system.
The grounds in open places appeared sown with grain in detached patches,
without fences or ditches. A rivulet not unfrequently bounded a piece of land
newly turned up, on the other side of which was observable either a copse, or a
field of corn advanced in growth, a space of vacant ground, or interspersed
with reed or sugar cane, and maize. In the midst of these a solitary palm tree
sometimes stood, and a declivity, a swamp, or a thick wood, broke upon the line
of culture and habitation. Roads appear next, which owe nothing to art, and
their existence only to the constant succession of travelers obstructing the
progress of rapid vegetation when not in the shade, and when beneath it, to an
absence of the sun's rays.

We reached a very populous village at the noon of the fifth day; when finding
myself extremely alarmed with feverish symptoms in consequence of the crowd
which pressed round me, was obliged to request by my interpreter, that we might
have a retired and separate habitation, and be secured from the intrusion of
the curious. My wishes were answered, and I determined to persevere in the
journey which now promised to be so short. The villagers procured horses for
us, but without the convenience of saddles. In this circumstance, and in a warm
climate I would have preferred walking, but was persuaded to accept offices
dictated by such hospitable intentions, and accordingly set forward. A person
was dispatched before us to announce our arrival; we determined to repose
during the heat of this day in a pleasant valley described by the natives, and
to travel in the night so that we might reach our destination by the ensuing
morning. My fever had entirely abated, and I found myself after the mid-days
repose, perfectly able to ride the rest of the way during the night.

We were now near our journey's end; and about 11 o'clock we had the pleasure
of seeing our courier return accompanied by about 100 persons armed with long
lances, who we were informed, composed a part of the Ebo Kings guard, and had
been sent to receive us. Upon their approach, they opened on each side of us in
good order, with their lances pointed downward behind, and as we passed through
them closed in files and followed with much regularity.

It was now about 2 o'clock, and we had advanced half a mile in this form, when
a large body of people appeared who we were given to understand, were the
principal persons of the town, dispatched to conduct us to the kings presence.
The roads were covered with people, so as to render our progress slow and
irksome -- at length we entered the town about 4 o'clock.

The capital of Ebo, or Quappa Ebo, is pleasantly situated on the sides of two
hills, which are cut at an acute angle by a cascade that descends through an
agreeable wood, and discharges its waters in a shallow pebbled rivulet that
bisects the valley in the center. Those parts of the town that occupy the
sloping grounds, form two sides of a triangle, the remaining side is formed by
a river of about four hundred feet wide, into which the rivulet falls; our
entrance was from the wood across this river which we forded. The open country
along the river downward was highly cultivated, and beautifully contrasted in
its verdure with the brown appearance of the town, which excepting the few
trees here and there dispersed, exhibited a view of considerable population and
regularity. The streets were laid out with a considerable regard to order, so
as even to be observed at a distance; there was not any thing of grandeur, it
is true, but certainly a degree of elegant simplicity and neatness which I did
not expect to find.

We were conducted to the kings hut, he received us at his door, and after
shaking me by the hands very earnestly for a minute, retired and beckoned us to
follow, which we did. This hut was oblong as large as some of our barns, and
divided into rooms by wicker partitions covered with neatly colored mats, and
ornamented with cane and reed baskets with other fancy works of the kind.

When we had reached the third apartment, where was a number of women already
seated, he sat down on a bench covered with a mat and holding out his hands to
me shook mine very earnestly again. He then shook Hurdee, speaking to him in
the Ebo language; I was then directed to salute all his wives, seventeen in
number; I would willingly have dispensed with this branch of the ceremony, but
Hurdee told me with a smile it was the custom -- and I accordingly, with no
little discomposure of my stomach, complied with all the form.

Having completed this business without showing evident marks of
dissatisfaction, was handed round to the elders, or what I suppose some subject
of an European monarch would call the nobility. With all these I shook hands in
turn, and was then led to a mat placed for me nearly in the front of his sable
majesty, with whom by means of Hurdee I entered into conversation on the
subject of my mission.

He informed me that he had been made acquainted with the object of my journey,
that he was pleased at my prefering him to his neighbors; that he was willing
to trade with me in gold, ivory, or prisoners; that he should wish to trade
constantly, and to be furnished with goods from the sea countries, as he called
them, in abundance, for which he would pay largely. Having stated my
satisfaction at his kindness, and my thanks for the attention bestowed by his
favor on me then and while on the road, I told him it was my wish to put his
proposals into practice by keeping the trade open constantly and supplying it
abundantly. He then entered on general conversation, enquiring into the
manners, customs, and situation of my country, of which he appeared to have
already had some accounts. He related some particulars concerning himself and
the people of Ebo, his wars with some neighboring people and frequently
enlivened his spirits and our conversation with draughts of excellent palm wine.

We continued thus, partaking occasionally of pine apples and other fruit, till
dusk, when a large fire being lighted, a banquet of roasted venison, some
birds, and milk, with rice, was served to us as we sat. He arose and beckoning
to a woman on his left, six others were called in, who were presented to me and
offered as wives. This piece of politeness and hospitality I endeavored to
decline, Hurdee had previously apprized me of this custom, but I conceived that
my informing them that I was already a married man would release me from this
dilemma; I was disappointed; the king femed surprised at the nature of my
objection, and instanced himself who was also married but yet took other wives.
Finding myself in this delicate predicament, and deriving no resource from the
advice of my interpreter, I resolved to accommodate myself to my situation with
as good a grace as possible. Judging one wife sufficient for any reasonable
man; I resolved not to be burdened with six; but thinking that I must in some
degree sacrifice to custom I resolved to choose two -- and with these I was
directly conducted to a handsome, but newly built apartment near what I must,
for the honor of the thing, call the palace!

My residence consisted of a long open building like a piazza, without any side
covering; within this was a long cross room divivided into two by a partition;
and in the rear another room the floor of which was a few inches higher than
that of the outer apartment. Lamps, (if I may so call small earthen misshapen
cups with cocoanut oil,) darkly illuminated these appartments; -- the outer was
covered with ordinary mats, the inner with one neatly woven and of various
colors, with rushes and palm tree fibers, At one end of this appartment was
half spread a large kind of mattrass made of cotton, thin but not
uncomfortable; and here it was that for the first time in my life, I was to
repose with the dusky daughters of Africa.

Readers of different humors will view this scene with varied sentiments; --
the jocular will anticipate the embarrassment of a qualmish youth, shoved into
a neat hovel with a tall slender and comely but sedate African girl who sat
half averted from me in the part of the room most remote from the door and the
place of repose, while another plumy, middle sized wench stood laughing and
giggling, by turns looking at me and then at her female partner, as if anxious
to determine which should enter upon, or avoid -- conversation.

I could not for a time determine whether to lie down in my clothes or undress
-- I really forgot every thing but the aukwardness of my situation. -- The
lamps, however, had fortunately nearly consumed their oil, and I took advantage
of the glimmer, to dispose of my apparel, and lay down -- like many a fond
husband -- with my face averted from my Ebon companions, who contrived to
approach and partake with me of the mattrass, and with it as I infer from my
own experience, of a pleasant repose.

When morning appeared, a wicker woven aperture admitted the light, and
discovered to me my two wives (for so I must henceforward call them) wrapped in
the arms -- of sleep; -- one at each side of me; but at a respectful distance.
I lay a while reflecting on the oddity of my situation, and call to mind the
graces of my own more favored country-women: I was soon however, disturbed from
my reveries, by the awakening of my two ladies, whose countenances I thought
seemed to rebuke me with dissatisfaction or contempt -- for my want of
politeness to, or neglect of them.

I could not speak a word of their language, and we were thus lying composed in
silence, when Hurdee announced a visitor. I sallied forth without the
ceremonial of a bow, or a farewell; and found the old Chieftain was waiting for
me. He proposed a walk after I should have refreshed myself; we accordingly sat
down to breakfast, and I was joined by my wives, as we were about to proceed on
our little tour; I was shown the greater part of the town; we ascended the hill
to the south westward, and the old man explained to me by means of Hurdee,
every particular that he thought worthy of notice, or that I asked.

The town consists of about 1200 houses, laid out into very regular streets,
not so much the effect of a previous plan, as of the judicious arrangements
taken to prevent any dwelling encroaching on the line of a street. The western
side of the shallow rivulet that passes through the town was first planned, and
laid out in one great street along its margin, not following its
irregularities, but presenting a strait front. On the opposite side, the same
system was pursued, but the streets, diverging from these to the feet of the
hills, were wider on one side than the other; they terminated each in a large
street at the feet of each hill, beyond which were gardens or maize ground,
orchards, or walks of orange or citron trees, with some of the date and
cocoanut -- here was likewise to be seen the sugar cane, and the finest maize I
had ever beheld, and the tree from which the cassava is procured, with a
considerable quantity of large species of millet, the broom, or guiney corn.
The whole town formed almost a regular triangle; the little rivulet divided it
into two irregular triangles, owing to diverging more one side than the other;
the other streets were strait, but at unequal distances.

I have before in some degree described* the houses of the natives: I had now
an opportunity of hearing the process of their building art described, and
witnessing the truth of the description.

When they purpose building a house, they first determine upon the form and
extent of it, by fixing stakes and making a large bank of earth within the
line, either circular, semicircular, oblong or square, for they have houses of
all these forms: -- this earth or clay being well tempered and mixed with sand,
is beat down and smoothed with an inclination of the plane to the door. They
leave it exposed to the heat of the sun, which is here very considerable, for
some days before they proceed further. When they find it sufficiently hard, the
frame is raised, roughly as may be supposed, and connected by ropes of the
cocoa bark, or dried canes, or the withes or saplings of young trees. When they
have fixed timbers round the cornice or eaves, if I may so call it, they
elevate two long slender timbers at each end of the building. These they tie
firmly at the corners, when the house is angular, and again at the elevated
points where they meet, longer timbers are raised about the middle, and what
may be called a ridge pole, consisting of one slender timber, firmly lashed
above throughout the whole length. Light branches are now laid on, and the
whole is covered over like the round huts, with the leaves or bark of trees,
etc. This species of building may be considered sumptuous, and is rare; the
structure of the round buildings requires less labor and combination. When the
roof is covered, they proceed to fill up the spaces between the corner posts in
the sides and ends: for this they drive stakes in regular order, leaving fit
openings by their intersections for doors or windows. These last are very
narrow and numerous, admitting a constant draught of air, and capable of being
easily closed: cane works formed with much ingenuity, ornament the inside. When
the walls are thus far completed, the outside plaistered with clay well
kneaded, which being smoothed, really has a handsome appearance, but suffers
upon the fall of heavy rains, against which every house is provided with a deep
ditch, leading all round to carry off the water as it falls. Each dwelling is
separated from the other by a small yard, marked by a fence or stockade of
posts, of four to six inches diameter.

The king's house alone was unencumbered by a close neighborhood, having a
greater space of yard in front. It had eight rooms, but was in reality, two
houses united: a handsome grass plot, shaded by about ten or twelve lofty trees
lay behind, and through this a path strewed with a brown and yellow glittering
sand, led winding to the summit of the hill, where was a neat hut erected with
only a light roof, and sides composed of mats that admitted of being raised or
let down at pleasure.

Before we had arrived at this place, I took care to send Hurdee for a few
articles that I purposed presenting to the king; and when we sat to rest, after
ascending to this beautiful eminence, I took an opportunity of presenting to
him, a handsome ornamented clasp knife, a small oval looking-glass, some brass
rings for bracelets, and a pair of ordinary paste sleeve buttons, with red
tinsel and a gilt knot in them. The old man was highly delighted, and did not
speak for several minutes, being so much engaged in admiring his riches. He at
last broke out into expressions of thanks, and proposed showing me where he had
lately fought a great battle with the Galla king, who had invaded his kingdom,
attempted to carry off his people, and reduce the country to be under his own
government.

We proceeded along the western side of the hill, about three miles, passing by
a sine cultivated country, and large fields of corn. Huts were scattered here
and there along our course, and goats and sheep grazed on the rich pastures as
far as the eye could reach. We now descended through a wood, and entered a
large plain: on our way to this place, he related the cause of the invasion to
have arisen from the following adventure.

A party of hunters from one of the remote towns of the Ebo country, had
pursued their game beyond what the Galla king considered his boundary, and were
met by a party of the latter people, likewise hunting. They now commenced a
pursuit of the game, that had been nearly run down by the Ebo people, but were
not successful, for one of the Ebo hunters, brought it down with his spear. The
Galla hunters sought to appropriate it to themselves; a fray ensued, one of the
Galla people was killed, the rest put to flight, and the game brought off in
triumph though several of the Ebo people were wounded severely.

Both parties were highly enraged; the Galla king raised an army, invaded the
country, burned two villages, carried off some cattle, and a few prisoners,
which he sold for slaves. The Ebo people were terrified with the first
successes of the enemy: they alloted a considerable force to oppose them;
several actions were fought, but the Ebo king was so much the sufferer in each,
that his army was nearly destroyed. The Galla king encouraged by these
successes, and relying too much on the weakness of the Ebo people formed the
resolution of subjugating the whole country to his rule. For this purpose he
collected all his force, and spreading desolation as he passed, crossed the
great swamp to the N. W. in order to avoid the circuit of the upper lands, and
had already approached within the distance of three miles from the capital,
where all the fugitives from the desolated towns, had taken refuge.

The city could be approached only by a narrow defile, through which the river
passed, leaving a road on that side next the city; or be attempting the road
over the hills and through the woods, by which we had entered. The Galla chief
preferred the former: a party of the Ebo people who had escaped from bondage,
communicated the design; that the old Ebo chief took his measures accordingly.
He collected a body of 200 picked men, supported by a body of 300 (...), to
guard the pass on the side next to the enemy. Over these as the reserve, he
appointed his eldest son, and his own brother; the rest of his army he led
himself, in two divisions: his second son heading the left, in which his
principal wives The stout young women engage in most of the expeditions
throughout the whole country; this being an extraordinary occasion, and utter
ruin or conquest being the only alternative -- the young boys and girls,
followed their parents to this action, and contributed by their presence, to
render it decisive
and their brothers, were distributed.

The king showed me the spot where he took his station; it was an elevated spot
of ground, covered with large shady trees, inaccessible in the front; but
overlooking the whole plain below, with which it communicated by two paths at
some distance to the right and left. A path was opened, and a line of men
stretched along the top of the hill, to the edge of this pass, to which he paid
constant attention.

The Galla people attempted to march before sun rise, but a large fire suddenly
appearing on their right, at the distance of about half a mile, occasioned them
to halt: it ceased in a few minutes, but had the effect of dispiriting the
Galla people; who marched on however, about an hour after. They advanced
rapidly, and soon descried the troops under the kings eldest son, ready to
receive them: the Galla people began the attack by a discharge of arrows, which
was returned by the Ebo party; and followed by a second flight before the Galla
army expected it. The Galla warriors then brandished their lances, closed their
ranks, and made a vigorous attack on the kings army, who being unprepared,
threw by their bows, and closed in a compact body to receive them with their
spears: this opposition was short, for the Ebo party fled into the narrow part
of the pass, as if panic struck, the Galla people pursuing them. The two
parties of the Ebo army now rallied on the inner side of a sloping ground; and
as she Galla people crowded through the pass to pursue them, the old Chief
sallied from his recess, and commenced the attack in the rear. The battle was
now carried on with the greatest vigor on both sides. The Ebo army being
sensible that this was their last and only hope, fought with desparation; while
the Galla troops no less instigated by the desire of victory and plunder, (...)
themselves to the utmost. The slaughter was terrible for a considerable time;
the Galla people, however, at last gave way, and fled in immense numbers to the
river, among the foremost of whom was their chief. He, however, rallied his
troops on the plain, in front of their camp. The numbers killed already,
exceeding that of the Ebo army; what remained was still as numerous. The old
Ebo chief determined to pursue his success, while his people were elated, and
marched into the plain, fate as yet seeming to hold the balances of victory.

The attack was made by the eldest son, but he was met with such warmth and
intrepidity by the enemy, that his ranks gave way. He called aloud to them, and
drawing a circle round him with his sword, declared, he never would quit the
spot, but with victory. The people roused by his bravery, returned to the
charge, but before they could rescue him, he fell, covered with wounds, and run
through by lances. When his younger brother appeared, having carried all before
him on the left, a more desperate action ensued; the shouting of women and
children, enlivened the Ebo people, when the arrival of the old chief and his
brother with their divisions, decided the victory in their favor. -- The enemy
fought with desparation, but the old chief having attacked them in the rear, no
hope remained, and they who did not prefer death, were made captives. 700 were
taken prisoners, those who had remained in the Galla camp to guard against
surprise, took to flight; numbers of them were taken by the women and scattered
inhabitants, who pursued them for two days. The king, with but few followers,
effected his escape with much difficulty, while most of the principal warriors
were among the captives.

The Ebo king lost, beside his eldest son, his brother, who fell in the
conflict, and three of his wives. The old man conducted me to the spot, and I
could not but be sensibly affected at the tenderness which he displayed, when
speaking of them on this scene of their valor and death. He appeared to me on
this occasion, in a point of view very different from what he had at any time
before, so that I esteemed the man now, whom I before considered as the savage.

His person was strait and robust, and of excellent symetry, being about five
feet ten inches high: his countenance was extremely expressive; his eye quick
and penetrating, and his air and deportment affable, cheerful, and mild, but
still expressive of confidence and command. He appeared to be about 55 years
old, but was more. He made a motion to return, and we all moved toward the
city by way of the pass: our wives who had all followed us, now joined the
party; and my ladies sought every means to divert and please me, during the
walk, by plucking flowers and fruits, or picking up pieces of broken arrows or
lances, and at the same time, pointing at places, and speaking as if I
understood every word they said -- they continued their lively gambols all the
way home.

This species of amusement was at first to me very loathsome -- but after some
time, I must confess, the pains they took to please, and the little efforts
they made in the house, with their labor to teach and make me understand their
language, soon softened my disgust: from laughing at their folly, I came to
like it, and to be thankful for their efforts to excite it -- and in short, I
soon became so habituated to my situation, as not only to be satisfied, but
pleased with it. In fact, I felt a fondness for both my wives, although I
reluctantly confess it to the ladies of my former acquaintance, for they never
differed but in their efforts to please me, and never disputed, lest I should
be offended.

In all my subsequent rambles, they were never from me; when I talked to
others, they were silently caressing me, playing with my hands, or hair,
handling my side arms or pockets; if I sat, they squatted at my feet, and my
buckles became the objects of their care and curiosity -- for all which
attention and favor, they appeared highly gratified, if I made but a return of
bare notice, and highly familar, if I would enter into conversation with them.

We had now approached the town, and were met by several of the elders, and a
considerable number of the inhabitants, both men and women, who formed a
procession with us into the public streets. I had now some leisure and
opportunities to notice them; they were evidently, considerably blacker than
the natives of the lower Congo country, and the neighborhood of the sea, who
have generally a yellowish tinge in their complexion, owing, I suppose, to
their greater intercourse with the whites. Their stature is generally between
five feet six inches, to six feet high; the fewer number, however, approach the
latter height. The women were generally more slender and smaller, as is usual,
than the men; but were evidently more variable, in the first respect
particularly. Both sexes are admirably well formed, their limbs strait, and
bodies upright. They go almost entirely naked; the loins and waist only being
covered; the women wear a slight garment, or bandage of cotton cloth round the
waist, or a small apron of cotton stuff, fancifully decorated with feathers, or
strips of different colored cloths; this is about six inches long, and eight
broad, hanging in front, and tied on by two strings of cotton, which knot
behind, from which hangs a little tassel. The men, from the age of puberty
only, wear a narrow bandage of cotton cloth round the waist, with a strip of
the same kind, but five or six inches in breadth tucked in before, and passing
through the crutch, so contrived that the knot behind also affords a long bunch
or tassel, like that of the women. The men of respect among them, beside a
number of trifling ornaments of shells, ivory bracelets, etc. wear a large and
broader piece of cotton, that hangs nearly down to the knees like the Scotch
highlander's trews.

These simple garments, however display works of ornament, distinct from those
of mere utility; feathers, pieces of cotton cloth of different colors,
trinkets of copper, brass, glass, and tinsel, of European fabrication are
frequently seen, but these are uniformly the signs of riches or respect. The
old chief was dressed with a profusion of these baubles, fantastically arranged
on a kind of dark cotton smock frock, that hung down close to his knees.

Men and women uniformly wear rings round their wrists and ancles, mostly of
ivory, but frequently made of brass; these are made merely large enough to
admit the hand or foot through with some pressure. Their looseness renders them
to appearance inconvenient, but when we consider the numerous awkward articles
worn by both sexes in civilized life, we will not continue to wonder at the
sacrifices which savages offer to that universal idol, vanity, seeing that
these ornaments carry in their minds as lofty ideas, as any excited either by
the gold or embroidery, the coronet, the purple, or ermine. -- The ivory rings
are made by sawing the elephants tooth across the hollow part, and polishing
the rings with the dust; there are some, however, who wear clasps or broad
hoops, and other ornaments of gold.

The women wear beads of glass and metal with little plates, and other figures
suspended from their necks in successive strings falling over their breasts.
Some of them that in infancy promise to be comely, by the early care of their
mothers, have rings put on while young, which filling as they grow, become
tight, and this ornament in their riper years is esteemed an object of peculiar
note and elegance. Their admirers are more numerous, and this species of
ornaments often exhibits the love of show, admiration, and prudery in the
simple African, in as ridiculous and natural a point of view, as any of our
polished fashionable female decorations.

Every man wears a knife in his girdle, the blade of which is from six to eight
inches long, resembling the blade of a spontoon, rather narrower, but sharp at
both edges: it is carried in a sheath, generally of rush or reed work, and much
ornamented. This instrument serves for all purposes, for cutting timber or
food, slaying a beast or an enemy; and in occasions of war, is worn likewise by
the women. They employ it in their simple process of agriculture with much
dexterity, and this with a sharp pointed stake, was all the implement I could
discover them using, either for digging, turning up the soil, sowing or reaping
the crop.

I have been thus particular in the outset, from having observed when very
young, that circumstances among strangers are noticed more exactly at first,
than at a later period; perhaps familiarity with all objects lessens our
admiration of them.

The next morning the king showed me the spoils made in the late action, which
had taken place as nearly as I could learn, about the month of June preceding.
The bracelets and rings of gold and copper, the gold breast plates, some
European swords, and a numberless quantity of trinkets, spears, bows and
arrows, etc. formed a group of objects extremely striking and amusing. The same
apartment contained a variety of other articles, such as presents made him by
his own people, and by others, together with a quantity of elephants teeth and
gold dust, which was contained in small earthen pans, or pots, covered with
wicker basket work.

Having satisfied my curiosity here, he proposed that I should go and see the
prisoners; we accordingly crossed to the south-eastern side of the rivulet,
where at the lower side of the town, we found them confined in a large area
within a thick stockade, on the outside of which was a trench: the inside was
divided into parcels, and huts irregularly constructed, and the entrance as
well as the whole circuit, was guarded by men with spears.

We commonly find ourselves impressed with emotions of horror and compassion,
on entering places where our fellow men are doomed to punishment or thraldom.
In the scene before me, the ear was not indeed dinned with the clanking of
heavy fetters, but was horrible in its peculiar way. The captives were
distitute for the most part of even their necessary covering, and bound
indiscriminately together by the hands and legs, the cords being again fastened
to the ground by stakes; they were loosed a few at a time once every day, when
each was permitted to eat the only meal they were allowed, consisting of rice
and palm oil. Benevolence, however, sometimes broke through the rigours of a
savage life, and occasionally alleviated the sufferings of the weakly, or the
wounded with milk or other necessaries: their condition was on the whole
deplorable.

I had often in the course of the voyage, and of the journey, rebuked myself
for having embarked in the African trade, but found a consolation in the
reflection, that it was not from a malicious inclination or avaricious
disposition, that I had embarked in it, but from the pressing call of
necessity, and at a time when my dissent could not alter or obstruct the
undertaking. On the present occasion, however, I was fully convinced the
removal of these poor wretches even into the slavery of the West Indies, would
be an act of humanity, rather than one exposed to censure.

We passed through the whole range of the place of confinement, the old chief
pointing out to me those who were the greatest warriors of the Galla nation. He
then intimated to me that I might choose such of them as I should think proper,
and agree on what he was to receive in return. I agreed to do so, but requested
that I might have an opportunity of conversing with them, and choosing such as
would go with me voluntarily, if any could be found. To this he readily
assented; and for the next week I continued to visit them daily, and took
occasion through my interpreter, to exhibit as flattering a prospect of their
future situation in America, should they go with me, as I thought was just in
itself, and favorable to their wishes.

This week was occupied by occasional excursions, in fishing and hunting
parties, in pleasant evening entertainments, and at intervals by my visits to
the captives. Having arranged matters on this subject to my mind, I mentioned
to the old king the several articles which I proposed exchanging with him, and
showing specimens of such few articles as I had brought, proposed dispatching a
person to the ship with a letter, directing the Captain to send a shallop with
goods to the mouth of the little Congo, and that rafts should be ready with
hands to convey them up the rest of the way. The Galla nation having suffered
so much by their last war, had now became fearful of molesting or interfering
with the Ebo people, a circumstance, which if we had previously known, would
have saved us a long circuitous and troublesome journey, which might now be
performed with ease in one half the time.

The old Chief was much pleased; three persons were appointed to carry my
dispatches, and they departed accordingly. From this time, I had no occupation
but making myself acquainted with the language and manners of the country, and
obtaining such information as they could afford.

Their form of government is a limited monarchy; the affairs of the nation are
comprehended in the simple measures necessary for the defense against an enemy,
and so far the chief is absolute. -- The ablest warrior, is generally therefore
chosen to the place, but he must possess other qualities, he must merit the
affections rather than excite the fears of those, whom he is to govern. There
is no writing, and of consequence no written law; the plain lessons of natural
equality in regard to personal safety and property, are well understood, so
that parental and filial love, are among their most distinguished characters.
-- Disobedience to a parent in a slight degree is severely punishable, and in a
larger extent, the punishment extends to death or slavery: -- as every man has
the means of obtaining a house by his industry, and consequently will have to
defend it and his family, he is obliged by necessity for the time, and thence
by habit, to be a soldier. From this circumstance there is no army, but the
inhabitants are called together by the urgency of necessity or danger, or by
the immediate will and command of their chief. Before they are disbanded,
however, enquiry is made into the conduct of the different officers, whether
they have done their duty, or whether any one has eminently distinguished
himself. Those who are thus remarked for their valor and good conduct in other
respects, obtain a considerable distinction among them, and soon acquire from
the liberality of their king and country, rewards in ornaments and other
property, sufficient to support the honors they have acquired.

From among these the king or chief is chosen, in the event of a vacancy by
death, or otherwise. If the king has a son or a brother distinguished, and
worthy of the public confidence, the preference is given to him; but either the
want of approved courage, of activity, of talents, or of a family and children,
are sufficient disqualifications to prevent his election. On such an occasion,
the old men and warriors from all parts of the kingdom, meet and choose the
person whose character is best suited to the important trust. If two or more
are equal in estimation, it falls to him who has the greatest number of
children, which from the prevalence of polygamy as well as other circumstances,
the warm climate, etc. it may readily be supposed, are in considerable numbers.

It is remarkable, however, that hospitality is one of the virtues which
procure men distinction among these people; I saw two instances of this; during
my stay at Quappa Ebo: a person who had by his own valor, with the industry of
a daughter and son, acquired considerable spoil from the Galla invaders, and
had seized a large flock of their cattle, was suddenly raised to opulence. He
was eager to follow the passion of his countrymen, to share his riches, and
obtain the reputation of an hospitable man; his own immediate relatives were
invited to his house, and preparations commenced for a sumptuous feast for the
king, with all the elders at court, and those of the neighboring towns of the
Ebo country. The forests were ravaged for venison, and the trees for fruit; the
palm poured forth its exhilerating juices, and every skin shined in bright
blackness with the anointing of rich oils. The elders wore their best makad: or
dresses, and the young girls displayed their feathers and rings with all the
purposed artifice of coquetry. -- The feast is held on a lawn or plain, the
conversation is general, on subjects of love, war, or hunting; the parties
employed taking frequent opportunities of making it partial. The generous
entertainer takes care that all are satisfied, encourages the warriors to
valor, the lovers to fidelity, and reminds them that these virtues are the
only sure paths to universal regard. These sentiments, no doubt, are not
expressed in their regular form, but in this way (if I may so express it) may
their ideas and expressions be translated. The master of the feast
thenceforward becomes a man of celebrity, and is called to the meetings of the
elders of the several towns, which at stated times, assemble and consult upon
measures of common utility.

The repast terminates with a dance, to the music of two sorts of drums; the
one made by cutting the trunk of a hollow tree across about a foot in diameter,
and eighteen inches long. The bark is pulled off and the knotty parts made
smooth; a square hole is cut in its side, and a piece of dried sheep skin drawn
light over it; both ends are covered in the same way, and beads, rings, etc.
are fixed to it. The other kind is the gourd or callabash, cut off at one side,
and a skin drawn over it in like manner, both these instruments are sounded by
striking with the hand or fingers. The dance, as may be supposed, is neither
pleasant to the eye, nor agreeable to the ear of a person acquainted with the
sound of a violin, but to them is a source of the greatest enjoyment.

From these particulars, it might possibly be supposed that the inhabitants are
of a very active character. The reverse however, is the fact; they are from the
natural effect of the climate, indolent to an extreme, but in cases of exigency
exhibit a vigor that is truly surprising. Their wants are but few, and a warm
sun and prolific soil supercedes that powerful stimulus to activity --
necessity. They know not those cares which call forth labor, to provide for
their children, nature is their inheritance; if they possess rice, roots, and
palm wine, a cow, a few goats or sheep to afford them occasionally milk or
meat, to feed themselves and entertain their friends, they enjoy consummate
happiness. In metals they find little value, except for occasional ornament and
exchange for provisions. For this purpose mostly when prompted by the soft
passion, both sexes will spend weeks in tedious succession gathering gold dust
in but scanty portions. The command of a parent, the desire of a brother or
sister, or the order of a chief, will procure the like assiduity, but these
latter occasions are rare. This operation is performed only in the rainy
season, when the torrents which fall wash down from the high lands, the sands
and soil in which these riches are lodged. The specific gravity of the metal
causes it to subside, while lighter bodies are hurried along with the waters,
and thus it is that where the roots of trees, or crevices between rocks,
suspend the rapid course of the stream, the gold dust settles with the coarser
particles of the sand, and is gathered by the African, and deposited in his
gourd or calabash.

When a sufficient quantity is collected, it is taken to a standing water,
where it is again cleanly washed from all particles of earth, and in this state
is reserved for their purposes of trade, or for being formed into trinkets.
This they perform with the rude clay crucibles and charcoal fires; some
preserve it in small bars, of the value of about ten dollars, which method is
much more convenient for the trader, than when in dust.

I have before noticed that polygamy is customary among them, for having no
religious institutions, the practice cannot be considered a matter of
toleration; but it must be observed, that be the number of wives ever so many,
there is uniformly one who holds a distinguished place in the family. She is
called the makilma, and has the privilege of directing the domestic concerns
and employments of the rest; she sits next to the master of the family, and
obtains a suitable and undisputed regard from all the other members of it,
whose labors she superintends and controuls; for however opulent the husband
may be, his wives must work, and by them are all the labors of agriculture
usually performed. This appears certainly very laborious considering the heat
of the climate, but it must likewise be observed, that the soil is luxuriant,
and the vegetation rapid, the seasons of tillage though frequent, are short,
and the wants of the savage life few and simple; he must be a poor and a
spiritless African, who cannot maintain three or four wives.

The serenity and evenness of their tempers is truly admirable; their
cheerfulness is seldom clouded by passion; and jealousy is rare among the men,
although the women are by no means averse to gallantry. In fact, the commerce
of the sexes, as may have been already surmised by the reader, is not shackled
by the forms of laws, or the refinements of etiquette or hypocrisy; the sense
of shame is totally disconnected with their ideas on this head, though no
people are more strenuous and confined in their attachments when once formed
from mutual choice.

Irregularities of conduct are not, however, tolerated, though the discovery is
not attended with disgrace; the gallant, if detected, is subjected to a fine,
by the person aggrieved, such as a sheep, a goat, a cow, some rice, and the
like. Instances have been known of a husband conniving with his wife, to entice
persons into this snare, and to share the exactions of their treacherous
cunning; such instances, however, are extremely rare, and not peculiar to the
black children of Africa.

In other respects they exhibit examples that would do honor to the most
exalted people of the civilized world: in friendship and benevolence, no people
are so truly steadfast and disinterested; and theft, the reputed vice of all
savages, is rarely known among them; the unfortunate are sure of the solacing
aid and support of their friends, whose kindness does not halt even at the
lapse of life. When a neighbor dies poor, they assemble and perform certain
ceremonies with the same respect as if he were one of their own chiefs; if he
leaves children unprovided for, they are adopted and bred up; if marriageable,
they are provided with suitable companions, and the means to commence a new
family.

Hearing that the master of a family whom I had seen on my arrival, was dead in
my neighborhood, I was inclined to attend, having heard that their funeral
ceremonies were strangely ludicrous. It is their rule never to bury the body on
the day of decease, the intervening night being devoted to lamentation; the
women of the family perform the clamorous part of this duty, and with little
intermission, until the corpse is interred. They seat themselves in order round
the deceased, his favorite wife being seated at the head; if the deceased be a
woman, the most beloved matron of the family performs the same office. Should
the family not afford a sufficient number of women, they call in friends, or
employ strangers to assist them, whom they reward according to merit. In the
present instance, the deceased had been rich, but had few female relatives
besides his wives, who hearing that I meant to attend the funeral, had resolved
to show their respect for the deceased master, in the most pompous manner, by
procuring a lamentation which they could not of themselves find lungs to
support. It appeared, however, that the persons employed had been differently
rewarded, and their tones varied in proportion to the value received, all were
found too low for the occasion. The wives were dissatisfied, but resorted to
the expedient of further presents to promote the vigor of their grief: a
sensible effect was produced, for with an increase of sound from the lamenters,
there was an evident change in the tone of what they uttered, different from
that of the widows, and very different from that of grief. The matrons had
further resort to their first plan, but the poor women unaccustomed to
dissemble, could not now conceal under their wailings, the satisfaction which
they derived from the value of their presents received, and scarcely restrain
the smile. The wives themselves appeared glad, when I visited them on the
morning, at the approaching period of their grief; when the good man was
wrapped in a kind of mattrass, and carried to a grave where he was interred,
and further lamentation ceased. The whole then returned to the house of the
deceased, and the scene of grief was converted into merriment; men and women
regaled with palm wine, and then dispersed to their respective homes.

Their notions concerning death, prove that they have an idea of a future state
of existence; they believe that after a given time, they must return to their
own country, and remain forever free from care or pain; on this account it
should seem that they are always hospitable to strangers on their arrival among
them, as they consider such persons coming thither, and from a judicious choice
prefering it to other countries.

Girls are usually marriageable at fourteen, but few of them bear their virgin
zone untied to the nuptial bed; this, however, is never a subject of solicitude
or enquiry. The ceremony of marriage is very simple; a few presents of
ornaments are made by the lover to the bride, her father or friend, gives in
return a few lances, bows and arrows, a knife, and some provisions; the
relations and friends of both sexes meet together in the evening, drink
plentifully of palm wine, and dance till pretty late, when the bride goes to
her husband's hut, and the next day enters on the employment and duties of her
station.

Their police is as simple as their manners, and more efficacious than volumes
of labored regulations. I have before noticed that offenses against parents,
are punished by slavery or death; thefts I also said are rare; the catalogue of
their crimes is indeed a brief one; if a quarrel arises, or blows ensue, or if
any personal injury is done, through passion, or any finister motive, a
complaint is made to one or more of the elders of the village or town, who,
after hearing the complainant, and the person complained of, give their
decision by the plain rules of common sense, from which there is no appeal:
instances of murder are very rare, one however, took place while I was among
them; the culprit was seized, brought before the old King, who immediately on
hearing the cause, passed his sentence of death, and ordered six of the best
marksmen from among his guards to seize and bind him to a tree, and to shoot
him to death with arrows. The appointed persons could not but obey, they stood
at about ten paces from from the victim, and he died at the first discharge,
from which fact may be formed a tolerable idea of their skill and power with
those weapons: the body was interred on the spot, and was looked at with an awe
that could not fail of producing strong moral impressions.

Stealing and such petty offenses are generally punished by selling the
offender into slavery. When a thief is detected, the neighborhood assemble,
and are bound to make it a common affair; if convicted, the full value of the
thing stolen is made good to the person aggrieved, from the sale of the
culprit, with one third of whatever should remain; the two other thirds as a
perquisite to the king.

Persons who have borrowed goods or property of any kind, and have failed to
make restitution, are brought before the chief, or elders; and if found to have
wilfully avoided payment, or neglected it through indolence, he is sold, and if
not sufficently valuable, his children or wife, or wives, or all together, are
sold to make up the sum; as they say the community should not be made to suffer
by the knavery or idleness of one man, who has rendered himself unworthy by
neglecting the duty he owed his own children, his wives, and himself. The case
of the savage in this particular, is more severe than in any other of their
modes of justice; but it must be allowed, that the ease and abundance of their
climate and soil, afford strong evidence of vice in the man, who with such
advantages, still contrives to wrong others without bettering himself, where
neither fashion, luxury, nor arts exist to seduce or allure him: indeed I
believe it will be found true upon examination, that they decide with wisdom,
when they pronounce the borrower who means not to return, only a more wicked
kind of robber.

I have before said they have no religious institutions, they however,
entertain certain sentiments common to all ages and nations; they believe in a
happy futurity of life in their own country; and they have some idea of a
Supreme Being, who has made them and all things. They call him Kanno, and
ascribe to him infinite power, and all the common attributes of the Divinity,
excepting only the eternity of the person. They believe that he will die and be
succeeded by another, who will punish the vicious, and reward the good, in
proportion to their merit, or demerit. They believe likewise, that the deceased
become spirits, and act as protectors or guardians to their former friends;
under which impression, one of them, when flying from danger, will hurry to the
grave of his patronising friend, where if he escapes, it is all attributed to
the interposition of this good genius, either personally, or by intercession
with the Kanno. This protecting spirit they call the Jannanin, and hold it in
higher respect and veneration than their Supreme Being. They consult their
private Jannanin in any case of uncertainty and doubt, with full confidence
that he will direct them for the best. They sacrifice to them on these
occasions, a cow, rice and palm wine, believing that this subleity delights in
no other kind of offering. If they prove successful in any of their
undertakings, they sacrifice for gratitude, and if unsuccessful, they likewise
sacrifice to appease the offended spirit. Their prayers and incantations,
although intended for the Supreme Being, are all addressed to these spirits as
mediators for them with the Kanno, of whom as mentioned before, they hold the
most exalted ideas that can be imagined.

They are as much given to the belief in sorcerers and magicians, as to that of
the good spirits. These they are persuaded, have a power over the seasons, are
able to forward or retard the growth of their rice, destroy the cattle, afflict
them with disease, and render their lives miserable. They believe all the
Albinos, or white Moors, are of this class of beings, and the poor wretches
from this character, are constantly harrassed and tormented by the people. They
finding themselves excluded from society, and attacked on every occasion, are
under the necessity of providing for themselves some private cavern. They
retire and constructing a hut in the neighboring woods, remain private, and
issue forth only at night, not being able, from the structure of their eyes, to
bear the brilliant light of the day. In these excursions they plunder
indiscriminately, not considering themselves interested in preserving the laws
and customs of their country; and frequently being unacquainted with them, they
will destroy the property, and do whatever mischief they can, without being
immediately discovered. Their appearance has considerable effect in exciting
these unfriendly opinions of the Albinos in the minds of the people. They go
entirely naked; their skin is white, but has not that animated appearance so
perceptible in Europeans; it has a dull, deathlike whitish cast that conveys an
idea more of sickness than of health. Their hair is a red or ashes-coloured
yellowish wool; and their eyes are uniformly white, in that part by which
others are distinguished into the black, gray, and blue eyes. They are set deep
in the head, and very commonly squint; for as their skin is deprived of the
black mucous web, the distinguishing characteristic of these Africans, so their
eyes are destitute of that black matter resembling a pigment, so uniformly
found in people of all countries, and so useful in preventing the eye from
being injured in cases of exposure to a strong light.

These people rendered unfortunate by a prejudice of their countrymen, are born
of black parents, they have all the features of other inhabitants, but differ
from them only in these circumstances. The difference in color cannot arise
from the intercourse of whites and blacks, for the whites are very rarely among
them, and the result of this union is well known to be the yellow or mulatto.
Many of the Natives assert that they are produced by the women, being debauched
in passing through the woods by the large Baboon, the Ourang-outang, and that
species in particular called the Quaga mooroos. No satisfactory discovery has
been made to account for such singular, but not unfrequent, phenomena in the
species, it may perhaps be ascribed to disease, and that of the leprous kind,
with more reason than to any other cause that has yet been assigned; the
generally apparent vigor of the individuals being the only material objection.

The time of new moon is always attended to, and celebrated as a festival by
the Ebo nation. No work is done on this day, nor do they enter into contracts,
or execute business, though the occasion be of ever so ungent a nature. The
different families assemble at an appointed place, and begin to dance by the
time it is clear day, and continue till the heat becomes disagreeable: they
then retire and enjoy each others company in small parties, in different places
throughout the day, drinking of palm wine, and renewing the dance in the
evening.

Their year is divided into four parts; the sunny season, the tornado season,
the rainy season, and the foggy season, no subdivion, such as months and weeks,
are attended to, except the different periods of new moon, by which they
ascertain the time of planting their rice, hunting, fishing and building.

The sunny season commences about the last of December, and ends about the last
of April, continuing not less than four months, in which time the inhabitants
collect the different kinds of fruit, intended for provisions; gather in their
rice, and provide in general against the more unfriendly season. The country
being situated between the 10 and 12 of south latitude, this season answers to
that of summer in our climate; the month of February being esteemed midsummer
with them. In this season the inhabitants are frequently visited by the land
cloud, called ferrino by the Portuguese, which is most frequent in the dry
sultry weather, about the time of noon, and mostly when easterly winds prevail.
It makes its appearance like a cloud, or thick white mist extended but a few
hundred yards in breadth, but in length covering the space of one or two miles,
in height not exceeding one hundred feet. There are many varieties, however, in
these particulars of extent, it being remarked that the largest are in general
the least distressing, from the circumstance of their being more diffused, and
less dense than the smaller. When one of these clouds appears, the inhabitants
shut themselves up in their houses, the goats, sheep, etc. fly for shelter to
the nearest hovels or thickets, and every animal appears anxious to avoid
exposure to its influence. When it comes in contact with the body, a sensible
increase of heat is first observed, the respiration is then instantly affected
in a very peculiar manner, attended with an itching, prickling sensation on the
skin, increasing with the length of exposure, so as to be almost intolerable,
with a dryness and actual change of color in the negro, from the black, to a
dusky gray. It does not appear to affect the respiration by any sensible
quality of its own, for no stricture or pain is perceptible about the breast
when taken into the lungs, but an extravagant anxiety, an uneasiness of mind, a
want of some thing to support life, the nature of which we did not understand,
was very evident. Its increased heat could not be the cause, for common
atmospheric air of that or a much greater temperature, would not produce
effects in any degree equal to this -- viz. the destruction of life. Its color
and its continuing in contact with the surface of the earth, although warmer
than the surrounding atmotsphere, will prove it to be a fluid very different
from common air; probably some exhalation or eruption, similar to the volcanic,
discharged from the earth in the vast deserts eastward of this, by the violent
and constant action of heat, and wafted on by the prevalence of earsterly
winds. This at least is certain, that it is an air deprived of that property by
which life is supported, for it uniformly extinguishes the fires over which it
passes. This cloud is more particularly injurious in high and open situations,
in the neighborhood of the city, where the country is low, and sheltered by
the adjoining hills; instances of death from this source are but rare; back of
this, however, where the country is higher and more exposed, they are by no
means unfrequent, particularly among the wild animals; sometimes likewise, the
domestic animals, and occasionally the unfortunate inhabitants experience its
destructive influence.

The weather continues warm without interruption, except by a few occasional
showers of rain, till the last of April, when the season of Tornados commences.
These are violent hurricanes that infest the warm tropical elements, throughout
this part of the year. They are in general preceded by an uncommon degree of
calmness and stillness in the air, the leaves of the trees cease to move, and
the ponds and other waters resemble glass by the smoothness of their surfaces,
every thing indicating a supension of circulation in the atmospheric air. In
that night and next day, the wind rises, but is extremely irregular, changing
rapidly to all points of the compass, and-blowing from them only in sudden
gusts, or what are called flaws. At length a sudden and violent blast is
observed from the west; the horizon begins now to be covered with scattered
clouds, and one black, peculiarly thick and heavy cloud makes its appearance in
some point westwardly. This advances rapidly, extending itself over the greater
part of the horizon, attended with constant and reiterated claps of thunder,
and the most severe flashes of lightning, which appear to contend for
pre-eminence with the extraordinary darkness, which would otherwise prevail;
torrents of rain succeed, which by their weight and violence, would threaten to
force away even the earth itself in its course. To a scene of this kind I was
witness, after my return from the present expedition, while we lay on the river
receiving the remainder of the cargo. I thought it the most awfully majestic of
any sight I had ever beheld, and such as would afford a most elegant field for
the descriptive genius of some poet, to display itself into advantage. To see a
partial midnight, like a monster winging its course through the air, darting
from its horrid brow the incessant streams of electric fire, enforcing silent
and awful attention by the constant and reiterated peals of dreadful thunder,
and marking its progress by the vast deluge of rain which uniformly falls as it
advances, leaves an impression on the mind of the most imposing grandeur that
can be imagined.

This disagreeable season, in which the inhabitants live under the continued
impression of fear, is not as lengthy as the others. It commences as mentioned
before, in the last of April, and is generally over by the middle, or last of
June. About this time the rainy season sets in, and continues without
interruption till the end of September, in all which time, scarcely a day
passes without the country being drenched by one or more showers of rain, the
violence and force of which, can scarcely be conceived by those who have only
lived in the northern or even middle latitudes. Next ensues the season very
properly called the Foggy, from the sun being obscured throughout the greatest
part of the day, by a thick dense fog, which falling at night, covers the whole
horizon so completely as not to admit of a view, except for the distance of a
few yards. This is doubtless occasioned by the cold in the upper regions in the
atmosphere, condensing the water evaporated from the ponds, marshes, and low
grounds, which are all overflown and covered with water, by the excessive rains
in the preceding season. The heat of the sun produces the evaporation, the cold
of night ensuing, condenses the vapor which descending in consequence,
obscures the prospect, till the sun on the succeeding day, restores it to the
form of vapor, and occasions a further exhalation. This continues until the
excess of water is either evaporated, or has run off, which generally takes
place about the last of December -- the succeeding, or sunny season, gliding on
imperceptibly as this declines. The first part of this season is properly
speaking, their winter, for though the weather about noon would be called warm
by persons in our climate, yet the mornings are in general, such as are styled
raw and cold.

My time was now constantly occupied by the customs and characters of the
people, among whom I lived; and the 22 days of danger and fatigue, which I had
endured on the journey, appeared but as hours of pleasant trial long past, for,
from the 7th. of March, the day of the departure of the messengers, to their
return on the 3d. of April, having no other objects to engross my attention, I
had become so perfectly familiar with my company and way of life, that I could
almost have brought myself, if self alone were concerned, to relinquish the
bustle and cares of enlightened society, to partake of the simplicity and kind
manners of the cheerful African.

I had become desirous of acquiring all their knowledge, and found the people
ready to communicate what they knew; -- among others of their arts, and of the
most important to them, that of extracting the oil from the fruit of the palm
tree, excited my curiosity, because the process indicates a combination of
ideas, that the Africans are alleged incapable of maintaining.

The palm tree -- the object which first attracts the observing eye of the
stranger, and the regard of the natives, is called Avoura; the various uses to
which it is capable of being applied, justify their predilection. It rises to
the height of, from 58 to 60 feet, presents a trunk at its full growth of from
30 inches to 3 feet in diameter, at the height of 4 feet from the ground it
insensibly lessens, but without branches to the top, where it may be about a
foot or more, in diameter. From this part the branches, or rather fibrous
leaves, expand in a beautiful tuft like rays from a center, to the variable
length of six, eight, and twelve feet. In order to procure the wine and the
fruit, they climb this tree, with remarkable speed and adroitness, by means of
a rope, or hoop, which encloses the trunk of the tree, but so as to leave
commodious room for action to the climber. He being provided with his empty
calabashes, and a knife in his girdle, places himself within the hoop, against
which he leans his back, and raises himself up by his feet, placed against the
tree, till he can rise no higher, when he has thus far elevated himself, he
grasps the tree in his arms, and raises the hoop as far up as it will extend,
and again leans against the hoop, thus continues to raise himself by his feet
and the hoop, until he gains the top, where with his knife, he cuts away such
of the branches as are necessary, to afford room for his calabash. He then
proceeds to make an incision in the tree, and forms a lip or spout, for the
conveyance of the juice, which flows in a few days from this aperture.
Sometimes they fix a small piece of a hollow cane in the hole, through which
the liquor flows for nearly a month, they taking care to supply new vessels to
receive it accordingly as the others fill; when it appears to flow slowly, they
kindle a fire at the foot of the tree, and it again flows, as fast as formerly,
but the tree is then exhausted, and will not bear again, but it is converted to
domestic uses. The juice when fresh drawn, resembles water slightly colored by
milk; in the course of a few hours, however, it undergoes a light fermentation,
and becomes a wine of very pleasant flavor, much resembling that of the weak
Spanish white wines, but soon loses these properties, being unlike other wines,
growing worse by age. But the fruit is the most valuable part; this grows at
the top between the branches; when young, it is used as food by roasting, and
is of delicate flavor, being covered when full grown and ripe, with a hard
shell of a brown color, but which when cut, appears black in the edge. The
oil, so essential an article of food, and of domestic use, for anointing their
bodies, feeding their lamps, and various other uses, is procured by expression.
The nuts are broken in a trough made of a hollowed tree, and planks radely hewn
are then placed over each other for the press, the power of compression being
produced by a long piece of timber, acting as a lever, is made firm at one end,
close beyond the planks, and resting on them, the other end is forced down by
the weight of a number of persons, who place themselves on it, until they find
by the quantity of oil that has run off, that it has been sufficiently pressed.
The oil appears of a crude reddish color when fresh, but changes to yellow,
and at length to white. To the palate of the white man, this oil in any state
is very nauseous at first, until like tobacco, from being disagreeable, habit
renders it pleasant; the Africans employ it in all their meals, with yams,
rice, millet, fish, and even with beef and mutton.

The palm possesses many useful qualities beside these above described; and in
respect to beauty, it must certainly be ranked first of the graces of the
forest, or the landscape; of inferior trees and shrubs, Africa affords
abundance. I have already noticed some on the route toward the capital; but the
toils of travel, and the calls of appetite under circumstances, such as I made
my tour hither, left very little room for the mental taste to feed upon, and
perhaps at times jaundiced the eye, and converted the luxuriance of the
enamelled plain or fruitful wilderness, into simple uninteresting wastes;
certain it is, that on my excursions in my hours of leisure, the wild boar that
would have appeared an object of horror, under the impressions of fatigue and
anxiety, no longer excited any apprehensions; I could calculate upon the
whiteness of his tusks, and the moroseness of his aspect, as objects of traffic
and curiosity; and I would instead of trembling, lest I should hear, travel
under the dews of night, heedless of sleep, to listen to the hoarse voice of
the lion. Of this noble animal, I saw none on my journey hither, and but two
old ones and a cub, during my stay in Ebo. The antelope whose venison alone I
sought, now excited my curiosity by its grace, innocence, and agility; the
elephant, the tiger, and the wolf, are become objects too familiar to need
description. Industry prompted by the appetite of human curiosity, has
familiarized the inhabitants of the most populous cities with these beasts of
the desert; and we no longer have to learn from books, how close description
adheres to nature. Goats of a large long bearded species, short horned, and
with a curved profile, like the Spanish gennet; the celebrated African sheep
with the hair coat, and tallow tail; and the horses small, but hardy. The cows
are small, and yielding but little milk, and the art of making butter was
unknown to the people of Ebo; I endeavored to teach my housekeepers the
process, but their good humor prevailing on me, or their own want of
habituated performance, always frustrated my efforts to teach them what might
have proved so highly useful.

Among the plants and shrubs that I saw, and could form any knowledge of, were
the sisban, or large thorny sensitive plant, sometimes called the good morrow,
these are abundant among the underwoods. The bind-weed that winds about the
loftiest trees, exhibited a beautiful object, it bears a many-leaved flower,
with purple and white horns; it blows at sunrise, and sheds at the approaching
night, for about six weeks, (a moon and a half); it grows extremely thick,
either from seeds, or branches torn and placed in soft mold within the reach of
the sun's rays; the children of the natives amuse themselves in planting it,
and forming arbours, within which they spend several hours of the warm part of
the day. The gum tree and the palmetto, are among the useful and elegant
productions of the climate; the basil and the annota, are beautiful flowering
shrubs; the Guiney a^e, of the bark of which they make cords; the acacia, is
also abundant; and the sides of the sloping hills, exhibit the white Narcissus
and the Convolvulus. In the flat grounds, and on the edges of the rivers, the
mangroves are frequently to be found, and fertility always with them; here
also, there are some species of the willow, distinguishable from the European,
by the weakness of its wood, and by the leaf being round at the point. Among
the fruit trees that I have not mentioned before, are the Guava, of three or
four species, which are esteemed by the inhabitants as powerful remedies in the
cure of dysentery, likewise the Pomegranate, with all its beauties. The
Amaranth that spends its odours in the morning, and the Lotus or night lily,
the white, yellow, and red, that droop at the approach of day, and perfume the
air with their intoxicating fragrance during the night only, are abundant here.

The brooks and rivulets yield their abundance likewise, for beside the Carps
the Grig, and the Perch, that are to be had in great numbers, with others that
I cannot describe, the rivers at their mouths, and up as far as the tides flow,
afford lobsters, crabs, prauns, cray-fish, soles, mullets, etc. in great
abundance; while the thickets on their banks, afford the Guiney-hen, the Moor
fowl, the Ortolan, and innumerable others.

Between the amusements in the villages, and the pleasures of various
expeditions into the country, I could bear with perfect ease, the long absence
of accounts from the ship; it was not the 1st. of April, and the people were
not yet returned, although I had understood they could reach the ship in ten
days by the course of the river; I amused myself in shooting birds and other
curious animals, or in pursuing the monkeys, in the vallyes and woods. Of these
animals, beside the small green and brown species, I saw several of a large
kind, of a yellowish cast, and with white bellies; greet parrots, scarlet
birds, honey-birds, the long tailed fly-bird, gray parrots, and green and red
paroquets; the vulture and many other birds well known to the naturalists. I
was frequently accompanied by the old chief, who was delighted with the
execution of my gun, and made himself acquainted with its use, as well as the
nature of gunpowder, so far as to understand that it was composed of very
simple materials.

On the 3d. of April, while I was on an excursion abroad, one of the messengers
returned from the ship, and I found him before me at my hut in the evening,
with a packet from the Captain, advising me of the goods which he had sent by
the shallop, to the mouth of the little Congo, and giving me directions how to
proceed.

The information being communicated to the old chief, he informed me he would
send a number of experienced old men with me, to choose such articles as they
should approve; and after three days, provisions and horses being provided, we
set out, the company consisting of six of the deputation, with some of their
families, a number of persons to carry provisions and goods, and my two wives.
We had nearly 100 miles to go, which engaged us six days; riding proved very
unpleasant to me, on account of the heat and the want of a saddle. We found the
boats as we were directed, and a cargo of brandy, rum, gin, and tobacco, a few
coarse guns, some ammunition, swords, knives, spears, and ornaments, such as
rings of various kinds, for the legs, arms, and fingers, some gilt and plated
breast plates for their warriors, tinsel laces, and some glass-ware. An
assortment so extensive and rich in their eyes, had never been there before;
and bargains were very soon made for goods, in exchange for 100 slaves, (being
ordered not to bring down more) for the rest I procured ivory and gold, in dust
and bars. In these dealings I found my wives of more use to me than my
companion Hurdee, for they sincerely studied my interest, while he studied to
profit himself.

Being informed by my wives, that if I had a quantity of goods at the capital,
I should be likely to turn the whole to valuable account, I determined to take
with me as much as the horses we had could bear, and the people for a
reasonable reward, would be prevailed on to carry. Accordingly we set out on
our return to the city, where we arrived without any other difficulty, than
what arose from the ordinary labor of travel, and the heat of the weather, for
I was now too well acquainted with the comforts of repose under the canopy of
heaven, without any other furniture than the thick leaved trees, to complain at
trifles.

I was considerably diverted during my return by the effects which ornaments
produced on the vanity of those who had acquired them, either by traffic or
labor. Their passion for spiritous liquors, was likewise excessive, but I was
both surprised and pleased, to find their effects on the tempers of the
Africans, so very different from that of our American savages. Those who
purchased them, used them at first divertingly, trying the taste of them in
small sips, frequently repeated until their operation commenced, or the
experimenters became tolerably intoxicated. A rude scene of drollery then was
acted; fits of laughter and antic pranks were played; the parties running,
hallowing, climbing trees, and the like, without the least disposition to
mischief or ill humor. I reflected frequently on the outrages and crimes
committed in drunkenness by the American Indians, but could not account in any
satisfactory way, for the singular contrast between their behavior, and that
of the Africans under similar circumstances.

We were received with great satisfaction by the old chief and his family, and
by our general acquaintances in the city; the goods brought by the deputation,
gave him particular satisfaction, and I contrived to convince him of my
gratitude for his attention, by a present of some paste jewelry, which though
coarse in the eye of one acquainted with their true worth, were of a luster and
value, in the eyes of the Ebo king and his people, comparatively superior to
the diamonds of the Indies; a handsome hanger with a plate hilt, completed my
present, and made him in his own estimation, one of the richest of potentates.

Having arranged affairs for the sale of the remaining effects, the
intelligence was soon spread around the adjacent villages, and the whole as
soon converted into ivory, and gold in bars and dust. It soon became necessary
for me to prepare for the chief, but most irksome and difficult part of my
duty. The slaves that I had purchased were young men, many of whom being eager
to escape from their bondage in Ebo, preferred the evil that they "knew not of"
to that which they then felt; but the majority were evidently affected with
grief at their approaching departure.

Arrangements were made, and a sufficient body of the Ebo people undertook to
accompany me as a guard to the place of embarkation; provisions were provided
for the journey, so that each of the slaves was well fed, and a load of
provisions or goods given him to carry. They were tied to poles in rows, four
feet apart; a loose wicker bandage round the neck of each, connected him to the
pole, and the arms being pinioned by a bandage affixed behind above the elbows,
they had sufficient room to feed, but not to loose themselves, or commit any
violence; and as the guard was provided with arms, we had nothing to apprehend
during the night, as we divided the Ebo people into parties, one of which slept
while the other watched.

We set out from the city about 5 o'clock in the morning; the old King and his
family, the elders and their families, and my two wives; of the former I took
my leave, with evident marks of regret; the old man telling me if I should come
that way soon, he would be fond of seeing me at my own house, for he should
continue henceforth to call that part of his own, mine, which I had occupied;
my wives accompanied me.

This journey was extremely different in its nature from that in which I had
last passed this way; the giddy pranks of the vain, or the inebriated Ebo, was
woefully contrasted by the sullen melancholy, and deep sighs of the poor Galla
prisoners: often did they look back with eyes flowing with tears, turn sudden
round and gaze, seeming to part with reluctance, even from their former
bondage. It was excessively affecting to me, but I considered that death night
have been their sure otherwise, and I endeavored to reconcile them to their
condition, by representing flattering accounts of the country to which they
were going; that the bonds they then bore were only to prevent their flight;
that they should be at their liberty where they were going, and have plenty to
eat, drink, etc. These assurances occasioned a temporary composure, and we at
length arrived at the place of our embarkation; two boats had been brought up,
as the shallop drew too much water; the slaves were put on board, and
necessarily in irons brought for the purpose. -- This measure occasioned one of
the most affecting scenes I ever witnessed: their hopes with my assurances had
buoyed them up on the road; but a change from the cordage to iron fetters, rent
their hopes and hearts together: their wailiags were torturing beyond what
words can express; but delay at this crisis would have been fatal; the boat's
crews were acquainted with the duty, and they were all safely embarked.

Meanwhile I had retired from the painful scene, and had to arrange my
departure so as to leave the two affectionate creatures who had been so anxious
to procure me every satisfaction during my residence with them. It was a task
more delicate (although affection cannot be supposed as concerned) than may be
believed by those who are unacquainted with vicissitudes of an adventurous
life, and such as would be deemed absurd to those whose standard for judging
the feelings and actions of all mankind is formed by the education, the habits,
and prejudices of a particular society. I had prepared some presents for them,
consisting of such trifles as I deemed suitable to their sex and tempers;
Koomla the tallest was a graceful young woman, and possessed a degree of
sensibility and disinterestedness that might be deemed uncommon even under a
fair complexion and a more temperate climate. Yanee whose temper was more
lively, displayed her feelings in a different way; Koomla with her head
reclined, expressed herself by sighs and upbraidings that I should go without
her; Yanee believed that I would, as I said, soon return again; the former
would not accept my presents, the latter enjoined her to keep them for my sake,
and told me she would make it her care to please Koomla till I should return:
she would still fain that both should go with me. -- I promised shortly to
return, and enjoined them to take care of each other, that on my return I might
find both well as I meant to reside then with them. They followed me to the
edge of the river and held me by the coat till I broke from them and jumped on
board the boat, when they both burst into tears, and were carressed by the rest
of the natives among whom I had distributed such little baubles as remained
with me.

We soon lost sight of them in a winding of the river; and continued going down
with the current till night; the slaves seemed every hour to feel their
situation more grievously, and I ordered them each a dram of liquor which for a
while exhilerated their spirits, and quieted their cares. The narrowness of the
river, and the difficulty of rowing from the shoals, and fallen trees that
thwarted the current, obliged us to lie too; we accordingly made fast an
anchor, and lay with the two boats along side of each other, keeping a regular
watch during the night. We furnished the slaves with provisions, but whether
through grief or sulleness, very few of them would partake of any refreshments
beside water.

As soon as we had light we unmoored, and before noon we reached our shallop,
extremely fatigued from the heat and closeness of the air, the banks of each
side as we passed, being overgrown with wood and thicket, obstructing its free
circulation. We had now another disagreeable piece of duty to execute, viz. the
removal of the slaves from the small boats into the shallop; they were in want
of room, and it was suggested to loose six of them at a time; we according
moved to the center of the river, and being moored by a grapling, began to
remove them; they appeared generally more quiet, and willing to act as we
directed by the interpreter than usual, and had now all been removed, and
placed below, but the last six, whom we suffered to remain on the deck; when we
had not under weigh, and were passing through a narrow part of the river, two
of them found means to jump overboard; a sailor who was in the small boat
astern, seized one of them by the arms, and the end of a rope being thrown to
him, the slave was taken on board, though not without some difficulty. The
others who had been at the oars, seeing their fellows, one of them seized, and
the other struck on the head with a pole, set up a scream, which was echoed by
the rest below; those that were loose made an effort to throw two of the
sailors over board; the rest, except the one in the boat and at the helm, being
asleep: the noise had now roused them, and the scream had impressed them with
some degree of terror; they sezied on the guns and bayonets that lay ready, and
rushed upon the slaves, (...) of whom from below had got loose, and were
endeavoring to set the rest free, while those we had to deal with above, were
threatening to sacrifice us to their despair. These transactions were but the
events of a moment; I had neither gun nor sword, and to retire in search of
either, would have been to give the slaves a decisive superiority; I laid hold
of the palloon stick, and had raised it to strike one of them who had nearly
wrested a gun from one of the sailors, but before I could give the blow, I
received a stroke of an oar, which severed my little finger from my hand; I
know not how it was that I felt nothing of the severe pain for the moment, a
slight twitch on the hand was the only sensation I experienced; the blow was
broken that I had intended, but I renewed the effort, and with effect, for I
levelled the fellow, and the sailor recovered his gun, whom I could not prevent
from running the poor negro through the body; the hatch was open, and he fell
among his fellows, who had, crowded tied, and ironed as they were, to assist as
far as they were able, by holding our legs, encouraging their companions, and
shouting whenever those above did any thing that appeared likely to overcome
one or other of us. We at length overpowered them; one only having escaped and
one being killed, the rest we immediately bound in double irons, and took care
from thence till our arrival at the ship, not to suffer any of them to take the
air without being made fast. Five of the sailors were considerably, but not
dangerously hurt, and of the slaves, those who had been riotous above and
below, nine were severely wounded.

We reached the ship in five days from our first embarkation, where we were
received with much satisfaction; the officers had all provided themselves with
three or four wives each, and rebuked me for not bringing mine along, alleging
that they would, according to the account given by their messmates, bring a
good price when we arrived in America. I was sorry, however, to find that two
of our best seamen had expired during my absence, from the excessive fatigue of
the ships duty, and the heat of the climate.

While I was away, the Captain had opened a trade in another channel, he had
obtained (...) slaves in the place where he lay, beside gold and ivory; and had
contracted with some French and English factors up the river Reyo Naunus, for
the remainder of his cargo, and for his sea stores. We accordingly weighed
anchor and stood for that river, which lies about 40 leagues N. of the Reyo
Pongo, or in 10 degrees. 40 min. south, and on the 16th. of May arrived off the
Cape, which forms one side of the southern outlet of that river.

The Reyo Naunus is navigable above 150 miles from its mouth; its banks are
low, fertile, and moderately inhabited, but within a few miles of the sea; for,
advancing farther into the country it is swampy, unwholesome, and uninhabited
for seventy or eighty miles above; beyond which, the ground again obtains its
elevation, so that health and population are seen in union with a luxuriant
country, and a pleasant climate. Here the factors of European nations have
established a settlement, and lead a life of heedless extravagance and
dissipation. The American and European traders to this country, supply them
with all the luxurious produce of the world, with wines, jewelry, and costly
^^^thing. The produce of their gardens, uniting the productions of every
climate by being maintained at a great expense of negro labor, is obtained in
great perfection by a few, and in abundance by all. Although a plenteous
climate and limited society, renders hospitality scarcely praiseworthy, and
although every individual, even of moderate property, supports his own
establishment, of house, gardens, horses, and slaves; these settlers
unquestionably deserve notice, for among them hospitality exists, in a degree
unknown in other countries.

The Captain and I on our arrival, went on shore to lay in stock and water, but
had contemplated returning as soon as we should have engaged with some person
to supply us; we were met, however, and invited to the house of an Englishman,
who had once followed the sea; he entreated us to spend the day with him, and
that in the meantime, our business could be done by ordering what we wished
from his house. It was early, and we were provided with a sumptuous breakfast
of chocolate, tea and coffee, elegantly served up in beautiful China and plate,
with fruits of various kinds in glass ware. Several of the neighboring factors
joined us, and appeared jealous of our accidentally becoming guests of one and
not of the other; however, that the society of the place should be kept up,
they agreed (without asking our consent) that we should spend a day with each
of them, in order. We objected to this excessive liberality, but were obliged
to stay dinner with one, and sup with another, to take a bed with a third, and
a glass of wine en passant, with half a dozen more; we were conducted to the
gardens that I have before noticed, and heard the anecdotes of the several
plantations, and possessions from the first settlement. As the heat of the day
increased we retired, and the sacrifices to Bacchus commenced, with what they
called a whetter before dinner. Some of our company, however, had been rather
earlier at their devotions; -- but as the minutiae of the two days which we
were obliged to spend with them, would be tedions, a general description of
their customs and mode of life, will be more suitable and comprehensive.

These factors mostly consist of persons who have led a seafaring life, but
being left in the country either by design or accident, have gradually become
attached to the indolence and indulgence which the climate affords. The woods,
the rivers, and the labors of the Africans, afford all that luxury can require
for the table, and trade supplies the rest. One of them, John Stone by name,
whose house we had first entered, was from the north east of England, and had
resided at the Colong about 8 or 10 years. He had at first sight, (these were
his words) attached himself to me partially, and took much pains to induce me
to remain there, pointing out the advantages that I should derive from being
the only American in the settlement, and the independence I would speedily
acquire by trade in the interior, from the experience in that line which he
learned I already had. These temptations offered in the moments of hilarity
made but a feeble impression on me, and the laxity of manners and intoxication
that I saw, did not appear so much the effect of common and general custom, as
of a supposed desire of these settlers, to contribute to the comfort and
pleasure of persons who had partaken of none, but the few enjoyments of an
adventurous life, for a long time previous.

But I proposed describing their way of life, I need not remark on the
customary plurality of women in the domestic establishment, but will only
observe that the whites adopt this fashion of the country in all its extent;
the morning beverage of Madeira or Lisbon wines, spiritous liquors, or the more
palatable liqueurs of the belle nation, circulate during the forenoon, which is
devoted to visiting from house to house. The hour of dinner is that which fixes
company to a point, as all keep open and ample boards; it is not so much the
question whether they shall all dine together, as with what particular one that
shall be, and each person wishing to be the favored man, the best
accommodation has generally the preference, which makes every one emulous to
have the most tempting viands and agreeable fare. This spirit so liberal in
appearance, is yet not the effect of an amiable passion, but rather the
contrary, and the excesses of which, is the parent will, be perhaps the best
test to prove its mischievous tendency.

The board is scarcely spread, and the guests seated when the debauch begins;
for their behavior is untestrained by that taste for decorum which is always
inspired by the society of amiable and accomplished women, while the rudeness
of the conversation is generally assorted with the uncourteous way of life, to
which the company has been habituated. They come to the table nearly
intoxicated, and before dinner is completed, they become downright drunk; the
vacancy which marks the uncultivated mind, affording no room here for useful
conversation or agreeable hilarity, folly and wantonness supply their place.
The coarse jocularity of destroying their apparel or wasting the food, is their
amusement; while the most exquisite viands are wasted without utility, and the
appetite being palled by superabundance, loses all its value but that which
gratifies the vanity of the provider, by indulging the waste and absurdity of
his guests. After the wine has circulated freely, the meats are even
occasionally dashed about at the heads of the best humoured, or most patient of
the company, and the empty dishes, plates, and tables are demolished to show
the spirit of the party, and the lengths to which they could carry a joke.

A man of high spirit on an occasion of this kind, has been known to furnish a
second, and a third course for a like entertainment, each of which met with a
similar fate -- and the whole was afterward celebrated as a high frolic.

At the conclusion of these debauches, the black wives who know their duty,
attend and convey each exemplary master to his own house. This, with the simple
variation of hunting, shooting, and fishing parties, at particular seasons,
giving orders for the management of their gardens, their meals, and
occasionally their traffic, is the round of life the white people lead in this
settlement.

My landlord had contrived to acquire convertible property, to the amount of
between 3 and 4000 l. he had originally hoped to have returned to Europe, and
spend the remainder of his life happily, but he confessed he did not then think
he could be comfortable any where else, and had determined to stay where he was.

I had however, conceived different ideas of comfort, and though I could not
shun their noisy and mad festivity for the time, was convinced that if I
possessed the means which my host then did, that I should find scenes on the
banks of the Hudson or Delaware, where it could be converted to more rational
and desirable purposes.

As our cargo was now complete, and our stock and water provided, sufficient
for the passage home, it was high time to depart, which we did not without much
obstruction from our madly hospitable factors, and with aching heads and sick
stomachs, not likely to let us soon forget them.

Our entertainers determined to accompany us to the ship, and the Captain with
some others of the factors having taken one boat, my host accompanied me in the
other; on the way he took much trouble to persuade me to leave the ship and
stay with him, and offered me 300 l. per annum to quit the ship and keep his
books. It was in vain that I told him I could not obtain a discharge from the
vessel, that all the accounts were kept in my hand writing, and that I was not
sanguine enough of advantage to induce me to stay, even if I had the power; he
still continued to urge his proposal. I was however, indeed much allured on
further reflection, by the knowledge I had of my own resolution against a
dissipated life, and particularly by the prospect of making a rapid fortune, so
much within my power, by my acquaintance with the Ebo King and people, and by
the progress I had made in their language; so much, that could the difficulties
which I saw in my way, be removed, I should have embraced the offer.

We reached the vessel, and with such rough fare as we possessed, endeavored
to regale our visitors, who took leave of us with the evening, but not without
a more pressing invitation to me, to get on shore.

We were now to prepare for sea; our vessel lay nearly a mile from the shore,
and our cargo was all on board; but a very severe distemper already threatened
the slaves; they had become sullen and melancholy, and discontented with their
food, and confinement. The air of the ship, and the scene before me, perhaps
together with the remaining fumes of debauch on shore, contributed to render me
discontented with my situation. I revolved in my mind that I had now discharged
my duty to the owners, that I had but a few entries to make to complete the
accounts, and while the hope of fortune and the temptations of the English
factor, pressed upon my recollection; I determined finally, to finish my
business, and embark in the enterprise that now occupied every turn of my mind.

The work being executed in the heat and enthusiasm of my resolution; I had now
to contrive the means of my departure. The Captain could not according to his
articles, give me a discharge, but this obstacle was only a stronger
instigation to persevere in the attempt. Every person of the ship's company but
the Captain, Surgeon, and myself, had stated duties in the watch, which from
the arrival of the slaves, was constantly and rigdly kept up: the only boat not
on board was chained astern, and this it would be impossible to get clear
without exciting alarm.

I had marked the advice of the factor, not to leave the ship till on the verge
of her departure; we had dropped down with the tide, and moored by the best
bower and stream anchor, in a fine sandy bottom, but the opposite shore was
marshy: the next morning was to be that of our departure. My determination to
escape was confirmed by my accidentally seeing as I passed the main hatch, one
of the slaves in the pangs of death; the sickness had already made considerable
progress, and I was struck with the danger that must follow when out at sea, as
the disease had already inflicted death.

My whole mind was now concentred on my escape, and I soon prepared two bottles
of spirits to give the watch, after the Captain should have gone to sleep: a
few articles of linen, my best hat, and my hanger, I set apart; and when all
had retired, about ten at night I came upon deck, and offered the boatswain,
who commanded the watch, a can of grog, of which I knew him to be not a little
fond; he freely shared it with the rest, and I was not backward in replenishing
the quantity, which had its desired effect; for I then retired, and soon after
coming up with my things, found them all extended on the deck, and fast asleep.
I fixed (...) on a plank which the carpenter had marke^ out for the scantling
of a barricade, and l^^ it down in the water by a rope's end; I the^ stripped
myself to all but my shirt and trowsers, and committed myself to the water,
intending to swim to the shore with the plank, and buoy myself up by it when I
should feel fatigued. I meant to float astern, but from want of means to manage
the plank, it had got entangled in the man ropes, I endeavored to make for the
boat, which with much difficulty, after having disengaged my clothes and
hanger, letting them go adrift, I effected. Persisting in my purpose, I once
more made the attempt; but the tide was now rapid, and I unfortunately swept
against the stream cable, by which I was turned over, and separated from the
plank. My only resource now was to adhere to the cable in order to get safe on
board if possible, and after much difficulty, I got out of the water and
clambered up to some distance: having rested for some time here, and the tide
slackening, I once more thought of committing myself to the water and swimming
to shore, when I discovered by the occasional scintillations of lightning,
three or four aligators floating below me in the current; my blood was chilled,
and I congratulated myself for the moment on my happy escape. I now concluded
to make my way back on shipboard as well as possible, which having effected, I
found my shipmates all still happy and heedless; and slunk to my birth, cooled
and fatigued, and ready for repose. On the morning as the anchors were about to
be taken up, I was called to take the usual beverage which seamen call their
morning, but pleaded illness, and was waited on by the Doctor, to whom I
without reserve, but in confidence stated the plain truth. He was much
surprised, promised secrecy, and furnished me with some of his own clothes, in
which I made my appearance upon deck, the Captain condoling with me upon my
illness, which he said was visible in my countenance, and expressing his fears
that I had caught the sickness which had already killed several of the people;
though I could with difficulty refrain from laughter, I was satisfied to find
all had gone so far well.

We had now dropped down a considerable length, and I had nearly despaired of
effecting my escape, when accident threw an opportunity in my way, that I
directly embraced. It was found necessary to take in some ballast, and the
boatswain having surfeited himself with watching the previous night, and was
unable to go on shore with the boat, I accordingly offered my services; but had
no opportunity of taking any conveniences with me, except a small cutlass and
jack knife. I determined upon effecting my purpose now once for all.

When we reached the shore I set the men to work, urging them to make haste,
while I took a short walk along the bank, to return by the time they were
ready, if not, for them to call me. Instead of taking to the water side, I soon
got out of sight of the boat's crew, and made the best of my way inland from
the water; but finding it was populous in that direction, I judged it better to
take the shelter of some brush wood and high grass that was near. They hailed
as directed, and I heard them; they searched in all directions, and passed
several times close by me, calling my name, and at length returned concluding
me lost or devoured by wild beasts. The Captain was extremely surprised to find
the sailors return without me, and determined to go on shore himself that
evening, and engage a party of the natives to go in search of me. I,
insensible, and unsuspecting of this, had not stirred before midnight from my
covert, but having marked where the sun went down, set forward from that
direction, and traveled till daylight; having found plenty of fruit, I
feasted, and chose a recess once more, and committed myself as I hoped, to
sleep. The monkeys, however, were less civil than I had before found them, they
collected in numbers about, and annoyed me by their incessant screaming and
chattering, which made me uneasy, as I feared that their noise would attract
some of the natives to the place. To avoid this, I determined to move forward,
and was accompanied by this noisy pestiferous crew, jumping from tree to tree
before and on all sides of me, crying louder if possible, than before.
Frequently did I, with the desire of revenge, wish for a gun that I might
sacrifice some of them; but in the afternoon having obtained some quietness, I
lay down to sleep; and about 9 o'clock pursued my route. Several pathways
crossing convinced me that the country was thickly peopled; I endeavored to
take that which was least trodden, but shortly after discovored five persons
crossing the path which I was pursuing, I changed my course up an ascent, and
escaped unnoticed, but had not gone above a mile when I discovered two others
somewhat ahead of me. The openness of the country now deprived me of shelter,
for a few scattered trees were all that this rising ground afforded; the two
men approaching, and I had placed myself behind a tree, shifting my position as
they drew near -- I thought they would have heard my heart beat as I stood
against the tree, so great was my apprehension; they passed me, however, and I
turned into a path that led down into the woody country. I had plucked some
fruit and sat down by a rivulet to refresh myself, when fatigue and want of
sleep overcame me, so that I lay down under shelter of a bank. About midnight,
as I computed by the time I had been asleep, I was awakened by violent claps of
thunder, the lightning streamed along the verge of the horizon, and illumined
the heavens; the dark heaps of clouds, rising volume over volume, displayed a
variety of the most sublime shadows, through the intervals of which, the
coruscations burst in a thousand points, breaking into angles, and exploding in
deep resounding peals that gradually were lost undulating on the ear, and this
still succeeded by another louder, and accompanied by a torrent that seemed to
pour from the heavens like the waters of a cataract. The storm began now to
abate, and was faintly heard muttering at a distance; but the winds rose, the
trees of the forest shook, and in alternate moments was all horrible, awful,
dark, and still. -- Drenched with rain and overcome with a depression, from the
awful scene that had passed, a momentary consideration of my present
circumstances, produced sensations that I cannot describe; my eyes overflowed
with tears which eased me of my anxiety, and I then felt an unconquerable
propensity to sleep.

The day had been far spent when I awoke; the heat of the sun was considerable;
I stripped off my dripping clothes, dried them, and bathed in the rivulet on
the banks of which I had lain. Having collected a few fruit, and being further
refreshed, I determined to pursue my route over the hill from which I had
before descended; but found I had suffered more than I previously suspected by
fatigue and by the rain: of this I was convinced by my weakness, and the length
of time employed in ascending the hill. I took advantage of a few trees that
stood near each other to rest myself, and sat down for about half an hour, when
I was alarmed by the sound of human voices. I rose up, and to my astonishment
saw a body of the natives of about twenty, armed with fire arms and spears, and
within 100 yards of me. I was immediately struck with an apprehension that they
were in pursuit of me; but concluded that the ship must have sailed before this
time. I then felt a disposition to accost them; but still undertermined I found
myself creeping along toward the opposite side of the hill on all fours. As
soon as I conceived myself out of sight I fled toward the valley with all the
speed in my power; but I fled in vain, I was discovered, and to my astonishment
and alarm, three or four shots fired after me. I redoubled my speed; but the
pursuers were too fleet, and uncertain what fate awaited me, I turned short
round and faced them; they seized and were about to tie me; I endeavored to
make them understand what I had to say in the Ebo tongue without effect but by
signs informed them that I would go without-opposition. They conducted me back
by almost the same route I had come, guarding me closely, and some of them
occasionally showing the marks of my shoes, by which I suppose they had traced
my course. We arrived that night at a village, where I had a dry hut and plenty
of rice straw to sleep upon; a party was placed to watch me, but I was supplied
with food and palm wine -- I slept soundly, but awoke feverish, and was obliged
to rise early in that condition. I felt extremely weak, but determined to go
whithersoever they led, provided my strength should be sufficient; to my
surprise, however, upon clearing a wood through which we passed, I saw the ship
close in by the shore. Mixed emotions overcome me, and I fainted; on recovery I
found the Captain, the Doctor, and some of the ship's crew around me; the
Captain received me with great coolness; but the Doctor, the mate, and sailors
all with the greatest cordiality.

Having arrived on board; the Captain upbraided me with deserting him; I
alleged in my defense that I had completed his business, and signified the
apprehensions I entertained for my health; apprehensions which have since
proved to my sorrow, were but too well founded. I did not hesitate to declare
my expectations of soon realizing a property, could I reach the Colong factory,
and desired as the ship's business was all brought up, that he would permit me
to go thither in the best manner I could. He told me that there was yet further
business to do, that he had shipped in my absence, an additional number of
slaves, brought to him down the Reyo Naunus, and that he could not agree to it,
even had that business not interfered; finding it in vain to strive farther
against difficulties, I relinquished my ideas of fortune, and reconciled myself
to return home.

I was afterward informed, that the Captain had gone on shore, finding me not
return with the boat, and learned from the people of the next village that they
had seen the footsteps of an European in their neighborhood on the preceding
day; he accordingly hired 25 of the natives to go in one direction, and an
equal number in the other, as they said I could only get out of that part of
the country by two passages, owing to the large rivers then filling with the
rains that had fallen on the inland mountains. The party that took me had
discovered my tracks, and pursued their course till they overtook me, in
consequence of which, they received a runlet of rum as a reward.

The whole number of slaves that we had now on board, I found about 500, of
whom above 50 were then lying in a dangerous state of illness; it was time for
us to depart, being now the 13th. of June, 1795. We accordingly got in our
anchors, and procured six of the natives boats, with six men in each, to tow us
down night and day, when the tide served.

On the morning of the 15th. while waiting for the tide, about 9 o'clock, we
were alarmed on beard by a quarrel in the boats. Some of our people who had
been on this coast before, had excited a spirit of competition between the
natives in the boats that towed on each of our bows; each party claiming the
greater merit, to ensure it, they proceeded from hard words to actual blows;
the party offended had drifted a little astern, the others preserved their
place; the offended now united their force, and rowed up to attack the
aggressors. These being pressed, flew up the sides of the ship, and were
pursued by the others, which made it time for us to interpose. Our only
resource was to drive both parties over the sides of the ship, we were then
swinging round, and it would be vain to expect further service from the
combatants; all hands were, therefore, ordered to quarters, and the Captain
directed he interpreter to order them from off the deck, and the ship's side,
or we should fire upon them. They directly made to their boats, but assailing
each other with knives and other weapons: some of them, to escape, attempted to
get in the cabin windows, where I was stationed with two men, I discharged a
musket over their heads, which scared them so that they jumped into the water;
their boats were cut adrift, and the tide serving, we left them in a warm
conflict, wherein several must have been killed.

We cleared the Capes without any further event worthy of notice, on the 17th
June; the wind at S. E. we steered a N. N. W. course. From thence to the 27th.
there was little to note, but the ordinary variations of wind and weather,
except the increased severity of the disorder that raged on board; it was an
inflammatory fever, attended with symptoms of dysentery in some, but mostly
with a violent inflammation and swelling of the eyes and eyelids, with a
discharge of fetid rheum. The slaves were almost uniformly afflicted with this
disorder in the eyes, even more than had been seized with the dysentery. Both
diseases soon communicated to the crew, and by the 30th. of June, we had
scarcely men enough to work the ship.

Hitherto by exercise and an open air, by keeping constantly on deck,
refraining as much from salt food as possible, and by frequent bathing on
board, I had kept myself in perfect health, though in constant terror, from the
frequent deaths of the slaves, and the sickness of the crew around me.

On the 1st. of July, I found my precautions had not availed, and the goodness
of my constitution not sufficient to support me against the prevailing disease
any longer. The fever attacked me, and my eyes swelled to such a degree that I
could scarcely open them, my spirits, however, still kept me up, and after the
eleventh day I began to recover: on the 20th. I could go upon deck, and
continued to do so, regaining my strength hourly. Early on the morning of the
24th: a vessel of war hove in sight, and as we had heard on the coast of
Africa, that war was expected between the United States and Great Britain, we
were much alarmed lest it should prove a British man of war.

The crew were divided in opinion regarding the ships form, some asserting that
she was not a British vessel; I took the glass, intending to satisfy myself and
settle the dispute, and went forward; -- I saw that the ship carried the
British colors, but alas! I had strained my sight, and never saw more. The
inflammation returned, a relapse took place, and the light of the sun became to
my eyes, as indistinct and dark as the gloom of death; the beauties of nature
to me were "blotted out for ever," and in my 23d. year, when I looked forward
to days of ease and comfort, from the resources of my activity and industry --
my path is shut up, and the world become a blank of indistinctness and
uncertainty.

A termination of this kind to the voyage, could afford me neither amusement
nor comfort, for upon reaching my native country, and returning to my once
cheerful home, the reader will easily conceive how melancholy must the
impression have been, which my misfortunes had made on my friends and family;
and how sorely I was distressed by the want of sight, and its invaluable and
consoling blessings.

But it becomes man to submit to that range of toward or untoward
circumstances, which is the birthright of his being -- to persevere calmly and
bear patiently with the changes of fortune, and the shocks of black adversity;
If he be fortuate, never let him be too confident that he is placed beyond the
reach of affliction, -- and he will thus be always willing to act the man, and
able to stem the torrent of misfortune, though equal to that which I now
sustain.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 9 next line to the bottom, for misfortunes to read misfortunes are to.
Page 12 for 1793 read 94, and for 1794 read 95. Page 18 for cruod read crowd.
Page 31 for where read when. Page 34 for not fear read not to fear. Page 47 for
chewing read chewed. Page 72 for call read called. Page 74 for to diverging
read to its diverging, and for more one read more to one. Page 75 for
intersections read interruptions. Page 112 for as read are. Page 119 for
ferrino read Ferrino. Page 122 for clements read climates. Page 154 for
partially read particularly. Page 162 for man's read main. Page 165 for and was
unable read was unable.
District of Pennsylvania, viz.
BE it remembered, That on the 3d. day of January, in the Twenty-first Year of
the Independence of the United States of America, Joseph Hewkins of the said
District, has deposited in this Office, the Title of a Book, the Right whereof
he claims as Proprietor, in the words following, viz.

A History of a Voyage to the Coast of Africa, and Travels into the Interior of
that Country, containing particular descriptions of the Climate and Inhabitants
-- and Interesting particulars concerning the Slave Trade. -- By Joseph
Hawkins, of New York -- who has since become blind, and for whose benefit it is
now Published by his Friends.

In conformity to the Act of the Congress of the United States, "Entitled an
Act" for the encouragement of Learning, by Securing the Copies of Maps, Charts,
and Books to the Authors and Proprietors of such Copies, during the time
therein mentioned.

SAMUEL CALDWELL, Clerk of the District of Pennsylvania.


