NARRATIVE OF HIS CONNECTION WITH THE OLD AMERICAN COMPANY, FROM THE FIFTH
SEPTEMBER, 1792, TO THE THIRTY-FIRST OF MARCH, 1797,

BY JOHN HODGKINSON.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY J. ORAM, NO. 33, LIBERTY-STREET

NARRATIVE, etc.
ON the 29th of March I was prevented from going on with my Character for the
Evening, by a Part of the Audience calling for Mrs. Hallam, formerly an Actress
in the Company, but who, for Reasons which will hereafter appear, was no longer
under any Engagements. Mrs. Hallam, contrary to the Regulations of the Theater,
and to an express Article signed by Mr. Hallam, came through the private Door
into the Theater, and, on the Stage, where she was supported by Mr. Hallam, a
Performer and principal Proprietor of the Theater, who addressed the Audience,
and obtained Permission for her to read a Paper intended for their hearing; the
Purport of which was, a Complaint of having been driven unjustly from the
Stage, after having been ten Years on it, without any sufficient Cause;
intimating all this had been effected by my Agency. In the Confusion which
followed, I was not allowed to justify myself. After some Time, I submitted,
engaging to exculpate myself by a Publication in the Papers, or elsewhere.

THE Proceedings of this Evening, in Connection with what had passed in the
Course of the Winter, left no Room to doubt of Concert between some of the
Spectators and Mr. and Mrs. Hallam.

ON the 31st, a still larger Party attended the Representation at the Theater,
with an apparent Determination to prejudge and condem me. Marks of this
Determination were so renewed and repeated, that I thought it no longer
possible for me to continue on the Stage. It remains for me to fulfill my
Engagement with the Public: For this Purpose I shall exhibit a brief Narrative
of my whole Connection with the American Theaters. The Result will show, that
so far from having conducted unjustly toward Mrs. Hallam, and the Public, in
Regard to her, that she has been the Source of the principal Troubles which
have arisen: that my Conduct in this Respect, at least, has been becoming my
Situation, and that it is I, and not she or Mr. Hallam, who have been injured
on the present Occasion.

I was engaged from one of the first Theaters in England, by the late Mr. John
Henry, as a principal Performer for the New York and Philadelphia Theaters, and
arrived in this Country September 5th, 1792. An Idea instilled into me, that
every Article of Life was full as cheap again here as there, made me accept a
more moderate Salary than I should have done, had I been rightly informed. I
was to remain for two Years and six Months, at three Guineas and a Half weekly;
to be secured to me for ten Months in the Year. This Contract I fulfilled on my
Part, though violated in several Instances by the Managers, Hallam and Henry,
and eleven Weeks of Salary due at this Hour to me and my Family from them, on
my original Agreements.

I found the Theater under Regulations widely different from my Expectations;
the Managers and their Families did not know each other out of the Profession;
and when they met in it, their whole Study seemed to be the sowing Dissentions
and creating different Interests -- a System of Government avowed and
recommended by Mr. Hallam. The Consequence of this was Negligence, Party, and
Strife. I soon was given to understand that this had always been the Case. Mr.
Henry's Conduct and Behavior seemed so different from the Gentleman, I had
conversed with in England, that I could not avoid forming Prejudices against
him, and in favor of Hallam. This Mr. Henry saw, and took an Opportunity of
telling me I misjudg'd him; and that Mr. Hallam, though appearing perfectly
mild and candid, secretly gave him every Disquiet and Misery, and had utterly
broke his Temper. The Want of Unanimity at (...) to a total Subversion of all
Order: Pieces were given out, and no Manager attended to point a single
Direction. The Orchestra was composed of about six Musicians, some of whom were
incapable of their Business, and had I not been induced by Considerations for
my own Reputation as an Actor, to take Care that the Stage Department was not
totally destroyed where I was concerned, this neglect would have been more
apparent than it was! Notwithstanding my Exertions, the Theater was nearly
deserted. Mr. Henry said he could not exist under such Torment longer, and
offered to sell his Share of the Property. I urged Mr. Hallam to negotiate for
it, and offered to become a Purchaser afterward from him, and that I would
undertake the conducting of the Theater. The Terms of Sale were left for Mr.
Hallam to arrange with a Friend of Mr. Henry's; and at this Period I saw a
Letter of his, requesting a speedy End to the Business; for that, sooner than
be concerned any longer where Mrs. Hallam was, he would transport himself to
Botany Bay. I deemed this the Effect of violent Anger or Prejudice, and
suffered it to make no Impression on my Mind at the Time.

IN the Month of May, 1794, Mr. Henry sold to Mr. Hallam all his Share of the
theatrical Property within the United States of America, for L 4000, payable by
four annual Instalments of L 1000 each.

IN the same Month, I purchased from Lewis Hallam one Half the Property of the
Old American Company within the United States, for L 4000, payable by four
annual Instalments of L 1000 each.

DURING the Summer, I endeavored to make such Additions to the Company as were
necessary; and on the 22d of September commenced my unfortunate Career as a
Manager and Proprietor in the City of Philadelphia. On the 20th October, Mrs.
Hallam performed Lady Rackett, in too degraded a State to be seen; and on
observing that some of the Ladies of the Theater noticed her Situation, gave
them ill Language, and finished with this Expression -- "Wretches that I
support by my Labors!"

ON the 27th of October, in a violent Fit of Intemperance, Mrs. Hallam was
quarreling with Mr. Ashton, a Member of the Company; and as the Performance of
"Wild Oats," was then proceeding, I mildly interfered, and begged her for the
Present to treat whatever the Matter was as not worth her Notice. She
immediately commenced a strain of Invective and Abuse, such as I had never
heard, or ever did expect to hear, from the Mouth of a Female Rascal!
Scoundrel! Swindler of her Husband's Property! and other Epithets equally
unjust, for two Hours was I baited with; and during the Performance of the
After-piece, "Don Juan," every Mock and Ridicule that could be was cast on my
Endeavors to conduct so troublesome a Pantomime to its Close. Some of the
Performers then with us, still remain.

ON the Morning of the 28th, I wrote Mr. Hallam a Letter to the following
Effect: "That having taken twelve Hours to pause on the unmerited Treatment I
had received, I must beg to decline any further official Capacity in the Old
American Company: observing, that the Property had been so little a Time in my
Hands; Mr. Hallam could receive no Inconveniency by accepting it back on the
same Terms I had purchased; that I had no Wish to distress him by an immediate
Removal, but would stay with him upon the Fulfillment of my original Engagements
to the Expiration of them, or the conclusion of the following York Season." To
this Letter Mr. Hallam wrote the following: Dear Sir,
I cannot answer you -- I have not closed my Eyes from the Circumstance of last
Night -- Will you meet me at Oell^^ Tavern, and we will dine alone?




I want as usual, to the Theater, to conduct the Rehearsal, and in some little
Time after my Arrival there (...) a Message from Mrs. Hallam -- that she was at
my (...) and (...) to see me. I returned for answer, I was at the Theater, and
could not attend Mrs. Hallam. She sent my Servant back to say she must see me,
and that if I would not wait on her then, she would remain till I should come
Home. I determined on seeing her: She began with Tears, a very strong Apology
for her Conduct, and said she was utterly ruined with Mr. Hallam if I persisted
in resigning the Property. I asked her if she remembered the Events of the
preceding Evening? She replied, she had no Recollection of them, and that my
Letter to her Husband was a Thunderbolt to her. I repeated the Epithets she had
made use of, and she seemed very much shocked. She begged my forgetfulness of
the past, solemnly asserting she should look upon herself as the veriest Wretch
existing, should she ever, by similar Imprudence, risk a future
Misunderstanding. I forgave her sincerely, and we parted. I dined the same Day
at a Tavern, with Mr. Hallam, according to his Appointment, who seemed, and I
believe was most sensibly affected, and I recollect made use of the following
Expression: I know that Girl so well, I Am sure she never will forgive herself,
or drink any Thing but Water as long as she lives. I told Mr. Hallam, it was a
Failing that, if not put an effectual Stop to, would destroy every Possibility
of my Continuance in the Company, or Management. I proceeded, as usual, in my
Capacity of Acting-Manager, and on the 14th of November she was again
intemperate and abusive when performing Lady Fancourt, in the Comedy of "Love's
Frailties." My Wife also now began to feel the Effects of her Pride, and was
frequently treated with every Contempt. I closed that Theater on the 4th of
December, after ten Weeks of woeful managerial Experience.

I commenced in New York, December 15th, and on the 20th Mrs. Hallam was again
in a State which incapacitated her for performing Miss Walsingham, in the
"School for Wives," in a suitable Manner. On the 29th she was considerably
worse in the Character of Marianne, in the "Dramatist." On the 5th of January,
1795, we performed "Percy," and in the Fight with Douglas, I, by Accident, cut
Mr. Hallam's Hand: Mrs. Hallam came behind the Scenes in a violent Rage, and on
being asked what had disturbed her, replied, "Why! that damned Butcher has cut
Mr. Hallam!" On the 6th of January, I wrote Mr. Hallam the following Letter:
Sir,
ON so disagreeable a Business, as it is my Duty to come to a perfect
Explanation with you, I was in hope I might gain an Opportunity of personal
Remonstrance: But no -- you seem to shun me! I had adopted a certainty that
after the very unmerited and illiberal Language heaped on my by Mrs. Hallam, in
Philadelphia, and her solemn Oath, I never should hear a Repetition, it would
have ceased. Why, Sir, am I so frequently the Cause of her present Vengeance?
And why do you not take Measures to prevent such Conduct? Is it because every
Moment of my Life is dedicated to promoting our mutual Interest? Is it because
I am incessantly studying to make the Theater respectable, and increase your
Welfare and Prosperity? Why, Sir, last Night, for an Accident of trivial
Nature, had I the very delicate Term of Butcher applied to me? And why, a few
Evenings back again, that of Swindler and Rascal? Good God, Sir, if either have
a Claim on the other for Gratitude, I think it is due from you, and that your
Property by this Time, had I not stepped in and prop'd it, would have fallen to
the Ground. It becomes no Plea to assert that Reason has no Share in these
Declarations: They are private Sentiments, which Reason smoothers, and that
banished, the Soul is thrown open undisguised. I feel your Situation, Mr.
Hallam: I am cut to the Heart to see it, but I cannot, will not, remain
indifferent to my own. My Wife, Sir, is not permitted nor does she endeavor or
wish to know more of Business than I casually communicate; and as I cannot
compliment Mrs. Hallam with a better Head than my own, I don't think she can
fairly judge my Actions, and I am certain you ought not to permit her; at any
Rate I will not; and I think it but honest to inform you, the next Time I hear
her make Use of my Name undeservedly, I will immediately throw up the Business,
and call the Public as an Umpire between us. Let Mrs. Hallam vent illiberal
Language on her Dependants, if she must use it; I am none: And as to the
Property which she is weak enough to imagine so infallible, I would rather give
it up than have another Hour's concern where she is or will be a Meddler. --
Sir, we are a City Talk; and it would certainly be better to endeavor that
Mrs. Hallam should be kept at Home, than suffered to expose us and herself,
when so unfit to be seen. I know, Sir, I am speaking in plain Terms; I think it
my Duty to do so. Delicacy, when we throw apart ourselves, we cannot expect
others to preserve for us: * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
* * * * * * * * * * * * Once more, Sir, be assured, my Friendship and good
Wishes are undiminished; so much so, that I conceive it an indispensable Duty
to use no Reserve; but, pointing out the Obstacles that destroy our Harmony,
give an Opportunity of removing them, or breaking the Whole at once.

I am, Sir, etc. etc. JOHN HODGKINSON.
New York, Jan. 6th, 1795.



There is an Omission in the Letter, where the Stars are. The Part left out,
related entirely to his Son; and as he is no Way implicated in this
Controversy, it would not be proper to mention it.
THIS Letter I received no Answer to, but was informed Mr. Hallam seemed much
concerned on perusing it. On the 10th of January, Mrs. Hallam (again in a State
of partial Intoxication) performed Lady Euston, in "I Will tell you What." On the
28th equally so in the Marchioness Merida, "Child of Nature." On the 25th
February, I brought forward the Comedy of the " Jew," for the first Time in
this Theater; and in the elegant chaste Character of Eliza Ratcliffe, the
Audience witnessed an Exhibition too disgustful to remember, and too
disgraceful to the Stage to be dwelt upon. The general Cry seemed to be -- "She
must insult us no more!" I informed Mr. Hallam of this, in Company with a
Gentleman who has been long his Friend, and both our Opinions were, that if
Mrs. Hallam risked another Appearance, the People would show their Resentment.
Mr. Hallam determined on withdrawing her, and begged from me the disagreeable
Office of communicating to her the Resolution. I undertook this, and a Scene so
distressing, so harrassing to the Feelings, I scarce ever did witness, and hope
never may again. She was from before the Public one Month, and the Theater
progressed with every possible Harmony and Credit. During this Time, a Report
was industriously circulated that Laudanum was the Cause of Mrs. Hallam's
frequent Incapability. The Public Voice turned, and there was a Wish to see her
again. Convinced, whatever was the Cause, it would be her Study in future to
avoid that particular Thing, which brought her Weakness before the Public Eye,
I took Advantage of this Prepossession, and told Mr. Hallam I was certain, if
she appeared, she would be greatly received. I did this because I felt
Conviction her late Mortification must have been a strong Monitor, and possibly
a Reformation must ensue, both in Conduct behind the Scenes and on the Stage.
On the 25th of March she reassumed her Profession in Lady Teazle. The second
Character she represented was Cordelia, March 30th, in which she was not
perfectly herself. On the 10th of April she performed Louisa, in the "World in
a Village," and several People in Disgust left the Theater. On the 11th of May
she performed Miss Neville, in "Know your own Mind," a Comedy got up by me,
about a Fortnight before, for Mrs. Hodgkinson's Benefit. My Wife dressed in the
same Room, and a little Time after Mrs. Hallam's Arrival, she commenced her
abuse of me, and of the Character she was going to represent; and, looking in
my Wife's Face, cried, "Damn the Play; damn the Person who got it up, and damn
the Person for whom it was got up." The next Day I requested Mrs. Hodgkinson to
quit that Room. I then wrote to Mr. Hallam the following Letter: Sir,
I have delayed, till Mrs. Hallam's Benefit was past, communicating my
Determination on our future Connection. After the most minute Investigation on
the Possibility of Friendship or Harmony existing, I find none. There are
Obstacles insurmountable. I have combated them in Hope; I have borne them from
sincere Attachment. When I became a Partner in this Theater, it was not with
the Hope of bettering my Situation: It was to make it permanent; it was to
support, as far as I could, you; because I conceived you injured and oppressed
by your former Connection. My Opinion now is, that whatever might have been Mr.
Henry's other Failings, he saw you your own Enemy, and was convinced an
unworthy Influence made you other People's. I will not dwell on what, with me,
is fixed as Fate: We must separate. I am anxious to regain that Peace which as
a private Individual no Man possessed in a higher Degree. I wish to resign the
Management. If you will not take the Property on the Valuation of three
unprejudiced Persons, I will certainly advertise my Share to the highest
Bidder. Mr. C -- is in full Possession of my Sentiments. I would wish you to
advise with him on the best and most peaceable Mode of transacting this
Business, and or acquainting our Subscribers to the new Theater.

I am, Sir, etc. etc. JOHN HODGKINSON.




ON Monday, May 18th, the Comedy of "Which is the Man?" was performed; and the
Hair-Dresser who attended Mrs. Hallam came to my Room to say that it was
impossible for her to go on the Stage that Night, for she was so senseless she
could not sit in her Chair! It was a Benefit, and therefore the Audience could
not well be dismissed. When the Hour of commencing arrived, I was requested,
three several Times, to delay the Performance, while she had Vinegar and strong
Green Tea given, to restore her as much as possible. When she did come forward,
let those who witnessed the Spectacle declare the Shame of it.

I had soon after a Meeting with Mr. Hallam, at the House of one of the most
respectable Characters in this City; and two other Gentlemen, as mutual
Friends, attended to give their Advice. I stated my Grievances plainly before
them, and they uniformly agreed it was impossible for me to remain any longer
in the Theater if Mrs. Hallam did; and one of them observed, -- Mr. Hallam, I
have heretofore been anxious to suppress and do away Mrs. Hallam's Misfortune,
as a Calumny; but, Sir, I was present at the Representation of Which is the
Man? and when I saw her come on the Stage, I immediately left the House; and
had any one plunged a Sword through my Heart, it could not have given me a
keener Pang than I felt at that Moment. Mr. Hallam said he had no Reply to
make* he could not deny any Thing I had asserted, and that he knew my Situation
to be dreadful! I offered him, once more, the Property on the same Terms that I
had purchased it. This he declined, and promised, before the Gentlemen who had
interested themselves, to withdraw Mrs. Hallam from the Stage totally at the
Conclusion of the Season; commissioning me, at the same Time, to procure an
Actress in her Place from England. I wrote, by the earliest Vessel, for Mrs.
Johnson, and she arrived here on the first of October following. The Calamity
that afflicted this City in the Autumn of 1795 compelled us to make a Treaty
for the Boston Theater; and I was not a little surprised, while in Hartford, to
hear that Mrs. Hallam had returned to the Stage, and was performing at
Providence, with Mr. Hallam. Some few Days after our arrival in Boston, Mr.
Hallam waited on me, to say, that he should make his first Essay before that
Audience in Lord Ogleby, and that Mrs. Hallam must perform the Character of
Miss Sterling! I made no Reply; I was too much astonished! I parted with him to
reflect on what had passed. I made Enquiries of the Performers respecting Mrs.
Hallam's Conduct at Providence. They were all agreed it had, if possible, been
worse than ever. I felt shocked at Mr. Hallam's Duplicity: a manifest Violation
of his Word, without even an Attempt at Apology; without any Reason but "it
must be so!" Entire Strangers, as we were, a Misunderstanding, immediately on
our Appearance before the Public, would have been Ruin. I submitted in Silence.
In the mean Time I stood highly implicated to Mrs. Johnson* who had come three
thousand Miles to supply a Line of Characters Mr. Hallam's Insincerity would
deprive her of. Mrs. Johnson, however, with the greatest Generosity, in Part
relieved me, by saying that Mrs. Hallam might retain all the Characters she had
performed: but that, in the Arrangement of new Pieces, she should expect her
Engagement fulfilled, by being given the elegant Characters in Comedy. This I
not only promised, but stood pledged to. My Situation as Manager now became
more irksome than ever. Mr. Hallam quarrelled with me because he did not
perform many of the young, First Rate Characters, which he said he had supplied
since his first Arrival in America, and that he had not resigned them, nor ever
would. Mrs. Hallam poured on me every odious Epithet that Intemperance could
suggest. An Opportunity offered of releasing myself from this Misery, by an
Offer of Connection with the Boston Theater; but, after some Reflection, my
Respect for the Patronage I had experienced from the Citizens of New York
determined me on not accepting it. Mr. Hallam was taken ill, and I felt some
Alarm, that as yet he had never conveyed my Share of the Property to me, though
I had frequently solicited to have it done, and had paid a Part of the Purchase
Money. He recovered, and I again applied. He begged it might be postponed till
our Arrival in New York. I agreed reluctantly. When we did arrive in New York,
I repeated my Request. I was not successful, till, finally, I sent Mr. Hallam
Word I would not enter the Theater till the Deeds were executed. I got legal
Possession last March, 22 Months after the Purchase had been made. I think it
but Justice to declare, that I was informed this Conduct was not Mr. Hallam's
Will, but that Mrs. Hallam could not be prevailed on to sign. I had frequently
conversed with Mr. Dunlap, respecting my Situation, and the Torture I labored
under; and as I knew him to be attached to the Theater, in one of our
Conversations, I offered to sell him Half my Share, if he would undertake the
Acting Management; for that I had more Labor than the Mind or Body could
possibly sustain. I had applied to Mr. Hallam, to know what he meant to allow
me for my extraordinary Fatigue, and he had peremptorily refused any
Compensation; which I thought hard, because, on the first Commencement of
Theatrical Business after our Partnership, we had paid a Gentleman One Hundred
Pounds for acting as Treasurer and Book-keeper only ten Weeks. And here I hope
it will not be deemed an unnecessary Digression, if I mention what my Situation
exactly was. I had to cast and arrange the Business of every Play brought
forward. I had the various Tempers, Rivalships, and Ambitions of thirty or
forty People to encounter and please. I kept all the Accounts; I made all
Disbursements, and was made, in all Money Transactions, solely responsible. My
professional Labors were extreme, and I never finished them for the Evening
that I did not attend to take the State of each Night's Receipts. Nay, instead
of enjoying my comfortable Hour of social Intercourse with my Family, on my
Arrival Home, I had a Check Account to take, and to make the regular Entries in
my Books. I wrote and corrected every Play-Bill for the Printer. I planned and
copied every Scene-Plot for the Carpenter. I attended every Rehearsal, to give
Directions. I went through a varied and extensive Line of Characters on the
Stage. I found principally my own Wardrobe for them; and my Salary, for all
this, was twenty Dollars per Week, paid only when we performed! Mr. Hallam
received the same, and had no Share in the Fatigue. His Answer to me, on
Application to know what he would allow me, was, that "he would quit the
Theater the Moment any Man received a Shilling more than him." An idea
exceedingly unjust; for at the Time of his Purchase from John Henry, the Shares
were, Mr. Henry Four and a Half, Mr. Hallam Three and a Half; and when Mr.
Hallam agreed with me, he reserved the Difference: for the whole Property being
equally divided between us, Mr. Hallam gained a Sixteenth; as he paid Mr. Henry
no more for Four and a Half Shares, than I did him (Mr. Hallam) for Four Shares.

To return to my Narrative: Mr. Dunlap seemed inclined to treat with me, and
finally was introduced, as Acting Manager, into the Theater, with the
Concurrence of Mr. Hallam, and to receive my Assistance. I flattered myself I
was now some little Distance removed from my Disquiets; but I was disappointed.
Mr. Dunlap's Inexperience compelled me still to be the Director in the Stage
Department, according to Agreement, and I never gave an Order in Mrs. Hallam's
hearing that she did not pointedly ridicule and insult me. My Wife never passed
her, that she was not treated with every Mark of Contempt; and those who may
lack Information on this Part, or labor under a different Impression, I here
inform, that she never made one Word of Reply. I now acquainted Mr. Dunlap, it
was impossible for me to stay and perform my Agreements with him; and a very,
very irksome and disagreeable Correspondence took Place, between us in
Consequence: I offered to sell him the remaining Share I held, or to put it
into his Hands as a Trust and Security, that he should not be a Loser by my
Absence: He accepted the latter, and I wrote to the Philadelphia Managers my
Resolution, and of my Wish to gain a Situation in their Theater. They, I
presume, thought my Services of some Value for both arrived Post here, and
conversed personally with me on the Business. I asked my Terms, and to their
Honor let me thus publicly declare, I never did experience in any Negotiation
more Candor and Liberality; and had I left New York, their Acquiescence in my
Demands must have proved to me and my Family infinitely more valuable than any
Thing I ever did, or probably may hereafter attain. About this Time Mr. Dunlap
waited on me, to say, that if I could not remain in the Company, and perform my
first Contracts with him, he must relinquish his Purchase, though subjected to
very great Loss and Inconvenience thereby: He also informed me, he had written
Mr. Hallam, that Mrs. Hallam 's Continuance in the Theater was an insuperable
Objection to his making any Arrangement with him. I replied, I could not -- I
would not stay; and that I preferred retiring peaceably, to waging open
Controversy with Mr. Hallam; who, in my Opinion, from his long Services, had an
unquestionable prior Right to his Situation: -- that I felt the Injuries of Mr.
Hallam and his Family forcibly; but that I was better able to provide for, and
bear the Evils of Separation, than he was, and I would not retaliate. I
relinquished the Sale I had made to Mr. Dunlap, and he quitted the Business. On
the 17th of June last, I wrote Mr. Hallam the following Letter: Sir,
THE Season approaching to a Conclusion, it is necessary that the State in
which our Property will be involved by a Separation, should be accurately
determined and finally put to Agreement. Our Continuance of Partnership is
impossible -- and therefore it behooves both of us to promptly act as mutual
Justice may demand: -- Repeated Insult and Injury have steeled me against
further Connection; and I have only left to make such Arrangements as will
secure to me a Prevention of total Loss, in what I have taken so much Pains to
uphold and increase. You are not ignorant that the Theaters, belonging to us,
cannot be justly employed bv either without the Consent of his equal. It is not
my Wish that the Property should go to ruin: I Wish it to be prosperous: I have
brought it to that Permanency and Respectability that Misconduct alone can make
it otherwise. Your Resources, by the Return of Capt. Adamson, will be
increased: [here followed the Names of some Performers expected over] -- These,
with what you will have left, and in your Power to retain, will form a good
Company; -- and the following are Terms on which I will leave you in peaceable
Possession of the Whole, or on which I will take the Management myself; each
permitting the other to make use of his Talents in any future Way or Situation
he may choose. I will give you Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars, for the Use of
your Share and Property, till the First of next May; I taking all Profits that
may accrue up to that Time, etc. -- This Agreement reservable only at the
Option of the Parties.

I will take Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars, for the Use of my Share and
Property, up to the Day of the Date abovementioned; leaving you to take all
Profits, etc. as before stated.

You have now your Choice, to adopt or reject; one of which I expect will be
determined on immediately.

I am, Sir, etc. etc. JOHN HODGKINSON.
New York, June 17, 1796.



Mr. Philip Ten Eyck, was kind enough to bear this Letter; and some Time after
I met him in Broadway, when I was in Company with an Agent, who had arrived
from Philadelphia to complete my Engagements for that City: I inquired Mr.
Hallam's Determination, and was told he wished some Days for Consideration. I
informed Mr. Ten Eyck, that my peculiar Situation required an Answer on the
following Morning; and that I could not wait longer than that Period. I urged
Mr. Ten Eyck to return to Mr. Hallam, and he did so: Mr. Hallam then promised a
definitive Answer by Mr. Ten Eyck the next Day. At the appointed Hour* Mr. Ten
Eyck waited on me, and found at my House Mr. Dunlap, and the Agent from
Philadelphia. Mr. Ten Eyck observed, that Mr. Hallam had commissioned him to
say, that he knew the Cause of our Differences, but they should cease; for he
would withdraw Mrs. Hallam from the Stage, which he presumed would reconcile
the Whole. I answered Mr. Ten Eyck, that it would not; that Mrs. Hallam's being
withdrawn was no Stipulation of mine; for as Mr. Hallam, had once before openly
broke his Word with me on that Score, I had thought it needless to mention as a
Difficulty, what if promised to be removed, would not be long maintained: That
Mr. Dunlap, I believed, had quitted the Theater, upon finding it impossible to
conduct it with Propriety, if Mrs. Hallam continued, and had written Mr. Hallam
a Letter to that Effect: That Mr. Hallam's last Difficulty with me was, his
having laid Claim to many of the most principal and youthful Characters in the
Drama, which I thought he had resigned long ago, such as Hamlet, Ranger, Zanga,
Orestes, Benedick, Don John, etc. etc. and his informing Mr. Dunlap that I had
injured him, by not giving him out for them; but that now he expected them to
be brought forward; and that all that I wanted from Mr. Hallam now, was an
Answer respecting my Proposal of our Property. Mr. Ten Eyck observed, he was no
Way privileged to speak on that, as he had supposed Mrs. Hallam the great
Objection. I replied, she was so; but remarked again, I had conceived no Use in
mentioning an Impossibility. Mr. Ten Eyck requested Mr. Dunlap to accompany him
to Mr. Hallam: They went together, and, some Time after, Mr. Dunlap returned,
with Information, that Mr. Hallam was not only willing to take Mrs. Hallam from
the Stage, but to leave the casting of all Pieces to his ( Dunlap's) Judgment;
and that he was willing to enter into Contracts, with any Penalty, for the
Performance of what should be agreed on, as the best Mode to secure our future
Peace. I observed, that, wearied by my repeated Disappointments, I wished no
further Connection with Mr. Hallam; and that I conceived I had proceeded too
far in my Philadelphia Engagement to honorably recede. Mr. Dunlap differed
with me in this, and remarked, that he had quitted a Business, in Part, to
purchase my Property; and that he must inevitably experience great Loss by my
Departure: That while he saw no Prospect of my Grievances being redressed, he
was content to submit; but, now that there was a Certainty of their being
remedied, he must in Duty call on me to fulfill my Engagements wih him, or that
he should be compelled to seek for Restitution in some other Way. Finally, I
broke off my Philadelphia Negotiation, and concluded to remain once more.
Contracts were ordered to be drawn up; and I inquired of Mr. Dunlap, if Mrs.
Hallam's Name was to be inserted? He replied, it would be more delicate to omit
her Name, as they could be made equally forcible, without mentioning her. I
applauded the Idea. The following are the Articles, which Mr. Hallam had three
Days in his Possession, previous to signing; and they were made to extend to
Two Years, at his own Request

ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT Between LEWIS HALLAM, JOHN HODGKINSON, and WILLIAM
DUNLAP.
WE, the SUBSCRIBERS, do hereby Covenant and Agree, to exert ourselves in the
several Ways hereafter mentioned, for the mutual Benefit and Profit of each
other, and of that Property known under the Denomination of Property of the Old
American Company; of which the One Half belongs to Lewis Hallam, One Fourth to
John Hodgkinson, and One Fourth to William Dunlap.

THAT William Dunlap shall, as Acting Manager of the Company, determine,
weekly, the Business of the coming Week; that is, what Plays shall be
performed; subject to no other Control than the joint Disapprobation of the
other Proprietors. That he shall get up what new Pieces he shall think best,
and in the Manner he shall deem proper, subject only to the same Control; and
cast them in Conformity to his Judgment, and the Articles of the several
Performers.

THAT Lewis Hallam shall exert himself as a Performer in all those Characters
which he has performed, on Stock Nights, since the Commencement of the Firm of
Hallam and Hodgkinson, if called upon so to do by the Acting Manager, either by
Notification that the Plays containing such Characters will be performed, or
otherwise: That these Characters are considered as his Property; but he shall
not resign any one or more of them, without the Concurrence of the Acting
Manager; and then only into his Hands, to be at his sole Disposal.

THAT John Hodgkinson shall exert himself as a Performer in all those
Characters which he has performed, on Stock Nights, since the Commencement of
the Firm of Hallam and Hodgkinson, if called upon so to do by the Acting
Manager; either by Notification that the Plays containing such Characters will
be performed, or otherwise: That these Characters are considered as his
Property; but he shall not resign any one or more of them, without the
Concurrence of the Acting Manager; and then only into his Hands, to be at his
sole Disposal.

THAT, in all Engagements made with any Performers, the Acting Manager, and one
of the other Proprietors, shall have Power to bind the three; and no Contract
or Engagement shall be made with any Person whatever, without such Concurrence
of the Acting Manager, and one of the other Proprietors.

THAT no other Division of the Profits of the Co-partnership shall take Place,
under any Appellation whatever, than such Division, or in such Proportion as
now exists; and no Alteration whatever shall take Place, without the
Concurrence of all the Proprietors.

THAT, to prevent Disorder and Confusion behind the Scenes, no Person shall be
admitted, except the Performers, under any Pretense whatever, without a written
Permission from the Acting Manager; Servants, etc. having Tickets for the
Season.

THAT, in all Regulations for the Welfare of the Theater, made by the Acting
Manager, with the Concurrence of the other Proprietors, or such one of them as
shall be present, they shall consider themselves on an Equality with the other
Performers, except as more bound to a scrupulous Observance of them by the
superior influence of their Example.

THAT the following Plays, The Revenge, Distressed Mother, Suspicious Husband,
Hamlet, Much Ado About Nothing, and such other of the old Drama as have not
been performed during the Firm of Hallam and Hodgkinson, shall be liable to the
Cast of the Acting Manager; Mr. Hallam or Mr. Hodgkinson having no other
Control over such Cast than the Refusal to play in the Piece, if the Character
allotted to either of them is such as he shall object to.

THAT, in Addition to the Business of Acting Manager, William Dunlap shall act
as Treasurer and Bookkeeper to the Company.

THAT John Hodgkinson shall assist the Acting Manager by his Advice and
personal Aid; and, in Case of William Dunlap's Sickness, or Absence from other
unavoidable Causes, or for Purposes agreed upon among the Proprietors, or a
Majority of them, John Hodgkinson shall be considered as Acting Manager, and
execute the Duties of the Office in the Place of William Dunlap; receiving from
said Dunlap (in Case such Absence shall be for one or more Weeks) that Salary
which he receives as Acting Manager.

THAT, in Case of any Default on the Part of either or any of the Subscribers*
within the Term of two Years, from the first Day of May, 1796, they do
severally bind themselves in the Penalty of Four Thousand Pounds, lawful Money
of the State of New York, to be forfeited by such Breach of this Agreement.

THAT, in Case any of the Subscribers should determine on selling the Whole, or
any Part, of their Division of the abovementioned Property, within the
abovenamed Time, the Party so wishing to sell, shall give the Offer, or
Refusal, to the other Party or Parties, at a Price to be agreed on by them, or
to be determined by th^^e indifferent Persons, chosen by the respective Parties.

JEWIS HALLAM. (L.S.) JOHN HODGKINSON. (L.S.) WILLIAM DUNLAP. (L.S.) Hugh
^^ine. John C^mage.


IN the Course of the present Winter, Mr. Hallam has appeared much
dissatisfied. It was many Times rumoured that he intended to force his Wife on
the Stage: But about the 9th or 10th of February, Mr. Dunlap informed me, that
Mr. Hallam had called on him, to let him know that Mrs. Hallam ought to be
engaged: And on Mr. Dunlap's replying, that he thought "that Matter had been
settled in June last," had only answered by charging me with sending him in an
Account of Money due to me; and by asserting the Injuries done to his Wife;
concluding with saying, that -- he had prevented Disturbances in the Theater;
but he would do so no longer.

ABOUT the 14th of February, Mr. Dunlap informed me that he had waited on Mr.
Hallam, having requested a Gentleman to witness the Conversation; when Mr.
Hallam confirmed the above Determination; and, on being reminded of his
Engagements, said, "I did tell Mr. Ten Eyck that I would withdraw Mrs. Hallam,
-- but I did not say for how long:" That he told Mr. Hallam that he should
consider his Attempt to force Mrs. Hallam on the Stage as a Violation of the
Articles; and was answered, he might THINK as he pleased: That he told Mr.
Hallam, that if there was any Disturbance in the Theater, on Account of Mrs.
Hallam, after the Avowal that she had waited upon a Number of Ladies, who had
espoused her Quarrel, he should consider him (Hallam) as the Cause; and was
answered, he might THINK as he pleased: That on saying he (Dunlap) must take
Measures for the Security of his Property, he was answered, he might DO as he
pleased.

FINDING that the Dissatisfactions of Mr. Hallam continued; hearing that he
intended to introduce his Wife on the Stage, during the Benefits; and convinced
that the Dissolution of the Company must be the Consequence, to the great
Injury of the Performers, as well as of the Proprietors; I determined, with the
Concurrence of Mr. Dunlap, and the Advice of Gentlemen whom I supposed Mr.
Hallam's Friends, to make him Proposals that might prevent Violence, and
terminate all Differences to his Satisfaction. Many Modes were premised by
these Friends, and they can vouch I did not, I would not listen to any, that
had not for its End the future Comfort and Independence of Mr. Hallam. -- With
this View the following Letter was sent to him: March 17 th, 1797. MR. L.
HALLAM, Sir,
YOU having declared to me your Readiness to sell your Theatrical Property, at
the same Time that you expressed your great Dissatisfaction of the Arrangement
made last June, by which I became connected in Business with you, I am induced
to make, with the Advice and Approbation of Mr. Hodgkinson, the following
Proposals:

THAT Lewis Hallam shall sell his Theatrical Property, known by the Name of
"Property of the Old American Company," at such Price, and on such Terms, as
may be hereafter determined; quitting, by such Sale, all Claim or Title
whatsoever on said Company or Property, to William Dunlap and John Hodgkinson;
they giving satisfactory Security for the Fulfillment of the Terms of Sale; and,
moreover, agreeing to pay to Lewis Hallam One Fourth of the Profits arising
from the Exhibitions of said Company, in any Part of the United States of
America, or any Denomination whatsoever, during the Period of the natural Life
of Lewis Hallam, to be paid yearly, on the first Day of May: And this in
Consideration of the Good Will of the said Lewis Hallam toward said Property or
Business, according to the Usage of Men retiring and giving up any fixed
Business to other Men.

IF these Proposals appear to you so far reasonable as to serve for the
Groundwork of Arrangements, more satisfactory to all the Parties concerned, it
will give great Satisfaction to

W. DUNLAP.




TO this Letter Mr. Dunlap received no Answer, except, that, in a Conversation
which took Place between Mr. Hallam and me, on (I think) the 20th of March, he
said, he did not know that he should sell his Property at all; and, if he
accepted a Sinecure, it must not only be a certain, but a large one! On being
asked how he could expect a large Certainty? he replied, the United States were
peculiarly situated: A War might take Place, and the Theaters be either shut
up, or, from Distress, deserted.

ON Saturday, March the 25th, the following Rules were put up in the Green
Room, at the Theater:

REGULATIONS for the OLD AMERICAN COMPANY at the ENSUING BENEFITS.
THE Nights on which Benefit Plays will be performed, to be thrown for in two
Classes as on the last Season.

ANY Performer giving Notice after this Date, to the Acting-Manager for the
Time being, of his or her Wish to get up any new Piece, on his or her Night,
will obtain, by such Notice a prior Right to such new Piece.

NO Piece shall be performed in any Manner, other than as cast by the
Acting-Manager for the Time being; that cast to be obtained previous to
advertising the Piece.

NO Bill to be published until submitted to the Correction of the
Acting-Manager for the Time being, and his Consent obtained.

NO Person, not under Engagements as a Performer in the Company, shall be
permitted to play on any Benefit-Night without the Consent of the
Acting-Manager for the Time being, and one of the other Proprietors.

NO Performer can be required to study more than four Lengths, from Play-Night
to Play-Night, and in the same Proportion for a longer Time.

JOHN HODGKINSON. WILLIAM DUNLAP.


ON the Monday Evening following, Mr. Hallam came into my Dressing Room, and
told me he did not choose to comply with those Rules. I told him I was sorry to
hear it, and that I supposed he could not violate them, without violating also
the Contracts that existed between us! He replied, he chose to violate them,
and that he had torn them down, and set us at Defiance.

THE Wednesday following, the Transaction took Place which I have briefly
stated as the Motive for this Narrative, in which I trust it will appear, --
1st, That, by Articles entered into voluntarily by Mr. Hallam, the Purport of
which was known to him, and to which he was explicitly advised by his Friends,
Mrs. Hallam had no Right to come on the Stage, or Mr. Hallam to demand it: --
2d, That Mrs. Hallam had not been withdrawn by any Stipulation of mine, at the
Time of the present Agreement; but by Mr. Hallam's own free Offer and apparent
Conviction, that her Conduct had made it improper for her to remain before the
Public, and impossible for a respectable Stage to be where she was a Performer:
-- 3d, That Mr. Hallam, in favoring the Attempt to reproduce Mrs. Hallam on
the Stage, and in attempting himself to introduce her; as well as by tearing
down the Regulations of the Acting-Manager; has not only violated his
Contracts, but treated the Public with Disrespect, and the other Proprietors
with Injustice.

IN Regard to the Proceedings of the 29th and 31st of March, I can only
observe, the Prejudice and Misrepresentation that unhappily prevailed, have
compelled me to the most painful and irksome Mode of justifying myself -- that
of exposing many Transactions, to public View, which none but the Parties
concerned ever ought to have been made acquainted with, or interested in; and I
trust my prior Determinations of quitting my Situation, rather than make this
Exposure, will convince every Reader, the Differences stated would never have
been known through me, had not every Means been tried to render my Conduct
completely odious to the Parties who came forward on this Occasion, that
Calumny could suggest. I have been made accountable for an Action I was not
concerned in, or in my Power solely to remedy! as a second Perusal of our
Contracts will convince. It has been also asserted, that Mr. Hallam only
applied to have Mrs. Hallam perform at his Benefit: This is not a Fact. -- Mr.
HALLAM has never made any Application, but that to Mr. Dunlap, in which he
stated Mrs. HALLAM ought to be engaged in the Company! His Son applied on his
own account, but Mr. Hallam, sen, was never mentioned.

I beg Leave also further to remark, that the Situation I was placed in was so
peculiarly trying, none but an Actor, or a Person who has made himself
responsible for a well regulated Entertainment, can possibly feel or judge.

I was received, for the first Time in my Life, with pointed disapprobation,
before I could even speak. A Person who had no Connection with the Stage, whose
own Faults had deservedly banished her from it -- was called for -- was
secreted, ready to burst forward -- was protected -- supported by her own
Husband, in direct Violation of his most solemn Contracts -- was allowed to
address the Audience -- and I not suffered to explain or to defend myself, when
I was the Party, and the only Party injured! If, at such a Crisis, I betrayed
any improper Marks of Impatience, I trust they were such as few Men could
refrain from, under such distressing Circumstances.

THE Situation of a Theatrical Performer seems here to be peculiarly
unfortunate: Strong Prejudices are entertained against the Profession, and
against the Drama itself, by many. There are also those who consider Actors as
Public Slaves, who are to have no Will of their own, but are bound to be the
obedient and submissive Victims of their Caprice; and so wide is the
Prepossession against the Calling, that many look upon an Actor as Something
different from his fellow Men.

IN Consequence of these Prejudices, that is deemed Insolence in an Actor,
which would scarcely be called Spirit in another Man; and thus a Profession,
which, to excel in, requires the Union of many Talents and Accomplishments, and
in particular Feeling, the Professor, on some Occasions, is not allowed to feel
at all. But this is certainly unjust: Resentment should always be measured by
the Nature of the Injury, not the Profession, of the Individual. I felt myself
aggrieved: I was not allowed to defend myself: Few Men are so much Masters of
their Temper, as to conduct with perfect Propriety in such Circumstances! I
might fail in this; if I did, it must be ascribed to the peculiar Irritation of
the Moment; for I hope I scarce need add, I could never entertain an Idea, of
treating with indecorum, that Public, from whom I have received the most
constant and flattering Marks of Approbation -- to whose Justice I now make my
last Appeal* Whose Candor will, I am convinced, acquit me after this hearing,
and whose

Grateful and ever obedient Servant I am, JOHN HODGKINSON.
New York, April 6th, 1797.
ERRATA.
Page 5 -- end of Line 11th, for "offered" read sought.

Page 17 -- last Line but one, for "reservable" read renewable.

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
State of New York, ss.
BY this public Instrument, be it known to all whom the same does or may
concern, That I, Charles Bridgen, a Public Notary, in and for the State of
New York, by Letters Patent under the Great Seal of the said State, duly
commissioned and sworn; and in and by the said Letters Patent invested "With
full Power and Authority to attest Deeds, Wills, Testaments, Codicils,
Agreements, and other Instruments in writing, and to administer any Oath or
Oaths, to any Person or Persons, do hereby certify, That on the Day of the Date
of these Presents, before me personally came and appeared, Mr. JOHN HODGKINSON,
who being by me duly sworn, did depose and say, That all and every of the Facts
stated by him in his Narration of his Connection with the Old American Company
are just and true, according to the best of his Knowledge and Belief.

Whereof an Attestation being required, I have granted this under my Notarial
Firm and Seal; and the said John Hodgkinson hereunto subscribed his Name.

Done at the City of New York, in the said State of New York, the fifteenth Day
of April, in the Year One Thousand Seven Hundred and Ninety-seven. Quod
Attestor. CHARLES BRIDGEN, Notary Public. JOHN HODGKINSON.



