AN ORATION, Delivered at NEW-SALEM, JULY 4 th, 1797: BEING THE ANNIVERSARY OF
THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

BY JOEL FOSTER.

Saevior armis, Luxuria incubuit [Romae] victumque ulciscitur orbem, JUVENAL.
PRINTED AT NORTHAMPTON, BY WILLIAM BUTLER. 1797.

An Oration, etc.
THE joyful day has revolved upon us, my Countrymen and Fellow-citizens, which
recovers to our thoughts a series of events, not only interesting to the
feelings of every true AMERICAN, but which have arrested the attention of an
astonished world! It is the birth day of our Nation, which brought her forth
into a separate political existence, and gave her a distinguished rank among
sister Kingdoms and Republics.

ON a day like this, which brings to our remembrance a catalogue of all the
leading circumstances, which paved the way to our Independence, we cannot avoid
being affected with very different sensations: We cannot forget our former
injuries and resentments, at the same time that we rejoice in the present happy
situation of our country; and, with the most exhilarating emotions of mind,
contemplate the rising progress of our political greatness and security.

WITH an accelerated motion of thought, we run over the several distinguished
periods which have marked the road of Providence, and guided our unexperienced
steps to the goal of political manhood and maturity.

THE bold hand of imagination draws a scenery which cannot fail to catch the
attention of every contemplative mind. Aided by a magic peculiar to herself,
she rolls back the sun a century and an half -- she erases the feats of
industry -- she demolishes cities and temples, and exhibits to our view this
wide extended country in it is native dress, rude, uncultivated, and without
inhabitants. She presents the fancy with here and there a savage hunter, while
the woody mountains and dales are teeming before them with howling beasts and
poisonous reptiles. Between this and the mother country, she raises up to view
a huge impervious ocean, and in her story magnifies the dangers of attempting
to cross it. Then she diverts our attention by tempting the ambition and
enterprise of her heroes, with certain lucrative motives, to try the dangerous
passage, and, if possible, form settlements in this unknown wilderness. But she
all along leaves them unsuccessful and makes their attempts abortive. At length
she varies the scene and gives us a picture of what persecution can do: She so
manages the story of the High Church party, and makes them so domineering and
abusive to the Dissenters, as to force them, for their own safety, and for the
sake of enjoying their civil and religious liberties, to thrust themselves from
the bosom of their native country, and commit their lives and fortunes to the
merciless seas. At this period, imagination ascends her car and rides in
pensive state behind them. She sees them pass through inexpressible toils,
losses and sufferings till a feeble and disheartened few are allowed to set
foot on the American shores. Here she gives us a portrait of what Providence
had done to make room for her strangers, in sweeping off the natives by a
raging pestilence; and after committing her new-comers to the nurturing hand of
Providence, imagination retires, and the story becomes real! Real, did I say?
It is all hitherto founded upon fact; but like other facts of a remote date,
which lie neglected in the musty page of the historian, it passes with us as a
dream. We are too unmindful of the ways of God, whose wisdom is conspicuous in
ordering the occasion and means of emigration, in dividing to the nations their
inheritance, and determining the bounds of their habitation.

BUT the history of our own country is fresh in all our minds. And as we have
advanced in thought to the beginnings of our settlement in this western
territory, we are now presented with an open theater on which a succession of
the most interesting and important events have rapidly taken place. Our
attention is no longer held to the first planting of our forefathers in this
new world, or to the first stages of their political existence; but with
pleasure we trace their increase and progress till, under the royal patronage,
farther settlements were encouraged, and they were formed into distinct
corporations and colonies. Their lands were chartered to them, and
constitutions were formed and guaranteed to them by the reigning king and his
successors, which defined the principles of their distinct polities and
governments.

BY these charters, our connection with the King of Great Britain was, indeed,
asserted and stipulated; but the prerogatives of the crown were limited, and
the rights of the colonies ascertained and secured. The King was to be
acknowledged as our rightful sovereign and liege lord; but we were not, by
these constitutions, brought under the authority of the British house of
Parliament. We had elective assemblies and representative bodies of our own, to
frame our laws of justice and rules of political intercourse. And
notwithstanding the efforts of restless power, which had an effect, in some
instances, to mutilate and change our charters, in others, to vacate them,
which occasioned uneasiness and gave rise to frequent remonstrances; yet we
were so fortunate as to obtain those redresses which still preserved the idea
of a mutual interest between the two countries.

UNDER these circumstances our nation flourished, and we rapidly increased in
numbers, wealth and military force. From these small beginnings, we became
great, numerous, rich and powerful. Nature and the hand of industry stored our
country with all the necessaries for subsistence in a time of peace, and for
defense in war.

IN this situation, our mother country being insensible of the maturity to
which we had advanced, began to be jealous, only, of our rising greatness. And
to secure our future subjection, and share our future wealth, she adopted
measures which thwarted the principles of our charters, and removed the great
barriers of our freedom. Her claims became more and more exorbitant, and
alarming to the spirits of Americans. Not content in abridging us in the
freedom of our trade by what was called the navigation act, to which we had
long reluctantly submitted, the parliament at length formed a design to raise a
revenue by an internal tax upon colonies; and, as a first experiment, the stamp
act was brought forward, which excited such a general uneasiness as soon to
procure it is repeal: Yet the Parliament took this occasion to assert their own
prerogatives, and declared that they had a right to make laws binding upon the
colonies in all cases whatever. This declaration was justly supposed to contain
the essence of despotism. From this moment our hearts began to be alienated
from the parent country, and all our affairs took a most serious turn. We were
prepared to make the most decided opposition to the subsequent oppressive acts
of Parliament -- such as imposed duties upon tea, and other articles of
importation -- such as were designed to affect our internal policy -- to
control the powers of our corporate towns -- to mutilate our judiciary system,
and alter our modes of trial, etc.

A PARTICULAR recital of these abuses, and of the unreasonable strides of
despotism, would necessarily carry me beyond the limits which I have been
obliged to prescribe to myself, and, perhaps, only agonize the patience of this
respectable Audience. Your memories will supply the defect -- You will easily
call to mind the measures adopted by the British King and Government to quash
what they called the rebellion of Americans, and to enforce their own laws --
the act for blocking up the harbor of Boston, and the stationing of several
regiments of regular troops in the town to support the Governor and his
Officers in carrying into effect the resolutions of Parliament. Most of us were
witnesses to the universal trepidation which, at that time, pervaded the
country, and shook the breasts of our greatest heroes and politicians.

WHEN matters came to this extremity, few as our means were, it was thought
best to provide against the worst. Inventive necessity called forth the powers
of the human mind, like the latent spark from the flint, into action. She
explored the abilities and resources of the country, which, till then, had been
hidden and unknown, like treasures in the bowels of the earth.

BUT no sooner were the court of Britain informed of our policy, than orders
were issued for destroying our magazines and military stores. An attempt of
this kind was made on the nineteenth of April, 1775, and the first battle at
Lexington ensued. Here the tragic story of the war begins -- here the door
opens to those scenes of devastation, blood and death, through which we have
waded in the defense of our liberties, and which lay an infinite bond upon
posterity to defend them till time shall be no more! But I forbear: -- I would
not wound your feelings, on this joyful day, by dwelling upon a subject so
painful.

IT is, however, presumed, whatever our sensations might then be, that it will
quicken the grateful and joyous emotions of our hearts, on this occasion, to
recollect, that the truly patriotic sons of Massachusetts had the courage to
repel force by force -- that the fire of resentment, quick as the electric
shock, spread itself through all the sister colonies, gave impulse to our
united exertions, and made our opposition to tyranny successful. Such a
remarkable union took place through the whole, as clearly evinced a design in
Providence that we should be free. Though never before bound by any particular
social compact, all the States, at once felt the fraternal tie; our hearts, our
interests and our councils were united to bear down the bulwarks of oppression;
but even now the idea of INDEPENDENCE did but begin to dawn in the minds of
some few of our political fathers.

BEFORE the war actually broke out, we had selected some of the wisest and most
experienced of our Brethren to constitute a national council or Congress. These
sage Patriots conducted with a coolness, discretion and intrepidity suitable to
the critical situation of the country and the confidence reposed in them. Even
after America's soil was stained with the blood of her sons, they resolved to
try the effect of one petition more for peace, liberty and safety. But they
were unsuccessful in this, as they had been in former experiments of the like
kind. Thus it appeared, from a long series of occurrences, that the way was
prepared, and America ripened for a mighty change in her affairs, and means
were not wanting to effect it. The conduct of Britain furnished the occasion,
and pointed out the road to our Independence, and Providence evidently called
us to assume a new political rank among the nations.

ACCORDINGLY, on the ever memorable fourth of July '76, the American Congress
laid the broad basis of this then infant empire, which has since advanced to a
more desirable maturity. On the corner stone thereof we find this inscription:
We hold these truths, say they, to be self evident, that all men are created
equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights;
that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness; that to
secure these rights, governments are instituted among men, deriving their just
powers from the governed; and that when any government becomes destructive of
these ends, it is the right of the people to alter, or abolish it, and to
institute a new government, laying its foundation on such principles, and
organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall appear most likely to
effect their safety and happiness. -- After some farther preamble, and a
particular enumeration of the abuses, and grievences which ushered in the war,
and gave the occasion for Independence, they come to the following declaration,
which ought never to be obliterated from the minds of Americans: We therefore,
the representatives of the United States of America, in Congress assembled,
appealing to the supreme Judge of the world for the rectitude of our
intentions, do in the name of these Colonies, solemnly publish and declare,
that these United Colonies are, and of right ought to be, FREE AND INDEPENDENT
STATES: That they are absolved from all allegiance to the British Crown, and
that all political connexions between them and the State of Great Britain is,
and ought to be totally dissolved.

THUS was the political birth of our nation ushered in, and America separated
from the Mother country, which had forgotten her children and become cruel like
the Ostrich.

WE do honor to ourselves in commemorating an event so interesting and
important in the scale of human affairs. The American revolution has justly
been considered as forming one of the most distinguished epochs in the history
of mankind. -- In its progress, it has been the means of disseminating just
sentiments of the rights of man, and of the nature of legitimate governments --
It has excited a spirit of opposition to tyranny in general, and is likely to
give a lead to universal liberty. It has furnished the world with a short
experiment of a Republican Government, founded upon principles more equitable
and more liberal than any before known. -- It has prepared an assylum for the
oppressed in every region of the earth, and laid the foundation of an empire
which may be the seat, not only, of freedom, but of science and virtue. And may
we not hope, that these blessings will, from hence, spread themselves, till
they become universal, and that ignominious slavery, which has hitherto
debased the world, is exterminated!

SINCE the declaration of our Independence -- since it has been supported, and
by the parent country acknowledged, we have had the rare and uncommon
opportunity of entering into an original compact among ourselves, and of
framing a Constitution of Government, which unites the interests and subjects
of the several States under one political head. The Federal Constitution has
been the result of deliberation, and confirmed by the free suffrages of the
people. It was not, like the Constitutions of many other nations, brought
forward by artful and designing men, and proposed to the great body of the
nation when their hearts were agitated with fear, or their minds previously
wrought upon by artifice, and prepared to receive any thing: But it was framed
by wise men of our own choosing, and proposed to the free and leisurely
adoption of the several States, when under no other annoyance than what arose
from the critical situation of the whole.

SINCE the adoption of this national charter, the administration has been
entrusted to men chosen by the people. It has had the effect to secure our
peace, to afford due encouragement to the exertions of genius, to science in
general, and to every useful manufacture. It has been effectual to quell
turbulent insurrections, and provide for the national defense. Arts and
Sciences have greatly flourished, and improved systems of education been
adopted -- Agriculture, Commerce, and all useful manufactures have made a rapid
progress toward perfection -- and every industrious class of citizens been
uncommonly prosperous.

WHAT may we not hope from our Federal Constitution if it be wisely and
faithfully administered. A confederacy between free States, as the American,
may have advantages superior to any civil establishment. If a republic be
small, says a great Politician, Spirit of Laws.
it is destroyed by a foreign force; if it be large, it is ruined by an
internal imperfection. This two fold inconvenience is remidied by a confederate
republic -- a kind of assemblage of societies, which constitute a new one
capable of increasing by means of new associations. It was these associations
that contributed so long to the prosperity of Greece. By these the Romans
attacked the universe; and by these alone the universe withstood them. For when
Rome was arrived to her highest pitch of grandeur, it was the associations
behind the Danube and the Rhine, associations formed by the terror of her arms,
that enabled the Barbarians to resist her.

IN pursuing the progressive steps of our national advancement, we have the
pleasure to look over a list of the most distinguished Sages, Heroes and
Statesmen that ever adorned the history of any Country. These have been
nurtured in the bosom of America, and successively appeared upon the stage, and
in the different departments of business, as the exigencies of the nation
required. Time will not permit me to enumerate all the public characters, who
have deserved well of their country, and are entitled to the acknowledgments of
a grateful people. Our hearts take a sincere part in the whole aggregate of
those applauses and grateful eulogiums which have been heaped upon our late
illustrious President and his Cotemporaries, for their unremitted application,
and indefatigable attention to the public weal; and for the important services
they have rendered their country both in the field and in the cabinet. Like
skillful pilots they have, under God, safely conducted our political ship and
cargo through the dangers of a tempestuous season, and at length brought us
into the port of Peace and plenty. -- And from the present circumstances of our
nation, and firmness of our government, does not the American Republic bid fair
to endure when the power lately armed against it shall be broken in pieces, and
the remembrance of it, perhaps, blotted out from under heaven!

WHILE we contemplate the improved state of our politics, and our happy lot
among the nations of the earth, remote from the feuds and contentions which
have infested Europe, it may not be unseasonable to call into view of what
importance it is, and what obligations we are under to preserve our character
as AMERICANS. And what is there which ought, and would more naturally
distinguish Americans, than a national spirit of union and love of liberty,
combined with the habits of industry and frugality?

IS there not reason to fear, that as we increase; as we enlarge our
connections, and extend our commerce; a vain magnificence, the lust of power,
profusion and luxury will creep in upon us, and the profligate manners of older
countries be imported to this, in as large cargoes as foreign commodities? But
why should we yield to the insidious influence of foreigners? Why should we ape
their manners or imitate their fashions? -- Does it not better become us to
erect a character to ourselves, and establish habits of our own, which are more
worthy of imitation, and better fitted to the principles of the revolution?

THE illustrious Patriots who laid the foundation of this rising Republic, in
the declaration of our INDEPENDENCE (an event which we now celebrate) expressly
recommended to us to be frugal, industrious and temperate, shunning every
species of extravagance and dissipation, and every expensive diversion. If
persons of figure, fortune, and influence, would join in this laudible
resolution, they would merit much of their country. The fair daughters of
America, while they enjoy the richest advantages of education, would honor
themselves by encouraging simplicity, economy and industry, promoting the
manufactures of the country, and guarding against foreign fashions and
amusements.

IT is not to be dissembled, that bribery, corruption and tyranny always
prevail where luxury does, and nearly in the same proportion. May the habits of
temperance, in this country, never be lost in the excesses of luxury, nor our
liberties be swallowed up in a flood of licentiousness. But may the spark of
liberty, kindled in America, spread its flame through the whole earth, till all
the fabrications of despotism are demolished, and the standard of freedom
erected in the most remote empires.

ALREADY has the event we celebrate given a lead to the emancipation of several
nations from slavery and oppression. Our Gallic Brethren, fired by our example,
have ventured their single resistance against the most formidable combination
of despots, and their unparalleled successes argue a design in Providence that
they shall be free, and the cause of liberty universally prevail.

WHILE we join our ardent and affectionate prayers for the restoration of their
peace, the protection of their freedom, and the permanent security of their
Government; let us still be watchful over our own liberties, and endeavor to
secure and perpetuate, by our vigilance and virtue, what we have gained at the
expense of so much blood and treasure. Then we may not only felicitate
ourselves in recognizing those past occurrences which have contributed to build
us up into a free Republic; but with prophetic sagacity we may look through the
blank space of unborn ages, and see our latest progeny rising into the fair
possession of Freedom, and hear them call us blessed.

FINIS.

