DOCTOR LATHROP's. DISCOURSE AT THE PUBLIC LECTURE, MARCH 16, 1797.

God our Protector and Refuge in Danger and Trouble.

A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED AT THE PUBLIC LECTURE IN BOSTON, ON THURSDAY, MARCH 16,
1797.

By JOHN LATHROP, D.D. A.A.S.

WITH AN APPENDIX, Containing an Account of several daring Attempts to set Fire
to the Town and rob the Inhabitants: together with HINTS tending to the
Security of populous Towns and Cities, against the Evils to which they are more
particularly exposed.

BOSTON: Printed by MANNING and LORING. 1797.

A DISCOURSE.
PSALM CXXVII. I. EXCEPT THE LORD KEEP THE CITY, THE WATCHMAN WAKETH BUT in
VAIN.
BY the words now before us, we are taught the following interesting lesson,
That having made use of all the means in our power, to guard against the evils
to which we are exposed, our dependence must be placed on the Providence of God.

As this truth will apply universally, in all cases of danger and trouble, in
the following Discourse I will call your attention to some of the dangers and
evils, to which large towns and cities are particularly exposed. I will then
suggest a few considerations, tending to impress on our mind the important
lesson expressed in the text.

In the first place, our attention shall be given to some of the dangers and
evils, to which large towns and cities are particularly exposed.

Large towns and cities are more exposed to the calamities of war, than less
populous places.

People are invited to settle in towns and cities, by the advantages which they
offer to commerce, to manufactures, and the useful arts. The wealth of towns
and cities bears a general proportion to their extent and population. In times
of war, therefore, the largest towns and cities will be objects to which an
enemy will give the first attention. The conquest of such places has a double
effect: It weakens the country invaded, and by adding wealth to the conqueror,
enables him to make farther depredations.

In all countries, where invading armies are successful, large towns and cities
have been exposed to the greatest calamities. I need not be particular in
repeating instances. The historical part of the Bible, -- the histories of
modern nations, and of the age in which we live, are full of them.

Large towns and cities are more exposed to the calamities arising from
sedition and rebellion, than less populous places.

Experience teaches, what indeed would be natural to expect, that the
fermentation of party zeal has been more violent, and productive of more
serious consequences in large towns and cities, than in small places. In towns
and cities, men of restless temper and seditions spirits can have frequent
communications; and having devised mischief, they can with more expedition and
effect execute their purposes, than in places where accomplices are spread over
a considerable space of country.

Large towns and cities are more exposed to infections and pestilential
diseases, than less populous places. In places crowded with inhabitants, the
air which is inhaled, is charged with noxious vapors.

In some places, fatal disorders are generated by the action of heat on bodies
capable of discharging a mortal poison: In other places, if diseases of the
worst kind are not generated, the constitutions of people may be predisposed to
receive infection, when it is brought to them.

Those who make the healing art their study have noticed the malignancy of
particular disorders, in particular parts of crowded cities.

Large towns and cities are more exposed to the rage of devouring flames, than
smaller places. The danger from this evil may be considerably diminished by the
use of such materials, in the construction of buildings, as will resist the
flames: It is however next to impossible, to erect houses, fit to be inhabited,
without having a certain portion of the materials, of a combustible nature.

Such is the constitution and frame of our body, that it is equally necessary
to guard against the effects of cold and damp habitations, as against the
danger of fire: so that by carrying our caution to an extreme against fire, we
might possibly expose ourselves to other evils fatal to our health and comfort.
The danger of fire, however, cannot be too watchfully counteracted in a town
like this, in which we live, where the greatest part of the buildings consist
of materials highly combustible. The danger is constantly before our eyes: we
seldom pass a season, without beholding the habitation of some of our
neighbors and friends on fire. Although the destruction of property, by this
dreadful enemy, has not been so great during the last twelve months, as in some
former seasons, the cry of fire has been unusually frequent since the year
commenced, and attended, in some instances, with circumstances peculiarly
alarming.

We add, once more, Large towns and cities are more exposed to incendiaries,
and robbers, than smaller places.

In large towns, the proportion of abandoned characters is greater, than in
places more thinly inhabited. The basest of mankind find it more easy to hide
themselves; and they find more opportunities to spend the fruits of their
wickedness to their mind, in populous places, than in country villages.

To people in the industrious and peaceful walks of life, it will appear almost
incredible, that any of the human race can be so vile as to break open your
dwelling place when you are at rest, and rob you of the property which you have
laid up for your comfort, and the comfort of those who depend on the fruits of
your industry. But to the disgrace of human nature, we find there are people so
base, so lost to all sense of moral rectitude, so vile and abandoned, as to
wander about in the night time, like beasts of prey, seeking what they can
find, and whom they may devour. -- There are people, who, when the virtuous and
good are asleep in their beds, devise mischief against them, and endeavor to
find out ways to enter their houses and rob them. There are people, who, when
perpetrating such acts of violence, would, if possible, murder those who
oppose, or venture to arrest them.

Instances of night-robbery and murder, in countries long settled and full of
inhabitants, have not been uncommon. From those elder and more corrupt parts of
the earth, some of the basest of men have found the way to America.

It has been suspected, that the late devastations by fire, in several of the
southern States, were occasioned by some wicked persons, who have come among
us. Strong suspicions have been entertained, within a few weeks, that
incendiaries and robbers have found the way to Boston; and within a few days
past, we have had alarming evidence, that our suspicions were not without
reason.

Several houses have been broken open in the night, and the inhabitants put in
danger of their lives. One of those daring enemies of our peace, seized in the
very act of robbery, and with a deadly weapon in his hand, is now under
sentence of death, and in a few days must be removed from among the living.

But the solemnity of the trial, which brought together a vast crowd of people,
was not sufficient to deter other sinners, who were at the time lurking in our
borders, from crimes equally atrocious.

On the very night after the trial, two other houses in the town were broken
open; to one of which fire was kindled, and had the inhabitants remained
ignorant of their danger a few minutes longer, they must have perished in the
flames.

Imagination cannot describe the consternation we should have felt, had not the
increasing flame been discovered just at the moment. From the combustible
nature of the building to which the fire was kindied, and of the buildings in
the neighborhood, -- from the force and the direction of the wind, on that
night, it is not probable the fire could have been checked, in its dreadful
progress, until it had laid in ruin a large portion of the town. We thank God
for the wonderful preservation!

I should expose myself to the just resentment of my fellow citizens, did I
attempt to excite their fears, and disturb their repose, without sufficient
reason. But the repeated instances of house-breaking and robbery, and of
attempting to set fire to the town, afford painful evidence, that some of the
worst and most dangerous of mankind are now among us: The utmost vigilance and
exertion of the inhabitants are called for on this occasion.

Having mentioned some of the dangers and evils to which large towns and cities
are more particularly exposed, it will be natural to inquire, What is to be
done? -- will it be advisable to abandon the cities, and spread more thinly
over the country? -- or, can we think of any means of guarding against the
dangers and evils to which populous places are particularly exposed?

Towns and cities grow up with commerce and manufactures: They cannot be
abandoned, therefore, without doing violence to the natural course of things in
society. There are evils in society, and there are evils in a state of nature:
There are evils peculiar to large and crowded places; and there are advantages
in some measure to balance them. Evils we shall find, more or less, in all
situations and employments of life. Before we determine to shift our situation
and employment, we shall do well to make use of all the means in our power, to
secure ourselves against the evils which attend them; and then, after comparing
all circumstances, we may determine, whether a change of situation and
employment would, on the whole, give us a greater prospect of happiness. But
after all we can do, let our situation be what it may, we are taught to place
our hope in God, both for success in the business of life, and for protection
in danger and trouble.

Except the Lord keeps the city, the watchman waketh but in vain. --

These sacred words teach us to hope in God as our protector and refuge in
trouble; and they teach us that we ourselves also must be active and vigilant.
We must watch, as well as pray.

In this place I would beg leave to mention a few particulars, to which we
shall do well to give heed, as we wish to lessen the dangers and evils incident
to large and populous places.

The limits of the present discourse will only admit of Hints, which I will
venture to suggest under each of the particulars already mentioned; the
propriety of which I submit to the judgment of my fellow citizens.

1st. Large towns and cities are more exposed to the calamities of war, than
smaller places. The inhabitants, therefore, if they are wise, will endeavor to
keep peace with all those powers which are able to injure them: They will be
careful not to give occasion, by threatening speeches, or by any unrighteous
conduct, either to their neighbors, or foreign powers, to make war upon them.

But as the rulers of the nations are more generally governed by passion and
self-interest, than by reason and equity, and people who were the most
inoffensive have been invaded, the inhabitants of rich towns and cities will do
well, even in profound peace, to provide for their defense: But in the present
restless state of the world, when nations rise up against nations, and the fury
of war creates innumerable wants, those who are not particularly connected with
the contending powers need to be on their guard, and fortify against lawless
invaders. Note 1st See Appendix.


2dly. Large towns and cities are more exposed to the calamities arising from
sedition and rebellion, than less populous places. The wise and virtuous,
therefore, will endeavor, by all prudent means, to counteract a factious
spirit: They will unite, and come forward with alacrity and firmness, to
support government and withstand the turbulence of unreasonable men.

3dly. Large towns and cities are more exposed to infectious and pestilential
diseases, than less populous places. Wisdom and the healing art will at all
times lend their aid to prevent the spread of fatal disorders, and guard the
inhabitants of crowded places against the maladies to which they are
particularly exposed. The removal of all putrescent matter -- cleanliness, and
a free circulation of good air, are certainly among the first things necessary
to the preservation of health in large towns and cities. Note 2d. See Appendix.


4thly. Large towns and cities are more exposed to devouring flames, than
smaller places. The inhabitants of large and crowded places are therefore
required to be particularly watchful. Much may be done to guard against this
calamity by brick walls, and the use of such materials for covering, as are not
combustible: But after all that can be done, in the ways above mentioned, under
Providence, safety depends very much on the habitual attention and vigilance of
the inhabitants.

5thly. Large towns and cities are more exposed to incendiaries, and robbers,
than smaller places.

To lessen the danger, from the enemies now mentioned, it will be necessary
that the government of large towns and cities be sufficiently vigorous to
apprehend, and confine, all suspected persons.

As towns and cities increase in population and wealth, it is found necessary
that the government be more vigorous, and that it proceed with more firmness
and dispatch, than in the earlier stages of society. Note 3d. See Appendix.


But as I only mean to give a few hints, tending to our security against the
dangers and evils incident to populous places, I would leave them with my
fellow citizens, and go on, according to promise,

To suggest a few considerations, in order to impress on our mind the
importance of trusting in God as our protector and refuge in danger and trouble.

Having done all in our power, we still need the protection of Omnipotence. The
lesson contained in the text cannot be too frequently inculcated: The important
idea cannot be too deeply engraven on our heart: Except the Lord keep the city,
the watchman waketh but in vain. The enemies of our peace and safety may be
working in secret places, where the most vigilant eye of man cannot see them.
But while their designs are hidden from us, and we know nothing of them, all
their wicked plans are known to God. There is no secret corner -- no dark
retreat, where the thief and incendiary can hide from the eye of Him who
knows all things.

He beholds the kindling sire, which, if blown up to a flame, might consume us
and our dwellings together. His good providence has saved us. To him we give
thanks, that the meditated destruction was discovered, and that some who
devised mischief against us have been detected and confined.

We derive unspeakable consolation from the assurance we have, that a Being of
infinite perfection governs the world, and that he is able to counteract and
frustrate the designs of our most dangerous enemies. To a God of infinite power
and goodness we may look: on him we may place our hope in all times of danger
and trouble.

When invaded by foes from abroad, God can frustrate their designs: He can turn
their councils into foolishness: He can scatter them by storms; and in a
variety of ways prevent their executing the thing, which they may have purposed
against us. If God is, pleased to defend us, we are safe; and we may hope he
will be our defense, if we are careful to do the things which please him.

When reslless and wicked men combine for seditious purposes, and say in their
heart, Let us break the bands of society and cast away the cords of government,
He who sits in the heavens can make them ashamed, and bring the mischief
which they had purposed for others, on their own heads.

When contagious and mortal diseases break out, and begin to spread calamity
and death through our streets, He who commands the winds and they blow, and
governs the seasons according to his pleasure, can instantly change the state
of the atmosphere, and remove the threatening evil. Fire and vapor, and all
the elements, are under his control. And He who controls the winds; -- He who
makes the flaming fire minister to his purposes, controlleth also the passions
of the children of men. He makes the wrath of man to praise him; and the
remainder of wrath he restrains. The most vile of the creation, even the
bloody-minded assassin, the incendiary and murderer, are under his authority:
they cannot move, when he is pleased to exercise his power, to restrain them.

To men of religion, such considerations as those which have now been
suggested, are highly pleasing. What can afford us more solid comfort, than to
be assured, that all things in the heavens and on the earth, yea, all the
events which have taken place, and which shall take place throughout the
unmeasurable universe, are under the control of insinite wisdom, and infinire
goodness!

Let us rejoice that the Lord reigns; and as the government which he
execiseth over his rational creatures is just and equal, let us always submit
to him. In humble obedience to his will, let us commit all our important
concernments to his providence: And when the scenes of time and nature shall
change no more, may we be admitted to those peaceful regions, where no
threatening enemy shall ever come near us: where the sons of anarchy and
licentiousness shall never disturb us: where disease and death shall never
invade us: where the flames shall never reach our mansions: where the
incendiary and robber shall never interrupt our repose. In those peaceful
regions may we unite with the general assembly of the wise and good, in adoring
the perfections of God, and the wisdom of his government, forever and ever.

AMEN.
APPENDIX.

APPENDIX, CONTAINING An Account of several daring Attempts to set Fire to the
Town of BOSTON, and rob the Inhabitants; together with HINTS tending to the
Security of populous Towns and Cities against the Evils to which they are more
particularly exposed.
TO whatever cause or causes it may be owing, -- whether to the unusual
commotions among the European nations, and the West India islands, -- or to
false notions of liberty and equality which have been received by people void
of understanding, -- or to the efforts of certain modern apostles of infidelity
to break down the restraints of religion, and remove from the mind of man all
apprehension of an hereafter, certain it is, that the American States have of
late been exposed to threatening and unusual calamities, from lawless and
wicked men.

Heretofore there have been but few instances of arson, or house-burning,
attended with night-robbery, in this country: But of late, instances of
perpetrating, or of attempting to perpetrate those crimes, have become alarming.

According to promise, and in compliance with the wishes of some of my fellow
citizens, I will now give an account of several daring attempts to set fire to
Boston, and rob the inhabitants. In a few notes, I will then enlarge on the
Hints, in the preceding Discourse, tending to the security of populous towns
and cities against the evils to which they are particularly exposed.

But before I relate the attempts which have been made to set fire to Boston, I
would just observe, that suspicions have been strong, that the fires which
spread desolation through the capital of Georgia and of South Carolina, some
months ago, were the effects of wicked design. Those suspicions, we are
informed, have been confirmed, and some have been executed for the crime.

Whether the incendiaries who began at the Southward came on toward the North;
or the same evil spirit has operated on wicked people, in different parts of
the country, in succession, we cannot say.

There is sufficient evidence that many attempts have been made (and in a
number of them with fatal success) to set fire to buildings in New Jersey, in
New York, in Connecticut, and in several towns in Massachusetts, within the
last three or four months.

The first instance of robbing and attempting to burn which I shall mention in
this town, was on the night of Feb. 22. In an advertisement in the Sentinel,
Mr. Marriott sets forth, that his house in Winter-street "was broken open,
robbed and fired." The neighbors testify, that Mr. Marriott and his wife being
from home, they saw an unusual light in the chamber, and on entering the same,
they found the fire had done considerable damage, and that the house in a few
minutes would have been consumed, had they not given "the timely assistance."

On the same night, the shop of Mr. Holmes in Union-street was broke open; and
to the surprise of the owner, when he entered it in the morning, he saw fire
had been placed on one of the shelves, which spread several feet, -- burned the
wood work to a coal, and then went out.

On the night of the 7th of March, the house of Mr. Solomon Hewes was entered
and robbed of a considerable sum of money; and on the same night the house of
Mrs. Lee was robbed of money, plate and other valuables.

On Sunday morning March 5th, the town was alarmed with the fire which broke
out in the house occupied by Mr. William Turner. The fire had made such
progress before it was discovered, that no exertions were sufficient to stop
its rage. In a few minutes the building in which it was first discovered, and
the elegant stable of the late Governor Bowdoin, were in flames. Although there
were at the time some suspicions of wicked design, no proof could be obtained,
until a black man was apprchended for another crime of the same sort, in whose
possossion were sound several articles, the property of Mr. Turner, which were
taken from his house, on the night in which it was burned.

The next instance I shall mention is that which took place ar the house of
Capt. Enoch Rust, in Prince-street. It appeared on the trial of the criminal
that the house was violently entered between the hours of two and three in the
morning. Four or five locks were broken in the lower part of the house, but as
the robbers did not find all the money which they expected, one of them, with a
deadly weapon in his hand, entered the lodging chamber of Capt. Rust, jun. and
with the threatening language of a murderer, demanded his money. The young
gentleman, with great spirit, slew upon the robber, and fortunately indeed,
laid him on the floor. He was soon confined, has since had his trial, and is
now under sentence of death (...) was executed on the sixth of April


In the night of March 16th, the house of Mr. Samuel Goldsbury was broken open
and robbed of several pieces of plate. The wretch who was guilty of the crime,
before he left the house, perpetrated another much more dreadful. He kindled a
fire in a part, the most convenient to communicate with the lodging chambers;
and had not the inhabitants been awoke by the smoke, the slames would soon have
rendered their escape impossible.

A black man who had served in the family was suspected, and search being made,
plate and other articles were found with him which had been taken, both from
Mr. Goldsbury, and from Mr. Turner. The unhappy creature, who, it appears, had
been confined for some crime in Nova Scotia, not many months before, is now
fast bound in chains, and kept for the time of trial.

On the same night that the burglary and arson were committed in the house of
Mr. Goldsbury, the house of Mr. Rallion, in State-street, was entered by a
thief, who was taken before he could make his escape, and is also committed. On
the same night a Mr. Tufts was robbed of his money, by three men, as he was
passing over Winter-Hill.

Fire has also been sat to a building in Middle-street, belonging to Mrs.
Beals; which having burned sufficiently to discover the wicked design, went
out, without farther injury.

In short, for several weeks, almost every news-paper has given an account of
fresh instances of setting fire to buildings of one kind or another, either in
our neighborhood, or in some parts of the country. Dr.Williams's barns and
corn house in Roxbury were burnt on the 2d of April.


The instances now mentioned, are sufficient to show, that some of the worst of
the creation are lurking among us, and that the utmost vigilance and exertion
are necessary to guard against them, and if possible to detect and confine them.

IF any apology be necessary for laying before my fellow citizens the following
Notes, in addition to the Hints already given, I have only to say, they are
offered with a good design.

Note 1st. In the present restless state of the world, those who wish to live
in peace, and are not particularly connected with the contending powers, need
be on their guard, and fortify against lawless invaders.

The political situation of the American States at the present day, is
peculiarly difficult. It is certainly our wisdom to keep out of the quarrels of
the European quarter of the world: But while those kingdoms are angry with each
other, they may not be disposed to treat neutral countries with impartiality
and justice. -- As God has kindly placed us three thousand miles from the
present great theater of quarrel, we are in no great danger of hostile armies:
But should the war continue to rage, our seaports may possibly be insulted by
armed cruisers.

It seems as necessary that our towns and cities, near the water, should be
fortified against lawless invaders, as that our houses should be barred and
bolted against thieves and robbers. It is as necessary that a lock should be
fixed to your harbor, as to the chest which contains your money: -- As proper
that the key should be in the hand of the supreme authority, as that the key of
the family treasures, be in the hand of the head of the family.

Note 2d. The removal of all putrescent matter, -- cleanliness, and a free
circulation of good air, are certainly among the first things necessary to the
preservation of health, in large towns and cities.

It is now universally acknowledged, that some of the most distressing
maladies, which spread desolation and death through large and populous places,
are occasioned by the noxious vapors which the inhabitants inhale.

The first thing therefore which requires the attention of people who live in
large and crowded places, in order to preserve health, is to remove as much as
possible, every kind of substance which tends to poison the air.

The atmosphere in which we live, is never entirely pure: it is a compound of
healthful and noxious fluids. By the laborious experiments of Dr. Priestly, Dr.
Ingen-Housz, the late celebrated Lavoisier and others, it has been
demonstrated, that the quantity of noxious gas in the atmosphere, is always
much greater than the pure vital air. The proportion of noxious to the vital
air, in a state of the atmosphere favorable to health, is found to be as 72 to
28. On the preservation of this proportion, or something near to it, we depend
for strength, for health, for spirits, and life itself.

The discovery of this proportion of vital air, and of noxious gas, in the
atmosphere which we breathe, together with the means of increasing, or
diminishing the one or the other, as occasion may require, are certainly among
the most important discoveries of modern times.

If I can assist my fellow-citizens in the application of these discoveries,
for the purposes of preventing any of the evils to which large and crowded
places are particularly exposed, I shall feel happy.

It is well known that the vapor from stagnant water, particularly in hot
weather, from dirty streets, dead carcasses, and all putrescent bodies, is
unfit for respiration. Such vapors, rising about us, and mixing with the air
we breathe, destroy the healthful proportion abovementioned: When the quantity
of noxious gas is great, and long continued, it will produce some of the most
fatal disorders, under which the inhabitants of large and crowded places are
ever doomed to suffer.

To prevent those evils, the first attention must be given to cleanliness. If
individuals in large and crowded places, neglect, or refuse to remove filth
from their houses and doors, especially in the summer season, the common safety
certainly will justify the interposition of authority.

Doctor Mitcheli, of New York, in his ingenious and very useful attempt to
ascertain the true nature of contagion, has the following observation to the
present purpose; -- While puddles of putrid nastiness, and piles of reeking
dung are incessantly exhaling their poisonous steams, that magistracy consults
very imperfectly the public health, which neglects the removal of such common
nuisances.

As the gaseous oxyd, or noxious vapor from stagnant water, and the filth
which is too long suffered to remain in the streets and lanes of populous
towns, is heavier than good air, it is disposed to settle in low places: and
accordingly the lowest parts of Philadelphia and of New York, were the places
where the yellow fever raged with the greatest violence. In low and dirty parts
of a populous town, those fevers which are occasioned by bad air, may be always
expected to put on the worst appearances.

Having done all in our power to prevent the increase of bad air, our next
attention should be given to promote the increase of that which is good.

The most certain means for this purpose, and at the same time, the least
expensive, is to adorn the places in which we live, with thristy trees.

Trees, during the whole time they are covered with green leaves, are found to
take up, as their food, the nitrogene gas, -- the corrupted air which has
served the purposes of combustion, -- which has passed the lungs of animals, or
has been exhaled from putrid bodies; and in the kindest manner, to return
streams of good air, from the upper surfaces of their leaves, exposed to the
light of the sun.

I beg leave to finish this note with a part of the speech delivered before the
Royal Society of LONDON, by Sir John Pringle, at the giving a prize medal to
Dr. Priestly, as an honorable testimony of the approbation of that learned
body, of the labors which he had bestowed on the doctrine of air.

From these discoveries, says he, we are assured, that no vegetable grows in
vain, but that from the oak of the forest, to the grass in the field, every
individual plant is serviceable to mankind; if not always distinguished by some
private virtue, yet making a part of the whole, which cleanses and purifies our
atmosphere. In this the fragrant rose, and deadly nightshade cooperate: nor
is the herbage, nor the woods that flourish in the remote and unpeopled
regions, unprofitable to us, nor we to them; considering how constantly the
winds convey to them our vitiated air for our relief, and for their
nourishment. And, if ever these salutary gales rise to storms and hurricanes,
let us still trace, and revere the ways of a beneficent Being, who, not
fortuitously, but with design, not in wrath, but in mercy, thus shakes the
waters and the air together, to bury in the deep, those putrid and pestilential
effluvia, which the vegetables upon the face of the earth, had been
insufficient to consume.

Note 3d. As towns and cities increase in population and wealth, it is found
necessary that the government be more vigorous, and that it it proceed with
more firmness and dispatch, than in the earlier stages of society.

The truth of this observation cannot be called in question. Populous towns and
cities, will find, by experience, the necessity of changing or improving their
police, as their circumstances alter: Those regulations which answer the
purposes of small villages and country towns, will be found insufficient for
large commercial places, especially when they become the resort of foreigners,
bringing with them the habits of different nations, of different modes of
education, and of different religions.

A great part of the inhabitants of Boston, I believe, are convinced that the
government of the town wants energy, and that the police established by our
venerable fathers, may be improved to advantage.

Some new regulations are wanting, or additional force and spirit given to such
as have been already made, to prevent the evils we suffer from vagrants,
strolling mendicants, and people of suspicious, and of bad character.

A complete remedy of the evils now mentioned, can be expected in nothing short
of the confinement of persons, of the above description, in some place of
punishment or industry, where they shall be prevented doing mischief, and if
possible, be obliged to earn their living.

The astonishing relief given to the city of Munich, by our countryman Sir
Benjamin Thompson, now Count of Rumford, when it was infested with a multitude
of impudent mendicants, and people of the most vicious character, is sufficient
to show what may be done; and to encourage like attempts in other parts of the
world.

A house of Industry was provided, with suitable accommodations and
employments; and under the direction of that enterprising and benevolent
officer, Munich was, in one day, delivered from 1200 miserable creatures, sunk
in vice, and pests of society.

Nor will the expense of such an enterprise, as that which was carried into
execution by Benjamin, Count of Rumford, to put an end to the evils of
mendicity in Bavaria, be at all discouraging, when it is considered, that he
prepared a very wholesome kind of food for 1200 people in the house of
industry, for L 1.7.6. per day, which is but a little over one farthing for
each person; and by a great improvement in the construction of the kitchen
fireplace, the fuel necessary to cook food for 1000 people does not cost more
than four pence half penny.

What has been done by Count Rumford in Bavaria, may be done in America.

Conceive now of the relief we should experience from an institution similar to
that which we have been considering! -- Such institutions in our large towns
and cities, would go far to prevent the evils which we suffer from idle and
vicious persons, who are constantly strolling about, and of late, have spread
alarm both in town and country.

Such an institution, executed with spirit, and accompanied with a frequent
return to an office of police, of the names of all persons who put up at
lodging houses, and houses of entertainment of every description, together with
the general state of the several wards into which the town now is, or may be
conveniently divided, would do more toward our security against thieves and
incendiaries, than the nightly watch and patrol of a large number of the
inhabitants.

END.

