AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED AT NEWPORT, IN THE STATE OF RHODE ISLAND, ON THE FOURTH
OF JULY, A. D. 1797.

BY WILLIAM MERCHANT.

" -- haec Manus, inimica Tyrannis,
Ense petit placidam sub Liberate quietem."
NEWPORT: Printed by HENRY BARBER, 1797.

ARTILLERY COMPANY of the TOWN of NEWPORT, 4 th JULY, 1797.
VOTED, That FRANCIS MALBONE, BENJAMIN FRY, WALTER CHANNING, and JOSEPH BOSS,
jun. be a Committee to wait on WILLIAM MERCHANT, Esquire to present him the thanks
of this COMPANY for his elegant, pertinent, and (by them) highly approved
ORATION, and to request a copy for the Press.

HOLMES WEAVER, Clerk.

To the ARTILLERY COMPANY, of the TOWN of NEWPORT.
GENTLEMEN,
EVER obedient to your requests, I have suffered your unequivocal Approbation
to overcome a real diffidence of Merit; -- and with a hope, that the short time
employed to compose, will atone for the defects and inaccuracies of this
ORATION, I submit it to the candid inspection of the PUBLIC.

W. MERCHANT.

ORATION.
ALL NATIONS, inspired by the spirit of Ambition, actuated by the love of
Liberty, or compelled by the influence of Example, -- have distinguished
Periods and Epochs in their Histories, commemorative of happy Events or
Illustrious Achievements.

AMERICANS perpetuate the remembrance of a DAY, in which the collected Wisdom
of the Nation, defined and asserted those important Rights, its combined
Efforts and Magnanimity have established.

THIS is elevated above other Days of the Year; -- it possesses a majestic
dignity which Freemen love to serve and reverence -- while our national liberty
is preserved, its Remembrance shall not be oblitera^ed, its Glory sullied or
its Observance interrupted -- but the Planets which enlighten the FOURTH Of
JULY, shall ever raise the spring Tide of our Joys.

AMID the warrantable festivity of this occasion, it is worthy our employment
to recur to those principles which originated and emboldened the efforts of
this Country, and to follow their operation in the production of events which
ultimately crowned them with success.

COULD the Author of our existence intend that one part of the human race
should have an absolute property in, or unlimited authority over the other? --
Freedom is the original, unalienable right of Man; a sense of this right is
coeval with its existence; and but for the force of habit, of example and
education, it would ever be abhorrent to our feelings to invade the liberties
of others, or voluntarily to prostrate our own, -- the Throne of Despotism
would ever be vacant -- its Courts untrodden by the feet of Votaries -- its
Altars unstained with the blood of Victims.

BUT however accustomed to assume or submit to Power, the spirit of man often
despises its exercise and refuses its obedience -- He assents to the
impositions of constituted Authority, but rejects the burdens of assumed or
hereditary Prerogative. -- This lively sense of natural right, -- deeply
implanted in the breasts of our ancestors, was too luxuriant to be restrained
by the arbitrary Government and monastic rigor of the Parent Country; and by a
removal to this Continent they sought at once, relief from the confining
Shackles of political and religious Tyranny.

UNITED by similarity of sentiment and necessity of circumstances; -- they
formed Constitutions and established Governments, in which as in the origin of
all social compacts, certain privileges were submitted to the control of the
community -- to secure to individuals the limited use of those, and free
exercise of all other rights. Unassisted by England, they established
themselves in opposition to numerous and warlike foes. -- It would be
impertinent on this occasion, to arraign the justice, or plead the necessity of
a conduct, which secured to our Fathers the peaceable possession of this
Country by the almost total extirpation of its natives; -- but while we rejoice
in the successful issue to their toilsome and dangerous conflict, We cannot but
repine at the means by which it was obtained.

WHILE a friendly intercourse and harmonious connection subsisted between the
Colonies, and Great Britain; her Commerce was increased, her revenue yearly
augmented and mutual advantages resulted to both Countries. In the last and
successful War with France, the Colonies had borne no inconsiderable part, and
the justice and wisdom of Chatham perceived and acknowledged their importance;
but when his steady councils were exchanged for the visionary schemes of North,
and justice and moderation were displaced by violence and rapacity, -- the
insatiate avarice of Great Britain, -- not content to imbibe that moderate
stream of wealth which constantly flowed into her coffers, sought to drain the
source, to gratify the Harpeian appetites of her minions. -- The effectual
assistance given by the Colonies in the war, discovered to the Ministry their
Power and Resources, and excited its ambition and avarice to reduce the one and
exhaust the other. The perceptive faculties of the Colonists were not
inattentive to those circumstances, and when the Government of Britain,
endeavored by subtle artifice to steal upon our liberties -- the wary policy
of our wise men, and native bravery of our citizens, were lively to discern,
and firm to oppose innovations.

THESE dispositions of the two Countries were the immediate cause of the
American Revolution. A thirst of Power in one, and love of Liberty in the
other, produced a disunion of feeling, and discovered the adversity of their
interests.

THE virtues of the English Constitution had long been a favorite subject for
praise and encomium to political Panegyrists. The rights of trial by Jury and
of representation in the House of Commons, where all Bills for taxation
originated, were regarded as the greatest privileges of the People and those to
which they had an indisputable claim: But the Parliament and Ministry in their
plan for taxing the Colonies, were either unmindful of those privileges, or
believed Us insensible to their infraction; and without reflecting that an
invasion of our rights was a violation of their Constitution -- they passed
Acts for taxing these Colonies, and directed trials for delinquents -- other
than by Juries.

THEY expected that unsuspicious affection or cowardly fear, would induce the
Colonists to acquiesce, or oblige them to obey these Laws; but they served to
alarm their Jealousy, and at once awakened their apprehensions to a discernment
of the policy, and aroused their opposition to the system of taxation -- Act
after Act, declaring the right, recommending the expediency of taxing this
Country, and tending to effect the measure, passed in rapid succession, and the
repeal of the "Stamp Act," the most odious and most vigorously opposed, was the
only retrograde step taken from their progress to Tyranny and Oppression. --
But even this temporary appearance of conciliatory measures was soon changed,
and the former face of affairs renewed. The hopes of the Colonists were scarce
raised by the repeal of one act, when another was passed, declaring "that his
Majesty in Parliament of Right had Power to bind the People of these Colonies
in ALL cases whatsoever."

TO a People of different manners and language, this would have been the signal
for revolt; but that affection which was originated and increased by a
similarity in both, proposed hopeless expedients for reconciliation in
preference to the doubtful alternative of arms.

HAPPILY for this Country, the pride of Britain disdained to accept such
conciliatory proposals, as fear or affection induced us to offer. With
petitions, remonstrances, and addresses, we besieged the King, the Parliament,
and the People of Great Britain. Contempt and Contumely were the returns. The
only offers short of unconditional submission and a total prostration of our
Rights, accompanied the disembarkation of Troops; and artful, delusory
proposals calculated to divide, not to satisfy, were presented upon the point
of the bayonet by military Plenipotentiaries. -- In all respects the conduct of
the British Ministry, however well it might be calculated to intimidate the
Fearful and alarm the Apprehensive, tended only to excite the indignation of
the Brave. When its vindictive rage had singled out the objects for vengeance,
and individual Towns and Colonies were unable to withstand the shock of its
malice; plans for association were formed. -- The dissolution of the Colonial
Assemblies was at once to punish and defeat these attempts; but the seeds of
Division perished, while those of Union grew stronger with every effort to
eradicate them, and arose to a full grown maturity, spite of the baleful blasts
of faction, and the inclement influence of venality.

EXCESS of irritation was avoided by the British, and a display of
determination to resist by the Colonists, till the arrival of fresh troops
increased their audacity, and sharpened our necessities. Though Congress approved
the opposing of force by force, they earnestly recommended forbearance from
aggression; and not till many unoffending victims had been immolated on the
unhallowed Altars of despotic Power, -- not till the numerous fleets and armies
of Britain evinced her immovable resolution of entirely subjecting us to her
arbitrary will, and to her natural means of accomplishing this unnatural
conquest, were added the hireling hosts of Germany, and the cruel hordes of our
native foes, -- did the Congress of the United Colonies, on the 6th of July,
1775 -- publish an affecting complaint of grievances, with a bold declaration
of rights, avowing a determination to redress the former and defend the latter.
When destruction was threatened by the Court and already executing by her
forces, -- when Proscription had unveiled its awful terrors to the view of our
Patriots; they dared to hold forth at once the Pen and Sword, avowing with one
those rights they resolved to obtain by the other.

THEY declared, -- "That in a just Cause and with a perfect Union they would
employ the arms their enemies had compelled them to assume for the preservation
of their liberties, -- resolved to die Freemen, rather than to live Slaves: --
That they had taken arms in their native land, in defense of the freedom which
was their birth right, and for the protection of property acquired solely by
the honest Industry of themselves and their forefathers, -- against violence
actually offered; -- and would never lay them down till hostilities should
cease on the part of the Aggressors, and all danger of their renewal be removed.

THIS was the result of deliberation, the dictate of necessity. Humble
submission or open firmness was necessary to appease or contend with the wrath
of our enemies. Yet so studious was Congress to preserve the reality as well as
appearance of moderation, and so infatuated were they by a hopeless desire of
honorable accommodation; that subsequent to this an humble petition was
presented to the King, and an affectionate address to the People of
Great Britain; and long after it was apparent that unconditional submission or
avowed hostility were our only alternatives, the Heads of these States avoided
an open choice of either; but when it was too demonstratively proved for
incredulity itself to doubt, that we had nothing to hope from the clemency, but
every thing to fear from the resentment of our foe, We laid open claim to
INDEPENDENCE, that great National Right, of which, by the energy of Councils,
the bravery of Troops, and the assistance of Heaven, we have acquired quiet
possession and complete enjoyment.

WHEN the lofty Fleets of England whitened the ocean, her wide-spread Tents
covered our fields, and her proud banners waved in triumph over our populous
Cities. When the blazing Torch and desolating Tomahawk of savage Barbarity,
scattered wide havoc and indiscriminate slaughter through our western frontier.
Destitute of the necessary impliments of war, fettered with a depreciated
currency, depressed by accumulating debt, and unallied to foreign Power, --
relying upon God and the Justice of their cause; -- the Representatives of
these United States of America in Congress assembled, on the 4th of July, 1776;
-- after premising the natural right of Men and of Nations, to dissolve the
political connection which had united them, and stating the aggravations which
reduced these Colonies to the necessity, and justified their separation from
the Mother Country, -- declared, "That these United Colonies are, and of right
onght to be, free and independent States; that they are absolved from all
allegiance to the British Crown, and that all political connection between them
and the State of Great Britain, is, and ought to be, totally dissolved; and
that as free and independent States they have full power to levy War, conclude
Peace, contract Alliances, establish Commerce, and to do all other things which
independent States may of right do. -- And for the support of that declaration,
with a firm reliance on the Protection of Divine Providence, they mutually
pledged each other, their Lives, their Fortunes, and their sacred Honors."

HITHERTO the objects for which they had contended were undefined. Resentment
for injuries and resistance to oppression had excited their natural and
involuntary efforts: -- But when Freedom became the prize of contention; when
on one side was seen the bright path which lead to honor and liberty, and
diverging to the other the dark road to disgraceful servitude, the Inclinations
of the brave Americans hesitated not to decide.

IT should ever give us pleasure to renew the remembrance of a Deed so
productive of good. Which wrought a regeneration in the political sentiments of
Men, and has occasioned revolutions in the civil Governments of the World.

THE feelings which actuated, the principles which directed, and the success
which crowned the exertions of the American Patriots, should ever excite
gratitude and emulation. -- Proscription and Death, -- Confiscation and
Attainder, were to have been their unmerited Punishments: -- But fearless of
consequences to themselves, they regarded only the Interests of their Country,
and responded only to the Integrity of their Hearts; -- They addressed Freedom
as a Mistress, they adored her as a Divinity, and as a Pillar of a Cloud by
Day, and a Pillar of Fire by (...) conducted them through a Sea of Blood and a
Wilderness of Despair, to the promised Land of Liberty and Peace.

WHEN Britain was most sanguine in her hopes of subjugation, -- when the Courts
of Europe beheld with apprehension or dismay, a contest between Powers so
apparently unequal; -- when the hopes of the Brave were in suspense, and the
fears of the Irresolute confirmed; -- the Declaration of Independence arrested
our fleeting expectations of Victory, and recalled us to the onset, armed with
hope, or fortified with despair. The sentiments and actions of men were decided
and confirmed, and the Friend to his Country designated from the Foe to her
Liberties. -- The exertions of the former were renewed and increased, urged by
hope of freedom or by fear of bondage, while the dastardly policy of the
latter, cringed to the iron rod of power, and his unnatural rapacity carved out
for his own enjoyment, the fairest possessions of Freemen.

THE superior numbers and discipline of our adversaries, long baffled our
attempts to expel them, and rendered dubious the fortune of the War; -- but
when the animated ardour of our Militia had overcome the cooler courage of
their numerous army in the North, and the Fabian Generalship of our Washington
had defeated their expeditions and captured their troops in the Jersies, -- our
own and the faith of foreign Nations was convinced of the certainty of our
eventual success: -- and when those and other proofs of our adequacy to the
conflict, had overcome doubt and shamed despair, the Ambition and Policy of the
Court of France prompted her to share the glory, and reap the advantage, of
humbling her natural and inveterate enemy.

BY an alliance with France, the forces of the English were divided and our own
increased, their partial successes at the southward, served but to desolate
that Country and place a wreath of Glory on our GREEN. His signal victories
and rapid progress in their expulsion from those States, merited the thanks,
honors and gratuities they bestowed, and deservedly ranked him the second
American General in fortune and ability.

HERE we might enumerate a long list of Heroes and of Sages, who in the Cabinet
and the Field, devoted their Lives and Fortunes to the service of their
Country; -- but they are too numerous to repeat, -- too worthy to admit
discrimination.

IN the progress of hostility, every method which malice and cruelty could
devise, was attempted to discourage and dishearten our Soldiers and Seamen; but
the thousands massacred in cool blood, or destroyed in prison ships by
pestilence and famine, served but to exasperate the living, and that unbridled
rage which dealt indiscriminate carnage, plunder and desolation, envigorated
the opposition of their Enemies and weakened the assistance of their Adherents.

WHEN the bright prospects of conquest had vanished from the deluded view of
the most sanguine, predatory and desultory Excursions were substituted for more
civilized and regular Warfare, the bayonet of the Soldier was molded into the
dagger of the Assassin, the match of the Matross exchanged for the torch of the
Incendiary.

BUT the fainting hopes of the British Ministry were still feebly sustained by
a meditated junction of their armies, commanded by Clinton and Cornwallis, till
the useless confined situation of the one, and entire capture of the other, at
length decided the fate of a war already far from doubtful.

A difficult task still remained; -- to secure by advantageous Treaty with the
belligerent Powers, those important rights so strenuously maintained in Battle.

FRANCE, Spain, and England, expected mutual advantages by negotiating with a
People unversed in courtly artifice and intrigue.

IT was the policy of those Nations to prevent the sudden aggrandizement or
complete independence of these States by great commercial advantages or extent
of territory. The insinuating a^dress o^ VERGENNES had a sensible effect upon
the accommodating disposition of FRANKLIN; but the keen sagacity sound policy
and invincible integrity of JAY and of ADAMS, (...) the art and baffled the
designs of that Minister; and on the 3d of September, 1783, a definitive Treaty
of Peace -- honorable and advantageous, was concluded at Paris with the British
Minister.

IT is needless to add that the acknowledgement of our Independence was the
preliminary article of that Treaty, as it had been of the provisional Articles
settled the preceding year. -- Ever after its declaration, Congress had refused
to treat upon other terms. -- In the darkest night of adversity they never lost
sight of that Polar Star, by whose guidance they were directed through the
intricacies and perils of a doubtful revolution, to a harbor of safety and
repose.

A lengthy digression is now unnecessary to show the justice of a cause thus
obtained. If there is an original difference between the motives for licentious
rebellion and those which influenced the revolt of these States, then we are
not indebted to the success of our cause for its justification; but rely upon
that distinction which Justice and candor will ever draw, between the
unwarrantable subversion of constituted authority, and a just opposition to the
exercise of lawless power. -- The attainder of the high commissioned Court who
condemned the first Charles, the reascension of the House of Stuart upon the
Throne of England in the person of the second, and the decrees of oblivion to
the Acts of the Protectorate, cannot convince the enlightened understandings of
this Age, that the People of England exercised an illegal authority in the
unprecedented trial and death of a Tyran. -- Neither would Posterity have
stigmatized these United States with the opprobium or Treason, had the Power of
Britain reduced their aspiring hopes and humbled them to a state of servility
and bondage.

SUBSEQUENT to the Peace of '83, the fair prospects of these States were
obscured. Instead of that bright sunshine of political happiness, they had
expected to cheer their future existence, their views were darkened by thick
mists of political error, their hopes assailed by stormy tempests of national
adversity. -- That union which had subsisted during the war, no longer existed
in its first perfection. The powers of Congress in time of peace in but few
instances exceeded a recommendatory authority. Those who had councelled in the
cabinet and fought in the field were regarded with envy, and to possess the
grateful affections of a part of their fellow-citizens, was sufficient to
ensure the malicious jealousy of the rest:

THE experience of Ages has taught that Republics are most ungrateful for the
services of their Citizens. This truth may be useful to guard against the too
great agrand^z^ment of individuals; but will ever damp their ardour and
enterprise: -- few serve their Country with so disinterested views as not to
regard and claim her thanks as their due reward.

LEGISLATIVE injustice, dissension and rebellion, threatened us with civil war
at home and national discredit abroad; but the wisdom of those who had
conducted us to what we had regarded as the possession of liberty, once more
beamed a brighter day upon our prosperity, and gave us the undelusive enjoyment
of the boon, by the formation and adoption of our present Constitution of
Government.

THE HERO whose arm had rescued us from servitude to Kings was placed at the
head of the Nation, and equal wisdom and success guided and followed his
conduct in a political as had in a military employment. Our regret for his
departure from office, can be alleviated only by our confidence in the
abilities and integrity of his Successor. -- It is believed, that as the
justice, wisdom and magnanimity of WASHINGTON, prevented the calamities of a
war, and secured the benefits of an amicable Treaty with Great Britain; -- the
like qualities in ADAMS may yet extricate us from our difficulties with FRANCE.

WE acknowledge, the assistance of the Gallic Monarch conduced to a speedier
conclusion of the war, and with the change of their Government, transfer our
obligations from the King to the People of France: -- but while we cherish in
our bosoms so noble a virtue as gratitude, we should not so far lose sight of
their motives or of our interests, as tamely to suffer from professional
Friends, Indignities unfit to be offered by avowed Enemies. To declare war
against one Nation from motives of partiality or in obedience to the dictates
of another, would be a folly justly punished by the chastisement of Enemies,
and perfidy of Allies.

CLOSE adherence to the interests of either belligerent party, would subject us
to a share of their disasters -- the impaired state of the finance of England
has alarmed the apprehensions of the commercial World, and the unsettled plan
of Government in France, with the power she arrogates of influencing the
politics of other Nations, threaten political ruin to her, if not to involve
others in her Catastrophe.

THE want of ability or inclination to distinguish between freedom, as
restrained in its exercise though not impaired in its excellence by Government,
and that lawless indulgence of liberty which involves in anarchy and ends in
tyranny, has been a stumbling block to Republics in all ages, a quick sand upon
which most free States have foundered.

IT can be ascribed only to the vanity inherent in our natures that the
misfortunes of others cannot deter us from their pursuits; and though it is
demonstrated by stubborn fact, that Democracy is the most oppressive of all
Governments (if a Government it may be called) yet there are not wanting to
advocate its excellence and attempt its experiment. Constant agitation is
incident to its operation, and like the turgid billows of a troubled ocean, its
Individuals rise in uncertain vicissitudes and are overwhelmed by constant
opposition. Let it be remembered, that in such a State, we can have no liberty
but by the variable sufferance of our neighbors. Are we politically happy
because we have the unrestrained power of molestation, when we are also subject
to its inconvenience? Nature itself ha^h Laws, which because they are perfect,
are unchangeable, -- The happy experience of eight years has taught, that our
Constitution well administered approximates that perfection, and should never
be changed by party of altered by caprice.

Fellow-Citizens in Arms,

UNDER the protecting auspices of a free Government, we are associated to give
energy to its laws, and to maintain order in Society. What honor demands and
our interests require, we are bound to perform. We should remember that we are
to defend not oppress our Country. -- Her interests are inseparable from ours,
and when we lose sight of duty to her, we become estranged from our dearest
rights.

OUR reverence for authority and jealousy for liberty, should be weighed with
impartiality, since we must decide between the lawful exercise of power and the
unjust oppression of the Citizens, when called to enforce the one, or excited
to resist the other.

THE liberties of our Country are entrusted to our care, and consigned to our
defense. -- They are our liberties, -- are inestimable treasure, -- once lost
may never be retrieved; -- to guard them is a privilege worthy of emulation,
and should be the ambition of every Freeman.

ASSOCIATED by union of sentiments and the bonds of brotherhood, -- embracing
each other with an affection, the offspring of Nature and dictate of Reason, --
our Parson hropy should also be extended to our Fellow Citizens, -- and
expanded by those sentiments which spring from Civilization and Refinement, and
are nursed by Unanimity and Fraternity, the extensive Benevolence of our
Affections should embrace the World of Mankind -- hating only Tyrants, whether
riding in single majesty over the prostrate liberties of numerous Subjects, or
trampling with multitudinous violence upon the rights of the few.

Fellow-Citizens,

LET not the festivity of this day drown, but enliven the remembrance of those,
whose steady councils and intrepid courage obtained the blessings we possess.

IN a fertile country and a healthy climate, under a mild government and a just
administration, blessed with the benignant smiles of a gracious, Heaven, -- We
will neither receive from, nor give Laws to other Nations; but ever mindful of
the Principles which actuated our FATHERS; those invaluable privileges
inherited from them, we will transmit undiminished to our Posterity.


