A LETTER TO THOMAS PAIN, IN ANSWER TO HIS SCURRILOUS EPISTLE ADDRESSED TO OUR
LATE WORTHY PRESIDENT WASHINGTON: AND CONTAINING COMMENTS AND OBSERVATIONS ON
HIS LIFE, POLITICAL AND DEISTICAL WRITINGS, etc. etc. INTENDED AS AN ALARM TO
THE GOOD PEOPLE OF THESE STATES, FROM BEING LED ASTRAY BY THE SOPHISTICAL
REASONINGS OF MR. PAIN.

BY AN AMERICAN CITIZEN, In whose heart the Amor Patriae holds the highest
place.

NEW YORK: Printed for the AUTHOR by JOHN BULL, No. 115, Cherry-street.

A LETTER TO THOMAS PAIN.
SIR,
"AS censure is but aukwardly softened by apology, I shall offer you none for
writing this letter," The eventful crisis to which those disorganizing and
infidel principles which you glory in propagating, have brought the affairs
both of France and America, render the undertaking both warrantable and
necessary.

There was a time, when the people of the United States had a high veneration
for Thomas Pain. The pamphlets which you heaped upon this country, in the time
of the American war, however extravagant and ridiculous, had a considerable
effect in effecting the independence of this country, for this assistance we
willingly give you credit, on the same footing as we would comply with the
principles of the old adage, "to give the devil his due."

At the period when all America was animated with a just resentment at the
arbitrary and tyrannical measures of the court of Great Britain, and had
actually, and justly, taken up arms against that insolent power, they were, as
is very natural to suppose, glad of any assistance, coming from whatever
quarter, that would aid them in the great object they had in view.

Among an enlightened people, the press has a powerful effect, in controuling
political sentiments, and among a people where there are very few but can read
a news-paper; superficial pieces, containing some flashes of wit, pointing at
particular subjects of existing commotions, were perfectly well calculated to
attract the attention of the multitude -- availing yourself of a junction of
favorable circumstances, your superficial and grub-street genius was brought
into activity, and an eclat given to your literary performances, more than ten
degrees beyond what their intrinsic worth ever merited.

Having by these means obtruded yourself upon public notice, you have become
intoxicated with vanity. Not a piece comes from you, but Tom Pain is the hero
of the story. Having, in various of your pieces, arrogantly attributed to
yourself almost the exclusive merit of the American revolution, yet not content
with those plagiary flowers with which you have adorned your political nosegay,
you have of late assumed to yourself the exclusive honor of completely
overturning the christian system. From your exalted eminence, (like the master
whom you faithfully serve) you look down with the sublimest satisfaction, on
seeing Kings and Priests, Prophets and Apostles, nay, the Savior of the world
prostrate at your feet. Bless me, what a man!

It is storied of Alexander, that when he had conquered the world, he wept that
there was not another world to conquer. But had that ancient hero of chivalry,
been possessed of the pregnant genius of our modern hero of politics and
divinity, he might have saved the effusion of all his tears, for, instead of
weeping for another world to conquer, he should have conquered the same world
over again; for our hero of politics, having, by a dash of his pen, conquered
the despotic monarchies of England and France, has proclaimed war against the
Republic of the united States, and intends if possible, to make George the
third, and Washington the first, share the fate of Louis the sixteenth.

When one peruses the variety of your dashing works, it is laughable above all
other things, to see your consistency and your honesty; your genius is properly
compared to the atoms of Epicures which were in an eternal, accidental and
opposite motion. Having early committed yourself to the world as a Republican,
you had sense enough to know, that leaving that ground, and becoming an
advocate for monarchy, would make your political character appear so
notoriously ridiculous, that no description of people would regard you: but in
your various Republican pieces, you have advocated sentiments, that are far
more irreconcilably opposite, than the present constitution of England and
France.

In your "Common Sense," and "Rights of Man," you are evidently an advocate for
a single legislature. In your Dissertation on first principles of government,
you directly oppose that form of government, and plead earnestly for two
houses. In the first of these books we discover such profound political
penetration, in regard to choosing a president by lot, your observation on a
navy, and of a public debt, as really attract our wonder and admiration.

But, if our wonder is started here, our admiration is carried to its ne plus
ultra, on comparing the arguments which you adduce from the sole authority of
scripture against monarchy, with your extraordinary performances, called "The
Age of Reason," (rather the age of folly.) In the former you frequently call
the Bible "the word of God," in the latter you say "we ought to feel shame at
calling the Bible the word of God." These passages of your ranting brain,
compared together, leave us no other alternative, but either to pronounce you a
shameful impostor, or an infamous liar. They necessarily oblige us to the
adoption of both.

Having arrogated to yourself, though very unjustly, the fame of changing the
American system of politics, you thirsted after the honor of having it said,
that you changed their sentiments of religion. And were you so vain, as to
think that a man so profoundly ignorant of religion in general, as you
evidently are, could convert a nation of enlightened christians, and make them
change their Bible, the word of eternal life, for the scurrilous nonsense of
your Age of Reason? No, Sir, had the People of America been disposed to change
their Religion, they had little need of your assistance, unless it had been
better, for while the best informed deists of this country, are proud of
quoting the production of a Hume, or Voltaire, they are ashamed to mention the
name of a Pain in support of the subject. In this instance I trust you have
missed your aim, while you have fully discovered the cloven-foot of your evil
intentions.

Republican as I am in principle, and a revelationist by profession, rejoicing
as I ever have, both at the American, and French revolutions, I nevertheless
view the Atheistical and murderous principle of the most distinguished men, who
conducted the French revolution, with the most superlative detestation. As to
yourself, though you deny that you are an Atheist, or that you approved of the
murderous system that will cast an eternal reproach on the French revolution,
yet, many of your doctrines both political and religious, lead directly thereto.

As to your notions of religion, you deny that we have any knowledge of a God,
or of a future state, but what our reason teaches us; and if your notions are
true, what is the amount of all our knowledge of these infinitely important
subjects? As to a future state of existence, our reason, so far from teaching,
is entirely against it. Every appearance in nature from which our reason can
judge, bespeaks that when man dies there is an end of him; with respect to an
hereafter, reason alone is as silent as the grave itself. The natural
immortality of the soul is no more a doctrine of reason, than the Scripture
doctrine of the resurrection. After all the laborious researches of mankind,
from the creation of the world to this day, on the subject of the natural
immortality of the soul, after you have had an opportunity of examining all
that the philosophers of ancient and modern times have had to say on this most
momentous subject, I find the most powerful reason which you can give, is,
"that a Caterpillar changes to a Butterfly," which is about as much of a proof,
as the circumstances of wheat's changing to drock, is a proof that the moon is
made of green cheese.

But, though reason alone is wholly silent as to teaching a future state of
existence, yet I am ready to allow, yea to affirm, that it teaches the
existence of a God. But even this cannot be satisfactorily proved from the
common principles which Deists lay down, nor from those which you have advanced
in your Age of Reason; for the argument that nothing can exist without a cause,
does not remove the objection of the Atheist; who immediately enquires, if
nothing can exist without a cause, how came the first cause to exist? and this
objection appears unanswerable. I therefore argue the existence of a God, when
revelation is out of the question; not merely by stating the necessity of a
cause for all things, but by contemplating those evident marks of design which
appear both in animate and inanimate existence. These evidences of design
plainly demonstrate the existence of a Supreme intelligent Being; but though
reason, judging from these evidences, discovers his existence, yet it is wholly
incompetent to a discovery of what is called his moral attributes.

In the first part of your Age of Reason, I find you proposing the following
questions, viz.

"But if objects for gratitude and admiration are our desire, do they not
present themselves every hour to our eyes? Do we not see a fair creation
prepared to receive us the instant we are born? -- world, furnished to our
hands, that costs us nothing? Is it we that light up the sun, -- that pour down
the rain -- and fill the earth with abundance?"

These questions will do for those who are content to view things only on the
bright side, (which I find, by the bye, you are, in some instances, far from
being willing to do); but the impartial observer, with equal reason, will
contract with yours the following questions, viz.

Do we not, the moment we see an infant born, hear him begin to cry? -- sad
forboding of a life of sorrow which is to succeed! Do we not, if his life is
spared, find that, in his progress through life, he is beset with innumerable
evils, which cause him pain and grief? Do not disorders of the body frequently
bring on the most excruciating pains? Is he not frequently visited with poverty
and disgrace? -- Not only deemed to these evils himself, is he not called to
the view of scenes the most distressing -- a child gasping in his arms; or a
darling wife expiring at his bosom? Is he not in the world as frequently called
to the house of mourning as to the house of feasting? -- to the mournings of a
funeral, as to the festivity of a marriage? And are there not more graves in
the world than palaces? And is not the grave, after a short life of trouble,
the house appointed for all living?

As you will not deny the proper application of these questions, may I not be
permitted to ask, by what criterion, in all the phoenomina of nature, are we to
determine the moral attributes of the Deity? seeing it is a question hard to be
solved, whether, taking the whole of man's existence into view, in this visible
system, evil or good really preponderates.

From these few hints we may easily see the absurdity of supposing natural
religion adequate to the formation of the moral character of mankind. You say,
"the moral duty of man consists in imitating the moral goodness of God." Here
you beg the question; for your religion can never prove that God is a being so
essentially made up of moral goodness, as to render it warrantable for us to
imitate his works. This doctrine, that the moral duty of man consists in
imitating the works of God, is pregnant with the most dreadful consequences
that can be conceived for by the same rule that we are led to imitate the good
which he confers, we shall be led to imitate the evils which he inflicts; and
what would that be but to open the flood-gate for the introduction of all the
horrors with which the ancient pagan religion was replete? Famine, wars,
assassinations, and miseries of every kind, would be the natural effect. I
believe that all the evil which the Deity inflicts on his creatures, will
finally be subservient to the happiness of the intelligent system. In this view
of things the (...).


The ancient pagans, whom you ignorantly call a moral people, justified all
these enormities, from the principle of imitating the works of God. Among
innumerable evidences of this, the most striking one is that of human
sacrifices,

They, observing that it was the character of the Deity to inflict death upon
mankind, thought to appease his anger and gain his good will would be to
imitate him in this respect. Accordingly, the custom of offering up human
beings in sacrifice was universally adopted by all, the nations in the world,
except the Jews; and so universal was this practice among all the heathen
nations, that even some of the most vicious Jewish kings, who partly relapsed
into heathenism, appear, in some instances, to have imitated the horrid example.

The brevity which I study in this letter will not admit of giving
circumstantial details of this horrid practice; every person who has any
acquaintance with history, knows the thing to be a fact. In general the victims
were slaves; but on extraordinary occasions, young men and women of the first
families were sacrificed. This practice was equally carried on among the
civilized, as among the savage nations. The modern Mexicans sacrificed, at one
time, no less than sixty thousand souls.

Not only the practice of offering human sacrifices, and the destruction of the
human race, by wars and murder in general, was justified by the example of the
Supreme Being, but every practice which degrades the human species, and levels
them with the brutes, was practiced under the same pretense. Prostitution, even
in their temples, was a common thing. Among some nations, it was an essential
article of religion, that every woman should, once in her life, prostitute
herself to a stranger.

To say that these nations believed in two, or a great number of independent
principles, or Gods, some good and other evil, and that these practices were in
imitation of the evil principle, gives nothing in favor of natural religion,
but only confirms us in the opinion of its total insufficiency, as a guide to
the practice of moral virtue, or to any proper idea of the Supreme Being, or
the future destination of man.

In plain forms, all that natural religion teaches an attentive mind, is, that
there is an intelligent cause for all things, both good and evil; that we are
the production of this cause, sharing at present both good and evil; but, that
the evil of death will shortly take us out of existence, where we shall be as
though we had not been -- where the good and the bad will share exactly alike.

This, Sir, is the gloomy, but true picture of that religion which you are most
industriously endeavoring to propagate in this country. This is the religion
which you wish us to embrace, in exchange for that glorious system which "has
brought life and immortality to light;" -- a system which gives the most
satisfactory account of the existence and attributes of the Deity; -- of the
design and final result of evil, both moral and natural; making plain our duty
before us; expressly promising the reward of every virtue, and positively
threatening the punishment of every vice; ever suspending our happiness, on the
condition of intentional rectitude; giving us the utmost encouragement for
persevering in the cause of virtue, holding out every thing to deter us from a
course of vice; -- a religion calculated to afford the greatest consolation
through life, and holding up, as an object of holy ambition, a crown of
immortal glory beyond the grave; -- a religion that teaches us, on the most
infallible authority, that when we, with all our near and dear connections, are
laid in the silent grave, it is in certain prospect of a resurrection to an
eternal happy life, where we shall meet with our dear friends and relatives,
when death has separated for a time, adorned in all the glory of unceasing,
immortal bliss and beauty. I have often been disgusted at Mr. Paine's illiberal
and unmanly manner of writing. It is his invariable practice, to give out his
sentiments in the most Sovereign dictatorial style, and treating with affected
insolent contempt every argument, however conclusive, that is urged against
him. -- The doctrine of the resurrection, he says, "is so far from being an
evidence of immortality to him, that it is an argument against it, for if he
has once died in this body, the probability is, that he shall die again."

This remark is childish and absurd: The same authority which declares that the
dead shall arise, declares likewise, that they shall never die again. (Luke xx
36) Neither can they die any more, for they are equal unto the angels; and are
the children of God, being the children of the resurrection.

The whole volume of nature affords neither evidence, nor probability, of a
future state. This volume (...) nothing inconsistent with the old epicurean
maxim. "let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die." The volume of the Bible
teaches the doctrine of a future eternal state of existence, with that
demonstrative certainly which is sufficient for the satisfaction of every
rational man.




Here, did the limits of my design admit, I would cheerfully enter on the
subject of demonstrating, that the Bible, which fully warrants the preceding
sentiments, is a book of really divine and infallible authority; but this being
a thing already done to your hands by others, I shall only observe, that after
having put forth all your might on the subject, you are unable to produce one
objection against the bible, that need, for one moment, disturb the feelings of
a man of sense. You have a tolerable genius for wit, and a good one for a
blackguard; but, heartily speaking, after a careful perusal of all your
writings, I have never been able to discover you to be a man of knowledge
sufficient to warrant that important idea, which you never fail to inform us
you have, of your own literary merit.

I cannot dismiss this part of the subject without observing in the two parts
of the Age of Reason, your old practice of contradicting yourself. In the
first, you tell us that the morality which Christ preached was excellent. In
the second part you say, that wherever it exceeds heathen morality, it is mean
and ridiculous. Loving of enemies, you say, is offering a premium for crimes,
and of course a bad doctrine. I think your memory must be as treacherous as
your heart is vicious.

The revelation of a future life, which is evidently the grand end and design
of the bible, is of infinitely more importance to such dying mortals as we all
are, than all other topics, put them all together, that ever employed the
genius of man. What are the circumstances of a few uncertain years, compared to
that state of existence which shall never have an end? What are the ruins and
revolutions of Empires which history unfolds, to the wonders of that universal
revolution which the bible, with such majestic grandeur, fully reveals and
unfolds. What is the dunghill story of a caterpillar's changing to a butterfly,
as to a proof of an hereafter, compared with the solemn declaration, positively
confirmed by a divine interposition, no less miraculous than the resurrection
of its author from the dead.

"Marvel not as this, that the hour when all that are in their grave a shall
hear his voice, and shall come forth, they that have done good to the
resurrection of life, and they that have done evil unto the resurrection of
damnation."

I am fully of the opinion, that no mortal man would have ever had the most
distant idea of a God, or of a future state, had it not been for divine
revelation. I am confirmed in this opinion both from history and observation.
It is certain that no nation of people had so proper an idea of the true God,
and of a future state, as the Jews. It is equally certain, that all the nations
in the neighborhood of Judea, where they naturally learnt more or less of the
Jewish doctrine, had the strongest sense of religion, and were the most
civilized people. In proportion as you recede from the Jewish nation, you find
the people growing more and more uncivilized, until you find them immersed in
the deepest gloom of savage ignorance. The Deity, knowing that the ordinary
powers with which he had endowed his creature man, were incapable of
discovering; his existence, merely from the appearance of his ordinary works,
has, in certain instances, inverted the general course of things, as the most
proper way to convince mankind, that the whole course of nature was under the
control of a Being who was infinite in all his attributes. This invertion of
the ordinary course of nature is what we call a Miracle. But the existence of
miracles you refuse to believe, though attested by a million of evidences. You
are so excellent a logician, and so candid a man, that if a million of men
inform you of a miracle, and one man contradicts it, his single evidence must
preponderate against the whole; and what increases our astonishment here, is,
that in this respect, Hume is almost as ridiculous as you. I will not disgrace
my page by attempting to reason against such sottishness; but proceed to
observe, that the proof of the existence of one real miracle, is of sufficient
authority to warrant the belief of the whole system of Divine Revelation. And
what better evidence can we possibly have of the existence of miracles than we
really have. For instance; I know not of a fact in all history that is better
attested than the resurrection of Christ. In proportion to the importance of an
historical fact, will always be the scrutinizing researches respecting its
authenticity. And as all unbelievers, from the time the fact happened to this
day, have exerted themselves to the utmost to weaken the evidences of the fact,
it is curious to find, that after you, with all their assistance, have tugged
and sweat at the business, are evidently unable to produce a single
circumstance as objectionable, but what rather serves to strengthen than to
weaken the evidences. The non-essential variation in the different accounts,
which your extreme prejudice would magnify into insurmountable objections, are
strong corroborations of its reality and truth. If the writers of the account
of the resurrection were impostors, why did they not tell their stories exactly
alike? Or if they wrote without any knowledge of each other, how could they
contrive a lie so nearly alike? Surely this would be as great a miracle as the
resurrection itself. What had they to induce them to tell such a lie? Was it
riches? no. "Silver and gold have I none." Was it popularity or the good will
of men? no. "Ye shall be hated of all men, for my names sake." Was it power?
no. "My kingdom is not of this world." Was it ease and security? no. "Behold I
send you forth as sheep among wolves." Was it long life? no. "The time comes
when whosoever shall kill you, shall think he does God service."

The resurrection of Christ was not only attested by several hundred witnesses,
(you say with your usual confidence, which shows how much you are to be
depended on by not more than eight or nine) by the eleven of his disciples, who
saw and conversed with him at different times, for the space of forty days, Mr.
Pain likewise says, that the whole space of time from the crucifixion to the
ascension of Christ, was apparently not more than three or four days. Campare
the assertion of this excellent divine, with (Acts, Chap. 1. verse 3.) "To whom
also he showed himself alive after his passion, by many infallible proofs,
being seen of them forty days."
but was believed by the best informed of his enemies, and even his very
murderers. Of all men living, who was not an eye witness to the resurrection of
Christ, we may naturally suppose Pilate, to be the best judge, who at the same
time was interested in suppressing the belief of the fact. He had been well
acquainted with the whole history of Christ, particularly of his miracles. It
was he who gave orders for his execution. It was he, who being strictly intent
to guard against any deception, or any trick of his disciples, apparently to
fulfill the public prediction of Christ, respecting his own resurrection, gave
positive orders both for setting a watch, and for securing the sepulcher: Yet
the evidences of the resurrection, were so notorious, so unanswerably attested,
that Pilate himself believed it. He wrote a letter, shortly after the
transaction, to Tiberius the Emperor of Rome, informing him particularly of the
wonderful miracle and resurrection of Christ. Upon which the Emperor made a
report of it to the Senate. (See the History of Rome abridged by Dr. Goldsmith,
page 218.)

Are the philosophers of Paris better judges of this affair, than Pilate who
was personally acquainted with Christ, had seen his miracles, seen him expire
on the cross, was living in Jerusalem in the time of his resurrection, and
perfectly well acquainted with all the circumstances of the transaction. In
Thomas Pain possessed of better evidence of this affair than Pilate. If he is,
it is needless to go so far back into antiquity for miracles to justify the
doctrine of a divine interposition, for here is a miracle before our eyes.

O ye Deists! of all men you are the most unreasonable. You talk much of the
superstition and bigotry of christians. But if you are not superstitious, you
are of all men the greatest bigots. You are so bigoted to your doctrines, that
you lay it down as a kind of maxim that the testimony of one Deist is of more
weight than the testimony of a million christians. Who can reason with such
sots. You are arrogant in the extreme. You may with more reason tell us that
Julius Caesar never existed, than that Christ never existed. Volney and
Lequinio, two Philosophers of France, are so ignorant as to deny that such a
person as Christ ever existed.
You may with much more reason tell us that he never was assassinated by Brutus
and others, than that Christ was not crucified. You may with as much reason
reduce all ancient history to a total blank, as to deny that Christ actually
arose from the dead. It is because you hate the doctrine of christianity that
you refuse to believe it. The loving of enemies is a hateful doctrine to modern
philosophers. Their pride and haughtiness is much easier gratified by answering
an affront with the sword or the Guillotine, than by forgiving an injury. But
wretched will ever be the condition of that people who are ruled by such
philosophers. The forgiveness of an injury settles a difference at once; but
there is no end to retaliation. Under the influence of this hellish principle
of retaliation, the world has ever groaned in wretchedness and despair, Was
this doctrine of loving our enemies, which implies no more than the forgiveness
of injuries, but once universally obeyed, what a happy world would this be.
This and this only, can lay the foundation for true republicanism. Here, and
here only, will the rights of man be in any sense secure. This single sentence
comprised in three words "love your enemies," is of infinitely more worth both
in the moral and political world, than as many volumes of your "Rights of Man,"
as can be piled between the heavens and earth. The book of job is generally
allowed to be the most ancient book that is now extant. In this book we find
the following remarkable vindication of the natural equality and rights of
mankind. We here find a true republican, respecting and vindicating the natural
rights of mankind, from this weighty and solemn consideration, that the Deity
took cognizance of all his works, and would punish every act of usurpation and
oppression. (Job xxxi.) "If I did despite the cause of my manservant, or of my
maidservant, when they contended with me; what then shall I do when God rises
up, and when he visits, what shall I answer him? Did not he that made me in
the womb make him? and did not one fashion us in the womb?"

How infinitely preferable is the authority of divine revelation toward
supporting the rights of man, the order and happiness of society, to Mr.
Paine's mathematical religion. Let common-sense judge which is the best plan of
morality; that which is contained in these few words of our Savior, "all
things whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so unto
them," or any thing that can be learnt by peeping through a telescope at the
satellites of Jupiter. O! Americans, beware of jacobin politics, and jacobin
religion.

Whenever Mr. Pain speaks of the natural rights of mankind to an equal
representation, he speaks in such a manner as would make one suppose that he
conceived himself to be the first man who ever made a discovery of these
natural rights, when the fact is, that he has not advanced a single idea upon
the subject that is truly original. These natural rights were contemplated by
thousands in ancient Greece and Rome, and vindicated by a multitude of writers
from Plato to Voltaire. It is true, other republicans, and other infidels have
had more modesty and prudence than Mr. Pain. He is distinguished from other
republicans, and other infidels, more by his rashness and impudence, than by
any extraordinary reasoning. He speaks of himself as of a great adept in
science, when he has ever discovered himself to be a mere smatterer.

Let the following queries and observations be attended to by the candid reader
( viz). A right to a choice of government must be derived either from property
or intellectual ability. To say that this right is derived from property is
attended with many absurdities. It is attaching rights to dead matter, and is
in fact the very foundation of all aristocratic governments. If this right is
derived from intellectual ability, on what principle is it confined to males,
to the exclusion of females. Is not this exclusion of one half the species in
Republics; just as arbitrary as the exclusion of all the men in absolute
monarchies. If it is intellectual ability, why is it confined to age? There are
many males under twenty-one who possess more intellectual ability than many who
are over that age. Is not the exclusion of these as arbitrary as to exclude any
other. About two thirds of the species are by these rules excluded from any
choice in the government. On what principle is this exclusion? on that of
expediency. This is the monarch's plea for excluding the men. On that of
necessity, this is the monarch's plea likewise. Is not society so imperfect as
to be driven to the absolute necessity of arbitrary rules in many instances. Is
not government in the freest Republics a discretionary thing, under the
control of a few men of superior seize, while not one in twenty has a
really independent choice.




From the ignorance and pride of a Deist, naturally arises a charge of
monstrous ingratitude. His ingratitude consists in refusing to give credit to
divine revelation, for what he has evidently borrowed from that source. All his
ideas of a God or of a future state, are evidently borrowed from the doctrines
of the bible. For though the existence of a Deity is confirmed by reasoning on
those evidences of design in the visible creation, yet there is no appearance
in nature, that will justify the opinion that ever our ideas would have arrived
to that degree of abstract refinement necessary for this discovery, without the
original aid of divine revelation. The christian who expects a future eternal
state of happiness in heaven; the Mohammedan who expects a future state
resembling a terrestrial paradise; the deist who expects a future state, of and
where he knows not what; the poor negro who expects to return to his native
Africa when he dies; the wandering Indian, who expects to meet his wife and dog
in some happy abode beyond the western mountains; are all equally dependent for
their discoveries, on divine revelation: The different modes and degrees of
their belief, resulting in general from circumstances in their natures
adventitious. Wherever we perceive the least notion of a God, or of a future
state, wherever we perceive the least notion of moral virtue; there we see
something of divine revelation.

As much as I dread the extraordinary calamities with which the nations of the
earth are frequently visited; as much as I detest every form of government
which is not founded on the will of a free people; yet I solemnly declare that
I dread the general introduction of your infidel principles, more than I do the
pestilence of a plague or an oriental despotism.

The innocence of the American character was formerly your almost constant
theme. From what source did this innocence arise, from Deism or Christianity?
not from Deism certainly; for a Deist was then so rare that he was esteemed a
monster in nature. He was ashamed to show his head, and you among the rest. It
was a strict attachment to the christian religion. Happy had it been for France
had there been the like attachment during her revolution. The scaffolds would
not in that case have streamed with torrents of innocent blood. Thousands of
prisoners would not have been massacred without a trial. The unfortunate cities
of Toulon, of Lions, and of Nantz, would not have been depopulated by
indiscriminate butcheries. Thousands of women and children, (my soul shudders
at the thought). Thousands of women I say, with their wishful infants at their
breasts, would not have been plunged into a watery grave. Young men and women
would not have been stripped naked, and tied face to face, then plunged into the
sea, patriotically called republican marriage. Philippi would not have come
into the jacobin society with the heads of his father and mother, boasting that
he had cut them off as a proof of his patriotism. Thomas Pain would not have
been imprisoned in the Luxemburg, and saved from the scaffold by nothing but
the respect which even the Parisian savages had for America.

These are traits in the human character, which the most acute philosopher can
never investigate. Light and darkness are not more irreconcilably opposite than
some of the intellectual powers which constitute an individual capacity. How
astonishing is it, that you who had so frequently boasted of "the innocence of
the American character," whose christianity was highly respected; who had been
so liberally rewarded and treated, by this nation of christians. How
astonishing, I say, is it, that in the midst of all the horrors that were
exercised by the infidels of France, yourself taken in among the number of the
accused, and menaced with the ghastly edge of the Guillotine; a recent and
strong remembrance of the morality and kindness of your "beloved America"
should take that opportunity for spreading those detestable principles which
are contained in your monstrous production called the Age of Reason. Was it
because, seeing all your ambitious projects blasted by the prospect of your
imprisonment and impending fate in France, the rancour of envy was stirred in
your breast, and you wished to make the happy people of this country as
wretched as yourself? Was it with you as it was with the Devil, who being cast
out of heaven down to hell, could not endure the sight of so much happiness in
the garden of Eden. It is utterly impossible on principles of fair reasoning,
and that in the full exercise of charity, to conceive of any worthy motive
which could excite you to the undertaking.

The belief of a God is of no practical use when revelation is denied. There is
no vice however monstrous, but what has been vindicated by modern unbelievers.
Marriage, the great bond and foundation of all society, is almost wholly
disregarded by them. And a law equivalent to an unlimited community of women
was actually passed by the national convention, founded on this maxim, that
"whatever will effects, will may change," that is, a man and woman may agree to
live together as long as they will, and then if they will may part. Deism saps
the very foundation of all morality whatever. In encourages every thing that is
congenial to the natural depravity of mankind. Lust, revenge, and every thing
destructive to the happiness of society is encouraged by this impious system.
Even those deists who are the most ostentatiously fond of extolling their own
virtues, have disgraced their lives, as well as their religion, by shameful
immoralities; Rousseau, in his younger years was a thief, in his middle age an
adulterer, Franklin, the best man among them, was a whoremaster, and Tom Pain
is a drunkard.

Dismissing the subject of your moral principles, we will attend for a while to
your present political character in particular, as we find it exemplified in
your late letter to the President of the United States. Here we find not only
your political creed, but the moral temper of your heart. Here we find in open
day, the baseness of an infidel, the odiousness of an incendiary, and the
impudence of a mercenary assassin. Nothing could induce the writer of this
letter to pay any attention to such despicable scurrility, but an apprehension
that there are yet numbers of people in this country, who are profligate and
unprincipled enough to give some credit to your impious lies. The number of
those, however, I can assure you from certain knowledge, are daily decreasing;
and you soon will have no credit but among the most despicable characters.

It seems the ground of this wondrous performance is the silence which the
President preserved during your imprisonment in Paris. That is, you was
imprisoned by those who exercised the powers of government in France. And Genesis
Washington did not interfere in the internal affairs of France so much as to
try to get you out. And what then. Is it an evidence that he is an enemy to
France because he would not interfere in her internal affairs? O no! It is an
evidence that he is ungrateful to you. Be it so. Perhaps he had better be
ungrateful to you than to all France. Or perhaps there was less danger in
provoking you, than in provoking the whole power of that nation. You were
imprisoned by the government of France on the accusation of being a traitor to
the Republic. What evidence had Mr. Washington that the accusation was false.
Why, he was acquainted with your character. Very well, this acquaintance led
him to know that you were not a man of sufficient stability or morality to be
one that should exercise the powers of government. He knew, with the rest of
the Americans, that though you might answer a considerable purpose, as a tool
to demolish a government, that you were a most miserable tool to build one up.
Mr. Pain was a principal agent in composing the French constitution of 1793.
This anarchical code contained the following article, ( viz.) "When the
government violates the rights of the people, insurrection is to the people,
and each portion of the people, the most sacred of rights, and the most
indispensable of duties" This article is sufficient proof, without any other
evidence, that the barbarities which have been exercised in France, were either
ordered or approved by the men who exercised the powers of government.
Congress, in the time of the American war, conferred upon you the office of
Secretary to foreign affairs, but it seems you soon lost their confidence, and
the post, which you but a short time enjoyed. Judging from these and other
circumstances, it seems a thing not impossible for you to be a traitor. But
heartily speaking, I am far from thinking it any evidence of a man's being a
traitor because he fell under accusation in France; for during their revolution
there has been no such thing as a traitor, or a patriot. There has been no
standard by which to determine the difference between patriotism and treason;
for what has been called patriotism one day, has frequently been called treason
the next. But be this therefore as it may, you were imprisoned on the
accusation of being a traitor, and let the accusation be as false as it may be,
it would have been arrogance in Mr. Washington, to have told the convention you
were not, or even to have interfered in the business in any shape whatever. You
were one of the convention who had exercised the powers of government in
France, and notwithstanding your quibbles upon the subject, were properly and
necessarily considered by the American government, as a French citizen.

Genesis Washington is not, I trust, so much of a Frenchman in politics, as to
interfere in the internal affairs of France. This practice of interfering in
the internal affairs of foreign independent nations, seems in a great measure
peculiar to the French. Since the revolution there has been no less than three
diplomatic characters sent from France to this country, and their multiplied
intrigues has made them appear more like incendiaries, than like the
ambassadors of a friendly nation. The President, who was obliged to exercise
all his vigilance to counteract the effects of these intrigues, would have
acted a very inconsistent part had he authorized either Morris, or Munroe to
interfere in any degree in the internal affairs of France. He knew his place
and his duty too well, for to act any thing of the kind. His faithfulness to
his duty and to his country, is what you call treachery and ingratitude to you;
but this impartial world will judge who has been the most ungrateful and
treacherous to each other, the President to you, or you to the President. He
has never done you any harm, neither has he in any sense been ungrateful to
you. He has in this instance acted the part of a wise and prudent man. His
feelings were on the rack to prevent the horrid tragedies that were acting in
France. There were multitudes of innocent people, who were not only imprisoned
but murdered in France. Several of these he numbered among his particular
friends. These might cast a wishful eye to the President, when they found
themselves in the hands of the executioner; but alas! it was out of his power
to help them. Louis had manifested a particular friendship for the President,
and was more entitled to his, and his country's gratitude, than any man in
France. This unfortunate man, whose only crime was the misfortune of being born
an hereditary King, a principle which the folly of his countrymen had
established for ages, and a short time before his execution had voluntarily
sworn to maintain, might, in the trying hour of his execution, have said, "Mr.
Washington, when I saw your country engaged in a contest with Great Britain,
and in danger of being crushed and enslaved by that overbearing and insolent
power, I sent both my fleets and my armies to your assistance. Having assisted
the citizens of America in establishing their liberties and their independence,
and finding that the people of France were desirous of having a free
constitution like yours; I voluntarily accepted such a constitution, and the
people took a solemn oath to maintain it. They voluntarily confided the
executive power to me, and declared it hereditary in my family. In direct
contradiction to their oaths, they have not only suspended my power, but after
inflicting every indignity more bitter than death upon me, have passed a decree
that in a few hours I shall ascend the scaffold, bound in the most indignant
manner, and have my head severed from my body, by the cruel blade of the
guillotine. Is there no assistance which you can afford your friend in this
distressing hour?

Though I say the President has not been treacherous nor ungrateful to you in
any sense, but doubtless wished you both liberty and happiness, yet I say that
you have been both treacherous and ungrateful to him in the extreme. The
friendly notice which he has taken of you, has been like that of a man who took
a serpent in his bosom, to sting him to death. O thou monster of ingratitude!
"Is this thy kindness to thy friend?" -- Hear the audacious accusations which
you bring against a man, whom you so lately extolled for his "eminent virtues,"
He is called by your slanderous tongue both a traitor, a hypocrite, and a
colleague of Robespierre in projects, and compared to an old woman in military
capacities."

Your slanders in general are so despicable, that they may safely be left to
have their course. I shall however just notice what you say of the President's
conduct in regard to the Treaty, and likewise in regard to his military
character.

After a number of the most illiberal and gross misrepresentations respecting
the transaction of the President in regard to the Treaty, you say, "the Treaty
with France says, that neutral ships make neutral property, and thereby gives
protection to English property on board American ships; and Jay's Treaty
delivers up French property, on board. American ships, to be seized by the
English. It is too paltry to talk of faith, of national honor, and of the
preservation of treaties, when such a barefaced treachery as this, stares the
world in the face."

There are two things which all the civilized world have agreed to observe, in
order to regulate the principles of commerce. One is a compendium of
principles, which some of the wisest men in different nations, have digested
and compiled, and are called the law of nations. The others are particular
stipulations which two different nations agree to observe toward each other,
and these stipulations, compiled together, are called a Treaty. When no Treaty
exists, the law of nations is ever the criterion to determine any dispute about
the right or nature of commerce. When a Treaty exists, commerce is regulated by
that Treaty, and the law of nations is superseded in every instance when the
subject is expressly stipulated in the Treaty. -- Applying these preliminary
remarks, we shall see the stupidity of your insolent and dogmatical conclusion.

The law of nations, as explained by all the learned civilians (particularly
Puffendorf and Vattel) declares enemies goods found on board neutral vessels,
to be lawful prize. France and America in their Treaty of Commerce,
reciprocally agreed in opposition to this article of the law of nations, to
make free ships make free goods. They both had their interested views for doing
this, but the very article in the Treaty which makes this provision,
pre-supposes that either party had a right to consent to that article or not,
as they should think proper, seeing the law of nations fully warranted them to
reject it if they thought proper.

In the Treaty between the United States and Great Britain, this matter is
rested on the principles of the law of nations, but it is false to say that
"Jay's Treaty delivers up French property on board American ships, to be seized
by the English." It is the law of nations that makes this delivery. It was
exercised in its fullest extent before the Treaty, and the Treaty does no more
than acknowledge a right founded on the generally received principles of the
law of nations. As this was a right which Great Britain was disposed to retain,
it was wise to have it expressly mentioned, to prevent any dispute afterward
upon the subject. The Treaty however makes provision, that at the end of two
years, commissioners should be appointed to report upon the article of free
ships making free goods.

Another instance of entire misrepresentation, you have exhibited in commenting
on the expression "other articles," in the treaty. You say, that "other
articles, are all other articles," and that "none but an ignoramus, or
something worse, would have put such a phrase into a Treaty." In another place
you call it "the sweeping phrase," giving a right to the English of
indiscriminately seizing all articles bound to a French port.

In order to judge of your candor, it will be proper to insert the passage in
the Treaty, in which this expression is contained -- "Whereas the difficulty of
agreeing on the precise cases in which provision and other articles not
generally contraband may be regarded as such, render it expedient to provide
against the inconveniences and misunderstandings which might thence arise, it
is further agreed, that whenever such articles so becoming contraband,
according to the existing laws of nations, shall for that reason be seized; the
same shall not be confiscated, but the owner thereof shall be speedily and
completely indemnified."

It is here expressly said that no articles are liable to be seized, but such
as "become contraband according to the existing laws of nations." Here your
terrible "sweeping phrase," has nothing more than a plain definite meaning. The
"other articles," are such articles as "become contraband according to the
existing laws of nations," and the security for the payment of these articles,
is a point fairly gained by this article of the Treaty. Who now is the
"ignoramus," John Jay or Tom Pain.

You call the Treaty, "a Treaty of surrender," but are unable to produce a
single article to justify the assertion. You say it is a counter Treaty, to our
Treaty with France, and at the same time, say that by virtue of the second
article of that Treaty, all the concessions made by Jay's Treaty to England
became common to France, and may be exercised by her as a matter of right. Then
you are certainly either ignorant, or inconsistent, and perhaps both.

There never perhaps was a Treaty negociated between two powers that has been
the subject of so much animadversion, as that lately negociated by Mr. Jay. No
stone has been left unturned to represent it in all the most odious colors
that party spirited ingenuity could invent; and notwithstanding all the most
plausible objections which have repeatedly been brought against it, have
repeatedly been amply and unanswerably refuted, yet still the rage continues.
There is nothing in the Treaty of the nature of an alliance, nothing (as it is
expressly declared in the Treaty) that can militate against prior Treaties, and
engagements: No concession made to England but what was already made by the
laws of nations; but on the contrary, many privileges gained to the United
States, which before they were legally deprived of. Among the number of these
advantages, may be reckoned the regulation of our trade with the British East
and West India settlements. The British West India colonies, are far the most
flourishing part of the West Indies. The trade to those islands is of more
consequence to the United States, than all the other West India islands, put
them all together. This trade, prior to the treaty, was almost totally
prohibited in American bottoms. It is now placed on a liberal footing.

Our trade with the British European territories, is of far more importance,
than that with any other nation. Mr. Jefferson in a former statement, computed
a balance to a considerable amount against us, in our trade with Great Britain.
How great he stated the balance to be, I do not recollect, but the balance must
be very great in order to make this trade a detriment to the United States. The
people of America are generally clothed with British manufactures, and so long
as we can buy those manufactures cheaper than we can manufacture ourselves, so
long the trade will be profitable to America, and this will be the case for at
least half a century. Where land is plenty and cheap, agriculture is far more
profitable than manufactories. In common times we cannot make clothing so
cheap by twenty-five per cent, as we can purchase it of the British. As the
price of labor now is, we cannot by seventy-five per cent. Whatever price it
costs us to manufacture our clothing more than the price we pay the British,
is clear gain to us -- Supposing the people of the United States to be in
number four millions, and on an average to consume three dollars worth of
British manufactured clothing per annum, this would make the whole sum
expended for this article, twelve million dollars. If these people by being
employed in agriculture can raise produce, that will sell for eightteen million
dollars, while in manufacturing they could not earn more than twelve, it is
evident that there is a clear gain of six million dollars.


The fact is, it has been the fixed policy of France, and of her agents in this
country, from the commencement of the present war, to draw this country into
the contest. I take part with her against England. The Treaty has completed
their disappointment, and it seems they are very angry; it is this, and not the
defects of the Treaty, that has made the unusual clamor, and it now only
remains to enquire whether it was the policy of this country, to have taken
part with France in the present unusually calamitous contest. That it was our
duty is not in general pretended.

Among all your writings, I never have noticed a phrase which I think is better
expressed, and with more truth than this, viz. "War is the Pharo-table of
kings, and nations the dupes of the game," It is this practice of national
robberies and butcheries, carried on under the pretext of "just and necessary
wars," which has made monarchical governments ever appear hateful to me. There
never yet was a war that both parties were not ready to plead that it was "just
and necessary."

As war and plunder has ever been too much the trade of all the old governments
in Europe, every honest republican has fondly indulged a hope, that, on a
change of the old system of government, the condition of mankind in this
respect would be greatly changed for the better. For this reason, the breast of
every true republican in America, glowed with an almost enthusiastic ardour, on
hearing that their powerful ally, the nation of France, had charged their old
system of despotism for a free representative government. Now, said they, we
shall soon see liberty, peace and happiness in Europe, but alas! how soon were
these fond wishes and expectations nipt as it were in the bud. The scene in
France has been like that of a bright and beautiful morning, when the sun has
arose in all its majesty and glory, to illuminate the extended and benighted
world, but while the enraptured eye was contemplating the delightful scene, it
was overwhelmed by a dark tempestuous cloud, a cloud pregnant with all the
storms of elemental strife. To the dawn of liberty in that country there soon
succeeded such a system of despotism, horror, and confusion, as is beyond the
power of man to describe. In America, where in general a love of order and
humanity was inseparably connected with a love of liberty, these enormities
were beheld with the most extreme concern, and every friend to his country,
thought himself bound in duty to use every effort to stop the progress of the
same dreadful system, which at times seemed to threaten the liberty and
tranquillity of their country. A grossly mistaken notion has induced many
shallow-headed people to think that the only way to support the character of
true republicanism, was by imitating all the Frenchified maneuvers of their
revolution. Accordingly in France, in order to carry on their revolution, they
instituted a society of people called the Jacobin society, whatever might be
the original motives of this society, yet an impartial observer who should
review the principles and conduct of the men who composed it, instead of
believing them raised up for the purpose of reforming society, would be tempted
to believe that hell itself had vomited forth her most execrable monsters, for
the scourge of the human race. Yet, notwithstanding the dreadful example set by
the popular societies of France; they were immediately established in this
country; as if we could not be a free people without imitating the horrors of
French anarchy. Happily the Jacobin societies of France have, by an order of
their government, been suppressed; which has brought the popular societies of
this country into disgrace, and perhaps prevented a flood of misery. The nation
of France having waded through oceans of blood, appears at length to have
assumed a form of some stability. Their constitution appears to be good, but
still the administration deceives the hope of every honest republican; the
extraordinary success which has attended their armies, has been attended with
symptoms by no means favorable to true republicanism. The tone of sovereignity
which the government in many instances assumes over other nations, must move
the indignation of every friend of independence. The enormous contributions
which are exacted of the unhappy inhabitants of the conquered countries, is a
thing extremely arbitrary, and not very common among a civilized people. To see
a conquering army then wringing from the hands of the wretched, whom the
fortune of war has put into their power, is a sight, by no means calculated to
strengthen our faith in the doctrine which the French have constantly preached
up, that of giving freedom and happiness to the world. The unusual degree of
severity with which the unhappy emigrants are treated, by no means bespeaks a
system that is founded on the modern improved principles of humanity. To see
these unhappy people deprived of the rights of existence in every country where
France can effect it by her influence or her power; to see the unfortunate
fugitives, if accidentally shipwrecked on the coast, carried to the place of
execution, and inhumanly shot, as has been the case in many instances is
calculated to draw a tear for their hapless fate, and to curse the despotic
principles by which they are murdered.

If the world is to form an opinion of republicanism by what has been acted in
France, since that nation has been called a Republic, they will see but little
to induce them to become Republicans. But if they are to judge from what has
been acted in America since their revolution, their judgment must inevitably
preponderate in favor of a Republican government. America has ever pursued a
system of peace, she wishes to be at peace with the whole world, and to do
justice to all. Her interest and her character depends upon pursuing pacific
measures. Her character depends upon it in order to justify the republican
maxim, that "war is the trade of Monarchies, and peace the element of a
Republic." If she appealed to arms to resent every affront, she would act just
like all the old despotic governments, and where would be her superiority? War
is attended with the same calamities in a Republic as in a Monarchy. Poverty
and death are no easier borne in a Republic than in a Monarchy. The smart from
the keen edge of the dagger is not in the least abated by coming from the hands
of a Republican.

America by entering into a war with Great Britain, could see no advantage she
was likely to gain even in case of the best success. Had she entered into the
war all her business would have been deranged, her commerce entirely ruined,
her national debt doubled, and poverty again staring the country in the face.
As we could propose no benefit to ourselves, in going to war, so we can see no
benefit which it could be to France. -- France has already a sufficient number
of soldiers to be a match for half Europe, I have heard people say that the
French cabinet must contain the most extraordinary abilities, or they never
could carry on such a war: But we can have no great idea of the wisdom of a
cabinet which has been almost as fluctuating as the waves of the sea. It is the
enthusiasm of the people. The revolutionary doctrine which they were taught, of
equality in life, and annihilation at death has made them excellent soldiers,
while near one half of the property in the nation, by an arbitrary
confiscation, furnished an ample resource for defraying the extraordinary
expenses of the war. The same causes would produce the same effects in any
country.
she wants no assistance except by sea, and there we are totally unable to
grant any assistance. As to what you assert that it was our duty to go to war,
after our commerce was made war upon, it is proper to answer, that the
government in this case pursued the measure which wisdom and the experience of
mankind in all ages, have pronounced to be the best, which was first to try the
peaceable method of negotiation; they did this, and complete indemnification
has been obtained without entering into the horrors of a war. But had even this
method failed, it is not certain that wisdom would have called for a war,
unless our losses had been yet greater. A single campaign would have been five
times as great a loss to the country, as all the British spoliations. Going to
war either for indemnification or for revenge, is much like going to law and
spending a million of money in order to recover a thousand pounds; or like
throwing away a thousand lives to avenge the death of an individual; nine
tenths of the wars that have been in the world have answered to this
description.

Whenever it has answered your purpose to overthrow monarchical principles, you
have affected to be a great advocate for peace, but you have now undertaken a
different job, and so of course you have commenced an advocate for war. You are
now endeavoring to disturb the happiest and most rational government in the
world. You are the most inconsistent man I have ever attended to. You have no
polar star to guide your actions. Had you died (as you ought to have done)
after you had written your Rights of Man, you would have died with honor.
America would have remembered your name with affection, but she now despises
you; you by living in France, have got tainted with French principles, and that
has been your undoing. There is a constitutional difference between a Frenchman
and an American. An American thinks before he speaks, and considers the
consequences before he acts. A Frenchman speaks before he thinks, and acts with
little regard to the consequences of his actions. He is impetuous in his
temper, and capricious in his humor. No man is better pleased at seeing their
independence honorably established, and a free government of their own choosing
adopted, so far I heartily rejoice at their success, and at the defeat of the
coalesced powers: But I cannot rejoice at that passion for war and conquest
which evidently shows itself in France. It is a sign the nation is not yet
regenerated. When I see their immense armies ravaging the finest part of
Europe, laying whole districts under arbitrary contribution, robbing the poor
Pope of his pictures, etc. it crowds in my memory oftener than I wish, the
history of Alexander, that great butcher of the human race, and that murderous
system which has ever been patronised by Kings, and which the principles of
true republicanism will ever directly oppose.

No man more heartly wishes than I do to see a perfectly friendly understanding
between this country and France; that our existing engagements to that country
may be punctually fulfilled; still I am not over fond of what is called their
fraternal hug. France is too volatile and capricious a gallant for the plain
and modest dame America. As I wish for no nearer political connection with
France, still less do I wish for any such connection with England. Every friend
to the independence of America, cannot but wish to be extricated from the
insolent and capricious intrigues of these two rival powers. I heartily wish
that every agent of foreign influence, whether French or English, was
exterminated from this country. This influence is a plague to America. It is a
thorn in the flesh of government; and the most watchful vigilance is requisite,
in order to prevent the baneful consequences. Shall we be bandied eternally
between these two haughty nations? God forbid. Let France and England fight
their own battles. It would be the height of folly and madness for America to
meddle with the dispute. A rooted prejudice has existed between those two
nations England and France have been at war with each other no less than two
and twenty times since the Norman conquest,
this thousand years; and if my memory serves, one of their first general wars
originated in a dispute between some English and French sailors, who coming
very thirsty to a spring of wtter, quarrelled upon the question who should
drink first. As was the origin, so has been the progress. Almost all their
subsequent wars have been equally needless and ridiculous. This national
prejudice is foolish and childish in the extreme. A philosopher ought to be
ashamed to encourage or patronize it. It is quite as ridiculous as the
prejudice which two old women of my acquaintance have retained toward each
other this twenty years, because their two little sons, at that distance of
time, had a dispute about an apple. A revolut on in the government of France
has no effect in lessening this prejudice, but rather seems to heighten it.
Both nations continue their rancour. Sad disappointment to honest republicans!
The true republican wishes to see in every nation, the tranquil enjoyment of
liberty and property. To this their eager hopes have aspired; but they yet see
but a miserable prospect of a realization of their hopes. The honest friends of
liberty in America, predicted that France would set so fair an example of
liberty, as to excite all the surrounding nations to copy their example, and
shake off the fetters of despotism: but instead of this, France has set so
shocking an example as will, in all probability, retard the progress of the
liberty of Europe for at least half a century. Despotic kings will never want
for arguments, drawn from the example of France, to justify their despotism.
The ignorance and tyranny of the French reformers will have a more fatal effect
in rivetting the chains of Europe, than all the efforts of the coalesced
powers. For this every honest patriot and friend of liberty mourns almost in
silent despair. Had France set the example which America has done, it seems
probable to me, that your prediction, that in seven years there would not be a
crowned head in any of the enlightened nations of Europe, would have been
realized. Why, then, has that government, which has set so fair an example,
become the object of your abuse? Why has that excellent man, whose virtue, and
whose heroic love of liberty, has been unanimously acknowledged through the
world, become the mark of your greatest spite? Why have you dipped your envenomed
arrows in the gall of deadliest venom, and shot them with the most malignant
fury at his unspottedly virtuous and benevolent heart? Read but his farewell
address to the inhabitants of America, and blush -- blush -- with the utmost
confusion, at your feeble and infamous attempt!

In speaking of the military character of General Washington, you discover your
arrogance and stupidity in a most striking point of view indeed. So despicable
is your wit, that you are not ashamed to suggest a comparison between General
Washington and an old woman; alleging, that the method by which be carried on
the war, might as well have been done by old Mrs. Thomson as by him. And why is
it that you here act so low-lived a part? You say the Fabian system of war was
wrong for America, and that because there was not Fabian means to support it.
You have probably forgot how much you expatiated upon the resources and ability
of America to continue the war any length of time, in your Common Sense and
other pieces. But the General was not enterprising, or, in other words, he was
not so furious for the slaughter of the human race as Jourdan and Buonaparte.
He did not choose to risk the liberties of his country to the fate of a single
battle; especially when the British had, as was always the case, a much larger
army, and incomparably better disciplined and furnished. Instead of risking a
battle, which, if lost, would infallibly ruin the country, he chose, by
political maneuvers, to waste away their strength, and to entrap them, as he
eventually did. This is the great error, or crime, of Mr. Washington, Go, thou
idiot, and visit the tombs of Pompey and Cassius! there hear their mouldering
urns lament the dire necessity to which they were reduced, of suspending the
liberties of Rome upon the fate of a battle. There see the dreadful fulfillment
of what these ancient heroes predicted while living, who fain would have
avoided the dreadful trial, not from cowardice, but prudence, but whose
judgments were overawed by the clamours of rash and ignorant men, whose example
you eagerly copy, in rashly dabbling into those matters for which nature never
gave you any proper qualifications.

You say, "that Mr. Washington had the nominal rank of Commander in Chief, but
was not so in fact; he had in reality only a separate command. He had no
control over, or direction of the army to the northward, under Gates, that
captured Burgoyne; nor of that to the south, under Green, that recovered the
southern States."

These assertions of yours are not true. In the beginning of the war, Congress
did not think it prudent to leave the whole direction of the armies to Mr.
Washington; accordingly they retained the power of planning the several
campaigns and expeditions themselves; but they soon found that their limiting
the power of the Commander in Chief was attended with disadvantageous
consequences, and accordingly they gave up the whole military plan of the war
to tho direction of Mr. Washington. He planned the expedition which captured
Burgoyne, and that which recovered the southern States. His political sagacity
directed the whole plan which issued in the capture of Cornwallis, which
completely established the independence of America.

When it is considered that General Washington, as Commander in Chief,
conducted his country through an arduous conflict of seven years war, with the
most powerful nation at that time on earth; and the independence of the country
so completely and honorably established, as to become the admiration of the
world. When the impartial tribunal of the world shall compare the American and
French Revolutions together, in particular as to the moral character of each,
it will then be decided whether that extraordinary man, considered in his
military or political capacity, has merited that low lived abuse, which the
government of France has, in all probability, hired you to make upon his
irreproachable character.

I shall conclude this letter with some miscellaneous observations. In speaking
of American affairs, you frequently mention the "Washington faction." There is
not a reasonable man in America but will despise the phrase. No man ever made
it a more constant (...) clear of party and faction than General Washington has
done. His constant aim has been to be impartial. Even those in America who
disapprove of his conduct in regard to the British treaty, have never disputed
his honest intentions, nor had the impudence to call him the leader of a
faction. You speak of the internal distraction in America, (...) by Mr.
Washington's administration. The accusation is false. It is foreign intrigues
that have unhappily divided the people of America; -- the detestable intrigues
kept up by the English and French in this country; and you, like a faithful
tool of faction, are eagerly fanning the flames of discord. As a resident in
France, what business had you to be dabbling in American politics. Had you
forgot what you said of Burke, that his attack on the French Revolution could
not be justified on the score of manners. If you have, I hope you will remember
that the writer of this letter says, that your brutal attack on the President
and Constitution of the United States, cannot be justified, neither on the
score of manners, morality, or common sense.

It is true, the inhabitants of this country have got unhappily divided, but
"internal distractions" are not yet known in America. France is the place for
distraction -- the place for propagating the seeds of that dreadful evil. The
mania has strongly infected your brain, and the Bedlam of Luxembourg has had no
effect toward curing you. Strongly impregnated with the seeds of insanity, you
have vomited them forth, with all their loathsome qualities, on this once happy
shore. Our utmost gratitude is due to the serene temper and uncommon firmness
of a Washington, for making so manful a stand against the all spoliative
effects of Gallic philosophical maniacs.

Party and faction are the bane of human tranquillity and happiness; and where
there is not energy enough in the government to give a seasonable check, the
consequence is often fatal. No country labors under a more terrible and
afflicting despotism, than one whole government does not possess energy
sufficient to curb the licentiousness of faction. Every page of ancient and
modern history confirms this assertion. True liberty consists in doing whatever
is not injurious to the rights of another; but go one step beyond this, and we
are involved in all the horrors of anarchical despotism. That licentious
liberty which poetry paints as a Goddess, history paints as a cannibal. There
is no one instance in which people display more stupidity, than in showing a
greater attachment to names than to things. The word Republic will serve with
some people as a substitute for a deprivation of almost every other enjoyment.
France, at the expense of a million of innocent lives, which have been mowed
down by the hands of assassins, has obtained the name of a Republic. A dreadful
price this, to purchase a combination of eight letters. Surely so precious a
price ought to purchase something of substantial value. As we laugh at all
titles in this country, so we contend not for names but things. We think it not
worth while to contend whether a month shall be called January or Pluviose, or
whether a man shall wear a (...), or a hat with a tri-coloured cockade. If we
(...), we care but little whether it is by a King, or (...). We had as lieve be
devoured by the jaws of a lion, as to be gnawed to death by rats and mice.

France, in the time of Robespierre, was a republic; but there was not so (...)
a government on this side of the infernal world. There (...) republics in the
world, that are as tyrannical as an oriental (...). Some of the warmest and
most Frenchified republicans in the southern States of America, keep up a
system of despotism over some hundreds of the unhappy Africans, which is
scarcely to be paralleled in the regions of Algiers. In your Rights of Man, you
are constantly appealing to the example of your "beloved America," to justify
your doctrines; but now it seems that they too have proved perverse. Poor man,
where will you go now for an example -- to France? I hope they will not again
put you in the Luxembourg; but I will bet a million to one, that they never
prove to be better republicans than the people of America. If republicanism
will not do in America -- if Mr. Washington and La Fayette are not true
republicans, you may put up your pen, and call your Rights of Man a visionary
farce. You may cloth yourself in sackcloth, and cry alas! for the depravity of
man! Alas! for my Age of Reason!

The clergy and moral people in this country in general, will not believe that
infidelity is an essential article incorporated into French politics. They say
it is only a few such ignorant heads as yours, that are so bewildered as to
patronize infidelity. They will not believe that it is as settled a plan of
French politics to overthrow christianity, as it is to overthrow ancient
principles of government; much less will they believe that a great part of the
leading characters are absolute atheists. The pulpits of this country have
resounded with importunities for the success of the French revolution! -- fatal
prayer to the clergy, if hearkened to! They have fondly imagined that it was
opening the door for the general spread and success of christianity. The French
constitution, it is true, admits the rights of conscience, and the free
exercise of religious worship. But this is not peculiar to France. We hear of
no persecution for religion at present in any part of Europe. The Age of
Infidelity has succeeded the Age of Persecution. When the leading characters of
a nation patronize infidelity, it is far more fatal to the interests of
religion than even the Popish Inquisition. The humor now is not to persecute
for religion, but to laugh at and despise it; and no persecution is more
disagreeable to people than to be despised.
They were hardly made to believe that you were the author of the Age of
Reason. They were surprised to find that you had the same enmity to them that
you had to Kings. The struggle which America saw France engaged in with the
coalesced powers, irresistably excited their sympathetic feelings. This
sympathy, which in that instance was really laudable and generous, has
nevertheless, by being extended too far, made many honest Americans the dupes
and slaves of French politics. As if they could not be true republicans, and
real friends to France, without patronizing all their strange, whimsical, and
impious notions; as if they could not be real friends to the real liberties and
prosperity of that people, without imitating their disorganizing politics,
their impious morals, or their puerile distinction of tri-coloured cockades,
their Floreals and Thermidors.

If any should take occasion to say that the writer of this letter is an
advocate for too much power, or an enemy to the French revolution, considered
as a remove from a monarchy to a republic, he takes this opportunity publicly,
to deny the charge, and to declare that he detests every form of government
that is not founded on the principles of equal representation. He, in the calm
retreat of a country life, remote from political cabals, cast his eye on a
pamphlet entitled, "Thomas Pain to George Washington." The contents excited
within him the sensibility of an injured man. He instantly took up his pen, and
wrote the preceding pages, which he now commits to their fate in the world.
Whether you ever see them or not, they are offered as a small tribute of
respect and gratitude to that excellent man, who is now retiring from the
scenes of public life, accompanied with the warmest thanks, and most
unequivocal approbation, not only of all the respective governments in America,
but of millions of people, whose warmest affections are better expressed by the
starting tear, involuntarily flowing from each wishful eye, on the affecting
thought, that General Washington, the father and friend of his country, retires
from public life, and that we are to be blessed with his presence no more.

FINIS

