DEBORAH SAMPSON. (...)


THE FEMALE REVIEW: OR, MEMOIRS OF AN AMERICAN YOUNG LADY;

WHOSE LIFE AND CHARACTER ARE PECULIARLY DISTINGUISHED -- BEING A CONTINENTAL
SOLDIER, FOR NEARLY THREE YEARS, IN THE LATE AMERICAN WAR.

DURING WHICH TIME, SHE PERFORMED THE DUTIES OF EVERY DEPARTMENT, INTO WHICH
SHE WAS CALLED WITH PUNCTUAL EXACTNESS, FIDELITY AND HONOR, AND PRESERVED HER
CHASTITY INVIOLATE, BY THE MOST ARTFUL CONCEALMENT OF HER SEX.

WITH AN APPENDIX, CONTAINING CHARACTERISTIC TRAITS, BY DIFFERENT HANDS, HER
TASTE FOR ECONOMY, PRINCIPLES OF DOMESTIC EDUCATION, etc.

By a CITIZEN of MASSACHUSETTS.

DEDHAM: PRINTED BY NATHANIEL AND BENJAMIN HEATONS FOR THE AUTHOR.

M, DCC, XCVII.

TO THE PATRONS AND FRIENDS OF COLUMBIA'S CAUSE; THE FEMALE REVIEW Is DEDICATED:
THOUGH not with intentions to encourage the like paradigm of FEMALE ENTERPRISE
-- but because such a thing, in the course of nature, has occurred; and because
every circumstance, whether natural, artificial, or accidental, that has been
made conducive to the promotion of our INDEPENDENCE, PEACE, and PROSPERITY --
all through DIVINE AID, must be sacredly remembered and extolled by every one,
who solicits the PERPETUITY of these invaluable BLESSINGS.

THE AUTHOR.

PUBLISHED ACCORDING TO ACT OF CONGRESS.

PREFACE.
THERE are but two degrees in the characters of mankind, that seem to arrest
the attention of the public. The first is that of him, who is the most
distinguished in laudable and virtuous achievements, or in the promotion of
general good. The second, that of him, who has arrived to the greatest pitch in
vice and wickedness.

NOTWITHSTANDING these characters exhibit the greatest contrast among mankind,
it is not doubted but each, judiciously and properly managed, may render
essential service. Whilst the former ever demands our love and imitation, the
other should serve to fortify our minds against its own attacks -- exciting
only our pity and detestation. This is the only method, perhaps, by which good
may be said to come out of evil.

MY first business, then, with the public, is to inform them, that the FEMALE,
who is the subject of the following MEMOIRS, does not only exist in theory and
imagination, but in reality. And were she not already known to the public, I
might take pride in being the first to divulge -- a distinguished Character.
Columbia has given her birth; and I estimate her natural source too highly, to
presume she is dishonored in the acknowledgement of such an offspring.

HOWEVER erroneous this idea may be deemed, I shall here state only two general
traits in her life to corroborate its truth. The criterion will still remain to
be formed by a candid and impartial public.

SHE was born and educated in humble obscurity -- distinguished, during her
minority, only by unusual propensities for learning, and few opportunities to
obtain the inestimable prize. At the age of eighteen, she stepped forward upon
a more exalted stage of action. She found Columbia, her common parent,
enveloped and distracted with confusion, anguish and war, She commiserated as
well as participated, her sufferings. And as a proof of her fidelity and filial
attachment, she voluntarily offered her services in the character of a
Continental Soldier, in defense of her cause; by which, she seemed resolved to
rescue the rest of her brothers and sisters from that flagrant destruction,
which, every instant, seemed ready to bury them in one general ruin; or, to
perish, a noble sacrifice, in the attempt.

HAVING noted the leading traits of this illustrious Fair, I hasten to give a
concise account of the design and execution of the work.

JUSTICE, in the first place, demands that I should mention the reluctance,
with which she has consented to the publication of this Review of her life.
Though it has become more fashionable, in these days of liberty and liberality,
to publish the lives of (...) persons; yet she refused the solicitations of a
number of literary characters to publish her own, till after her exit. She is
not a stickler for tradition; yet this is against her.

ABOUT sixteen months ago, by desire of a friend, I made her a visit for this
purpose. She did not, positively, discard my request. Being indisposed, she
said, should she recover, if I would again be at the trouble to call on her,
she would in the interim take advice, consult matters with herself, and come to
a final decision. This was the first of my acquaintance with her.

IN a few weeks, I again waited on her. Having critically weighed her own
feelings, and wishing to gratify the curiosity of many, of whom she had taken
advice -- with extreme modesty and trembling diffidence, she consented to take
a public Review of the most material circumstances and events of her life. She
relies on that candor and impartiality from the public, that now attend the
detail of her MEMOIRS.

I INTENDED to have executed this work at leisure; as indeed, I have. I had no
other way; as the materials were mostly to be collected. This, with other
pressing avocations in life, brings me under the necessity to apologize to my
worthy Patrons, for the delay of its publication a few weeks longer than the
intended time.

SENSIBLY impressed with the idea, that every subject intended for public
contemplation, should be managed with intentions to promote general good; I
have, in every instance, in the FEMALE REVIEW, indefatigably, labored for this
important end. But perhaps I differ from most biographers in this respect. I
have taken liberty to intersperse, through the whole, a series of moral
reflections, and have attempted some literary and historical information.
However singular this is, I have the vanity to think it will not be deemed
useless.

As an impartial writer, I am bound to handle these MEMOIRS in a disinterested
manner. But where a total sacrifice of truth does not forbid, I take pride in
publicly avowing, in this place, my desire, (as every one ought) to extol
virtue, rather than give the least countenance to vice under any name, pretext
or sanction. Both may be represented and discussed -- Vice exposed -- Virtue
cherished, revered and extolled.

THE authorities, upon which I have ventured, for the support of facts related
in the following MEMOIRS, are not merely the words of the lady's own mouth.
They have been detailed to me by persons of veracity and notoriety, who are
personally, acquainted with the circumstances. But I particularly refer my
readers to the documents accompanying the appendix.

IT would be almost incredibly strange, should no idle, capricious and even
calumnious tale take rise with respect to the reputation of the female,
distinguished as she is, who is the subject of these sheets. Being aware of
this, she has already anticipated, and perhaps, in some measure, experienced
it. Her precaution now is, to prepare for the worst. She dreads no censure --
no lash of aspersion more than that of the judicious and virtuous. My own
wishes are in this respect, as in all others, that truth, candor and charity
may be our ruling principles. When we seriously consider the horrors, dangers
and general fare of war -- that it is unavoidably attended with many
irregularities, to which she was exposed in common with the rest; and yet, if
it be found that decorum and propriety of conduct predominated in her general
pursuits, we may bear to palliate a few foibles, from which we, even in our
most sequestered, happy and serene retirements, are not, always, exempt.

THERE are but two sides to a person's character any more than there are to his
garments -- the dark and bright. In my researches in the FEMALE REVIEW, though
I have, decidedly, declared my choice for virtuous and laudable actions; yet, I
have endeavored to pay proper attention to their opponents, when they happened
to make me visits. But if I must hereafter suffer the lash of aspersion from
either sex for having shown partiality, I shall rejoice in the conscientious
satisfaction of having given the preference to the Bright Side.

PERHAPS, there is not one new idea, in the course of these MEMOIRS, advanced
or hinted on the important business of education. But should I be so
successful, as to rouse the minds and excite the attention of the inattentive
to those principles, which have before been deemed useful; I shall esteem i^
the most agreeable and ample compensation for my endeavors.

SUSPICIOUS, from my first engagement, that the FEMALE REVIEW would be a
subject as delicate, especially for the Ladies, as it is different from their
pursuits; I have studiously endeavored to meliorate every circumstance, that
might seem to much tinctured with the rougher, masculine virtues. This,
however, has not been attempted with the duplicity of a facetious courtier; but
with a diction softened and comported to the taste of the virtuous female. And
although I am a well-wisher to their whole circle, it is the cause of this
class, only, I wish to promote.

I CANNOT disapprove their vehement attachment to many novels -- even to the
productions of our own soil. Whilst they touch the passions with all that is
captivating and agreeable, they inspire manly thoughts, and irresistibly gain
our assent to virtue. As the peculiar events, that have given rise to the
FEMALE REVIEW, stand without a rival in American annals; I, also, hope my
endeavors to render it agreeably entertaining and useful to them may not prove
fallacious nor in vain. I readily yield the palm of style to the ^^pturous and
melting expressions of the novelist: But I must vie with him in one respect: --
What he has painted in embryo, I have represented in expansion.

THIS gallant HEROINE has been reared under our own fosterage: and to reject
her now, would be disowning a providential circumstance in our revolutionary
epoch; which the annals of time must perpetuate.

EUROPE has exhibited its chivalry and wonders. It now remains for America to
do the same: And perhaps the most singular is already past -- her beginning in
infancy! It is a wonder, but a truth full of satisfaction, that North America
has become free and independent. But a few years have elapsed since this
memorable era; yet, even the face of nature has assumed a new and beautiful
aspect. Under the fostering -- powerful hands of industry and economy, art and
science have taken a rapid growth. The wreath of Virtue has sprung up; and
Liberty delights in twining it round her votary's brow.

HAPPY in the possession of such a Source for improvement, we should be
barbarians to ourselves to be inattentive to its promotion. Whilst other
nations may envy us the enjoyment of such distinguished rights and felicity --
Heaven grant, we may vie with them only for that, which dignifies and promotes
the CHARACTER of MAN.

MASSACHUSETTS, July, 1796.
THE FEMALE REVIEW: OR, MEMOIRS OF AN AMERICAN YOUNG LADY.
CHAP. I.
A laconic History of Miss SAMPSON'S extraction. -- Local, and other situations
of her parents. -- Her endowments -- (...) temper and disposition. -- Her (...)
for learning.

DEBORAH SAMPSON was born in Plympton, a small village in the country of
Plymouth in New England, December 17, 1760. She is a regular descendant of the
honorable family of WILLIAM BRADFORD a native of England, a man of excellent,
natural endowments; upon which, he made great improvement by learning. He
emigrated to America whilst young; where he was, for many years alternately,
elected Governor of the Colony of Plymouth. In this department, he presided
with wisdom and punctuality, and to the unanimous satisfaction of the people
under his charge. He married an American lady of distinction; by whom he had
considerable issue. -- As he lived beloved and reverenced, he died lamented by
all, 1756.

HER grandfather, ELISHA BRADFORD, was a native of Plymouth in New England. He
possessed good abilities, and explored many sources, that led him to literary
distinction. As he was eminent in property; so piety, humanity and uprightness
were the distinguishing characteristics of his life. He was married, September
7, 1719, to BATHSHEBA LE BROCHE, a French lady of elegant extraction and
accomplishments. Her father was a native of Paris. He left a large issue; of
which, Miss SAMPSON'S mother is one. -- But Mr. BRADFORD, for one of his
benevolent offices, being bound for a ship and rich cargo belonging to a
merchant of the same town, had the misfortune to lose the greater part of his
interest. Thus deprived, at once, of what he had learned to prize by the
industry and economy it cost him; it is natural to suppose, it was no small
discouragement to him, and that the face of things wore a different aspect
around him: especially, when we reflect, that the fulfillment of those
principles, which exert themselves in acts of benevolence and affection toward
all persons, depend, greatly, on wealth. Being at this time considerably
advanced in years, this circumstances, together with the loss of his eldest
son, preyed fast upon his constitution: And he did not long survive to mourn
the loss of what seemed not in his power to remedy.

MISS SAMPSON'S parents, though endowed with good abilities, cannot in an
eminent degree, be distinguished, either by fortune or scientific acquisition.
Her father was an only son, and heir to no inconsiderable estate. And if it be
asked, why her parents had not a more liberal education? the answer may be a
general objection: -- Different persons are actuated by different objects of
pursuit. Some, it is evident, have leading propensities for the accumulation of
lucrative gain: whilst others, who possess it, gladly embrace the opportunity
for their advancement in ^^^erature.

IT was, doubtless, the intention of Mr. BRADFORD to have given his children
good education. But whether the wreek in his fortune, or whether his numerous
progeny restrained the liberality of his bestowments in this respect, I pretend
not to affirm. It is, however, more than probable, that her mother's, and
perhaps her father's, education, in some respects, was superior to that of the
commonalty.

IT is no dishonorable trait in the character of any in America to be born
farmers; even if they pursue the occupation through life. Their aim, however,
must be to furnish themselves with the requisites, which will render them
useful and happy, and those who are round about them. Had the latter of these
blessings been confered on Miss SAMPSON'S father, he might, peradventure, have
surmounted difficulties, which, it is thought, tended to make him fickle, and
perhaps, too loose in his morals. He met with a sad disappointment in his
father's estate, occasioned by the ill designs, connivings and insinuations of
a brother-in-law. Thus, he was disinherited of a portion that belonged to him
by hereditary right. This circumstance, alone, made such impressions on his
mind, that, instead of being fired with a just spirit of resentment and
emulation, to supply, by good application and economy, that of which he had
been unjustly deprived, he was led into opposite pursuits, which she laments,
as being his greatest misfortune.

SUCH was her father's local situation after his marriage with her mother. She
informs, that she had but very little knowledge of her father during her
juvenile years. Despairing of accumulating an interest by his domestic
employments, his bent of mind led him to follow the seafaring business, which,
as her mother informed her, he commenced before her birth. However great his
prospects were, that fortune would prove more propitious to his prosperity and
happiness upon the ocean, than it had done on the land, he was effectually
disappointed: -- For after he had continued this fruitless employment some
years, he took a voyage to some part of Europe, from whence he was not heard of
for some years. At length, her mother was informed, he had perished in a
ship-wreck.

By this time, his unsuccessful fortune, both by land and sea, had the tendency
to break up his family. Her mother, however, by her industry and economical
management, kept her family together as long as possible after her husband's
supposed catastrophe. But she, meeting with sickness, and other providential
misfortunes, was obliged, at length, to disband her family and to scatter her
children abroad.

IT may, perhaps, be remarked, that nothing uncommonly singular has attended
Miss SAMPSON in the primeval stages of her life: Yet, the inquisitive and
curious mind, which is never tired in tracing the events and performances of
the most distinguished characters, is wont to extend its researches still
further, and to enquire where and how they have lived, and by what methods and
gradations they arrived at the summit of their undertakings. I believe it is a
truth, to which we may generally assent, that most illustrious characters
originate, either from very low or very high birth and circumstances, -- I,
therefore, big the reader's indulgence, whilst I trace the most singular
circumstances and events that occured to Miss SAMPSON during her juvenility;
which may not be deemed wholly useless and unentertaining.

SHE was scarcely five years old, when the separation from her mother was
occasioned by indigent circumstances. The affectionate and prudent parent can
best describe the emotions experienced by the mother and her daughter upon this
occasion. The young Miss SAMPSON had, already, contracted an attachment to
letters; and in many other respects, promised fair to crown the instructions
and assiduity of a parent, or patroness, with the most desirable success. And
it was with pain, her mother saw these slattering symptoms without being able
to promote, or scarcely to encourage them by the fosterage of parental care and
affection. Nor was (...) darkness of the s^ene diss^^^ted, until a (...)
relation of her mother's, an elderly maiden, by the name of FULLER, proffered
to adopt her into her family, and take the charge of her education.

THIS was a very honest and discreet lady. She showed her young pupil many
tokens of care and affection. But as Miss SAMPSON remarked -- "As I was born to
be unfortunate, my sun soon clouded." She had not continued in this agreeable
situation scarcely three years, before her benefactress was seized with a
violent malady, which, in a few days, proved fatal.

ALTHOUGH she was, at that time, not more than eight years old, she was much
affected with the loss of her patroness. -- She deemed it almost irreparable;
-- considered herself without a home, or scarcely a friend to procure her one.
But this scene was too distressing to last long. Her mother, hearing of her
circumstances, endeavored to obtain a suitable place for her, till she should
come of age. She was put into one Mrs. THATCHER'S family in Middleborough,
where she continued about two years. This lady took particular care to gratify
her favorite propensity for reading, etc. but as she was of a slender
constitution, her mother removed her to Mr. JEREMIAH THOMAS'S, of the same town.

Is it, indeed, sadly true, that nature our common source of being, is unequal
in her intellectual bestowments on the human species? If not, the apparent
difference must be in the manner, in which they are exhibited. This I am
inclined to believe: and the greatest remedy is education. -- Hence the shrewd
saying -- "Learning keeps him out of fire and water." -- An excellent
stimulation for every one. -- Logicians, I trust, will allow me to form an
estimation of Miss SAMPSON'S endowments, even before she had reached her teens.
This I do, without a design to slatter her into vain conceits of herself, or to
wheedle any one of the human species into her favor, or esteem of the writer.
It is a just tribute of respect due to the illustrious poor.

CERTAIN it is, that she early discovered, at least to every judicious
observer, tokens of a fertile genius and an aspiring mind: a mind quick of
perception and of strong penetration. And if it be allowable to judge of things
past, by their present aspect, I hesitate not to announce, that her primeval
temper was uniform and tranquil. Though destitute of many advantages of
education, she happened to fix on many genuine principles. She may be noted for
a natural sweetness and pliability of temper -- a ready wit, which only needed
refinement -- a ready conformity to a parent's or patroness' injunctions -- a
native modesty and softness in expression and deportment, and passions
naturally formed for philanthropy and commiseration.

A FURTHER enumeration might give occasion for a new apology. Nor have I a
right to describe her abilities in proportion to the improvements she has since
made. I might fall into gross errors. Nature might complain of injustice for
making a wrong estimate of her bounties. And it is a truth, too often to be
lamented, that she oftener complains of uncultivated talents, than for not
giving any for cultivation. Our endowments, of course, must be equal, if not
superior, to our improvements. -- Should the contrary be urged, those
principles, which have dictated her exertions, might lose a part of their
energetic influence; in which she still delights. Had she shared greater
advantages in education, she might have much exceeded the proficiency in
erudition, but scarcely the singularity of character, which she has since
attained.

IT was a circumstance peculiarly unhappy with Miss SAMPSON, during her
minority, that she found less opportunities, than inclinations, for learning.
The instances I shall adduce to corroborate this assertion will be comprised in
the next chapter; -- where the reader will find a general sketch of her
education during this period.

I SHALL only add, that many of our humble peasantry in America, would have
thanked fortune, if this evil had been consined to her. It is not so great a
wonder, as it is a lamentable truth, which, observation in many families may
evince, that they have amassed together a greater bulk of riches than of useful
science; whilst, perhaps, the man, who never could obtain a mediocrity of
wealth, only needed it to vie with them in every thing useful and ornamental.
-- Thus, the most fertile genius, like that of soil, which for want of proper
cultivation, is overrun with (...) becomes corrupted by neglect and (...)
habit: and the inherent beauties, that (...) have eclipsed a more than ordinary
(...) he dormant.

Where then, could the (...) science have been secreted! or, ^^d (...) not
taken an universal charge of this growing Empire! -- Instances of this kind,
however, are more rarely met with than formerly. And this error will always
find the best apology in the population of new countries, where the means for
subsistence unavoidably demand the most attention. But affluence, without being
regulated by refined education, cloys the sight of the beholder; and the
possessors are unqualified for duty. The minds of people are now roused by the
introduction of new scenes and objects. And it is here to be repeated, to the
honor of the citizens of New England, and the United States in general, that
they are, with success, endeavoring to counterbalance this once prevailing
evil; at least, they would make an equilibrium between their wealth and
literature.

Let not, therefore, any who have talents for improvement, despair of success
in any situation. Though a FRANKLIN has become extinct, a WASHINGTON survives.
Our native land smiles under the fostering hand of industry and economy. It
will still produce our men of government, our guardians of science, and our
encouragers and promoters of virtue.

CHAP. II.
MISS SAMPSON's propensities for learning, and the obstacles she met with in
it, contrasted. -- View of her (...) during her juvenility -- in which time,
she contracts a TASTE for the study of NATURE (...) NATURAL PHILOSOPHY; which
^^aches her regular ideas of DEITY -- the necessity of MORALITY and DECORUM in
her p^^suits.

WE are now to view Miss SAMPSON advancing into the bloom and vigor of youth.
In this season, comes on the trial of virtue and of the permanency of that
foundation, upon which improvements have begun. The passions having assumed
greater degrees of vigor, and still susceptible of quick and delicate
impressions from their natural attachment to the sexes, and other alluring
objects of pursuit; it becomes accountable, that so many of both sexes,
especially those deprived of genuine education, fail of that uniform course of
improvement in knowledge and virtue, which is the only barrier against vice and
folly, and our surest guidance through life. If she be found, at this age,
persevering in these duties and surmounting the principal allurements to
indecorum and vice, I need not hesitate to announce her a singular paradigm for
many in better circumstances and in higher life.

FROM the time she went to live in Mr. THOMAS's family, till she was eighteen,
it may be said, she lived in common with other (...) of her own sex; except in
two very important respects: -- She had stronger propensities for improvement,
and l^s^ opportunities to acquire it. Industry and economy -- excellent
virtues! being hereditary in this family, she was, of course, inured to them.
And as their children were numerous, and chiefly of the masculine sex it is not
improbable, that her athletic exercises were more intense on that account. As
they appeared more eager in the amassing of fortune, than of scientific
acquisition, she was obliged to check the bud, which had already begun to
expand, and to yield the palm of the fulfillment of her duty to her
superintendants in the manner they deemed best, to the sacrifice of her most
endearing propensities. But painful was the thought, that she must suffer the
bolt to be turned upon this, her favorite pursuit. Wounding was the sight of
others going to school, when she could not, because she could not be spared.
Her reflections were singular, considering her age, when contrasting her
privileges with those of other children, who had parents to take the charge of
their education. It was a circumstance effectually mortifying to her, that she
could not hold familiarity, even, with the children of the family, on their
school-topics. But the ambition that agitated her mind, made her wont to
believe her lot as good as that of orphans in general.

HAPPY it was for her, at this age, that neither mortification nor prohibition
impeded her (...) propensity for learning. This, instead of being weakened, was
strengthened by time; though she had not devised any effectual method to
gratify it. She had often heard -- that a forward and promising youth is short
lived: But she did not believe it. And, in this respect, her longevity was
rested on as good safety, as was that of the wisest man: Nor have I the least
inclination to censure either. -- The preceptor knows it is a task to kindle
sparks of emulation in most children; and reason informs him, when they are
naturally kindled, it is an injurious engine that extinguishes the flame.

IT is the pride of some undisciplined, tyrannical tempers to triumph over
supposed ignorance, distress and poverty. In this, our better-deserving orphan
found a source of mortification. But magnanimity and hope -- ever soothing
companions! elevated her above despair. The ideas of being rivalled by her
mates in learning and decorum, guarded their proper receptacle, and prompted
the establishment of the following maxims: -- Never neglect the least
circumstance, that may be made conducive to improvement: Opportunity is a
precious companion; which is too often sadly verified by the fool's companions,
folly and procrastination -- thieves, that rob the world of its treasure.

HER method was to listen to every one she heard read and speak with propriety.
And when she could, without intrusion, catch the formation of a letter from a
penman, she gladly embraced it. She used to obtain what school books and copies
she could from the children of the family, as models for her imitation. Her
leisure interims were appropriated to these tasks with as little reluctance, as
common children went to play.

AVAILING herself of such methods with unremitted ardor, together with
promiscuous opportunities at school; she, at length, found herself mistress of
pronunciation and sentences to such a degree, that she was able to read, with
propriety, in almost any book in her language. The like application, in process
of time, qualified her to write a legible hand. As soon as she could write, she
voluntarily kept a journal of common occurrences; an employment not unworthy
the humblest peasant, or the most renowned sage.

THE anxiety and aspirations of her mind after knowledge, at length, became
more notorious to many, who made learning their element. As catechetical
tuition, in some respects, was more in use thirty years ago, than now, she
committed to memory, at an early age, the Catechism by the Assembly of Divines,
and could recite a prolix proof of it verbatim. By this, she secured the esteem
and approbation of her village curate; which he expressed by many flattering
expressions, and a donation of a few books. And to mention the epistolary
correspondence, which she commenced at the age of twelve, with a young lady of
polite accomplishments, who had not only offered to supply her with paper, but
with whatever instructions she could, would be reminding her of a debt which
she could only repay by her gratitude for such obliging condescension. The
correspondence was of much utility to her in her future employments.

Thus, so much genius and taste were not always to remain sequestered, like a
pearl in the bowels of the deep, or in an inaccessable place. Nor must I
infinuate that she was here deprived of many other principal advantages of
education. She fared well for food and raiment; and that, she reflected, was
better than could be said of many of her surrounding companions. It is with
respect and gratitude she speaks of her superintendants on many other accounts.
She has often said with emotion, that the most morti^ying punishment she ever
received from her master, was -- "You are always hammering upon some book -- I
wish you wouldn't spend so much time in scrabbling over paper." Had he been
possessed of Miss Hannah More's beautiful satire, he might, more politely, have
recited the same ideas:

"I wish she would leave her books, and mend her clothes:
I think my stars, I know no verse from prose."
They not only carefully habituated her to industry and domestic economy in
general; but from them, her mistress in particular, she experienced lessons of
morality and virtue; which she thinks, could not have failed to have been
beneficial to any one, whose heart had not been too much tipped with adamantine
hardness, or whose faculties had not been totally wrapped in inattention.
Indeed, the laborious exercises, to which she was accustomed, during her stay
in this family, may be considered of real service to her. They added strength
and permanency to her naturally good constitution, kept the mind awake to
improvements; for the mind will doze, when indolence seizes the body, and thus
prepared her to endure the greater hardships, which were to characterize her
future life.

IT is with peculiar pleasure, I here find occasion to speak of Miss SAMPSON'S
taste for the study of Nature, or Natural Philosophy. More agreeable still
would be my task, had she enjoyed opportunities, that her proficiency in it
might have been equal to her relish for it.

THAT Philosophy should ever have been treated with indifference, much less,
with intentional neglect, is an idea, that affords singular astonishment to
every rational mind. The Philosopher has been considered as -- not a man of
this world; as an unsocial and unfit companion, and wanting in the general
duties of life. I HERE particularly allude to a small performance, which
contains, among these, many excellent moral maxims. It was written by a female,
and entitled -- "THE WHOLE DUTY OF WOMAN."
Such ideas must have been the result of a very erroneous acceptance of the
word; or, of a mind not a little tinctured with prejudice. -- I have always
conceived, that philosophy is a scientific sphere, in which we are enjoined to
act by nature, reason and religion; which serve as a directory, or auxiliaries
to accelerate us in it. The philosopher, then, instead of being rendered a
useless object in society, and wanting in the general duties of life, is the
person most eminently qualified for a useful member of society, the most
agreeably calculated for an intercourse and union with the sexes, best
acquainted with the social and enjoined duties of life; and is thus preparing
himself for a more refined BEING in futurity.

IT must then have been, merely, from the abstruseness, which many people have
falsely imagined attends this most plain and useful of all sciences, that they
have been deterred from the pursuit of it. But however reprobated and useless
the study of philosophy may have been deemed for the man of sense, and much
more dangerous for the other sex; it is certain, that it is now emerging from
an obsolete state, to that of a fashionable and reputable employment. Ignorance
in it being now the thing mostly to be dreaded. And many of both sexes are not
ashamed of having the appellation conferred on them in any situation in life.

I LEARN from Miss SAMPSON'S diurnals, and from the credibility of others, that
she early discovered a taste for the contemplation of the objects and
appearances exhibited in creation. She was notorious for her frequent
interrogatories relative to their nature, use and end. Nor is this, in a
degree, unnatural for children in general. Natural Creation is a source that
first excites the notice and attention of all. I have myself observed, even
infants, after long confinement, appear reanimated and filled with admiration
on being again brought into the refulgence of the Sun or Moon, the spangled
appearance of the stars, the enamelled mead, the aspiring grove, or a single
floweret. Thus, they make it a voluntary act to enquire into their origin, use
and end: Whereas, it often happens, that the same child, by reason of some
nursed, ill babit of temper, will brook no control by the best moral precept
or example, except it be from the dread of corporeal punishment. -- This,
therefore, should rouse the attention of parents. As the first dawning of
reason in their children displays itself in this way, they should make it their
peculiar care to assist and encourage it in every respect. Nature, indeed, may
be considered as a general monitor and instructor: But it is from experience
and practical experiments, that we are facilitated in the acquisition of
knowledge.

HER taste for the cultivation of plants and vegetable productions in general,
appears to have been somewhat conspicuous in her early years. And she has
intimated an idea of this kind, which, from its justness, and the delicate
effects it has on many of the softer passions, induces me to notice it. -- It
has been a source of astonishment and mortification to her, that so many of her
own, as well as of the other sex, can dwell, with rapture, on a romantic scene
of love, a piece of painting or sculpture, and, perhaps, upon things of more
trivial importance; -- and yet can walk in the stately and venerable grove, can
gaze upon the beautifully variegated landscape, can look with indifference upon
the rose and tulip, or can tread on a bank of violets and primroses, without
appearing to be affected with any peculiar sensations and emotions. This
certainly proceeds from a wrong bias of the mind in its fixing on its first
objects of pursuit. And parents cannot be too careful in the prevention of such
errors, when they are forming the minds of their offspring for the courses,
which are to affect the passions, and give sway to the behavior during life.

I KNOW not whether it was from her mental application to books, instructions
from public or private preceptors, or from her own observations on nature, that
she acquired the most knowledge of philosophy and astronomy. Perhaps, it was
from some advantage of the whole. I am, however, authorized to say, both from
her infant memorandums and verbal communications, that she did obtain, during
her juvenility, many just ideas respecting them. She has assured me, the
questions she used to ask, relative to the rising and setting of the Sun, Moon,
etc. never ceased agitating her mind, till she had formed proper ideas of the
spherical figure of the Earth, and of its diurnal and annual revolutions. In
this manner, she acquired a smattering of the Solar System. But she has no wish
even now, for having the appellation, philosopher, or astronomer: conferred on
her. But my readers may conclude, it is, merely on account of her fancied
ignorance of those sublime sciences.

SHE frequently made it her custom to rise in the morning before twilight.
During the Spring, Summer and Autumn, it seems, she was peculiarly attached to
rural speculation. And, as though she had been a Shepherdess, she was
frequently seen in some adjacent field, when the radiant orb of day first
gleamed on the hill tops to cheer and animate vegetable nature with his
prolific and penetrating rays.

THE studious and contemplative mind can best interpret her motive in this, and
the utility of it. To those, who have seldom or never enjoyed the delicious
repasts of this tranquil hour, it may be said -- the mind, like the body,
having rested from the toils and bustle of the day, awakes in a state of
sereneness the best calculated for contemplation, for the reception and
impression of ideas, which this season, above all others, seems capable of
affording. -- The physician may also inform, that early rising is a cordial and
preservative of health. It creates a lively carnation on the cheek, adds vigor
and activity to the limbs and senses; which no one wishes to exchange for the
languishing constitution, the pallid countenance, and mind staggering with the
weight of an inactive body of him, who takes too much repose on his downy
pillow.

THE dawning of day -- when the sun is dissipating the darkness, all nature
assuming reanimation, each tribe of instinct hastening to its respective
occupation, and man, who had been confined in morbid inactivity, reassuming
strength and cheerfulness -- is emblematic of CREATION rising out of its
original chaos, or nonexistence. Surely, then, this scene cannot fail of
filling the philosophic mind with just and sublime ideas, and with the purest
love and gratitude to that BEING, who caused them to exist and who still
regulates and superintends the whole.

MISS SAMPSON has repeatedly said, that her mind was never more effectually
impressed with the power, wisdom and beneficence of DEITY than in the
contemplation of his CREATION. It affords ideas the most familiar and
dignified, and lessons the most striking, captivating and beautifully sublime.

THE Earth, which is computed to be 25,038 English miles in circumference, and
to contain about 199,512,595 square miles of surface, is indeed a large body.
SEE Esquire. GUTHRIE'S and Dr. MORSE'S Geographics.
The thoughts of its construction, of its convenient situations for its
innumerable species of inhabitants, and of the abundance of good it affords
them, are sufficient to warm the human breast with all that is tender and
benevolent.

BUT our creative faculties in their researches are not limited to this globe.
The sight is attracted into boundless either, to roam amongst the other
revolutionary orbs and spangled situations of the fixed stars. CONSIDERED by
modern philosophers and astronomers, as SUNS.
In this, nature is our prompter, and reason our guide. Here we are led to
believe, without doubt, that such orbs, as are visible to the eye, occupy
immensity. And the probability is, that millions, yea, an infinite number, of
such bodies are peopled by inhabitants not dissimilar to our own. And when we
further consider the immense distance there is between each of these planets,
stars or suns, and the certainty of the regularity and mutual harmony, that for
ever subsists between them, although they are perpetually whirling with the
most inconceivable velocity; -- what august and amazing conceptions do we have
of that BEING, who has fabricated their existence! Surely then the mind, that
is not lost to all sense of rectitude and decorum, must be filled with ideas
the most dignified, with sentiments and passions the most refined, and with
gratitude the most abundant and sincere.

AS MISS SAMPSON had a natural attachment to the study of creation, it would
have been unnatural, and even criminal, to have been negligent in forming an
acquaintance with her own nature -- with its important use and end. Every thing
in nature, as well as in reason, enjoins this as a duty. The uniformity every
where observable in creation, doubtless, was influential and subservient to the
regulation of her moral and civil life. This may excite an idea of novelty with
those, who do not studiously attend the lectures of Nature. But had we no other
directory, by which we could regulate our lives and conduct, and were it not
possible to deviate from this, there would be less danger of the confusion so
often visible among mankind, of immorality, and of the sword, which is, even
now, deluging such a part of the world in blood.

FROM an habitual course of speculations like these, she may be said to have
been seasonably impressed with the following theoretical conclusions drawn from
them: That human nature is born in imperfection; the great business of which is
refinement, and constant endeavors of approximation to perfection and
happiness; -- That ignorance and the general train of evils are the natural
offspring of inattention, and that all tend to the degradation of our nature;
-- And that diligent application is the great requisite for improvement; which,
only, can dignify and exalt our nature and our character.

THESE traits, I venture to affirm, are some of the primeval exertions of those
endowments, which are so peculiarly characteristic of our rectitude and worth.
They are leading principles of life. I take the liberty to call them
spontaneous; because they are, more or less, natural to every one.

IMPELLED by desires to promote virtue and decorum, as well as by justice, I
here mention one more trait of her juvenility: and I could wish it might not
distinguish her from others at this day. -- During this season, it may be said,
she was generally a stranger and showed an aversion to all irregular and
untimely diversions. Nor is she more deserving a panegyric on this account than
her superintendents. She despised revelry, gossipping, detraction and orgies,
not because she was, originally, any better than others, but because genuine
nature exhibits no such examples -- because they were unfashionable in her
neighborhood; -- and, especially, because her master and mistress not only
disapproved, but prohibited them. This theory is certainly good, however bad
her practice hereafter may appear. Their practice, rather than their name
should be struck out of time.

PERHAPS I make a greater distinction, than many do, between what is called the
universal ruin of nature, and that occasioned by wrong education. We call
nature corrupt: instead of which, we may say corporeal substance. The immortal
part of man is pure; and it is the pride of genuine nature to keep it so. It is
embarrassed many times by a vicious body: but it will remain uncontaminated,
though the body tumbles into dissolution.

CUSTOM bears great sway; even the palate may be made to relish any diet by
custom. But this argues not, that any thing can be received by the stomach
without danger. We are the pilots of our children; and on us they depend for
safety. They learn by imitation, as well as by precept. And I have either read,
heard or thought, (no matter which) that children will always be gazing on the
figns their parents have lettered. -- We wish for reformation in youth; but let
age be careful to lay the foundation stone.

IT is not presumed, that Miss SAMPSON was, at this age, without her particular
blemishes and foibles. Like others destitute of principal advantages of
education, she was doubtless culpable for the misimprovement of much time and
many talents. Whilst her superintendents may corroborate this, they are ready
to do her the justice of saying, that she was a lover of order in their family
-- punctual in the fulfillment of her duty to them, and assiduous to heighten
their regard for her. And that her obligations of this nature did not terminate
here, many of her cotemporaries, I dare say, can testify. Studious to increase
a reciprocity of affection with her relations and surrounding companions, she
was successful. To behave with temperance to strangers, is what she deemed a
step of prudence: But to show an indifference, or actually to disoblige a
friend or companion, could only be repaid by redoubled attention to restore
them to her favor, and by acknowledged gratitude for their lenity.

ON the whole, we must look upon her endowments, in general, during her
juvenility, as the statuary may look upon his marble in the quarry; or as any
one may look upon a rich peace of painting or sculpture, which combines
uniformity with profusion; yet where the hand of the artist has not discovered
every latent beauty, nor added a finishing polish to those that are apparent.

CHAP. III.
Analysis of Miss SAMPSON's thoughts on the rise and progress of the AMERICAN
WAR, with a concise account of the Lexington and Breed's Hill engagements --
including a remarkable dream.

THE motives, that led to hostilities between North America and Great Britain,
and the period that terminated our relation to, and dependence on, that nation,
are events the most singular and important we have ever known: -- singular,
because, in their very nature, they were unnatural; -- important, because, on
them depended the future welfare and luster of America.

The operations of these affairs, both before and after the first engagement at
Lexington, are well known to have affected the minds, even of both sexes,
throughout the Colonies, with sensations and emotions different from whatever
they had before experienced. Our progenitors had suffered almost every hardship
in their first settlement of this country, and much bloodshed by the
Aborigines. But these are events that naturally attend the population of new
countries; and consequently, naturally anticipated. But when our property,
which our ancestors had honestly acquired, was invaded; when our inherent
rights were either prohibited or infringed, an alarm was universally given; and
our minds were effectually awakened to the keenest sense of the injuries, and
naturally remained in distress, till we became exempt from their jurisdiction.

PERHAPS the public may not be surprised, that events, so interesting and
important, should arrest the attention of any one. -- But when either of the
sexes reverses its common sphere of action, our curiosity is excited to know
the cause and event. The field of war is a department peculiarly assigned to
the hero. It may, therefore, appear somewhat curious, if not interesting to
many, when they are informed, that this uncommonly arrested the attention of a
YOUNG FEMALE of low birth and station. Miss SAMPSON is the one, who not only
listened to the least information relative to the rise and progress of the late
American War; but her thoughts were, at times, engrossed with it. -- I will
analyze them, as I find them sketched in her credentials, or as I learn them
from credible authorities.

BEFORE the blockade of Boston, March 5th, 1775, by the British, the Colonies
had been thrown into great confusion and distress by repeated acts of
oppression by the British, that produced riots, which, in Boston, were carried
to the greatest extremities. It was not till this time, that Miss SAMPSON
obtained information of the arrival of the King's troops, and of the spirited
opposition maintained by the Americans. She justly learned, that it was the
Acts of the British Parliament to raise a revenue, without her consent, that
gave rise to these cruel and unjust measures. Had she possessed information and
experience on the subject, like many others, she would doubtless, like them,
have seen the impropriety, that England should have an unlimited control over
us, who are separated from her by the vast Atlantic, at least, three thousand
miles.

BUT so it was. -- From the the first established settlement in North America,
to the Declaration of our Independence, we acknowledged the sovereignty of the
British Government; and thus continued tributary to her laws. And as though it
had not been enough, that she had driven many of our ancestors from their
native clime, by the intolerant and unrelenting spirit of her religious
persecution, to seek a new world, and to suffer the distress naturally
consequent -- they insisted still, that our property, our conduct and even our
lives must be under their absolute control. Thus, we remained subject to the
caprice of one, the influential chicanery of a second, and the arbitrary
decision of the majority. And it is not my prerogative to say, we should not
have remained loyal subjects of the Crown, to this day, had not our affections
been alienated by the administration of laws, in their nature, unjust, and
calculated to injure none, but those the least deserving of injury.

PERHAPS, there is no period in our lives, in which the principles of humanity
and benevolence can better take root, than in that of the juvenile age. And it
has been a rare instance, that the situation of any nation has been so
effectually calculated to bring these to the the act of experiment, as ours was
at the juncture of our revolution. The distressed situation of the inhabitants
of Massachusetts, and particularly of those in the metropolis, after the
passing of the Port-Bill, can never be remembered without starting the tear of
humanity, and exciting the indignation of the world.

MISS SAMPSON, though not an eyewitness of this distress, was not insensible
of it. She learned that the inhabitants of Boston were confined by an
unprovoked enemy; that they were not only upon the point of perishing for want
of sustenance, but that many had been actually massacred, their public and
private buildings of elegance shamefully defaced, or quite demolished; and that
many of her own sex were either ravished, or deluded to the sacrifice of their
chastity, which she had been taught to revere, even as dear as life itself.

THESE thoughts filled her mind with sensations, to which she had hitherto been
unaccustomed -- with a kind of enthusiasm, which strengthened and increased
with the progression of the war; and which, peradventure, fixed her mind in a
situation, from which, she afterward found it impossible to be extricated,
until the accomplishment of the object, after which it aspired.

DURING her residence in Mr. THOMAS'S family, they granted her many domestic
privileges; -- such as the use of a number of fowls, sheep, etc. upon
condition, that she would appropriate the profit arising from them to the
attainment of objects useful and ornamental. This was an effectual method to
inure her to method and a proper use of money. She applied herself to the
business with diligence and success And, at this time, she had accumulated a
small stock, which was appropriated, agreeably to her notion, perfectly
coincident to the injunction. The poor people of Boston were reduced to the
piteous necessity of asking charity, or contribution from the country
inhabitants. This was no sooner known to her than she experienced an anxiety,
that could brook no control, until she had an opportunity of casting in her
mite: Upon which, she sincerely congratulated herself, not upon the principle,
that any one owed her any more gratitude; but upon the consciousness of having
endeavored to relieve the innocent and distressed.

THOUGH I am as much disinclined to have faith in common dreams as in any
invented fable, or to spend time in reciting their ominous interpretations; yet
as they proceed from that immortal part of man, which no one ought to slight,
they may sometimes be of use. I cannot help noticing, in this place, a
phenomenon presented to the mind of Miss SAMPSON during her nocturnal repose,
April 15, 1775, in the fifteenth year of her age, and but four days before the
battle at Lexington. I insert the principal of it in her own language, and some
of the latter part, verbatim.

"As I slept, I thought, as the Sun was declining beneath our hemisphere, an
unusual softness and sereneness of weather invited me abroad to perambulate the
Works of Nature. I gladly embraced the opportunity; and with eager steps and
pensive mind, quickly found myself environed in the adjacent fields, which were
decorated with the greatest profusion of delights. The gentle ascending ground
on one side, upon which were grazing numerous kinds of herds; the pleasant and
fertile valley and meadow, through which meandered small rivulets on the other;
the aspiring and venerable grove, either before or behind me; the zephyrs,
which were gently fanning the boughs, and the sweet caroling of the birds in
the branches; the husbandmen, intent upon their honorable and most useful
employment, agriculture; the earth, then clothed with vegetation, which
already filled the air with ravishing odours; -- all conspired to fill my mind
with sensations hitherto unknown, and to direct it to a realization of the
AUTHOR of their being whose power, wisdom and goodness are, as they manifest,
as infinite as they are perpetual.

STUDIOUS in contemplating the objects that surrounded me, I should have been
barbarous, and perhaps, have deprived myself of advantages, which I never might
again possess, had I abruptly quitted, my ramble. I prolonged it, till I found
myself advanced upon a losty eminence that overlooked a far more extensive and
beautiful (...), both of the ocean and continent.

HAVING reached the summit, I sat down to indulge such thoughts as the scene
itemed altogether capable of inspiring. -- How much, thought I, is it to be
regretted, that I am not always filled with the same sensasations, with such
sublime ideas of CREATION, and of that BEING, who has caused it to exist!
Indeed, I fancied, I could joyfully have spent my life in researches for
knowledge in this delightsome way.

BUT how great was my astonishment and horror at the reversion of the scene! An
unusual appearance, different from whatever my eyes beheld, or imagination
suggested, was, at once, cast on every thing that surrounded me. The sky, which
before was so pleasant and serene, suddenly lowered, and became,
instantaneously, veiled with blackness. Though not altogether like a common
tempest, incessant lightning and tremendous peals of thunder seemed to lacerate
the very vaults of nature. The ambrosial sweets of vegetation were exchanged
for the nauseous stenches of sulphur and other once condensed bodies, that
seemed to float in either.

HAPPENING, at this instant, to cast my eyes upon the liquid element, new
amazement was added to the scene. Its surface, which before was unruffled, was
now properly convulsed, and seemed piled in mountains to the sky. The ships,
that before were either anchored, or riding with tranquillity to their harbors,
at once dismasted, dashing against rocks and one another, or foundering amidst
the surges. The industrious farmers, many of whom were visited, by their
conforts in their rural occupations, seemed dispersed, and flying for refuge to
the nearest place of safety. And the birds and bestial tribes seemed at a loss
where to go, being in as great confusion as the elements.

FILLED with astonishment at this distraction of the elements, without any
fixed precaution what method to take for safety; on the one side, the earth, a
volcano, which shook with the perpetual roar of thunder; and on the other side,
the liquid element foaming to the clouds -- my reason seemed entirely to
forsake me, on beholding the most hideous serpent roll itself from the ocean.
He advanced, and seemed to threaten carnage and destruction wherever he went.
At length, he approached me, with a velocity, which I expected would instantly
have cost me my life. I happened to be directed homeward; but looking back, and
perceiving the streets, through which he passed, drenched in blood, I fell into
a swoon. In this condition, I know not how long I remained. At length, I found
myself, (as I really was) in my own apartment; where I hoped not to be again
shocked with the terrific and impending destruction of the elements or monster.

BUT to my repeated grief and amazement, I beheld the door of the apartment
open of itself; and the serpent, in a more frightful form and venomous in
looks, reappeared. He was of immense bigness; his mouth opened wide, and teeth
of great length. His tongue appeared to have a sharp sting in the end. He
entered the room; but it was not of sufficient dimensions for his length. As he
advanced toward my bedside, his head raised, as nearly as I conjectured,
about five or six feet, his eyes resembled balls of fire. I was frightened
beyond description. I thought I covered my head and tried to call for
assistance, but could make no noise.

AT length, I heard a voice saying, "Arise, stand on your feet, gird yourself,
and prepare to encounter your enemy." -- This seemed impossible; as I had no
weapon of defense. I rose up, stood upon the bed; but before I had time to
dress, the serpent approached, and seemed resolved to swallow me whole. I
thought I called on GOD for assistance in these distressing moments: And at
that instant, I beheld, at my feet, a bludgeon, which I readily took into my
hand, and immediately had a severe combat with the enemy. He retreated toward
the door, from whence he first entered. I pursued him closely, and perceived,
as he lowered his head, he attempted to strike me with his tail. His tail
resembled that of a fish, more than that of a serpent. It was divided into
several parts, and on each branch there were capital letters of yellow gilt. I
pursued him, after he left the apartment, several rods, striking him every
opportuty; till at length, I dislocated every joint, which fell in pieces to
the ground: But the pieces reunited, though not in the form of a serpent, but
in that of an Ox. He came at me a second time, roaring and trying to gore me
with his horns. But I renewed the attack with such resolution, and beat him in
such a manner, that he fell again in pieces to the ground. I ran to gather
them; but on survey, found them nothing but a gelly. -- And I immediately
awoke."

THIS very singular Dream had an uncommon effect on her mind, and seemed to
presage some great event. The novelty and momentous ideas it inspired, induced
her to record it; but she kept it secreted from others. At that time she
attempted no particular interpretation of it.

ALTHOUGH the nature and limits of these MEMOIRS will not admit of a connected
sketch of the American War; yet, as the motives that led to open hostilities,
and the actions, in which the first blood was shed, so peculiarly occupied the
mind of a young FEMALE, I cannot help following the example: especially, as
these were the opening of the great DRAMA, so singular in its nature and
important in its consequences; and in which she afterward became so
distinguished an ACTRESS. These, added to a prompt regard and honor to the
memory of those HEROES, who fell the first sacrifices in the CAUSE of their
COUNTRY, induce me to dwell, for a few minutes on those scenes; the remembrance
of which, while they fire the mind and passions with genuine love of LIBERTY
and PATRIOTISM, must bring up reflections, shocking and melancholy to every
tender mind.

THE repeated and unjust Acts of Parliament, which they more strenuously
endeavored to enforce on the Colonies, seemed to threaten general destruction;
unless they would, in One mutual Union, take every effectual method of
resistance. For this purpose, a CONGRESS had been formed; whose first business
was to remonstrate and petition for redress. At the same time, they had the
precaution to take methods for defense, in case their voice should not be heard
in Parliament Great encouragement was given for the manufacture of all kinds of
military stores and apparatus. The militia were trained to the use of arms.

WHILST things were going on in this manner, a detachment of troops commanded
by Colonel SMITH and Major PITCAIRN were sent from Boston to possess or destroy
some stores at Concord, twenty miles from Boston. At Lexington, a few companies
were collected for the purpose of maneuvering, or to oppose the incursions of
the British. These, as some accounts say, were ordered by the British
commander, with the epithet of damned rebels, to disperse. Whether they so
readily complied with the injunction as he wished, or not, he ordered his
troops to fire upon them; and eight men were instantly the victims of death.

AFTER the dispersion of the militia, the troops proceeded to Concord and
destroyed a few stores. But by this time the militia had collected from the
adjacent towns, and seemed unanimously resolved to avenge, by severe
retaliation, the death of their innocent brethren. This the troops effectually
experienced during their precipitate march to Boston.

WHO but the actors and spectators, being themselves unaccustomed to scenes of
this kind, can best describe the anguish of mind and emotions of passion
excited by it! The loss of the Americans was small compared to the British. But
view them once tranquil and happy in the midst of social and domestic compact.
No music more harsh than the note of the shepherd, of friendship and innocent
glee. With the lark, each morn was welcomed, as a prelude to new joy and
satisfaction. -- Now behold the reverse of the scene! As if nature had been
convulsed, and with just indignation had frowned on some unpardonable offense,
their peace, and every social and private endearment was, at once, broken up.
But she stands acquitted; whilst the pride of man could be satiated only with
the dear price of the scourge -- the havoc of war. On that fatal day, when
their fields and streets, which had so often re-echoed with rural felicity,
suddenly assumed the aspect of the regular battalia, resounding with nothing
but the din of war, and the agonies of expiring relatives and friends, the
Earth seemed to precipitate her diurnal revolution, and to leave the Sun in
frightful aspect. The shepherds' flocks stood aghast. Birds forgot to carol,
and hastened away with astonished muteness. And think -- while the tender
female breast turned from the scene in distraction, how it must have humanized
the most savage temper, and have melted it into sympathy, even toward a
relentless enemy.

THE news of this battle spread with the rapidity of a meteor. All America was
roused. And many companies of militia, from remote parts, marched day and
night, almost without intermission, to the relief of their friends in
Massachusetts. Thus, in a short time, the environs of Boston exhibited, to the
view of the enemy, the formidable appearance of 20,000 men.

THIS event had the same effect on the mind of Miss SAMPSON, as it had on those
of every one, that was awake to the introduction of objects so interesting and
important; and whose feelings were ready to commiserate the sufferings of any
of the human race.

ON June the 5th, the same year, Congress unanimously appointed GEORGE
WASHINGTON, Esquire. to the chief command of the American Army. He is a native of
Virginia: And though he is a human being, his abilities and improvements can
never be called in question. He had acquired great reputation in the execution
of a Colonel's commission in the French war. He accepted this appointment with
a diffidence, which, while it best interpreted his wisdom, evinced the fidelity
of his heart, and his patriotic zeal for the fu^filment of the important trust
reposed in him. HE arrived at Headquarters in Cambridge on the 2d of July
following.
-- Of this illustrious personage, I may have further occasion to speak in the
progress of these MEMOIRS.

LEXINGTON battle was soon succeeded by that of Breed's Hill in Charlestown,
Massachusetts, a mile and an half from Boston.

THE 16th of this month, a detachment of Provincials under the command of Col.
PRESCOTT, was ordered to entrench on Bunker's Hill the ensuing night. By some
mistake, Breed's Hill was marked out for the intrenchment, instead of Bunker's:
It being high and large like it, and on the furthermost part of the peninsula
next to Boston. They were prevented going to work till midnight. They then
pursued their business with alacrity: And so profound was their silence, that
they were not heard by the British on board their vessels lying in the harbor.
At daybreak, they had thrown up a small redoubt; which was no sooner noticed
by the Lively, a man of war, than her cannon gave them a very heavy salute.

THE firing immediately rouzed the British camp in Boston, and their fleet to
behold a novelty they had little expected. This diverted their attention from a
scheme they meant to have prosecuted the next day; which was now called to
drive the Americans from the hill.

NOTWITHSTANDING an incessant cannonade from the enemy's ships, floating
batteries and a fort upon Cop's hill in Boston, opposite the American redoubt,
they continued laborious till noon, with the loss of only one man. By some
surprising oversight, one detachment had labored, incessantly, four hours,
without being relieved, or supplied with any refreshment.

BY this time the Americans had thrown up a small breast-work, extending from
the east side of their redoubt toward the bottom of the hill; but were
prevented completing it by the intolerable fire of the enemy.

JUST after twelve o'clock, the day fair and excessively hot, a great number of
boats and barges were filled with regular troops and apparatus, who sail to
Charlestown. The Generals, HOW and PIGOT, take the command. After they were
landed, they form, and remain in that position, till they are joined by another
detachment, consisting of infantry, grenadiers and marines; which make in all,
about 3000.

DURING these operations, the Generals, WARREN and PEMEROY, join the American
force. General PUTNAM continues ambitious in giving aid as occasion requires.
They are ordered to take up a post and rail fence, and to set it not quite
contiguous to another, and to fill the vacancy with some newly mown grass, as a
slight defense to the musketry of the enemy. They are impatiently waiting the
attack.

IN Boston, the Generals, CLINTON and BURGOYNE, had taken their stand on Cop's
Hill to contemplate the bloody operations now commencing. General GAGE had
previously determined, when any works should be raised in Charlestown by the
Americans, to burn the town: And whilst his troops were advancing nearer to the
American lines, orders came to Cop's Hill for the execution of the resolution.
Accordingly, a carcass was discharged, which satfire to the hither part of the
town; which, being fired, in other parts by men for that purpose, was, in a few
minutes, in a general flame.

WHAT scenes are now before us! There, a handsome town, containing 300 houses,
and about 200 other buildings, wrapped in one general conflagration; whose
curling flames and sable smoke, towering to the clouds, seem to bespeak heavy
vengeance and destruction! In Boston, see the houses, piazzas and other heights
crowded with the anxious inhabitants, and those of the British soldiery, who
are not called upon duty! Yonder, the adjacent Hills and fields are lined with
Americans of both sexes, and of all ages and orders. Now, turn to the American
lines and intrenchments. Behold them facing the most formidable enemy, who are
advancing toward them with solemn and majestic dignity! In a few moments, must
be exhibited the most horrid and affecting scene, that mankind are capable of
producing!

ALTHOUGH the Americans are ill supplied with stores; and many of their muskets
without bayonets; yet they are generally good marksmen, being accustomed to
hunting. The British move on slowly, instead of a quick step. The provincials
are ordered to reserve their fire, till the troops advance within ten or twelve
rods; when they begin a tremendous discharge of musketry, which is returned by
the enemy, for a few minutes, without advancing a yard. But the stream of
American fire is so incessant, and does such astonishing execution, that the
regulars break and fall back in confusion. They are again with difficulty
rallied; but march with apparent reluctance to the intrenchments. The Americans
at the redoubt, and those who are attacked by the British infantry in their
lines leading from it to the water, are ordered, as usual; to reserve their
fire. -- The fence proves a poor shelter: and many are much more exposed than
necessity obliges. So that the British cannot, in future, stigmatize them with
the name of cowards, who will fly at the sight of a grenadier's cap, nor for
fighting in an unfair manner. They wait till the enemy is within six rods; when
the earth again trembles with their fire. The enemy are mown down in ranks, and
again are repulsed. General CLINTON observes this, and passes over from Boston
without waiting for orders. The British officers are heard to say, "It is
downright butchery to lead the troops on afresh to the lines." But their honor
is at stake; and the attack is again attempted. The officers are seen to use
the most violent gestures with their swords to rally their troops: and though
there is an almost insuperable aversion in them to renew the attack, the
officers are once more successful. -- The Americans are in want of ammunition,
but cannot procure any. Whilst they are ordered to retreat within the sort, the
enemy make a decisive push: the officers goad on the soldiers with their swords
-- redouble their fire on all sides; and the redoubt is attacked on three sides
at once. The Americans are, unavoidably, ordered to retreat: But they delay,
and fight with the butt end of their guns, till the redoubt is two thirds
filled with regular troops. -- In their retreat, which led over a neck leading
from Cambridge to Charlestown, they were again in the greatest jeopardy of
being cut off by the Glasgow man of war, floating batteries, etc. But they
effected it without much loss, and with greater regularity, than could be
expected from men, who had never before seen an engagement. General WARREN,
being in the rear, was shot in the back part of his head; and having clapped
his hand to the wound, dropped down dead.

THE number of Americans engaged, including those who dared to cross the neck
and join them, was only 1500. Their loss was small compared with the British.
The killed, wounded and missing were 453; of which, 139 were slain. Of the
British, the killed and wounded were 1054; of which, 226 were killed.

IT has been said by a veteran officer, who was at the battles of Dettingen,
Minden, and several others, in Germany -- that for the time it lasted, he never
knew anything equal it. The British displayed great heroic bravery: And there
was a perpetual sheet of fire from the Americans for half an hour; and the
action was intensely hot for double that time.

AMONG the slain of the British, they particularly lament the deaths of Lieut.
Col. ABBERCOMBY, and Major PITCAIRN, who occasioned the first shedding of blood
at Lexington. Among the Americans, we lament, in particular, the fall of
General WARREN, the Colonels, GARDNER, PARKER, CHELMSFORD, etc. But the fall of
General WARREN is the most effectually felt. By his fall, the public sustain
the loss of the warm patriot and politician, the eminent orator and physician;
with which were blended the other endearing and ornamental accomplishments. And
though an amiable consort and a number of small children had rendered his
existence more desirable; he distinguished himself this day, by fighting as a
volunteer; and fell an illustrious EXAMPLE in the CAUSE of LIBERTY and the
RIGHTS of MAN.

ABOUT this time, the country inhabitants, near Boston, were frequently alarmed
by idle and ignorant reports, that the British troops had broken through the
American lines, were penetra^ng, with the greatest rapidity, into the country,
ravaging, plundering and butchering all before them. And more than once, was
Miss SAMPSON persuaded to join her female circle, who were as ignorant of what
passed in the arm^es as herself, to seek security in the dreary desert, or
deserted cottage. But she peculiarly noted the day of Breed's Hill engagement,
as did many others, by the incessant roar of the cannon. A fertile eminence,
near which she lived, is a standing monument of the pensive thoughts and
reflections she experienced during the melancholy day. She has said, that, for
some days after the battle, having had an account of it, sleep was a stranger
to her. It seems, her attention was of a different nature from that of many of
her sex and youth. Whilst they were only dreading the consequences, she was
exploring the cause of the eruption. This, as she had heard, or naturally
apprehended would terminate, at least, in New-England's wretchedness or glory.

IT is, indeed, too much to sport with the lives of any animals. But when a
large number of men, many of whom, perhaps, are involuntarily led into the
field, and many more, without knowing or caring for what reason, -- march
within a few paces of each other, that their lives may be made a fairer mark
for the sport of the avarice, pride and ambition of a few licenced incendiaries
-- nature must recoil, or the whole system of intellects forget there is a
higher dignity of man.

SHE had frequent opportunity of viewing the American soldiers, as they marched
from one part to another. -- One day, having gone some distance to see a number
of regiments, her curiosity was arrested by an officer, who boasted much of his
courage and heroic achievements. A young female domestic being near him, he
thus addressed her: -- "You S^^t, why are you not better dressed when you come
to see so many officers and soldiers!" -- Miss SAMPSON seeing her confused,
thus replied to the arrogant coxcomb: -- Elegance in dress, indeed, Sir,
becomes the fair, as well as your sex. But how must that soldier feel, who
values himself so highly for his courage, his great exploits, etc. (perhaps
where there is no danger,) should they for sake him in the field of battle!"

HOSTILITIES having commenced throughout the Colonies, a new and effectual
school was opened for the hero, politician and statesman; and which was a
stimulation, even to the philosophic moralist. The consequence of which, was
the declaration of our Independence, July 4, 1776. This momentous event took
place two hundred and eighty four years after the discovery of America by
COLUMBUS -- one hunded and seventy, since the first established settlement in
Virginia -- and a hundred and fifty six, since the settlement of Plymouth in
Massachusetts; which were the first permanent settlements in North America. And
whilst this Era will forever be held a Jubilee by every votary of American
Freedom, it must bring to our minds two very affecting periods: -- First, the
time when we, with the most heartfelt satisfaction, acknowledged the
sovereignty of our parent country: And secondly, when we were distressed, and
like her dutiful offspring askedher lenity and compassion -- but could not
share, even in her parental affection!

BUT out of great tribulation, it is believed, anguish has not been the
greatest result. Those necessitous events were, doubtless, conducive to the
raising our Empire to that rare height of perfection in the moral, as well as
in the political world; in which it now so conspicuously shires.

CHAP. IV.
MISS SAMPSON continues in Mr. THOMAS'S family after she is of age, without
meeting any incidents more uncommon, than her increasing propensities for
learning and the mode of interesting herself in the CAUSE of her COUNTRY. --
Engages in a public school part of two years successively. -- An outcry of
religion in her neighborhood. -- Her thoughts upon it. -- Summary of what she
deemed the truest religion.

WE are now to view the state of Miss SAMPSON'S mind comparable to him, who has
planned some great achievement, which, he believes, will be of the greatest
utility and importance to him; but, who finds his opportunities, rather than
abilities, inadequate to its completion.

I KNOW not that she ever was deserving the name of sickleness in her pursuits;
yet, I have the stronge^ reason to conclude, that her mind, during her
juvenility, was so crowded with inventive ideas for improvements, as to throw
it into uncommon anxiety. And notwithstanding her invention proposed many
schemes; yet, as they tended to the same comparative object, they ought rather
to be applauded than aspersed. Neither would I think it gratifying to any, to
account for this upon any other score. To assign no other motives for these
intellectual exertions, than the attainment of gewgaws, superfluity in dress
and the night consumption, would not only be doing injustice to her, but
mentioning a train of ^vils, which, it must be confessed, characterize too
great a part of our youth at this day; and which, every legislator should
discourage, and every parent prohibit.

BEFORE this time, Congress had taken effectual methods to encourage the
manufacture of our own apparel, and every other consumption in America. And the
reflection is pleasing, that Mr. THOMAS's family was not the only one, who had
not the reformation to begin. As though they had always been apprehensive of
the utility and honor they should gain by it, they had always practiced it; and
the voice of Congress was only a stimulation: So that Miss SAMPSON'S
employments were not much altered. And she has, somewhere, suggested -- that
had we continued this most laudable and ever recommendable employment, in the
same degree, to this day, we should not only have increased commerce with many
foreign nations; but, have retained immense sums of money, which are now piled
shining monuments of the opulence of other nations, and of our own vanity and
inattention. In this opinion, I am confident, every well-wisher to his country
is still ready to concur. Miss SAMPSON has just shown me pieces of lawn and
muslin, which were manufactured with her own hands, soon after the commencement
of the war. I consider them as nothing more than specimens of COLUMBIAN
abilities, genius and taste. It is wounding to me to hear -- "We can buy
cheaper than we can make." No doubt -- And so long as we encourage foreign
manufacture by sending them our specie. there is no doubt, but they can sell
cheaper than we can make. And even when they have entirely drained us of our
money, there will be one cheerful certainty left -- they will laugh at our
credulity.


NECESSITY, our dreadful, but useful, friend, having taught us the advantages
of our own manufactures for the support and conveniences of life, continued
still favorable to our intellectual powers, and prompted them to the study of
arts and sciences. The propriety of this is ratified by our Independence. Nor
was Miss SAMPSON the only one, who realized it: But she has often said, she
hoped every one, who had, or may have, the same propensities for it, may have
freeraccess to it. Her situation of mind was very applicable to the maxim --
"Learning has no enemy but ignorance." She was not now of age; but she
resolved, when that period should arrive, to devise some more effectual method
to attain it.

IT is natural for fear to subside, when danger flees out at the door. This,
doubtless, was the case with many good people in Massachusetts, after the seat
of war was removed to distant parts; when they were not so suddenly alarmed by
its havoc. To whatever degree this may have been the case with Miss SAMPSON, it
appears, that its first impressions, instead of being obliterated by time, were
more strongly impressed on her mind. In fact, it seems, she only needed a
different formation to have demonstrated in actions what she was obliged to
conceal through restraint of nature and custom.

JUST before she was eighteen, 1779, she was employed, much to her liking, six
months in the warm season, in teaching a public school in Middleborough. In
this business, experience more effectually convinced her, that her education,
rather than her endowments, was inadequate to the task. But her success more
than equalled her expectations, both with regard to the proficiency of her
pupils, and the approbation of her employers.

THE next season her engagement was renewed for the same term in the same
school. She now found her task easier, and her success greater, having had the
advantage of a good man school the preceding winter. The employment was very
agreeable to her; especially, as it was a source of much improvement to herself.

NOT far from this time, there began to be an uncommon agitation among many
people in her neighborhood; as had been, or soon followed, in many towns in
New England. This penetrating disorder was not confined to old age. It
violently seized on the middle-aged, and as she remarked, even children caught
the contagion. There are but few mischiefs, that war is not capable of
effecting.

BUT some well-minded people were ready to term this the workings of the
Spirit, of the Holy Ghost -- a reformation in religion. Whether it originated
from the unusual and influential exertions of the clergy, who took advantage of
this unparalleled crisis to add to their number of converts in the Christian
religion; or, whether it was a voluntary act of the mind, or a natural cachexy;
-- or whether it is a characteristic trait of the Divine Character -- I have
not time here to conjecture.

SHE was in the midst of it, and was excited to observe its operations. But she
had the wise precaution to study well its purport, rather than to suffer the
fugitive to take her by surprise. But let its tendency have been what it might,
it answered a good purpose for her. It served to rouse her attention; and to
bring about these important enquiries: -- From whence came man? What is his
business? And for what is he designed? She considered herself as having been
too inattentive to religion; which, as she had been taught, and naturally
conceived, is the most indispensable duty enjoined on man, both with regard to
his well-being here, and to the eternal welfare of his immortal part.

BUT from her best conclusive arguments drawn from a contest of this nature,
she saw no propriety in it. Reason being per^erted or obstructed in its course,
the whole system of intellects is thrown into a delirium. This being the case,
as she conceived, in this outcry of religion; its subjects were of course, not
only disqualified for useful business, which was, certainly, wanted at that
time, if ever, but rendered totally incapacitated for the adoration and worship
of DEITY, in a manner becoming his dignity, or the dictates of sound reason.

AT this age, she had not, professionally, united herself to any religious
denomination; as was the practice of many of her cotemporaries. She considered
herself in a state of probation, and a free agent; and consequently at liberty,
to select her own religion. In this, she was, in a measure, mistaken. Had her
mind been free from the manacles of custom, and unswayed by education, she
might have boasted of an advantage superior to all others, and might,
peradventure, have entertained the world with a set of opinions, different from
all other sects and nations. But these were her combatants. As she advanced on
the stage of life to establish a religion, her prospect was that of the
Christian world: And her assent to it was at once urged by her mode of
education. Indeed, this was the only religion of which she had any knowledge,
except that which simple nature always teaches.

BUT her researches in Christianity did not occasion so much surprise to its
votaries as they did to herself. On examination, instead of finding only one
denomination, she must have been entertained -- more probably, alarmed, on
finding almost an infinite number of sects which had sprung out of it, and in
each sectary, a different opinion -- all right, infallibly right, in their own
estimation. A great diversity of scenery in the same drama, or tragedy, upon
the stage, perhaps, has nothing in it wonderful or criminal. But a religion,
which is believed to be of divine origin, even communicated directly from GOD,
to Man, consequently, intended for the equal good of all, but still subject to
controversy -- differently construed and differently practiced -- she
conceived, has every thing of the mavelous, if not of an inconsistent nature.
Thus, when she would attach herself to one, the sentiments of a second would
prevail, and those of a third would stagnate her choice: and for a while she
was tempted to reject the whole, till thorough examination and the aid of HIM,
who cannot err, should determine the best. And I am not certain, there are not
many, who have made their profession, who ought to disapprove her resolution.

To have called in question the validity (...) authenticity of the Scriptures
would only have been challenging, at least, one half America, and a quarter of
the rest of the globe to immediate combat: For which she had neither abilities,
nor inclination. She began to reflect, however, that, the being bound to any
set religion, by the force of man, would not only be an infraction of the laws
of Nature, but a striking and effectual blow at the prime root of that liberty,
for which our nation was then contending.

I WOULD not leave the public to surmise, that she derived no advantage from
Christianity. Though divines utterly disallow, that the plan of the Gospel can
be attained by the dim light of nature, or by the boasted schools of
philosophy; yet, we have already found in these MEMOIRS, that, as feeble as
they are, they lead, without equivocation, to the Knowledge and belief of
DEITY, who, every one acknowledges, is the first and great object of our
reverence and devotion. Christian morality, she acknowledges with more warmth,
than I have known in many, who have had greater advantages of education.
Setting aside the doctrines of total depravily, election, and a few others,
which were always inadmissible by her reason, she is an adherent to its creed.
By her diffidence, she is willing, however, that her ignorance should be so far
exposed to the public, as to declare, that she knows not whether it is more
from the light of Gospel revelation, or the force of education, that she is led
to the assent of the fundamental doctrines of Christianity.

THIS view of her religious sentiments will be concluded by the following
summary of what she now believes to be genuine religion: And under whatever
denomination it may fall, it must always continue without a precedent.

THAT religion, which has a tendency to give us the greatest and most direct
knowledge of DEITY, of his attributes and works, and of our duty to HIM, to
ourselves and to all the human race, is the truest and best; and by which,
only, we can have consciences void of offense.

I TAKE the liberty to close this chapter with a few digressional remarks.

SENSIBLE I am, that when we can be made sensible that religion, in its truest
sense, ought to be made the ultimate end and object of our pursuit -- that it
is the greatest requisite for our general felicity, both here and in futurity;
-- or, should it be found, that, as we disregard, or attend to it, our temporal
interest will be effected, as it is by our legislative government -- I am
inclined to believe, not a mystery, or hidden part in it will long remain
unexplored, but established or rejected, as it may be deemed genuine. Civil
government and religion have, briefly, this difference: -- Civil government
serves as a directory necessary for the accumulation and preservation of
temporal interest and conveniences for life: religion teaches us how to set a
proper estimate on them, and on all other enjoyments in life. It expands and
elevates the mind to a sense and knewledge of DEITY, and to the dignity of
human nature. It pervades the whole soul, and fills it with light and love. It
is a source, from which, only, can be derived permanent satisfaction, and
teaches us the true end of our existence. For want of a knowledge or
realization of this, into how many gross errors and absurdities have mankind
inadvertently fallen, or inattentively been led: When impositions of this kind
have been multiplied upon them, when they have been stigmatized by this name,
or by that, in matters of sentiment; it seems, they have rested comfortably
easy, without enquiring into their truth or justice, or passed them off with
slightly indifference. But touch our interest -- that bright, momentary gem!
the check is immediately flushed, and the whole heart and head are upon the
rack -- set to invention for redress. So contracted and interwoven with
lucrative, fantastical gain are the views and pursuits of men.

CHAP. V.
Remarkable anxiety of Miss SAMPSON'S mind relative to the War, and to gain a
knowledge of her country. -- For once, she is tempted to swerve from the sphere
of her sex, upon the mere principle of gratifying curiosity and of becoming
more effectually instrumental in the promotion of good. -- There are but two
methods for the accomplishment of this, in which her inclinations lead her to
concur. -- The first is that of traveling in the character of a gentleman. --
The second, that of taking an effective part in the CAUSE of her COUNTRY, by
joining the Army in the character of a voluntary soldier. -- The latter, after
many severe struggles between prudence, delicacy and virtue, she resolves to
execute.

IT is impossible to conjecture what would have been Miss SAMPSON'S turn of
mind, had she obtained the most refined education. But it requires no great
force of logic to discover her leading propensities in her present situation.
She was formed for enterprise: and had fortune been propitious, she might have
wanted limitations.

AMONG all her avoca^ions and intervening occurrences in her juvenility, her
thirst for knowledge and the prevailing American contest, appear, by her
diurnals, to have held the most distinguished and important sway in her mind:
-- Distinguished, because they were different from the generality of her sex;
-- important, because on that depended the future welfare and felicity of our
country. Her resolutions on these accounts, and the execution of them will now
employ our attention.

FROM the maturity of her years, observation and experience, she could
determine, with more precision, on the nature of the war and on the consequence
of its termination This may be said to be her logic: -- If it should terminate
in our subjection again to England, the abolition of our Independence must
follow; by which, we not only mean to be free, but to gain us the possession of
Liberty in its truest sense and greatest magnitude: and thus secure to
ourselves that illustrious name and rank, that adorn the nations of the earth.

THIS, and her propensities for an acquaintance with the geography of her
country, were, alternately, severe in her mind. Her taste for geography must
have been chiefly spontaneous; as the study of it in books was unfashionable
among the female yeomanry. -- I am happy to remark here, that this useful and
delightsome science is now become a polite accomplishment for ladies.

IT was now a crisis with her not often to be experienced: and thought it was
painful to bear, it was, doubtless, conducive to improvement. Invention being
upon the rack, every wheel in the machine is put in motion, and some event must
follow. It produced many pertinent thoughts on the education of her sex. Very
justly did she consider the female sphere of action, in many respects, too
contracted; in others, wanting limits. In general, she deemed their
opportunities, rather than abilities, inadequate for those departments in
science and the belleslettres, in which they are so peculiarly calculated to
shine. -- From this, let me infer -- that, although custom constitutes the
general standard of female education; yet, the best method that occurs to my
mind to be used in this important business, is that dictated by reason and
convenience.

BUT the public must here be surprised in the contemplation of the machinations
and achievements of female heroism and virtue: which if not the most
unparralleled, are the most singular, that have ever sprung out of Columbia's
soil. And it is but reasonable, that we exercise all that candor and charity
that the nature of the circumstances will admit. By ideally putting ourselves
in similar circumstances, the reasonableness will be fully evinced. Though
independent and free, custom in many respects, rules us with despotic sway: And
the person who greatly deviates from it, exposes himself to numberless dangers.
An indelible stigma may doom him to infamy; though perhaps, his original design
was to effect some useful and important event. But on the other hand, liberty
gives us such ascendancy over old habit, that unless it bind us to some
apparent and permanent good, its iron bands are subject to dissolution. We
have, in some measure seen Miss SAMPSON'S motives for achievement; the rest
will be illustrated in the sequel.

HAVING come of age, her former resolution SEE CHAP. IV.
remained to be executed. For this purpose, she planned many schemes and
fabricated many castles; but, on examination, found them chimerical, or of
precarious foundation. Every recent information of the geography of the
continent, served only to stimulate propensities, which she had no desire to
stifle. But the news of the war served but to engross her mind with anxieties
and emotions she had long labored to suppress. And it must here be mentioned to
her honor, that she used arguments for, and against, herself in every important
proposition drawn for enterprise. Her chief problems for solution may have been
these: -- Must I forever counteract inclination and stay within the compass of
the smoke of my own chimney? Never tread on different soils; nor form an
acquaintance with a greater circle of the human race? Stifle that spirit of
heroic patriotism, which no one knows but HIM who foreknows all events, but may
terminate in the greatest good to myself, and, in some degree, promote the
CAUSE of my COUNTRY? Yield the palm of custom to the force of that
philanthropy, which should warm the bosoms of both sexes and all ages? -- In
fact, shall I swerve from my sex's sphere for the sake of acquiring a little
useful acquisition; or, shall I submit (without reluctance, I cannot) to a
prison, where I must drag out the remainder of my existence in ignorance: where
the thoughts of my too cloistered situation must forever harrass my bosom with
listless pursuits, tasteless enjoyments, and responsive discontent?

CONTRASTING this argumentation with the superior advantages of many of the
human race for acquiring knowledge, she was ready, for a moment, to find fault
with her formation: but happily, it was but momentary. As if she had been
instantly c^red of a frenzy, she could scarcely be reconciled with herself for
such presumption. It being not only an indignity to her own sex, but the basest
ingratitude to ber MAKER, and derogatory to his laws. Her humble solicitations
were, that she never might be so lost to all sense of virtue and decorum, as to
act a part unworthy her being, thereby not only bring infamy on herself, but
leave a blemish and stigma on the female world.

FOR this purpose, she resolved to think no more of projecting adventures, of
leaving the tranquillity of her domestic retirement -- her endearing circle of
relations and friends, to visit distant parts; as the good she anticipated in
the result was uncertain, and might, in a fatal manner, prove fallacious. Her
slights of imagination had furnished a clue the most requisite for the maxim,
which every one more or less needs -- "When fancy rides, let reason hold the
reins." She likewise resolved to suspend all further enquiries and anxiety
about the war. Vain attempts! The prohibitions proved a source of mortification
and discontent. And it seems, a prevention of these enquiries would have been
as much impossible as it would to have brought the war to a close without
negotiation, or by inaction itself. It seems, she could not hear of its success
without feeling the victory. She had heard of many beautiful cities, rich
soils, healthy climates and different customs with the inhabitants; And the
thought of being prohibited from augmenting her acquaintance with them, was but
anticipating her dissolution too soon.

IN this dilemma she continued several months without any fixed resolution. At
length, her propensities for viewing distant places, etc. gained such a perfect
ascendancy over cooler reason, that her propensities could brook no control.
She determined to burst the bands, which, it must be confessed, have too often
held her sex in awe, and in some mode and measure, stretch beyond the
boundaries of her own neighborhood; by which means she might be convinced
whether what she had re^^ or heard be true -- "That one half of the world does
not know how the other half lives." But here fresh scenes of difficulties
awaited her; though many had been before anticipated. Prudence, as usual,
appeared in her plain, but neat, attire, and called her resolution in question.
Delicacy trimmed her dislocated hair; and virtue brought her amaranthine
wreathe. The thought of traveling without a companion or protector, was deemed
by prudence, a step of presumption. Not to have traveled at all, might have
deprived her of much good, with increasing anxiety: And there was an avenue to
it both ways. But her greatest obstacle was the want of that current specie,
which is always sure to gain the esteem of all people. Without it, she must
have been liable to have incurred the appellation of an idler, a bonaroba, or a
vagabond: And so have failed in her design; which was the acquisition of
knowledge without the loss of reputation.

WHILST she was deliberating on these matters, she privately dressed herself in
a handsome suit of man's apparel and repaired to a prognosticator. This, she
declares, was not to stimulate, but to divert her inclinations from objects,
which not only seemed presumptuous, but impracticable. She informed him, she
had not come with an intention to put entire confidence in his delusory
suggestions; but it was partly out of principle, but mostly out of curiosrty.
He considered her as a blithe and honest young gentleman. She heard his
preamble. And it was either by art or accident, that he told her, pretty
justly, her feelings -- that she had propensities for uncommon enterprises, and
pressed to know why she had held them in suspension so long. -- Having
predicated, that the success of her adventures, if undertaken, would more than
compensate a few difficulties, she left him with a mind more discomposed, than
when she found him. But before she reached home, she found her resolution
strengthened. She resolved soon to commence her ramble, and in the same
clandestine plight, in which she had been to the necromancer. She thought of
bending her first course to Philadelphia, the metropolis of America.

IN March, 1781, the season being too rough to commence her excursion, she
proposed to equip herself at leisure: and then appoint the time for her
departure. A handsome piece of cloth was to be put to a use, of which she
little thought, during the time she was employed in manufacturing it. -- Ye
sprightly Fair, what is there in your domestic department, that necessity,
ingenuity and resolution cannot accomplish? -- She made her a genteel coat,
waistcoat and breeches without any other assistance, than the uncouth patterns
belonging to her former master's family. The other articles, hat, shoes, etc.
were purchased under invented pretexts.

BEFORE she had accomplished her apparatus, her mind being intent, as the
reader must imagine, on the use to which they were soon to be appropriated; an
idea, no less singular and surprising, than true and important, determined her
to relinquish her plan of traveling for that of joining the American Army in
the character of a voluntary soldier. This proposal concurred with her
inclinations on many accounts. Whilst she should have equal opportunities for
surveying and contemplating the world, she should be accumulating some
lucrative profit; and in the end, perhaps, be instrumental in the CAUSE of
LIBERTY, which had for nearly six years, enveloped the minds of her countrymen.

HERE I might bring forward her former monitors, and represent the affecting
dialogues, which no virtuous mind wishes to dispute, she held with them on this
trying occasion. But I leave this for the poet, novelist, or some more able
pen. Suffice it to say, the following motto is the chief result of her debates:
-- "There (...) be an heroic INNOCENCE as well as an heroic COURAGE." Custom,
not virtue, must lose its name by transition; unless custom be made the
criterion of virtue. She debated, with all the force of eloquence, that a sense
of duty to a parent or mistress could produce, whether to communicate her
intentions to them, or to make a confident of any one in so important an
undertaking. She resolved in the negative, for this reason: -- If her pursuits
should terminate in an event, that should cause her to lament her engagement,
she should not reflect upon herself for having gone counter to their advice and
injunctions; though she might, for not asking and adhering to them. In either
case, she meant to make an expiation.

FEMALES! you have resolutions, and you execute them. And you have, in a
degree, the trial of the virtues and graces, that adorn your sex. Then, by
ideal similitude, put yourselves in the situation of our Heroine, (for thus she
must be distinguished in future) and then grant her such favors as you might
wish from her. I am your friend, and would do honor to that, which dignifies
your character, and renders you the amiable companions of man. Heaven, who has
aided Columbia's Cause, recognize my sincerity! And although it has been
purchased, mostly, at the dear expense of her sons; you have not remained
uninterested nor without the pang of the distressed lover. -- I cannot desire
you to adopt the example of our Heroine, should the like occasion again offer;
yet, we must do her justice. Whether that liberty, which has now cemented us in
so happy an union, was purchased through direct, or indirect means; we
certainly owe the event to HEAVEN. And enterprise in it can better be
dispensed, than in many other eminent cases. -- Let your imagination,
therefore, travel with me through the toils and dangers she has passed. And if
you exercise that propriety and sweetness of temper, which I have known in many
of you, in the contemplation of other less interesting scenes and objects, I am
sure, I shall never be tired with your company.

CHAP. VI.
The time prefixed for her personating the SOLDIER. -- Reflections on her
bidding adieu to her relations, friends, etc. -- Takes a Western, circuitous
rout for Boston. -- Is hired for a class of Uxbridge, as a soldier, for three
years, or during the War. -- Her mode of joining the Army at West-Point. -- Is
put into the Fourth Massachusetts' Regiment.

IN April, 1781, having obtained what requisites she could for her new, but
hazardous, expedition, warm weather being generally settled -- she allowed
herself but a few days to compromise matters with herself, and to take a
private leave of her agreeable circle, before her departure. The thoughts of
being put into a kind of transformation were not so alarming, as the dread
fatality, which she knew not but it might produce. Whilst most females must
recoil at the commencement of an undertaking of this nature, few can have
resolution to attempt a second trial. And had I a tragi-comic pen, it might
find ample scope in the scenes now before me.

SEVERAL circumstances concurred, in this interim, which could not have failed
to excite peculiar emotions. She knew her mother had long doated on her future
felicity, with a young gentleman of fortune, and agreeable deportment; and with
whom she had contracted an intimate and endearing acquaintance. He had given
her many cordial proofs of the sincerity of his attachment and lasting
affections. And had her mind been disincumbered with a higher object in view,
she might, doubtless, have united her affections in the happiest alliance for
life. Already did she consider a parent not only disappointed in her warmest
wishes, but distracted with anguish by the elopement, and for aught she knew,
the fatal and untimely catastrophe of a daughter. She felt for those who had
taken the charge of her youth; whose affections had not been alienated by her
disobedience. For him, who loved her, she felt with emotions, that had not
before alarmed her. Indeed, such groups of ideas, that hurried upon her mind,
must have been too much for a breast naturally tender. She retired to indulge
the effects of nature: And in this seclusion, resolved, should her pursuit
succeed, to write to her mother in a manner, that might pacify her mind without
disclosing the delicate stratagem.

BUT neither the rigor of a parent to induce her marriage with one, whom she
did not dislike, nor her own abhorrence of the idea of being considered a
female candidate for conjugal union, is the cause of her turning volunteer in
the American War; as may hereafter, partly, be conjectured by an anonymous
writer. This must be the greatest obstacle to the magic charm of the novelist.
She did not slight love; nor was she a distracted inamorato. She considered it
a divine gift: nor was she deceived. For, strike love out of the soul, life
becomes insipid and the whole body falls into lethargy. Love being, always,
attended by hope, wafts us agreeably through life. -- She was a lover; but
different from those, whose love is only a short epilepsy, or for the
gratification of fantastical and criminal pleasure. This, I trust, will be
demonstrated by a fact, to which, but few can appeal. Her love extended to all.
And I know not, but she continues to have this consoling reflection, that no
one can tax her for having coveted the prohibited enjoyment of any individual.
This is that love, whose original source and motive induced Columbia's sons to
venture their property, endearments -- their lives! to gain themselves the
possession of that heaven-born companion, called liberty: and which, when
applied to conjugal union, is the same thing, only differently combined with
the other passions. And whatever effect it may then have had on her, she has
since been heard to say, without reserve -- That she deemed it more honorable
for one to be suffocated with the smoke of cannon in the Cause, in which she
was then embarked, than to waste a useful intended existence in despair,
because Heaven had justly denied the favorite of a whimsical and capricious
fancy. The perseverence for the object, dictated by love, in both cases,
corroborates, beyond doubt, its efficacy and utility.

JUST before her departure, she received a polite invitation to join a circle
of her acquaintance for rural festivity. She was cheerful; and the rest of the
company more so. Among many lively topics, it was remarked that Mr. --, brother
to a lady not present, had been killed in the battle at Long Island, in
New York. It was brushed into oblivion, by concluding -- his sweetheart was
again courted. It drew involuntary tears from our intended heroine, which were
noticed. In the evening, she returned home with emotions, that might affect a
lover.

NEXT day, the weather was exceedingly pleasant; and nature smiled with the
season. Miss SAMPSON performed her business with much affected gaiety and
sprightly conversation: But the night was to be big with the important event.

HAVING put in readiness the materials, she had judged requisite, she retired,
at her usual hour, to bed, intending to rise at twelve. She was, doubtless,
punctual. But there was none, but the INVISIBLE, who could take cognizance of
the effusions of passion on assuming her new garb; but especially, on
reflecting upon the use, for which it was assigned -- on leaving her
connections, and even the vicinity, where the flower of her life had expanded,
and was then in its bloom. She took her course toward Taunton, in hopes of
meeting with some stranger, who was going directly to Headquarters, then at
the Southward. -- Havingwalked all night, she was just entering the Green in
Taunton, when the bright luminary of day, which had so often gleamed upon her
in the rusticity of a shepherdess, then found her, not, indeed, impressed only
with the simple care of a brood of chickens, or a bleating lamb -- but with a
no less important CAUSE, than that, in which the future felicity of America was
then suspended. The reflection startled her: but female temerities were not to
be palliated.

AT this instant, she unwelcomely met Mr. WILLIAM BENNETT, her near neighbor.
Surely, an apoplexy could not have given her a more sudden shock. Though she
was not positive he had discovered her masquerade; yet, she knew if he had, she
should be pursued when he reached home. -- After some refreshment, and
supplying her pockets with a few biscuit, she hastened through the town; but
determined not to bend her course directly for the Army, till she should know
what had been done about her clandestine elopement. Fatigued with walking, she
took an obscure path, that led half a mile into a thicket of wood; where the
boughs of a large pine served for her canopy during her repose till evening.
Surprised when she awoke on finding it dark, with difficulty, she regained the
road; and by the next peep of dawn, found herself in the environs of her former
neighborhood.

DEJECTED at the sight of the place, where she had enjoyed so much rural
felicity, she half resolved to relinquish all thoughts of further enterprise,
and to palliate what had passed, as a foible, from which females are not always
exempt. The debate was not long. As usual, she must persevere, and make the
best of what might prove a bad choice. The groves were her sanctuary for
meditation that day and the succeeding night. After the birds had sung their
evening carols, she lay down with intentions to sleep: but necessity, our old
alarming friend, roused her attention. Impelled by hunger, during the
tranquillity of the village, she repaired to a house she had much frequented,
with intentions to appease the cravings of nature. Going to a pantry, where
victuals was wont to be deposited, and meeting with no better success than a
crust of bread, she again retired to her solitary asylum. -- The caroling of
the feathered tribe having again notified her of day, she resumed her ramble,
and soon lost sight of those Adjacent villas, long to her endeared,
By the rough piles our ancestors have reared.


SHE reached Rochester that day, and the next, Bedford, a seaport in
Massachusetts; which had been much distressed by the British in 1778 -- 79. She
here met with an American. Commander of a Cruiser; who, after much importunity
and proffered emolument, gained her consent to go his waiter to sea. But she
was informed, that, although he used much plausibility on the shore, it was
changed to austerity at sea. She, therefore, requested him to keep her month's
advance, and leave to go into town on business; and, that night, lodged in
Rochester, and was careful not to see him afterward. IT has been reported,
that she enlisted, as a Continental Soldier, for a class in Middleborough --
that she received a ^art of the stipulated bounty -- that she was immediately
discovered, and refunded the bounty: I have no account of this from her; nor is
the report in the least authenticated. It probably has since taken its rise
from this circumstance.


HEARING nothing concerning her elopement, she concluded to take a circuitous
ramble through some of the Western towns, and visit Boston, the capital of
Massachusetts, before she joined the army. This was partly to gratify
curiosity, and partly to familiarise herself to the different manners of
mankind -- a necessary qualification for a soldier, and perhaps, not
detrimental to any, whose minds are properly fortified, and whose established
maxim is -- To do good.

SHE left Rochester on Friday. The next night and the succeeding, she tarried
at Mr. MANN'S tavern in Wrentham. From thence, she visited some of the Western
towns in the State. Finding herself among strangers, her fear of being
discovered subsided; and she found herself in an element, from which, she had
long, involuntarily, been sequestered. She, doubtless, had awkward gestures on
her first assuming the garb of the man; and without doubt, more awkward
feelings. Those, who are unacquainted with masquerade, must make a difference
between that, which is only to heighten beauty for fantastical amusement and
pleasure -- and that of sex, which is to continue, perhaps, for life, to
accomplish some important event. She acted her part: and having a natural taste
for refinement, she was every where received as a blithe, handsome and
agreeable young gentleman.

IT may be conjectured, whether or not, she meant to see the army before she
enlisted. By what follows, it appears she did not. She doubtless chose to
engage for Massachusetts; not because she could render any more service, but
because it is her native State, and which had been the opening of the first
scene of the horrid drama, and had suffered most by its actors.

IN Bellingham she met with a speculator; with whom, for a certain stipulated
bounty, General Washington refused any pecuniary pay for his services during
the war. Our Heroine needed, at least, his wealth, to have followed the example.
she engaged for a class of Uxbridge as a Continental Soldier. Those are called
Continental Soldiers, who engaged for three years, or during the war.
Instead, then, of going to Boston, she went back, and was immediately
conducted to Worcester; where she was mustered. She was enrolled by the name of
ROBERT SHURTLIEFF. The general muster-master was, doubtless, glad to enrol the
name of a youth, whose looks and mien promised to do honor to the cause, in
which she was then engaged. Ah, females -- we have too long estimated your
abilities and worth at too mean a price! Pardon an inadvertent misapplication
of our intellects; as our profession is improvement, and our propensities to
redress all wrongs.

ON May 13th, she arrived at WestPoint in company with about fifty other
soldiers, who were conducted there by a sergeant sent for that purpose.
West-Point was then an important post, where was stationed a large division of
the American army. It guarded a passage in the river Hudson, sixty miles from
the city of NewYork. West-Point will forever remain distinguished by the
infamous treason of General ARNOLD in 1780. His conduct, the preceding winter
in the city of Philadelphia, had been censured; which gave him offense. The
consequence was -- he sought for revenge. He conspired with Sir HENRY CLINTON
to deliver WestPoint and all the American army into the hands of the British;
which he meant to accomplish during General WASHINGTON'S absence in
Connecticut. But the plot was, providentially, disconcerted. Major ANDRE,
Adjutant General in the British army, an illustrious young Officer, had been
sent as a spy to concert the plan of operations with ARNOLD. On his return he
was overtaken, condemned by a court martial, and executed. A particular account
of his behavior, from the time he was captured to his execution, would heave
the most stubborn bosom, and affect the magnanim^^^ mind.
ARNOLD made his escape by getting on board the Vulture, a British vessel: But
his character wears a stigma, which time can never efface.

IN the morning, she crossed the Hudson, near Fort Clinton. This is one of the
most beautiful and useful rivers in the United States. It takes its name, as do
many others in America, from its discoverer. Its source is between the lakes
Ontario, and Champlain, running in a Southern direction two hundred and fifty
miles, till it falls into the ocean; where it forms a part of NewYork harbor.
It is navigable for ships of almost any burden to the city of the same name, a
hundred and thirty six miles from its mouth.

THEY marched on level land, and quickly had orders to parade for inspection.
-- The soldiers were detached into their proper companies and regiments. It
fell to her lot to be in Capt. WEBB'S company of light infantry, in Col.
SHEPARD'S regiment, and in General PATTERSON'S Brigade.

The second day, she drew a French fusee, a knapsack, cartridge box, and thirty
cartridges. Her next business was to clean her piece, and to exercise once
every morning in the drill, and at four o'clock, P. M. on the grand parade. Her
garb was exchanged for a uniform peculiar to the infantry. It consisted of a
blue coat lined with white, with white wings on the shoulders and cords on the
arms and pockets; a white waistcoat, breeches or overhauls and stockings, with
black straps about the knees; half boots a black velvet stock, and a cap, with
a variegated cockade, on one side, a plume tipped with red on the other, and a
white sash about the crown. Her martial apparatus, exclusive of those in
marches, were a gun and bayonet, a cartridge-box and hanger with white belts.
She says, she learned the manual exercise with facility and dispatch, though
she lost her appetite; which, through favor, she afterward recovered.

HER stature is perhaps more than the middle size; that is, five feet and seven
inches. The features of her face are regular; but not what a physiognomist
would term the most beautiful. Her eye is lively and penetrating. She has a
skin naturally clear, and flushed with a blooming carnation. But her aspect is
rather masculine and serene, than effeminate and sillily jocose. Her waist
might displease a coquette: but her limbs are regularly proportioned. Ladies of
taste considered them handsome, when in the masculine garb. She wore a bandage
about her breasts, during her disguise, for a very (...) from that which
females wear round their waists. It is not improbable, that the severe pressure
of this bandage served to compress the bosom, while the waist had every natural
convenience for augmentation.
Her movement is erect, quick and strong: gestures naturally mild, animating
and graceful; speech deliberate, with firm articulation. Her voice is not
disagreeable for a female.

SUCH is the natural formation, and such the appearance of the FEMALE, whom I
have now introduced into a service -- dreadful I hope, to most men, and
certainly, destructive to all. Perhaps, exclusive of other irregularities, we
must announce the commencement of such an enterprise a great presumption in a
female, on account of the inadequateness of her nature. Love and propensity are
nearly allied; and we have, already, discovered the efficacy of both. No love
is without hope: but that only is genuine, which has, for its object virtue,
and is attended with resolution and magnanimity. By these, the animal economy
is enabled to surmount difficulties and to accomplish enterprises and attain
objects, which are unattainable by the efforts of the other passions. When love
sinks into despondency, the whole system becomes enervated, and is rendered
incapacitated for the attainment of common objects. -- What is Liberty -- I
mean, in a genuine sense? The love of it prompts to the exposure of our
property and the jeopardy of our lives. This is the surest definition of it:
For interwoven with and dependent on it, are all our enjoyments. Consequently,
love, the noblest passion in man, in no other instance, can do more, or better
show its effects.

CHAP. VII.
March by stages from West-Point to Haerlem; from thence to White Plains. --
Her company of infantry engage a party of Dutch cavalry. -- Retreat and are
reinforced by Col. SPROAT. Capture of the British Army under Lord CORNWALLIS at
York-Town, where our HEROINE does duly during the siege.

SIX years having elapsed (...) our revolutionary Epoch, four years and ten
months since our ever memorable Independence -- COLUMBIA'S DAUGHTER treads the
field of Mars! And though she might, like Flora, have graced the damask rose,
and have continued, peradventure, in the contemplation and unmolested enjoyment
of her rural and sylvan scenes; yet, for a season, she chose the sheathless
cutlass, and the martial plume. She is a nymph, scarcely past her teens! --
Think -- females, think -- but do not resolve till you shall have heard the
sequel.

WE have already found, that she did not engage in this perhaps unprecedented
achievement, without the precaution of reflection and pathetic debates on the
cause. And this renders her more excusable than many soldiers, who rush, like
the horse, to the battle, before they establish their proper ultimatum, which
is derived only from a thorough investigation of the principles of the
contention. Happy for us, that a dissemination of this knowledge is oftener the
effect of a confederated Republic, than of the jurisdiction of an unlimited
monarch. But neither a delirium, nor love in distraction, has driven her
precipitate to this direful extremity. In cool blood, yet with firm attachment,
we now see blended in her, the peerlessness of enterprise, the deportment,
ardor and heroism of the veteran, with the milder graces, vigor and bloom of
her secreted, softer sex.

ON the tenth day in the morning, at reveille-beat, the company to which she
belonged, with some others, had orders to parade and march. They drew four days
provision; which, with her large sack of clothes and martial apparatus, would
have been a burden too much for females, accustomed only to delicate labor.
She left some of her clothes, performed the march, and use soon became a second
nature.

As the infantry belonged to the rangers, a great part of their business was
scouting; which they followed in places most likely for success. In this duty
she continued till they arrived at Haerlim; where they continued a few days,
and then proceeded in like manner to White Plains. Here they, in their turn,
kept the lines, and had a number of small skirmishes; but nothing uncommon
occurred in these places.

ON July 3d, she experienced in a greater degree, what she had before mostly
known by anticipation. Captain WEBB'S company being on a scout in the morning,
and headed by Ensign TOWN, came up with a party of Dutch cavalry from Genesis
DELANCIE'S core then in Morsena. They were armed with carabines, or fusees, and
broad swords. The action commenced on their side. The Americans withstood two
fires before they had orders to retaliate. The ground was then warmly disputed
for considerable time. At length, the infantry were obliged to give way: but
they were quickly reinforced by a detachment led on by Col. SPROAT, a valiant
officer of the second Massachusetts regiment. They were then too much for the
enemy, although a large number had landed from boats for their assistance. The
ground they had gained was then measured back with precipitance, even to a
considerable distance within their own lines; where the action terminated.

THE Americans having retired to their encampment, our fair Soldier, with some
others, came near losing her life by drinking cold water. She says, she
underwent more with (...) ^atigue and heat of the day, than by fear of being
killed; although her left hand man was shot dead the second (...), and her ears
and eyes were continually tormented with the expiring agonies and horrid scenes
of many others struggling in their blood. She recollects but three on her side,
who were killed, JOHN BEEBY, JAMES BATTLES and NOOBLE SPERIN. She escaped with
two shots through her coat, and one through her cap.

PERHAPS, by this time, some may be ready to tax her with extreme obduracy,
and, without mercy, to announce her void of all delicacy of sentiment and
feeling. And really, had this been her customary plight in her kitchen at home,
she might not have passed for an agreeable companion: for she was perfectly
besmeared with gunpowder. But if we reflect, that this was not the effect of
indolence or sluttishness, but for ought we know, of the most endearing
attachment to her country; it ought, at least, to awaken the gratitude of
those, who may remain too callous to this great philanthropic passion. It
behooves every one to consider, that war, though to the highest degree
destructive and horrid is effectually calculated to rouse up many tender and
sympathetic passions. If the principles of humanity and benevolence are ever to
be forced into exertion, war, which should be the last resource, must have the
desired effect. And this renders it, at best, but a necessary evil; and the
promoters of it are the subjects of the greatest aspersion. Let us be free from
all other evils, to which dire necessity does not prompt, and we may excuse,
even a female, for taking arms in defense of all that is dear and lovely. --
She, doubtless, once thought she could never look on the battlearray. She now
says, no pen can describe her feelings experienced in the commencement of an
engagement, the sole object of which is, to open the sluices of human blood.
The unfeigned tear of humanity has more than once started into her eye in the
rehearsal of such a scene as I have just described.

FROM this time till Autumn, nothing unusual in war happened to her. Indeed, it
may be said, every thing she did in this situation was singular; much of which
might afford amusement and moral inferences. But the limits prescribed to these
MEMOIRS will not admit the detail of minute circumstances.

IN August, the Marquis DE LA FAYITTE had been dispatched from the main army to
contemplate the operations of Lord CORNWALLIS'S army in Virginia. After a a
multiplicity of military maneuvers between them, his Lordship selected
YorkTown and Gloucester Point as the most conspicuous and advantageous posts
for the seat of military operations. -- York-Town lies on the river of the same
name, which empties into the Chesapeak. It forms a capacious harbor, admitting
ships of great burden. Gloucester Point being on the opposite side, and
projecting so far into the river, that the distance being but about a mile,
they entirely command the navigation of it. Thither CORNWALLIS with 7000
excellent troops repaired; strongly fortified the places, and made other good
arrangements.

ABOUT the last of August, Count DE GRASS arrived with a powerful French fleet
in the Chesapeak, and blockaded York-Town by water. Soon after, Admiral GRAVES
with a fleet appeared off the capes of Virginia. The French immediately slipped
their cables, turned out of their anchorage ground, and an action succeeded;
and though both sides sustained considerable loss, it was not decisive.

THE Generals, WASHINGTON and ROCHAMBEAU had previously moved their main armies
to the Southward: and when they heard of the French Admiral's arrival in the
Chesapeak, they made the most rapid marches till they arrived at the head of
the Elk. Within an hour after their arrival, they received an express from DE
GRASS, with the joyful intelligence of his arrival and situation. The combined
armies embarked on board the vessels which the French Admiral had previously
prepared to transport them down the Chesapeak; and by the 25th of September
they landed at Williamsburgh. The American and French Chief Commanders had
reached Williamsburgh by excessive traveling eleven days sooner. They
immediately proceeded to visit the Admiral on board the Villa de Paris. A
council being called, and their plan of co-operations settled, they returned;
and all the Americans and allied troops soon formed a collision at
Williamsburgh. FAYETTE had previously been joined by 3000 under the Marquis DE
ST. SIMON: The whole regular force thus collected, amounted to nearly 12, 000
men, exclusive of the Virginia militia, which where called to service, and
commanded by governor NELSON. Preparations were then made with great dispatch
for putting the army in a situation to move on to York-Town.

IT is almost needless to mention the hardships, that common soldiers must have
undergone in so long and rapid a march. The deficiency of clothing,
particularly of shoes, but most of all, the scanty and wretched quality of
provisions, augmented their sufferings. Our heroine sustained her march from
some part of NewYork with good heart, and without faltering, till the day on
which she landed with the troops at Williamsburgh. She was then much
indisposed; which was not the only time she had experienced the inconveniences
of the concealment of her sex. She puked for several hours without much
intermission; which she imputed chiefly to the rolling of the vessel. With the
rest, she here drew good provision and spirits: and by the next day, she was
revived; and the luster and august maneuvering of the army seemed to perfect a
cure beyond the reach of medicine.

ON the morning of the 28th of September, after parade and review, general
orders were read to the armies; wherein his Excellency, Genesis WASHINGTON,
emphatically enjoined -- "If the enemy should be tempted to meet the army on
its march, the General particularly enjoins the troops to place their principal
reliance on the bayonet, that they may prove the vanity of the beast, which the
British make of their peculiar prowess in deciding battles by that weapon."
After this, the American and French Chief Commanders personally addressed their
armies. Our blooming soldier, always attentive to understand every new
maneuver and eventful scene, happened to stand so near his Excellency Genesis
WASHINGTON, that she heard distinctly what he said. He spoke with firm
articulation and winning gestures: but his aspect and solemn mode of utterance
affectingly bespoke the great weight, that rested on his mind. The common
soldiers were before mostly ignorant of the expedition, upon which they were
going. Being now informed by general orders and the affectionate addresses of
their leaders, every countenance, even of many who had discovered a mutinizing
spirit, wore an agreeable aspect, and a mutual harmony and reverential
acquiescence in the injunctions of their commanders were reciprocated through
the whole.

THE phalanx composed the advanced guards, and was mostly commanded by DE LA
FAYETTE. Our Heroine was one of these; and by reason of the absencce of a
noncommissioned officer, she was appointed to supply his place. Just before the
setting of the sun, Col. SCAMMELL, being officer of the day, brought word for
the army to halt two miles from York-Town. The officers and soldiers were
strictly enjoined to lie on their arms all night.

SUCH language (strange to say) was perfectly familiar to our fair soldier. It
did not even excite in her a tremor: although it was a prelude to imminent
danger. She had been used to keep her martial apparatus bright and in the best
order; as they were often prematurely wanted. Anticipating no greater danger
than she had often actually experienced, although she forboded a great event,
she acquiesced in the mandates of her officers with a calmness, that might have
surprised an unexperienced soldier.

NEXT morning, after roll-call, their equipments again reviewed, they went
through the quick motions of loading and firing blank cartridges by the motion
of the sword. They formed in close column, displayed to the right and left, and
formed again. The grand division then displayed, formed by platoon, when they
were ordered to march in the best order. The next day, Col. SCAMMELL,
approaching the enemy's works, was mortally wounded and taken prisoner by a
party of horse in ambuscade. York-Town was this day strongly invested by the
allied armies. Their lines being formed, the French extending from the river
above the town to a morass, where they were met by the Americans on the right,
their hard fatigues begun. They continued more than a week laborious,
sustaining a very heavy cannonade from the besieged. This business came near
proving too much for a female in her teens. Being naturally ambitious, it was
mortification too severe for her to be outdone. Many apparently able-bodied men
complained, they were unfit for duty, and were relieved. Among others, she
affected pleasure in giving them the mortifying consolation -- that, although
she believed their fever was settled upon them, she hoped it would prove
nothing worse than the cannon or gunpowder fever.

THE fifth night, she was one of a party, who was ordered to work on a battery;
the completion of which had been prevented by a too intense rain of bombs.
Before morning, she was almost ready to yield to the horrors of despair. Her
hands were so blistered, that she could scarcely open or shut them: and it was
nearly twenty four hours since she had taken much nourishment. But she resolved
to persevere as long as nature would make her efforts; which she effected
almost beyond credibility.

ON the ninth, the American intrenchments being completed, a severe cannonade
and bombardment commenced by them on the right, and continued all night without
intermission. Next morning, the French opened their redoubts and batteries on
the left; and a tremendous roar of cannon and mortars continued that day
without ceasing. -- Our Heroine had never before seen either of the main armies
together. Being thus brought into view of them, and led on to a general
engagement, doubtless excited in her sensations and emotions different from
what she had before experienced. And I should need the pathos of a HOMER, and
the polished numbers of a HUME or POPE, to do justice to her feelings, or to
exceed the reality of this scenery. -- The ground actually trembled for miles
by the tremendous cannonade, which was incessantly maintained by both sides day
and night. Notwithstanding it was not so horribly destructive as is generally
the consequence of an open field action; yet, the contemplation of two immense
armies, headed by the most illustrious leaders, each strenuously contending for
victory, must have afforded ideas peculiarly shocking and august. The nights
exhibited scenes, to the highest degree, solemn and awfully sublime. Perpetual
sheets of fire and smoke belched, as from a volcano, and towered to the clouds.
And whilst the eye was dazzled at this, the ear was satiated and stunned by the
tremendous explosion of artillery and the screaming of their shot.

I SHALL here notice a heroic deed of this gallantress; which, while it
deserves the applause of every patriot and veteran, must chill the blood of the
tender and sensible female.

TWO bastion redoubts of the enemy having advanced two hundred yards on the
left, which checked the progress of the combined forces, it was proposed to
reduce them by storm. To inspire emulation in the troops, the reduction of one
was committed to the Americans, and the other to the French. A select corpse was
chosen. The command of the infantry was given to FAYETTE, with permission to
manage as he pleased. He therefore ordered them to remember Cherry-Valley and
NewLondon Quarters, and to retaliate accordingly, by putting them to the sword,
after having carried the redoubts. Our Heroine was one of these! At dark, they
marched to the assault with unloaded arms, but with fixed bayonets; and with
unexampled bravery, attacking on all sides at once, after some time of violent
resistance, were complete victors of the redoubts. There were two women in the
one attacked by the Americans, and when our fair soldier, entered, the third
was unknown. After entering, the carnage was shocking for a few minutes. She,
standing near one of the women, heard her pronounce yankee, THE derivation of
this word is from farmer JONATHAN HASTINGS of Cambridge about 1713. He used it
to express a good quality. Thus, a yankee horse and yankee cider, were an
excellent horse and excellent cider. -- The British used it wrongly, as a word
of contempt to the Americans. Thus, when they marched out of Boston in 1775,
they played a march, called Yankee doodle; though the prediction of an active
boy was -- that their retrograde march would be to Chevy Chase. During this
siege, two bombs having fell, their fusees were extracted whilst burning; one
by a Female, the other by a Soldier. The contents of one were squash, of the
other, molasses.
which was no sooner articulated, than she saw a bayonet plunged into her
breast, and the crimson, vital liquid, that gushed from the incision, prevented
her further utterance! After this, they cried and begged so on their knees for
quarters, that the humanity of the Americans overcame all resentment, and they
spared all, who ceased to resist; for which they were afterward applauded by
their humane officers. Before they left the ^ort, one clapped her on the
shoulder, and said -- "Friend, fear not; you are only disfigured behind." She
took no apparent notice of what he said, till an opportunity presented: when,
happy for her, she found it no worse! The lapelle of her coat dangled by a
string; which must have have been the effect of a broad sword, or of a very
close shot.

WAS not this enterprise, alone, in a female, worth the attainment of liberty?
Yet where is the fair one, who could again hazard it! Methinks I see the
crimson cheek of the female turning pallid, her vigorous limbs relaxing and
tottering in the rehearsal of this eventful scene. Yet, let no one imagine I
have painted it to the life. The fact is simply narrated; and the proper
coloring is left for those peculiar inmates of the female bevevolent and heroic
breasts. -- I hasten to drop the scene.

THE French commanders, whose services demand the gratitude of every American,
led on their troops with a heroic bravery, scarcely to be excelled. And while
DE GRASS displayed much valor, and was doing great execution with his Armada,
the Americans, headed by the ever dear and unrivalled WASHINGTON, redoubled
their activity and resolution. Nothing, thus, but inevitable ruin, or an entire
surrender, awaited CORNWALLIS: And on the 19th of October, after three weeks
severe storm, an armistice having taken place for twentyfour hours, he was glad
to accept the terms of capitulation. -- He was not permitted to march out with
colors flying -- an honor that had been refused to Genesis LINCOLN the preceding
winter, when he, with all the American garrison, was captured in Charleston,
South Carolina. Lincoln was now appointed to receive his sword and the
submission of the royal army precisely in the mode his own had been conducted.

THE marching out of such an immense army, as prisoners of war, must have been
a scene the most solemn and important. The magnanimity which was discovered in
Genesis WASHINGTON upon this occasion, was inexpressibly peculiar. Tears trickled
from his eyes during the most of the scene. And a view of him in these moments
must have forced the tear of reverential gratitude from the most obdurate. He
thought of his COUNTRY! -- Remember the PATRIOT -- remember the PHILANTHROPHIST!

THUS, was the grand pillar of war, at length, broken down, and an ample
foundation laid for the establishment of the so much celebrated, and wished for
palladium of peace. We certainly owe this event, at least, in a great measure,
to our generous auxiliaries. Had they not lent us their powerful and timely
aid, America, for any thing we can tell, might have still clanked her chain
under a monarchical and despotic sway. Must not a remembrance of their LEADERS,
particularly of FAYETTE, start the tear of gratitude, and of filial and
sympathetic attachment? He generously and nobly made COLUMBIA'S CAUSE his own.
Unhappy man! Happy perhaps he might have continued, had (...) his philanthropic
designs been baffle^^. (...) his exertions to put them in execution in his
native country. Disappointed in these, his warmest wishes, behold him dragging
out a more useful intended existence in a loathsome dungeon! Soon after the
revolution in France, an accusation was decreed against him; and in attempting
to escape, he was apprehended in Magdeburg and im^^^soned. Heaven grant, he may
have been liberated before this time!
O wretched, inhuman return for philanthropy -- the best services of man!

See vegetable nature all conspire
To make man blessed, his ultimate desire:
Yet, mark how erring to great NATURE'S plan,
That man, made wise, should be unjust to man!
Whilst our blood can never cease to thrill with indignation for his
sufferings, may our gratitude and reverence never cool toward this
illustrious, but distressed, nobleman. May a reciprocity of friendship and
affection conciliate and cement us more strongly with France, our once helpful
and now sister republic. We solicit England to shake hands with COLUMBIA, her
natural offspring. Let the banners of war be forever furled, the sword of
contention sheathed in its proper place; and may she always forget to prove
inimical to her established CAUSE. May philanthropy become as extensive as the
nations of the earth: Men shall then qu^^ their fallacious pursuits, retire to
their respective and proper occupations, and learn humility and propriety of
conduct. Then shall mutual harmony, peace and prosperity pervade the world.

I SHALL leave our fair Soldier, or as she was frequently called, the blooming
boy, in winter quarters not far from West-Point and the banks of the Hudson, or
North River, in what were called the York huts. She arrived at this place in
December, much debilitated and (...) by hard marches and fatigues. She was
destitute of shoes, as were most of the soldiers during the march; excepting
raw hides, which they cut into straps and fastened about their feet. It was not
uncommon to track them by the bleeding of their feet on the snow and ice. And
it appeared, their officers fared not much better; although they used their
greatest efforts to soothe, animate and encourage the soldiers, principally
with the prospects of peace, and the great honor they should gain by
persevering to the end.

JUST before their arrival, one of her company having been severely chastised
for stealing poultry, importuned her to desert with him and two others. But she
not only disdainfully refused, but used all the eloquence, of which she was
mistress, to dissuade them from so presumptive an attempt. Having hazarded one
desperate presumption herself, she chose to take her lot in the present and
future ills; though, peradventure, her sex might in some measure, have
justified her breach of contract. The arguments she enforced were -- that, it
would not only be an evidence of disloyalty to their country, a token of
cowardice, a breech of civil obligation, but the greatest jeopardy of their
lives. As female eloquence is generally irresistible, they here yielded to its
energy: although they were insensible, that it was articulated through female
organs.

HAVING repaired the huts, in which business she froze her feet to that degree,
that she lost all her toe-nails, the soldiers were culled, in order that all
who had not had the small pox might be inoculated. The soldiers, who were to be
inoculated, paraded; when our Heroine, for the first time, showed an aversion
to it. Determined to hazard taking this malignant distemper unaware, she would
even have falsified the truth of her having had it, sooner than have gone to
the hospital; where the pride and glory of her sex, the source of the blooming
boy, might have been disclosed.

SHE did duty, sometimes as a common soldier, and sometimes as a sergeant;
which was mostly on the lines, patrolling, collecting fuel, etc. As the winter
was very intense, the snow the most of the time deep, I shall leave it for the
considerate to imagine the unusual hardships of a female in this situation. She
went cheerful to her tasks, and was never found loitering when sent on duty or
enterprise.

CHAP. VIII.
Building of the COLONNADE on West-Point after the opening of the Campaign. --
Writes to her MOTHER. -- A severe SKIRMISH, where she receives two WOUNDS, and
is left in the French hospital -- Returns to the army on their lines. -- Is
left with a sick soldier in a Dutchman's family, who is a tory and treats her
ill. -- Heroic ADVENTURE in her MODE of Retaliation. -- She and a party, being
attacked by a party of Dutch Cavalry, are obliged to ford a dangerous ferry. --
The main Army retire to Winter Quarters at NewWindsor. -- She is one of a
detachment sent to reinforce Genesis SCHUYLER in subduing the Indians on the
Frontiers above Albany; where a number of horrid scenes are exhibited.

HAVING now furnished a clue, by which the succeeding common occurrences of our
distinguished FAIR, whilst a soldier, may be gathered, I shall not tire the
patience of the reader in their enumeration. Though, as common as they then
were to her, could they be exhibited afresh by an indifferent female, I am
confident I have not a reader, but would think his leisure interims luxuriantly
employed in their recital. But I hasten to a narration of those, on which to
dwell must be luxury and wonder; but to pass them unnoticed, criminal injustice.

THOUGH peace had not longer been anticipated than wished for; yet, the conduct
of both armies after the opening of the campaign seemed to place it as a matter
of extreme uncertainty. The opening of this campaign was distinguished by the
building of a Colonnade, or rather a Bowery, on West-Point. It was begun on the
^d of May, and completed after about three weeks fatigue. In this business, our
heroic FEMALE often worked against the most robust and expert soldier: and had
not the delicate texture of her frame been concealed, it would, doubtless, have
been judged, that she was very unequally mated.

WHEN this delightful building was finished, the officers held a meeting of
social ifntercourse and conviviality. The full, sparkling bowl was here handed
cheerfully round. Many toasts of health and long life were drank to the
half-divine WASHINGTON -- to the true so^s of freedom and republicanism -- to
the increase and perpetuity of our alliance with FRANCE, and giving three
cheers for the new born Dauphin of that realm, they concluded the day.

THE reader has long enough been in suspense to know what effect her elopement
had on her mother and connections, and what method she took to pacify, as we
may suppose, their half distracted minds. Though she received her education in
obscurity, the news of her elopement, or among other conjectures, that she had
come to some untimely catastrophe, flew to a great distance. Her mother,
raising a thousand doubts and fears was almost inconsolably wretched. Sometimes
she harbored the too often poignant reflection, that her too rigorous exertions
to precipitate her union with the gentleman I have before mentioned, had driven
her to some direful and fatal alternative. The like dire, alternate thoughts
filled her undissembled Lover, with emotions he could ill conceal. And like a
man of sense and breeding, he commiserated each of their misfortunes. Frantic
at times, when reflection had pictured to his imagination all her frightful
groups of ideas and images, he would curse his too overbearing importunity and
too open declaration of his passions. These, he too late surmised, were the
cause of her leaving him abruptly, (which, by the bye, is the reverse of common
circumstances) and, for aught he knew, of her casual exit from all earthly
objects; or, that the too warm pressure of his love had rendered him odious,
and that she had too justly punished him by throwing herself into the embraces
of a more agreeable rival. He determined, however, were it practicable, once
more to see her, and to congratulate her on her union with a better companion,
than he could make; -- or, should she conceive as he once thought she had, a
growing affection for him, he should rejoice to find himself, in the road for
that happiness, which alone could render his existence satisfactory, or
scarcely desirable.

FOR this purpose, one of her brothers made a fruitless expedition a number of
hundred miles to the Eastward among some of her relations. Her Suitor took his
rout to the Westward. And among his rambles, he visited the seat of war; where
he saw his half adorable object of love. But as fortune, adverse or propitious,
would have it, he knew not, that she, who appeared in martial attire, was the
tender object, who occupied the most distinguished seat in his bosom. Her eyes
were not deceptory; and when she heard the articulation of her name in his
enquiries, it was not because she slighted him, nor because she was enraptured
with his love, that she, a second time, hastened from his presence. The big
tear trembled in her eye; and when she turned to conceal her emotions, she
silently and reluctantly bid him adieu.

AFTER many wearisome steps and unsuccessful researches, he returned home; when
it was concluded, that she must have crossed the wide Atlantic, or have found
an untimely sepulcher in her own country. -- She was preserved; and she only
could cure the cruel suspense and racking sensations, which would be brutal to
suppose did not pervade their bosoms on this occasion. The mind is scarcely
capable of picturing a contrast more trying to the tend^^ passions than this.
And no doubt, she allotted her sequestered retirements to indulge the
sorrowing, unnoticed tear; when the anguish of a mother, of her relatives and
of him, whose felicity she knew was perfectly interwoven with her own, took
complete possession of her mind together. -- After striving a long time in vain
to ease the distress of her mother, and to exonerate the too intense burden of
her own mind by writing, she found an opportunity, and enclosed to her the
substance of the following:

May, 1782. DEAR PARENT,
ON the margin of one of those rivers, which intersects and winds itself so
beautifully majestic through a vast extent of territory of the United States,
is the present situation of your unworthy, but constant and affectionate
daughter. -- I pretend not (...) justify, or even to palliate, my clandes^ine
elopement. In hopes of pacifying your mind, which, I am sure, must be afflicted
beyond measure, I write you this scrawl. Conscious of not having thus abruptly
absonded by reason of any fancied ill treatment from you, or disaffection
toward any; the thoughts of my disobedience are truly poignant. Neither have I
a plea, that the insults of man have driven me hence: And let this be your
consoling reflection -- that I have not fled to offer more daring insults to
them by a proffered prostitution of that virtue, which I have always been
taught to preserve and revere. The motive is truly important; and when I
divulge it, my sole ambition and delight shall be to make an expiatory
sacrafice for my transgression.

I AM in a large, but well regulated family. My employment is agreeable,
although it is somewhat different and more intense than it was at home: But I
apprehend it is equally as advantageous. My superintendents are indulgent; but
to a pun^tillio, they demand a due observance of decorum and propriety of
conduct. By this you must know, I have become mistress of many useful lessons,
though I have many more to learn. Be not too much troubled, therefore, about my
present or future engagements; as I will endeavor to make that prudence and
virtue my model, for which, I own, I am much indebted to those, who took the
charge of my youth.

MY place of residence and the adjacent country are, beyond description,
delightsome. The earth is now pregnant with vegetation; and the banks of the
river are already decorated with all the luxuriance of May. The cottages, that
peep over the rising grounds, seem perched like eagles' nests; and the nobler
buildings, well cultivated plantations and the continual passing and re-passing
of vessels in the river below, form one of the most pleasingly variegated and
noble prospects, I may say, in the world. -- Indeed were it not for the ravages
of war, of which I have seen more here than in Massachusetts, this part of our
great continent would become a paradisiacal elysium. Heaven condescend, that a
speedy peace may constitute us a happy and independent nation: when the husband
shall again be restored to his amiable consort, to wipe her sorrowing tear, the
son to the embraces of his mourning parents and the lover to the tender,
disconsolate and half distracted object of his love. --

Your affectionate DAUGHTER.


THIS letter, being entrusted with a stranger, was intercepted. -- Let us now
resume, her progress in war.

PASSING over many marches, forward and retrograde, and numberless incidental
adventures and hardships peculiar to war, I come to other MEMOIRS, which must
forcibly touch the passions of every bosom, that is not callous to reflection
and tenderness of feeling.

THE business of war is devastation, rapine and murder. And in America, these
brutal principles were never more horribly exemplified, than in this war. Hence
the necessity of scouting; which was the common business of the infantry, to
which our HEROINE belonged. And some time in June of this year, she, with two
sergeants, requested leave of their Captain to retaliate on the enemy, chiefly
refugees and tories in NewYork, for their outrageous insults to the inhabitants
beyond their lines. He replied -- "You three dogs have contrived a plan this
night to be killed, and I have no men to lose." He however consented; and they
beat for volunteers. Nearly all the company turned out; but only twenty were
permitted to go. -- Near the close of the day they commenced their expedition.
They passed a number of guards and went as far as EastChester undiscovered;
where they lay in ambush to watch the motions of those, who might be on the
plundering business. They quickly discovered that two parties had gone out; and
whilst they were contriving how to entrap them, they discovered two boys, who
were sent for provisions to a private cellar in the wood. One of them informed,
that a party had just been at his mother's and were then gone to visit the
Yankees, who were guarding the lines. Concealing from them, that they were
Americans, they accompanied them to the cellar, or rather a cave, which they
found well stored with provision; such as bacon, butter, cheese, crouts, early
scrohons and jars of honey. They made a delicious repast, filled their sacks
and informed the boys, they were Yankees; upon which, the cave loudly rung with
their cries. Dividing into two parties, they set out sentinels and again
ambushed in a place called, in Dutch, Vonhoite.

ABOUT four in the morning, a large party, chiefly on horseback and well armed,
were saluted by one of the sentinels; which was no sooner done, than they
returned (...) number of pistol and fusee shots at the flash of his gun. A
severe combat ensued. The Americans found horses without riders: they had then
light horse and foot. Our GALLANTRESS having previously become a good horseman,
immediately mounted an excellent horse. They pursued the enemy till they came
to a quagmire, as it appeared by their being put to a nonplus. They rushed on
them on the right and left, till as many as could, escaped; the rest begged
quarters. The dauntless FAIR, at this instant, thought she felt something
warmer than sweat run down her neck. Putting her hand to the place, she found
the blood gushed from the left side of her head very freely. She said nothing;
as she thought it no time to tell of wounds, unless mortal. Coming to a stand,
she dismounted, but had not strength to walk, or stand alone. She found her
boot on her right leg filled with blood; and in her thigh, just below her
groin, she found the incision of a ball, whence it issued. -- Females! this
effusion was from the veins of your tender sex, in quest of that LIBERTY, you
now so serenely possess.

SHE told one of the sergeants, she was so wounded, she chose rather to be left
in that horrid place, than be carried any further. They all, as one, concluded
to carry her, in case she could not ride. Here was her trial! A thousand
thoughts and specter at once darted before her. She had always thought she
should rather die, than disclose her sex to the army! And at that instant,
almost in despair, she drew a pistol from a holster, and was nearly ready to
execute the fatal deed. But divine goodness here stayed her hand: and the
shocking act and idea of suicide were soon banished by her cooler reason.

HAVING rested a little, being destitute of any refreshment, her wounds became
excessively painful; but nothing, we may judge, to the anguish of her mind.
Coming in view at length of the French encampment, near what was called Cron
Pond, she says, it was to her like being carried reluctant to the place of
execution. They were conducted by the officer of the guards to an old hospital,
in which was a number of soldiers; whose very looks, she says, were enough to
make a well man indisposed, and the nauseous smell, to infect the most pure
air. The French surgeon soon came; who, being informed of their circumstances,
gave them two bottles of choice wine, and prepared to dress their wounds. His
mate, washing her head with rum, told her, he supposed it had not come to its
feelings, as she did not flinch. Judge, my readers, whether this was not the
case, as her other wound so much affected her heart! She requested the favor of
more medicine than she needed for her head; and taking an opportunity, with a
penknife and needle, she extracted the ball from her thigh; which, by that
time, had doubtless come to its feeling.

THEY never rightly knew how many they killed or wounded. They took nine
prisoners and seven horses, and killed a number of others on the spot. Of their
wounded was ROSE, STOCKBRIDGE, PLUMMER and the invincible FAIR. DISTON was
killed.

AFTER suffering almost every pain, but death, with incredible fortitude, she
so far healed her wound unbeknown to any, that she again joined the army on the
lines. But its imperfect cure, had it been known, would have been sufficient to
exempt the most hardy soldier from duty.

IN August, on their march to the lines from Collabarack, she requested to be
left with a sick soldier, named RICHARD SNOW; mostly because she was unable to
do duty with the army, and partly out of compassion, for the poor object, who
was sick. But the fortune of war to her proved adverse. The fears and distress,
that here awaited her, were far greater than those, when with the army. The old
Dutchman, whose, name was VANTASSEL, with whom she was left, was not only a
tory and entertained the banditti, who plundered the Americans, but refused
them all kinds of succor. When she begged a straw bed for the expiring soldier,
he virulently exulted -- "The floor is good enough for rebels." They were
lodged in a dirty garret without windows; where the heat rendered it still more
insupportable.

ONE night, expecting to become a prey to the relentless cruelty of the rabble,
she charged both their pieces, resolving to sacrifice the first, who might
offer to molest. She likewise made fast a rope near an opening in the garret,
by which to make her escape, in case they should be too many. Thus, she
continued constant to him, till almost exhausted for want of sleep and
nourishment. On the tenth night, he expired in great agonies, but in the
exercise of his reason, (of which he was before deprived) and much resigned to
the will of GOD; which may be a consolation to his surviving relatives.

AFTER SNOW was dead, she rolled him in his blanket and sat at the avenue. She
saw a party ride up to the house, and the old churl go out to congratulate
them. They informed, the horses they then had, with other plunder, were taken
from the Americans. Whilst the house was again infested with their ungodly
career, it is (...) in my power to describe her melancholy distress in a dark
garret with a corpse. (...) multitude of cats swarmed in the room; and it was
with difficulty she disabled some ^ord^ her cutlass, and kept the rest from
tear^ the body to pieces. At length, she he^^ footsteps on the stairs. Her
heart fluttered; but her heroism had not forsaken (...) Hastening to the door,
she put her ha^^^ in a position to dislocate the limbs of (...) who should
enter. But the voice of a ^^male, who spoke to her in English, alla^^^ her
fear. It was VANTASSEL'S daughter who seemed possessed of humanity, and (...)
had before often alleviated her distress.

AT daybreak, she left the garret; but finding the outer doors bolted, she was
returning, when she again met the young female, who bid her good morning, and
said -- "If you please, Sir, walk into my chamber." She followed; and seating
themselves by a window, they regaled themselves with a glass of wine and a
beautiful, serene air. After entreating her agreeable guest not to let the ill
treatment she had received from her father make her forsake the house, she
bordered on subjects that might have enraptured the other sex. -- Summoned at
this instant by her mother, they withdrew.

OUR HEROINE, with the assistance of two ^^^ers, buried the dead; then sat out
to join her company. She acquainted the ^^ptain of the toryism of VANTASSEL, of
(...) treatment of her, and thought it best to surprise him. The affair was
submitted to her management. She frequented the (...); and having learned that
a gang was to be there at such a time, she took command of a party and found
them in their usual reverie. Some thought best to rush immediately upon them;
but she deemed it more prudent to wait till their intoxicated brains should
render them less capable of resistance. At midnight, she unbolted the stable
doors, when they possessed themselves of the horses; then rallied the house.
They came out with consternation; which was increased when they were told, they
were dead men, if they did not yield themselves prisoners of war. They conveyed
them to their company as such. The Captain enquired, of the gallant Commander,
the method of capturing them; which she detailed. He gave her a bottle of good
spirits, and told her to treat her men. This done, she requested, that the
prisoners might fare in like manner. The Captain said -- "Will you treat men,
who would be glad to murder us?" But she pleading the cause of humanity, he
gave her another bottle. Unlosing the hands of a sergeant, he dran^ but in
making them fast again, he acted on the defensive, and struck her to the
ground. She arose, when he made a second attempt; but she warded the blow. His
compeers chided him for his folly, as they had been well used. He vented many
bitter oaths; alleging, she had not only taken him prisoner, but had caused
his girl (meaning VANTASSEL'S daughter) to pay that attention to her, she once
bestowed on him. He, however, received fifty stripes on the naked back for his
insolence; then was sent to Head Quarters, and after trial, to the provost,
with the rest at West Point.

THE beginning of Autumn, she, with Lieut. BROWN and others, had a boisterous
cruise down the Hudson to Albany on business; soon after, a scouting tour into
(...) Jersies; and she was with the armies on the 19th of October in their
grand Display at Virplank's Point. I only instance ^^^se, as parties of
pleasure and a day of jubilee, when compared with the rougher events of war.

WE come now to the first of December, when she and a party were surprised by a
party of Dutch cavalry from an ambuscade and drove with impetuosity to Croton
Ferry; where their only alternative was that of fording it, or of risking their
lives with the assailants: each of which seemed to the last degree dangerous.
Without time for hesitation, compelling a Dutchman to pilot them on the bar,
they entered the watery element; and, by the assistance of that BEING, who is
said to have conducted the Israelites through the Red Sea, they reached the
other shore.

THEY went to the house of the Widow HUNT; who, under pretentions of
friendship, sent black George for refreshment. But our Heroine, more acquainted
with the cunning of her sex, advised them not to adhere to her smoothness of
speech. Accordingly, they went back to the ferry; and they can best describe
the wretchedness of their situation during a cold winter night. In the morning,
though the river was frozen, they determined to recross it; left the enemy
should drive them to a worse extremity. Before they had two thirds crossed, the
strength of our young FEMALE was so exhausted, that the briskness of the
stream, which was in height to her chin, carried her off the bar; when it was
concluded, she was for ever ingulphed in a watery tomb. As she rose, summoning
the last exertions of nature, she got hold of a string, which they buoyed to
her; and thus, providentially, regained the bar and shore. Frozen and languid
as they then were, they reached a store; where not being well used, they burst
in the head of a brandy cask, drank their fill, gave a shoe full to the negro
of the widow, whom they had before taken; then left him in a better situation
than he said, his mistress meant to have left them. She rendezvoused with her
company at Pixkill Hollow.

SOON after the army retired to Winter Quarters at New Windsor, the clarion of
war was again sounded for a reinforcement to assist Genesis SCHUYLER in subduing
the Indians on the frontiers, on to Saratoga. The officers chose to form their
detachment of volunteers; as the soldiers were worn down with the hardships of
war. Heavens what will not resolution and perseverance surmount, even in the
fair sex! -- Our Heroine offered her service; though an inflammation of her
wound would have deterred a veteran: it being an open sore a few days before
she crossed the river.

THEIR marches were over the ruins of Indian barbarity. On their return, they
flanked into parties, and took different routs through the wilderness. She was
in a party commanded by Capt. MILLS. Not far from Bradport, an English
settlement, the snow having fallen three feet deep, they saw a man sleeing for
his life. On enquiry, he informed, that the Indians had surrounded his house,
and were then in the heat of their butchery. Hastening with him to the place,
they found the infernals had not finished their hellish sacrafices. The house
was on fire, his wife mangled and lay bleeding on the threshold. Two children
were hung by their heels; one scalped, and yet alive; the other dead, with a
tamahawk in its brains. They took them. Females, have fortitude. The dauntless
of your sex thrust her hand into the bosom of one, and rent his vesture. The
effect was the discovery of his being of the complexion of an Englishman,
except where he was painted. They sent him to Head Quarters; but executed the
rest on the spot.

BEFORE they reached the army, their feet once more crimsoned the snow -- a
token of their sufferings. But her name resounded with plaudits; which would
have been enhanced, had the discovery of her sex then taken place.

CHAP. IX.
She goes to live in a GENERAL OFFICER'S family. -- Miscellaneous incidents. --
Marches with 1500 men for the suppression of a mutiny among the American
soldiers at Philadelphia. -- Has a violent sickness and is carried to the
hospital in this city. -- DISCOVERY of SEX. -- A young LADY conceives an
ATTACHMENT for our BLOOMING SOLDIER.

IN the Spring of 1783, peace began to be the general topic; and which was
actually announced to Congress. A building was erected; in which the officers
held their concerts. It would contain a brigade at a time for the exercise of
public worship. The timber was cut and drawn together by the soldiers, and
mostly sawn by hand. Our Heroine worked against any hardy soldier, without any
advantage in her yoke. In its raising, a joist fell and, carried her from a
considerable height to the ground; but without doing any (...) injury, except
the dislocation of her nose and ancle.

ON the first of April, Genesis PATTERSON selected her for his Waiter; as he had
previously become acquainted with her heroism and fidelity. Cessation of
hostilities was proclaimed on the 19th. The honorary badge of distinction, as
established by Genesis WASHINGTON, had been conferred on her; but for what
particular exploit, I cannot say. Her business was here much less intense; and
she found a superior school for improvement.

THE General's attachment toward his new attendant was daily increasing. Her
martial deportment, blended with the milder graces and vivacity of her sex and
youth, filled him with admiration and wonder. Anxious to avail himself of every
advantage to inspire his troops with emulation in the cause of their country;
it is said, perhaps justly, that when he saw a delinquency or faint-heartedness
in his men, he often referred them to some heroic achievement of his smock
faced boy, or convinced them by an ocular example.

KNOWING she had his commendations, she found new stimulations for
perseverance. And scarcely any injunctions would have been too severe for her
compliance. Hence it seems, he was led to conceive that such an assemblage of
courage and refinement could exist but in the superior order of his sex; and
that such a youth was highly calculated to shine either in the sphere of war,
or in the profession of a gentleman of taste and philosophic refinement.

THUS, Females, whilst you see the avidity of a maid in her teens confronting
dangers and made a veteran example in war, you need only half the assiduity in
your proper, domestic sphere, to render your charms completely irresistible.

GENERAL orders were, every warm season, for the soldiers to go into the water,
as well to exercise themselves in the art of swimming, as to clean their
bodies. These injunctions were so directly in point, that her compliance with
them would unavoidably have been unbosoming the delicate secret. To have pled
indisposition would have been an argument against her; as the cold bath might
have wrought her cure: and to have intimated cowardice, would have entitled her
to less lenity, than when before in the Ferry. So, after lying awake the first
night, she concluded to be the first to rise at roll-call. Accordingly, the
regiment paraded and marched to the river. She was expert in undressing with
the rest. After they were mostly in the water, what should ravish her ear but
the sound of a sweet fountain, that percolated over a high ^^ck near the
river's brink. It was thickly enclosed with the aspen and alder. Thither she
unnoticed retired. And whilst the Hudson swelled with the multitude of
masculine bodies, a beautiful rivulet answered every purpose of bathing a more
delicate form. Nor were there any old, letcherous, sanctified Elders to ^eep
through the rustling leaves to be inflamed with her charms.

ONE more incident may amuse those ladies, who are fond of angling. -- One day,
she, with some others, at the ebb of side went to the Hudson for this purpose.
Ne^ the boat, she discovered a beautiful azure rock, well situated for fishing.
Too careless of her famed predecessor's disposition, she disembarked from the
boat to the ro^^. Soon after, they purposely weighed anchor and left her
surrounded with water. She continued not long, before, to her surprise, as well
as the rest, the rock became a selfmoving vehicle, and sat out to overtake her
company. Dreading the passage, (...) leaped into the water and mire, and (...)
many severe struggles before she reached land. The rock proved a prodigious
Tortoise. And lest antiquity should not be cured of credulity and superstition,
there by enhance the prodigy to their generation -- that a female was once a
navigator on the back of a Tortoise, that he finally swallowed her and some
time after, spouted her alive on the fertile land; -- it is only needful to
mention, that they gaffed him, with much difficulty, towed him reluctant to the
shore, and soon after, on a day of festival, ate him.

THIS Summer a detachment of 1500 men was ordered to march to Philadelphia for
the suppression of a mutiny among the American soldiers. She did not go till
(...) days after the General left West Point. (...)-then rode in company with
four gentlemen, and had a richly variegated prospect through the Jersies and a
part of Pennsylvania. In Goshen they were invited to a (...); where she was
pleased to see, especially in the ladies, the brilliancy and politeness of
those in New England. They were here detained two days on account of Lieut.
STONE, who was confined for a duel with Capt. HITCHCOCK, who was killed. She
found the troops encamped on a hill, from which, they had a fine prospect of
the city and of the Allegany, which rises majestic over the intervening
country. Here she had frequent occasion to visit the city, sometimes on
business, and often curiosity led her to view its magnificence. The gentility
of her dress and agreeable mien gained her access to company of both sexes of
rank and elegance.

THE storm of war having subsided, (...) agreeable prospect once more gleamed
(...) the face of COLUMBIA. But Fortune (...) more dangers and toils a^^igned
her. (...) epidemic disorder raged in the city: and she was quickly selected a
victim, and carried once more to the hospital with all (...) horrible
apprehensions of her situation. Death itself could scarcely have (...) a more
gloomy prospect: and that seemed not far distant; as multitudes were daily
carried to the Potter's Field. She begged not to be left in the loathsome bunks
(...) soldiers. Accordingly, she was lodged in a third loft, where were two
other officers of the same line, who soon died. Alone she was then left to
condole her wretchedness; except Doctor BANA and the Matron, Mrs. PARKER, whose
solicitude she remembers with gratitude.

HOW poignantly must reflection have here brought to her memory those soft and
tranquil seasons, wherein she so often deprived herself the midsummer's morning
dream, to breathe with the lark the fresh incense of morning! -- when with
hasty steps she brushed the dews from vegetation, to meet the sun on the rising
grounds: by which, to catch fresh hints of CREATION, and to inhale thee, buxom
HEALTH, from every opening flower! But she is now, not indeed, like Egyptian
mummies, wrapped in fine linen and laid on beds of spices, but on the naked
floor, anticipating the Archer, Death, in all the frightful forms of his
equipage.

BUT at length, she was deprived of the faculty of reflection. The Archer was
about to execute his last office. The inhuman sextons had drawn their
allowance, and upon her vesture they were casting lots. One JONES, the only
English nurse, at that instant coming in, she once more rallied the small
remains of nature and gave signs of life. The sextons withdrew, and JONES
informed the Matron such a one was yet alive; which she discredited. Doctor
BANA at that instant entered; and putting his hand in her bosom to feel her
pulse, was surprised to find an inner waist-coat tightly compressing her
breasts. Ripping it i^ haste, he was still more shocked, not only on finding
life, but the breasts and other tokens of a female. Immediately she was (...)
moved into the Matron's own apartment, and from that time to her recovery,
treated with all the care, that art and expe^^ could bestow.

THE amiable Physician had the prude^^ to conceal this important discovery
(...) every breast but the Matron. From that time, the once more discovered
female became a welcome guest in their families. And they recommended her to
others, as an object worthy their attention and affection. -- But there remains
another event, perhaps, the most unparalleled of its kind, to be unfolded.

A YOUNG lady of the suburbs of Baltimore, beautiful in form, blessed with a well
cultivated mind, and a fortune, had often conversed with this illustrious
soldier. The gracefulness of her mein, mixed with her dignified, martial airs,
enraptured her. At first, she attempted to check the impulse, as the effect of
a giddy passion; but at length, suffered it to play about her heart unchided.
Cupid, impatient, at length, urged his quiver too far, and wounded the seat of
love. -- O Love! how powerful is your influence! how unlimited your domain! The
gallant SOLOMON could not have composed three thousand proverbs and his
madrigals to his love, without much of your conviviality. The illuminations of
Venus were known in those days. And it was by her rays, the Preacher of love so
often strolled with his Egyptian belles in his vineyard, when the flowers
appeared on the earth, the mandrakes gave a good smell, and the time of the
singing of birds had come; when they reciprocated their love amidst the dews of
dawn.

SUFFICIENT it is, that this love is preserved, and that it will remain
incontrovertible. And happy it is, that it is not only enjoyed by the prince of
the inner pavillion. It leaps upon the mountains; and, under the shadow of the
apple tree, it is sweet to the taste. From the moss-covered cottage, it is
pursued, even amidst the thunders of war and the distraction of elements. And
the nymph of Maryland was as much entitled to it, as the mistress of him, who
had the caressing of a thousand. Hers was sentimental and established: and she
was miserable from the thought, that it might not be interchangeable.

ON this account, the productions of her plantation were no longer relished
with pleasure. The music of her groves became dissonant, her grottos too
solitary, and the rivulets purled but for her discontent. From these she flew
in search of him, whom her soul loved, among the bustling roar of the city. And
the third morning after she was confined in the hospital, a courier delivered
her a letter and a handkerchief full of choice fruit. Enclosed was the
substance of the following:

DEAR SIR,
FRAUGHT with the feelings of a friend, who is, doubtless, beyond your
conception, interested in your health and happiness, I take liberty to address
you with a frankness, which nothing but the purest friendship and affection can
palliate. -- Know, then, that the charms I first read in your visage brought a
passion into my bosom, for which I could not account. If it was from the thing
called LOVE, I was before mostly ignorant of it, and strove to stifle the
fugitive; though I confess the indulgence was agreeable. But repeated
interviews with you kindled it into a flame, I do not now blush to own: and
should it meet a generous return, I shall not reproach myself for its
indulgence. -- I have long sought to hear of your apartment: And how painful is
the news I this moment received, that you are sick, if alive, in the hospital!
Your complicated nerves will not admit of writing. But inform the bearer, if
you are necessitated for any thing, that can conduce to your comfort. If you
recover, and think proper to enquire my name, I will give you an opportunity.
But if death is to terminate your existence there, let your last senses be
impressed with the reflection, that you die not without one more friend, whose
tears will bedew your funeral obsequies. --

ADIEU.


SOME have been charmed, others surprised by love in the dark, and from an
unexpected quarter; but she alone can conceive what effect, what perturbation,
such a declaration had on her mind; whose nearest prospect seemed that of her
own dissolution. She humbly returned her gratitude, but happily was not in want
of money; owing to a prize she in company had found in the British lines,
consisting of clothes, plate and coin. In the evening she received a billet
enclosing two guineas. The like favors were continued during her illness. But
she knew not in whose bosom the passion vibrated. -- Her recovery must make the
next chapter eventful.

CHAP. X.
Her critical situation. -- Commences a TOUR toward the Ohio with some
Gentlemen. -- Interview with her LOVER. -- They meet a terrible TEMPEST. -- She
is left sick with the Indians.

HEALTH having reanimated the so much admired Virago, one might conclude she
had business enough on hand: And, gracious Powers! what had she not on her
heart and mind? Suspicious that a discovery had been made during her illness,
every zephyr became an ill-fated omen and every salutation, a mandate to summon
her to a retribution for her imposition on the masculine character.

SUCH embarrassments foreboded the winding up of her drama. And she was
doubtless careful to picture the event in the blackest colors. A retrospection
of her life must have brought, to her mind, a contrast, unknown to many and
dreaded by all. But having stood at helm during the severity of the storm, she
concluded, if a concession must be extorted from her, it might appear less
dastardly after a beautiful, serene DAY had commenced: And that it mattered
little, whether it should happen among the insatiable throng of the city, or
the ruder few of the desolate heath. -- Thus the lioness, having pervaded every
toil and danger, from the hounds and hunters, at length, cornered on all sides,
disdaining their fury, yields herself a prey.

DOCTOR BANA was now waiting a convenient opportunity to divulge to her his
suspicion of her sex. He often found her dejected; and as he guessed the cause,
introduced lively discourse. She had the happiness to recommend herself much to
the esteem of his discreet and amiable daughters. And the Doctor was fond that
so promising a stripling should often gallant them into the city and country
villages. The unruffled surface of a summer's sea was also often a witness to
their pastimes. This rare species of innocent recreation was, doubtless,
peculiarly gratifying to the Doctor; as his mind could not be more at rest on
his daughters' account. Nor need they think themselves chagrined, when it is
known they once had a female gallant; on the strength of whose arm and sword
they would have depended in case of danger.

AFTER she had resumed her regimentals to rejoin the troops, the Doctor,
availing himself of a private conference, asked her, whether she had any
particular confident in the army? She said, no; and trembling, would have
disclosed the secret: but he, seeing her confusion, waved the discourse. To
divert her mind, he proposed her taking a tour toward the Ohio with Col.
TUPPER of Massachusetts, Messrs. FORKSON and GRAHAM of Philadelphia; who were
going, partly to contemplate the country and partly to discover minerals.
Knowing the mineral rods were peculiar to her, he said, whilst the tour might
be profitable, it might be a restorative to her health, and an amusement to her
mind.

SURPRISED to find this met her concurrence, he used some arguments to dissuade
her from it: But finding her unequivocal, he enjoined it upon her to visit his
house at her return; which she promised. And about the last of August, they set
out from the Conastoga Wagon and went, in the stage, the first day, to
Baltimore, which is eighty miles.

NEXT day, as she was viewing the town, she received a billet requesting her
company at such a place. Though confident she had before seen the hand writing,
she could not conjecture what was commencing. Prompted by curiosity, she went;
and being conducted into an elegant room, was struck with admiration, on
finding alone, the amiable and all accomplished Miss --, of about seventeen,
whom she had long thought a conspicuous ornament to her sex. The lady expressed
surprise on seeing him, who, according to report, had died soon after she left
the metropolis. An acquaintance being before established, mutual compliments
passed between the lovers. The young lady confessed herself author of the
anonymous letter. And though uncertain of a concession -- timorous as a young
roe, yet pliant as the bending ozier, with the queen of love resident in her
eye, she rehearsed her plaint of love with that unreservedness, which evinced
the sincerity of her passion and exaltedness of soul. The soul is the emporium
of love. -- Their blushes and palpitations were, doubtless, reciprocal; but, I
judge, of a different nature. But while this liberal concession was the
strongest evidence, that she possessed love, without desire of prostitution,
and friendship without dissimulation; let it be remembered, to her honor, that
her effusions flowed with that affability, prudence and dignified grace, which
must have fired the breast of an anchorite -- inanimate nature itself must have
waked into life, and even the superstitious, cowled friar must have revoked his
eternal vows of celibacy, and have flown to the embraces of an object,
exhibiting so many charms in her eloquence of love.

THUS, ye delicate, who would be candidates for the fruition of this noble,
this angelic passion, it is refinement only, that renders your beauty amiable,
and even unreservedness, in either sex, agreeable. The reverse is only a happy
circumstance between vice and virtue. While it there happily preys on every
delicate sensation, it renders the idea of enjoyment loathsome, and even
hurries delicacy herself into distress.

HAD this unfortunate lover uttered herself in an uncouth, illiterate,
unpolished manner, every word would have lost its energy and all her charms
become vapid on the senses. -- Or, had she assumed the at^^re -- the cunning of
an harlot -- the desperate simplicity of a young wanton; had she begun her
subtle eloquence with a kiss; and, with the poison of asps under her tongue,
have represented her bed of embroidery filled with perfume, and finally have
urged that the absence of the good man gave them an opportunity to riot in the
extatic delights of love-while our young fugitive would have needed
supernatural means to have answered the demands of venerious appetition, the
simple might have ^ound satiety in her seraglio: But Virtue would have
continued on her throne in sullen sadness. But this was not the case. Though
suspended between natural and artificial confusion -- though sickness had
abated her acuteness for the soft romances of love; she doubtless embraced the
celestial maid, and wishing herself mistress of her superior charms, could not
but participate in the genial warmth of a passion so irresistibly managed.
Knowledge intermixed with beauty and refinement, enkindles a warmth of the
purest love; and, like the center of the earth, commands the power of
attraction. She tarried in this school of animal philosophy the most of two
days; then promising to visit her in her return, proceeded on her journey.

FROM Baltimore, passing Elk Ridge, they came to Alexandria in Virginia. Nine
miles below, is Mount Vernon, the seat of the illustrious WASHINGTON, which
they visited. It is situated near a bond (...) the Potomak; where it is two
miles wid^. The area of the mount is 200 feet above the surface of the river.
On either wing, (...) a thick grove of flowering trees. Parallel with them, are
two spacious gardens, adorned with serpentine gravel walks, planted with
weeping willows and shady shrubs. The mansion house is venerable and
convenient. A lofty dome, 96 feet in length, supported by eight pillars, has a
pleasing effect when viewed from the wa^^r. This, with the assemblage of the
green house, offices and servant's halls, ^ears the resemblance of a rural
village; especially as the grass plats are interspersed with little copses,
circular clumps and single trees. A small park on the margin of the river,
where the English fallow deer and the American wild deer are alternately seen
through the thickets by passengers on the river, adds a romantic and
picturesque prospect to the whole scenery. Such are the philosophic shades, to
which the late Commander of the American Armies, and President of the nation,
has now retired, from a tumultuous and busy world.

THEIR next route was to the southwestern parts of Virginia. I KNOW not whether
it was in this tour, that she visited the famous Cascade in Virginia, MADISON'S
Cave on the North side of the Blue Ridge, and the passage of the Potomak
through the same; which is one of the most august scenes in nature.
Having traveled some days, they came to a large river; when the gentlemen and
guide disputed, whether it was the Monongahela, Yohogany, or the Ohio itself.
They concluded to wait till the fog, which was very thick, should be gone, that
they might determine with more precision. But instead of dissipating, (...)
increased, and they heard thunder roll as a distance. On a sudden, a most
violent tempest of wind and rain commenced, accompanied with such perpetual
lightning and peals of thunder, that all nature seemed in one combustible
convulsion. The le^ward side of a shelving rock illy screened them from the
storm, which continued to rage the most of the night. Happily they were
preserved; though one of their dogs became a victim to the electric fire. It is
said, he was so near their female companion, when killed, that she could have
reached him with a common staff.

NEXT day, the weather was calm. They discharged their pieces in order to clean
them; the report of which brought to their view six of the natives in warlike
array. Many ceremonies were effected, before they could be convinced of
friendship. When effected, they solicited the guides to follow them; indicating
by their rude noises and actions, they were much troubled. He refusing, their
Adventress laughed at his caution. One of the Indians, observing this, ran to
her, fired his arrow over her head, took a wreath of wampum, twined it about
her waist, and bade her follow. She obeyed; though they checked her
presumption. They conducted her to a cave; which, she thinks, is as great a
natural curiosity, as that of MADISON'S. They complimented her to enter first;
which she durst not refuse. They followed; and advancing nearly to the center,
fell on their faces; and whilst the cave echoed with their frightful yells and
actions, our Adventress, as usual, doubtless, thought of home. When they rose,
they ran to the further part, dragged three dead Indians out of the cave and
laid their faces to the ground. Then climbing a rock, they rolled down immense
stones; then whooping, first pointing to the sky, then to the stones, and then
to the Indians; who were killed by the lightning the preceding day. Having
convinced them, she understood it, and that the mate to a dog with her had
shared the same fate, they conducted her to her company. They told her, they
had despaired of ever seeing her again; concluding her scalp was taken off,
when they heard the shouting. She jocosely extolled them for their champion
courage, but not for their lenity; as they did not go to her relief. They all
then went to the cave and attended their savage, funeral ceremonies.

THE Indians went with them up the river, which they concluded to be one of the
Kanhawas. But in this they were mistaken; they being too much to the South.
They hired one of the tribe to pilot them over the Allegany. Passing the
Jumetta Creek and the Fork of the Pennsylvania and Glade Roads, about 40 miles
from the Jumetta, they came to the foot of the Dry Ridge. Here they found
trees, whose fruit resembled the nectarine; and, like it, delicious to the
taste. Eating freely of it, till observing the Indian did not, they desisted.
And happily so; for it came near proving mortal. Its first effect was sickness
at the stomach. The descendent of her, who is accused of having been too
heedless of the bewitching charm of curiosity, puked and bled at the nose, till
she was unable to walk. The Indian was missing; but soon came with a handful of
roots, which, being bruised and applied to her nose and each side of her neck,
stopped the blood and sickness.

HENCE they visited a tribe near a place, called Medskar. She was here so
indisposed, she could not proceed on the journey. Her illness proved a relapse
of her seven. The pilot interceded with the King for her to tarry with them
till the return of her company; which, he said, would be at the close of one
moon. Being convinced they were no spies, nor invaders, he consented. He then
ordered an Indian and his squaw to doctor her; telling them, the boy would, eat
good, when fattened. -- She remarks, that their medicine^ always had a more
sensible effect, than those of common physicians. Thus, in a short time, she
recovered. But I shall not attempt to recount all her sufferings, especially by
hunger, but a more intense torture of mind, during this barbarous servitude.

HER aim was, never to discover the least cowardice, but always, to laugh at
their threats. A striking instance of this she exemplified at their coronation
of a new King. Her master, like a hell-hound, hooting her into the square,
where were many kettles of water boiling, told her, he was going to have a
slice of her for dinner. Being the only white man (a girl!) among them, she was
instantly surrounded by the infernals. She asked him if he ever ate Englishmen?
He answered, good omskuock! She then told him, he must keep her better, or she
should never do to eat. Some understood her; and giving a terrible shout, first
told her to cut a notch in the great stone calendar, then putting her hands on
the king's head, she joined the dance, and fared with the rest. Ladies at a
civilized ball may be insensible of this scene.

THE reader keeps in view, I suppose, that all female courage is not jeoparded
in this manner. I am perfectly enraptured with those females, who exhibit the
mostrefined sensibility and skill in their sweet domestic round, and who can
show a group of well bred boys and girls, But I must aver, I am also happy, if
this rare female has filled that vacuity, more or less in every one's bosom, by
the execution of the worst propensities: For, by similitude, we may anticipate,
that one half of the world in future are to have less goads in their
consciences, and the other, faster accumulating a fund of more useful
acquisition.

CHAP. XI.
A hunting tour. -- She kills her Indian (...) -- Comes near perishing in the
wilderness. -- Liberates an English Girl, condemned to be burnt. -- Their
return to Philadelphia.

AURORA had scarcely purpled the East after the coronation, before a (...)
company, including our Adventress, fat out for hunting. She quickly espied a
will turkey on a high tree, which she killed. Then, with actions peculiar to
Indians, they surrounded her to extol her being quick fighted and a good
marksman. They encamped that night under an hickory* through which was a chasm
cut sufficient for two to walk abreast. In the morning they divided into
parties. An old Indian, a boy and our Adventress composed one. Elate with the
beauty of the morning, the old Indian (...) off about the sun's rising.
Ascending a large hill, the dogs started a buffalo, which she shot before the
Indian got sight. The boy was much elevated with her alertness: but the Indian
discovered much envy. He however craved the butchering; which she granted,
reserving the skin to herself. Making a hearty meal of the buffalo, they
traveled all day, without killing any more game, except three turkeys.

NIGHT having again drawn her sabie curtains, they took lodgings under a large
sycamore: but she had an unusual aversion to sleep; as she mistrusted the same
of the Indian. At length, she became satisfied he had a fatal design on her
life. Feigning herself asleep, she waited till he had crawled within musket
reach of her; when, to her surprise, she discovered a hatchet in his hand.
Without hesitating, she leaped upon her feet, and shot him through the breast,
before he had time to beg quarters.

THE explosion of the gun awaked the boy; who, seeing his countryman dead, rent
his clothes, whooped and tore the ground, like a mad bull; fearing he should
share the same fate. She pacified him, by observing, it was in defense of her
own life she had killed him; and that, if he would conduct well, and promise on
his life to conceal it from his countrymen, he should fare well. He swore
allegiance. And in the morning, they hoisted an old log and left the barbarian
under it.

BEHOLD now a young female, who might doubtless, have shown conspicuous with
others of her sex in their domestic sphere reduced to the forlorn necessity of
roaming in a desolate wilderness; whose only companion, except wild beasts, is
an Indian boy; whose only sustenance such as an uncultivated glebe affords; and
whose awful prospect, that of perishing at so great a distance from all succors
of humanity! To those, who maintain the doctrines of fatalism, she is certainly
a subject of their greatest sympathy. And even to those, who may be unwilling
to adduce any other traits in her life, but wild, dissolute freaks of fancy, to
be gratified at her option, she is rather an object of pity than contempt.

AT night, almost spent with hunger and fatigue, they lay down to repose. But
they were immediately alarmed by voracious beasts of prey. Their only safety,
and that not sure, was to lodge themselves in a high tree. The fires they had
kindled gained their approach and increased their howlings. The boy was so
frightened, he ran up the tree like a squirrel. She followed, assisted,
doubtless, by the same thing. Though drowsy, they durst not sleep, lest they
should fall. With the strap of her fusee and handkerchief, she made herself
fast to a limb and slept till day. It rained by showers the most of the night.
After she awoke, her second thought was of the boy. She spoke to him; but he
did not answer. Looking up at him, she was surprised to see him intently
employed in disengaging his hair, which he had faithfully twined round the
branches.

AFTER descending the tree and threshing themselves till they could walk, they
shaped their course for the East; but GOD only knows which way they went.
Toward night, they discovered a huge precipice; but found it inaccessible till
they had traveled nearly four miles round it. Then ascending, they came to a
rivulet of good water; and by it, took their abode during the night. In the
morning, they were at a stand, whether to descend, or attempt to reach its
summit. The poor boy wept bitterly; which, she says, were the first tears she
ever saw an Indian shed. They concluded on the latter; as their ascent might
possibly discover some prospect of escape. Passing many sharp ledges, they came
to a spot of bear's grass, on which she reclined, thinking the period of her
life was hastening with great rapidity, the following may not be a rude sketch
of her reflections on this occasion:

"WHERE am I! What have I been doing! Why did I leave my native land, to grieve
the breast of a parent, who has, doubtless, shed floods of tears in my absence,
and whose cup of calamities seemed before but too full! But here I am; where I
think, human feet never before trod. And though I have relatives, and perhaps,
friends; they can obtain no knowledge of me, not even to close my eyes, when
death shall have done its office, nor to perform the last, sad demand of
nature, which is to consign the body to the dust! -- But stop! vain
imagination! There is a DEITY, from whom I cannot be hidden. It is HE, who
shapes my end. -- My soul what think thou of immortality, of the world, into
which thou art so rapidly hastening! No words, no sagacity can disclose my
apprehensions. Every doubt wears the aspect of horror; and would certainly
overwhelm me, were it not for a few gleams of hope which dart across the
tremendous gloom. Happy, methinks I should be, could I but utter even to
myself, the anguish of my mind, thus suspended between the extremes of infinite
joy, or eternal misery! It appears I have but just now emerged from sleep! Oh,
how have I employed my time! In what delirium has the thread of my life, thus
far, been spun! While the planets in their courses, the sun and stars in their
spheres have lent their refulgent beams -- perhaps I have been lighted only to
perdition!"

WHILE in this extacy, she availed herself of the opportunity to write to her
female companion; and in it enclosed a letter to her mother, in hopes it might,
by means of the boy, reach her.

DEAR MISS --,
PERHAPS you are the nearest friend I have. -- But a few hours must inevitably
waft me to an infinite distance from all sublunary enjoyments, and fix me in a
state of changeless retribution. Three years having made me the sport of
fortune -- I am at length doomed to end my existence in a dreary wilderness,
unattended, except by an Indian boy. If you receive these lines, remember they
come from one, who sincerely loves you. But my amiable friend, forgive my
imperfections, and forget you ever had affection for one so unworthy the name of

YOUR OWN SEX.


WHILE in this position, she heard the report of a gun. Starting about, she
missed the boy and her fusee. She could not recollect whether he was with her
when she sat down, or not. But summoning all her strength and resolution, she
had nearly reached the summit of the mountain, when she met the boy. He told
her he fired that she might come to him; but as she did not, he concluded she
would do to eat, and was going to fill his belly with good omskuock. He seemed
glad he had found something to relieve them. Giving her a scrohon and four
grapes, he bid her follow him. Coming to an immense rock, he crept through a
fissure; and, with much ado, she after him. Here they found wild scrohons,
hops, gourds, ground-nuts and beans. Though mostly rotten, they ate some of
them, and were revived. Then, at a great distance, opened to their view, a
large river or lake, and vastly high mountains. Whilst they were contriving how
to get to the river, they heard the firing of small arms, which they answered
and had returns.

DESCENDING the precipice, they came to large rocks of isinglass, and brooks of
choice water. At its base, they came up with a large company of Indians, who
had been to Detroit, to draw blankets and military stores. But to her surprise,
who should make one of the company, but a dejected young female! At once, she
was anxious to learn her history; which she soon did at private interviews. --
She said, she was taken from Cherry Valley -- had been sold many times, but
expected to be sold no more! -- Tears prevented her proceeding.

IN three days they arrived at the place from whence she first sat out on
hunting. The old chief accused her for having run away after the Englishmen:
and it was the boy, with the interposition of Providence, saved her life. She
here quickly learned, that her unfortunate sister sufferer was to be burnt,
after they should have one court and a pawaw, for letting fall a papoos, when
traveling with an intense load. At once she resolved to liberate her, if any
thing short of her own life would do it. Her plan was thus concerted: She
requested to marry one of their girls. They haughtily refused; but concluded,
for so much, she might have the white girl. Begging her reprieve, till the
return of her company, which happened the next day, they all liberally
contributed, and thus paid her ransom. The poor girl fainted at the news. But
hearing the conditions, she seemed suspended in choice, whether to suffer an
ignominious death, or be bought as a booty to be ravished of her virgin purity:
-- For she intimated that, among all the cruelties of these savages, they had
never intruded on her chastity. Her intended husband privately told her, the
rites of the marriage bed should be deferred, till the ceremony should be
solemnized in the land of civilization. At night a bear's skin was spread for
their lodging; but, like a timorous bride, sleep was to her a stranger. On
their return to Philadelphia, they purchased her a suit of clothes; but she,
unable to express her gratitude, received them on her knees, and was,
doubtless, glad to relinquish her sham marriage, and to be sent to her uncle;
who she said, lived in James City.

ARRIVED at Baltimore, she repaired to visit her companion, who became much
affected with her history. She now thought it time to divest herself of the
mask; at least to divert a passion, which she feared had too much involved one
of the choicest of her sex. After thanking her for her generous esteem, and
many evasive apologies -- that she was but a stripling soldier, and that had
she inclinations, indigence would forbid her settling in the world: The
beautiful nymph replied, that, fooner than a concession should take place with
the leaft reluctance, she would forfeit every enjoyment of connubial bliss:
But, she added, if want of interest was the only obstacle, she was quickly to
come into the possession of an ample fortune; and finally intimated her desire,
that she should not leave her.

TOUCHED with such a pathetic assemblage of love and beauty, she burst into
tears, and told her, she would go to the northward, settle her affairs, and in
the ensuing spring, if health should permit, would return; when, if her person
could conduce to her happiness, she should be richly entitled to it. SHE has
since declared, she meant to have executed this resolution, had not some traits
of her life been published in the intervening time; and that this lady should
have been the first to disclose her sex. Before they parted, she made her a
present of six holland shirts, twenty five guineas and an elegant silver watch.
This she will not bl^sh to own, if alive; as it was out of the purest regard
for her own sex.
Thus parted two lovers, more singular, if not more constant, than perhaps,
ever distinguished Columbia's sort.

THIS event, as it is unnatural, may be disputed. It is also rare, that the
same passion should ever have brought a woman to bed with seven children at a
birth: And I think eight would rather be miraculous than natural. But it is
said, that though perhaps the coloring is a little exaggerated, that this is a
fact that will admit of incontestible evidence. Nor need females think
themselves piqued to acknowledge it; as no one denies, she was not an agreeable
object when masqueraded; which, by the by, I am sorry to say, is too often
mistaken by that sex.

THUS, we have a remarkable instance of the origin of that species of love,
which renders the enjoyment of life satisfactory, and consummates the bliss of
immortality. The passion entertained by the sexes toward each other is,
doubtless, from this source; and will always be laudable, when managed with
prudence. But I appeal to the lady's own bosom, if, after discovering her
sister, her passion had not subsided into a calm, and have drooped, like the
rose, or lilly, on its dislocated stalk. -- About the third of November, they
arrived at Philadelphia.

CHAP. XII.
DOCTOR BANA gives her a letter to Genesis PATTERSON, then at West Point. -- (...)
her journey there, she is cast away on Staten's Island. -- The letter discloses
her SEX to the General. -- Their INTERVIEW. -- She obtains an honorable
DISCHARGE and RECOMMENDATIONS. -- Goes to her relations in Massachusetts. --
Intrigues with her sex -- cenfured. -- Reassumes the FEMALE ATTIRE and ECONOMY.

ELATED with her transition from a savage wilderness, to a land smiling with
agriculture and civilization, her mind was once more illuminated with agreeable
prospects. But a review of her situation cast an unfriendly group of objects in
her way. A remembrance of the Doctor's queries and injunctions, was but
recognizing the necessity of a garland of fig leaves to screen a pearl, that
could glitter only without disguise.

ON the day of her departure from Philadelphia, he entrusted her with the care
of a letter to Genesis PATTERSON, then at West Point. Then taking an affectionate
farewell of his family, she sat out for the place. She went in the stage to
Elizabeth Town, 15 miles from New York. The stage boats being gone over, she,
with about twelve others went on board the only one remaining. The skipper was
reluctant to accompany them; as it was late, rainy and a strong wind a head. --
They quickly found the storm increased; and they had not gone h^^ their voyage,
before they had the terrible prospect of the foundering of a boat with nineteen
passengers from South Amboy, bound to New York. Every one was lost. They heard
their piteous cries, as the surges were closing over their heads; but could
afford no relief. Nor was their own prospect much better. It was asked, whether
it was possible to swim to Staten Island? It was unanimously negatived: but a
few minutes put them to the desperate experiment. Being nearly in the center of
the channel, the current rapid, and the storm boisterous, the boat filled, with
water and sunk under them. Though nothing but death now stared them in the
face; yet those exertions, which had before snatched her from his jaws, we may
suppose, were not here unemployed. She had on a large coat, which served to
buoy her above the water; though she was often ingulphed in the surges. She was
washed back twice, after reaching the soft sands. But, fortunately, clasping
her arms on a bed of rushes, she held till many waves had spent their fury over
her. Thus recruiting strength, and taking the advantage of the waves, she
gained hard bottom and the shore.

ON the shore, she found others in the same wretched situation, unable to
stand. She lay on her face all night. In the morning, the storm having abated,
she heard Dr. VICKENS say, "Blessed be GOD, it is day; though I believe I am
the only survivor among you all!" Happily, they were all alive, except two; who
unfortunately found a tomb in the watery element. They were soon taken up by a
boat cruising for that purpose, and carried back to Elizabeth Town. Most of her
equipments, a trunk, including her journal, money, etc. was lost. Her watch and
a morocco pocketbook, containing the letter, were saved.

THE third day, she had a good passage to New York; from thence to West Point.
Arrived at the General's quarters, she seemed like one sent from the dead; as
they had concluded the Potter's Field had long been her home. Her next business
was, to deliver the letter. Cruel task! Dreading the contents, she delayed it
some days. At length, she resolved, her fidelity should triumph over every
perturbation of mind in the delivery of the letter, and to apologize for her
non-trust. Accordingly, finding him alone, she gave him the quivering treasure,
made obeisance, turned upon heal and withdrew in haste.

PRECISELY an hour after, unattended, he sent for her to his apartment. She
says -- "A re-entrance was harder than facing a cannonade." Being desired to
seat herself, the General, calling her by name, thus gracefully addressed her:
-- "Since you have continued near three years in my service, always vigilant,
vivacious, faithful, and, in many respects, distinguished yourself from your
fellows. -- I would only ask -- Does that martial attire, which now glitters on
your body, conceal a female's form!" The close of the sentence drew tears in
his eyes and she fainted. He used his efforts to recover her; which he
effected. But an aspect of wildness was blended in her countenance. She
prostrated herself at his feet, and begged her life! He shook his head; but she
remembers not his reply. Bidding her rise, he gave her the letter, which he
continued to hold in his hand. Reason having resumed its empire, she read it
with emotions. It was interesting, pathetic and colored with the pencil of
humanity. He again exclaimed -- "Can it be so!" Her heart could no longer
harbor deception. Banishing all (...) with as much resolution, as possible, she
confessed herself -- a female.

HE then enquired concerning her relations; but especially of her primeval
inducements to occupy the field of war! She proceeded to give a succinct and
true account; and concluded by asking, if her life would be spared! -- He told
her, she might not only think herself safe, while under his protection; but
that her unrivalled achievements deserved ample compensation -- that he would
quickly obtain her discharge, and she should be safely conducted to her
friends. -- But having had the tuition of her as a soldier, he said, he must
take liberty to give her that advice, which he hoped would ornament the
functions of her life, when the masculine garb should be laid aside and she
taken to the embraces of that sex she was then personating.

IMMEDIATELY she had an apartment assigned to her own use. And when the General
mentioned the event to her Colonel and other officers, they thought he played
at cajolery. Nor could they be reco^^^ed to the fact, till it was corroborated
by her own words. She requested, as a pledge of her virtue, that strict enquiry
should be made of those, with whom she had been mess-mate. This was accordingly
done. And the effect was -- a panic of surprise with every soldier. Groups of
them now crowded to behold a phenomenon, which before appeared a natural
object. But as access was inadmissible, many turned infidels, and few had
faith. -- Her discharge is from Genesis KNOX; her recommendations from the Gens.
PATTERSON and SHEPARD. SINCE, by misfortune, lost:


BEING informed, her effects and diplomas were in readiness, she paid her
politest respects to the gentlemen, who accompanied her to the place; and
wishing an eternal FAREWELL to COLUMBIA'S CAUSE. turned her back on the
Aceldama, once more to re-echo the carols of peace on her native plains. In the
evening, she embarked on board a sloop from Albany to New York: From thence, in
Capt. ALLEN'S packet, she arrived at Providence.

THUS she made her exit from the tragic stage. But how requisite was a parent's
house -- an asylum, from the ebullitions of calumny, where to close the last
affecting scene of her complicated, woe-fraught revolution of her sex! With
what eager steps, would she have bent her next course over the then congealed
glebe -- to give a parent the agreeable surprise of beholding her long lost
child -- to implore her forgiveness of so wide a breach of duty, and to assume
a course of life, which only could be an ornament to her sex and extenuation of
her crime! The ties of consanguinity, of filial affection and of solemn
obligation, demanded this. But being deprived of these blessings, she took a
few strides to some sequestered hamlet in Massachusetts; where she found some
relations: and, assuming the name of her youngest brother, she passed the
winter as a man of the world, and was not awkward in the common business of a
farmer. But, if I remember, she has intimated -- that nothing in the villa
could have better occupied a greater vacuity, than the diadem -- education:
which, I fondly hope, some guardian cherub has since deigned to bestow.

BUT her correspondence with her sister sex! -- Surely it must have been that
of sentiment, taste, purity; as animal love, on her part, was out of the
question. But I beg excuse, if I happen not to specify every particular of this
agreeable round of acquaintance. It may suffice, merely, to say, her uncle
being a compassionate man, often reprehended her for her freedom with the girls
of his villa; and them he plumply called fools, (a much hasher name than I can
give them) for their violent presumption with the young Continental. Sighing,
he would say -- their unreserved imprudence would soon detect itself -- a
multitude of illegitimates! -- Columbia would have bewailed the egregious
event! Worse, indeed, it might have been, had any one entered against her --
not a bill of ejectment, but a system of compulsion, for having won of her a
large bet in a transport of bliss, after MORPHEUS had too suddenly whirled away
two thirds of the night -- still refusing to satisfy the demand! -- Blush --
blush -- rather lament, ye delicate, when so desperate an extremity is taken to
hurl any of your sisters into hymeneal bliss -- wretchedness.

To be plain, I am an enemy to intrigues of all kinds. Our female adept had
money; and at the worst could have purchased friends of our sex: But, methinks,
those who can claim the least pretension to feminine delicacy, must be won
only, by the gentleman, who can associate the idea of companion without
imbibing the principles of libertinism. Why did she not, after the crackling
faggot had rivalled the chirping of the cricket in the hearth, caution those,
who panted -- not like the hunted heart, to taste the cooling rivulet -- that
the midnight watch might not have registered the plighted vows of love! Having
seen the world, and, of course, become acquainted with the female heart, and
the too fatal avenues to it; why did she not -- after convincing them that she
lacked not the courage of a village HAMPDEN, preach to them the necessity of
the prudence and instructions of sage URANIA? That they might have discovered
their weakest place, and have fortified the citadel; left a different attack
should make a fatal inroad upon their reputation, and transfix a deadly goad
through their breasts VENUS knows not but she did: But they were all females.

SPRING having once more wafted its fragrance from the the South, our Heroine
leaped from the masculine, to the feminine sphere. Throwing off her martial
attire, she once more hid her form with the dishabille of FLORA, recommenced
her former occupation; and I know not; that she found difficulty in its
performance. Whether this was done voluntarily, or compulsively, is to me an
enigma. But she continues a phenomenon among the revolutions of her sex.

APPENDIX.
CONTAINING -- CHARACTERISTIC TRAITS and REFLECTIONS, with REMARKS on DOMESTIC
EDUCATION and ECONOMY.
AFTER deliniating the life of a per^^, it seems natural to recapitulate, in a
clo^^ assemblage, the leading features of his character.

PERHAPS, a spirit of enterprise, persever^^ce and competition was never more
distinguishable in a female, than in Miss SAMP^ON. And whilst we are surprised
that she left (...) own tranquil sphere for the most perilous the field of war,
we must acknowledge, it is, (...) least, a circumstantial link in the chain of
(...) illustrious revolution. She never would accept a promotion while in the
army; though it is said, she was urged to take a Lieutenant's ^ommission.

I WILL here give an instance of her dread of (...). It was soon after she
inlisted, -- having been reluctantly drawn into a ring of wrestling, she was
worsted; though it is said, (...) flung a number. But the idea of a com^^titor
deprived her of sleep the whole night. Let this be a m^mento to Columbia's
daughters; that they may beware of too violent scuffles with our sex. We are
athletic, haughty and unconquerable. Besides, your dislocated limbs are a
piteous sight! -- And it seems this was a warning to her: For it was noted by
the soldiers, that she never wrestled, nor suffered any one to twine his arms
about her shoulders; as was their custom when walking.

AND left her courage has not been sufficiently demonstrated, I will adduce one
more instance, that must surpass all doubt. -- In 1782, she was sent from West
Point, on business, to a place called the Clove, back of the high hills of
Santee. She rode Capt. PHELON'S horse. On her return, just at the close of
twilight, she was surprised by two ruffians, who rushed hastily from a thicket,
seized her horse's bridle, and demanded her money, or her life. She was armed
with a brace of pistols and a hanger. Looking at the one, who held the horse,
she said, " J. B --, I think I know you; and this moment you become a dead man,
if you persist in your demand!" Hearing a pistol cock at the same time, his
compeer fled; and he begged quarters and forgiveness; which she granted on
condition of a solemn promise, ever to desist from so desperate an action.

IT is, perhaps, sufficiently authenticated, that she preserved her chastity,
by a rare assiduity to conceal her sex. Females can best conceive
inconveniences to which she was subject. But as I know not, that she ever
grantied any one with the wondrous eclaircissement, I can only say, perhaps,
what more have heard, than experienced -- "Want prompts the wit, and first gave
birth to arts." If it be true, and if -- "A moment of concealment is a moment
of humiliation;" as an anonymous writer of her sex observes, she has humility
enough to bow to the shrine of modesty, and to appear without disguise, from
top to toe.

SINCE writing these sheets, I have been pained for a few, especially females,
who seem unwilling to believe, that a female went through three campaigns,
without the discovery of her sex; and consequently, the loss of virgin purity.
"SHE had no beard," is an objection, to which, I know not, that this class of
readers can be reconciled. -- A chaplain, since known in Massachusetts, was
once at Genesis Patterson's quarters, In the presence of his smocklaced attendant,
he took occasion to compliment the General -- "I admire your fare; but nothing
more, than your very polite attendant; who appears to possess the graceful
activity and bloom of a girl."


WE hear but little of an open prostitute in the army, or else where -- of
COLLIN and DOLLY, the milk maid, in their evening sauntering to the meadow.
Then why should any be so scrupulous of her, because she did not go in the
professed character of a soldier's trull! Though it is said, she was an
uncommonly modest soldier; yet, like you, I am ready to aver, she has made a
breach in female delicacy. But bring forth her fallacious pretensions to
virtue; and I am bound, as a moralist, to record them -- as vices, to be
guarded against. I have only to desire this class of my readers to think as
favorable as possible of our sex; but, on all accounts, to cherish the lovely
fugitive -- virtue, in their own. For, too much suspicion of another's, argues,
too strongly, a want of the same charming ornament in themselves; unless they
are old maids, or bachelors.

I SHALL here make a small digression. -- As our Heroine was walking the
streets in Philadelphia, in a beautiful, serene evening, she was ravished by
the sweet, pensive notes of a piano-forte. Looking up at a third lost she
discovered a young female, who seemed every way expressive of the music she
made. She often after listened to the same sounds; and was as often surprised,
that a sigh should be blended with such exquisite harmony and beauty. -- Of
this female, I will transmit to my readers the following pathetic history.

FATIMA was the eldest of three daughters; whose parents had acquired an ample
fortune, and resided in a part of the United States, where nature sheds her
blessings in profuse abundance. But, unhappily, their conduct toward them was
distinguished, like that of others, whose fondness, so infinitely exceeds their
prudence. They were not, however, deficient in many external accomplishments.
Early was FATIMA taught to speak prettily, rather than properly; to admire what
is brilliant, instead of what is solid; to study dress and pink alamode; to be
active at her toilet, and much there is to dance charmingly at a ball, or
farcical entertainment; to form hasty and miscellaneous connexions; to show a
beautiful face, and sign for admiration; -- in short, to be amused, rather than
instructed; but at, last -- to discover an ill accomplished mind! This is
beauty in a maze. Such occupations filled up her juvenile years. Her noblest
proficiencies were music, drawingetc. but an injudicious choice of books
excluded their influence, if they had any, from her mind. Thus we may conclude
her course of education led her to set the greatest estimate on this external
new kind of creature; whilst her internal source -- her immortal part,
remained, as in a fog, or like a gem in a tube of adamant.

NATURE had been lavish in the formation of FATIMA. And on her first
appearance, one must have been strongly impressed in her favor. But what says
the ^equel? -- The invigorating influence of Venus had scarcely warmed her
bosom, when, toward the close of a beautiful, soft day, in her rural
excursion, she first beheld PHILANDER; who had become a gleaner in her father's
fields. A mutual impulse of passions, till then unfelt, fired their bosoms: For
PHILANDER was much indebted to nature for a polished form; and something
uncommonly attracting in his looks, seemed to veil the neglect of his mind.
Unfortunate youth! His parents were poor: and to add to his misery, they had
deprived him of their only, and yet most important, legacy -- I mean, the
cultivation of his mind. Had not this been his lot, he might have made himself
rich and FATIMA happy.

AFTER this, FATIMA'S chief delight was -- to walk in the fields, to see her
father's flock, and to listen to the pipe of PHILANDER. Repeated interviews
brought them more acquainted with each other. Each attempted to steal the
luster of the eye and the crimson blush; which a too warm constitution could
ill conceal. At length, an unreserved familiarity took place. Both had been
taught to love; and both had missed PLATO'S and URANIA'S system, which should
have taught them -- how; FATIMA durst not let her parent's know, that a peasant
possessed her virginal love. She, therefore, under pretense of regaling herself
in the garden, often reserved the keys, that secured its avenues: and whilst
the dew distilled its pensive sweets, the requestered alcove, or embowered
grass plat, too often witnessed their lambent amors.

ONE night -- a night that must ever remain horrible to their remembrance, and
which should be obliterated from the annals of time -- FATIMA sat at the window
of her apartment, to behold, rather than contemplate, the beauties of the
evening. The hamlet was at rest, when she discovered PHILANDER passing in the
street. Her dishabille too plainly disclosed her charms, when she hastened with
the fatal key to the garden gate; where PHILANDER had just arrived. The massy
door having grated upon its hinges, they walked a number of times through the
bowling-green, till at length, almost imperceptibly, they found themselves at
the door, that led to FATIMA'S apartment. -- The clock struck twelve, when they
tip-toed through a number of windings, till they arrived at the chamber; which,
till then, had been an asylum for the virginity of FATIMA

It is needless to paint the scenes, that succeeded. A taper, she had left
burning on her scrutoire, with the rays of the moon, reflected a dim light on
the rich furniture of the room, and on the alcove; in which lay, for the last
time, the tranquil FATIMA! But this light, feeble as it was, disclosed to
PHILANDER a thousand new charms in the fascinating spectacle of so much love
and beauty. Sensuality took the lead of every reasoning faculty; and both
became instrumental to their own destruction. PHILANDER became a total slave to
his passions. He could no longer revere the temple of chastity. He longed to
erect his fatal triumph on the ruins of credulous virtue. He saw nothing but
what served to inflame his passions. His eyes rioted in forbidden delights. And
his warm embraces kindled new fires in the bosom of this beauteous maid. -- The
night was silent as death: not a zephyr was heard to rustle in the leaves below
-- but HEAVEN was a recording witness to their criminal pleasures!

THE lost FATIMA beheld her brutal ravisher with horror and distraction. But
from that fatal moment, his enthusiastic love cooled; and he shunned her
private recesses and public haunts. FATIMA, to avoid the indignation of her
parents, eloped from them. Her eyes were opended! Many were her wearisome steps
to find an asylum from that guilt, which, through her parents' neglect, she
incurred on herself. In vain did she lament, that some piteous cherub had not
preserved her to a more propitious fate -- that she had not been doomed to a
cloistered convent, to have made an eternal vow of celibacy, to have prostrated
herself to wooden statues, to have kissed, the feet of monks and to have pined
away her life in solitude! -- Thus, she continues to mourn the loss of that
happiness, she lost through neglect of education.

FATIMA was in her female attire -- our Heroine was a soldier. And I should
sacrafice many tender feelings to prefer, to my FAIR readers -- the situation
of either!

I CONFESS, I might justly be thought a monster to the female sex, were I
willing to suggest, that her original motive was the company of the venal
sycophant, the plotting knave, the disgusting, ugly debauchee; or that her
turning volunteer in Columbia's cause, was a meditated plot against her own
sex. Oh! this would be too cruel. -- Custom is the dupe of fancy: not can we
scarcely conceive what may not be relished, till the fugitive has worn out
every shift. But let us remember, though it constitutes our esteem and
reverence, it does not, always, our prudence and propriety. A high cut robe,
for instance, though it may agreeably feast the imagination, may not prove the
most prudent garb for every fair object, who wears it. But in the asylum of
female protection, may I not be thought their meanest votary, should not a
humble ejaculation prevent every robe-wearer from being led

" Over infant innocence -- to hang and weep,
Murdered by ruffian hands -- when smiling in its sleep!"
IT need not be asked, whether a proper union of the sexes is recommendable and
just. Nature claims this as her primogen I and indissoluble bond: And national
custom establishes the mode. But to mention the intercourse of our Heroine with
her sex, would, like others more dangerous, require an apology I know not how
to make. It must be supposed, she acted more from necessity, than a voluntary
impulse of passion; and no doubt, succeeded beyond her expectations, or
desires. Harmless thing! An useful eteran in war! -- An in offensive companion
in love! These are certainly requisites, if not virtues. They are always the
soldier's glory; but too seldom his boast. Had she been capacitated and
inclined to prey, like a vulture, on the innocence of her sex; vice might have
hurried vice, and taste have created appetition. Thus, she would have been less
entitled to the clemency of the public. For individual crimes bring on public
nuisances and calamities: And debauchery is one of the first. But incapacity,
which seldom begets desire, must render her, in this respect, unimpeachable.

REMEMBER, females, I am your advocate; and, like you, would pay my devoits to
the Goddess of love. Admit that you conceived an attachment for a female
soldier. What is the harm? She acted in the department of that sex, whose
embraces you naturally seek. From a like circumstance, we are liable to the
same impulse. Love is the ruling dictate of the soul. -- But viewing VENUS in
all her influential charms -- did she gain too great an ascendancy over that
virtue, which should guard the receptacle of your love? Did the dazzling
enchantress, after fascinating you in her wilds, inhumanly leave you in a
situation -- ready to yield the pride and ornament of your sex -- your white
robed innocence, a sacrifice to lawless lust and criminal pleasure! -- I
congratulate the fair object, whoever she was, and rejoice with her most
sincerely, that she happily mistook the ferocity of the li^n, for the
harmlessness of the lamb! You have thus, wonderfully, escaped the fatal rock,
on which so many of both sexes (it wounds me to repeat it!) have made shipwreek
of this inestimable prize. You have thus preserved inviolate, your coronet of
glory, your emblematic diadem of innocence, friendship, love, and beauty -- the
pride of your sex -- the despair and envy of the dissolute incendiary! This is
your virginity -- that chastity, which is such an additional ornament to beauty.

THE sun, with all his eclat, which has so often gone down on your innocence,
shall continue to rise with increasing beauty, and give you fresh satisfaction
and delight. Tannt; invective and calumny may storm; and, though you may dread,
you may defy, their rage. -- But what will be a still greater source of
comfort, old reflection shall not awfully stare you in the face on your bridal
day: nor remorse steal an imperceptible course into your bosoms; nor, as with
the scorpion's dagger, wound your tenderest place. Instead of a girdle of
thorns, the amaranthine wreath shall encircle you, and the banners of
friendship, love and tranquillity shall ever hover over you. Whilst others,
guilty of a breach in this emblem of paradise, may escape with impunity the
deserved lash of aspersion from a chaste husband, (for there may be chaste men
as well as chaste women) you shall be presented to your partner of life, an
object uncontaminated from the hands of your CREATOR. And next to the GIVER of
all good, he shall extatically hold you in his embraces, and esteem you at the
object of his supreme affections.

As the pure and brilliant dew-drop on the rose and lilly gathers their
fragrance; as the surface of the limpid stream outspreads its azure flow for
curious investigation: So, shall your words and actions be received by all who
are round about you. Your children, as coming from an unpolluted source, shall
rise up and call you blessed. And whilst the dupe and rude in thought shall
deign to bow at your shrine, your worth shall daily be enhanced in your
husband's estimation. He shall not forget to heap encomiums on your merit, when
he sits among the primogeniture of the land. A mutual exchange and increase of
affection will be perpetuated to you, through a long series of satisfactory
enjoyments -- even till second childishness steals upon you, and till time
itself dissolves your earthy compact, and seals you in the dust. Heaven, the
residentiary mansion of bliss, for the faithful and pure, will, at last,
condescend to crown you with a rich reward for your services, for your
integrity and virtue. -- FEMALES; ADIEU!

COLUMBIA demands our review. -- To stretch the memory to the momen^ous EPOCH,
when the optics of sage CO^UMBUS, first lighted on the American shores, and to
trace the mazy clue of her annals, from a savage wilderness (...) the present
period, when she stands confessed, a new star among the nations of the earth --
an elysian field of beauty, must feast the intellectual system with every idea,
perhaps of pain and pleasure. When we remember the sweat of the brow in the
culture of her once stubborn glebe, our encounters with the tomahawk, and with
the more formidable weapons of death in our late revolution; the breast must be
callous to sensation, that does not own the privileges and felicity, to which
we are now exalted; have been bought at a rate, dear enough to be instructive.

WE have molded a constitional government, at our option. It also guarantees
to us the privilege of making amendments: and under its continued auspices,
what good may we not anticipate? Scarcely three hundred years have rolled away,
since America was a solitary haunt for savages and beasts. But behold, now,
under the fostering hands of industry and economy, how she smiles; even from
the magnificence of the city, passing the pleasant country villas, to the
moss-covered cot! The sun of science is gleaming on her remotest corners; and
his penetrating rays are fast illuminating the whole empire of reason. -- Hail,
then, thou happy, radiant SOURCE of beauty! -- Our progress has, indeed, been
rapid: Heaven grant it may be lasting.

O war, thou worst of scourges! Whilst we hear of thy depredations, which are
now laying Europe in blood and ashes -- indeed, Columbia, we think of you! And
is there any, who are ignorant of the honors of war, and thirst for the
gratification? Let such be cautious of their propensities. You have heard, I
suppose, that an Emperor, Cardinal, or a gracious, sable-headed Pope, has
issued an edict, laying claim to a certain territory, to which, no body ever
mistrusted he was entitled. But the nation has turned infidels to his creed;
and though he is a man of insult, he is not to be insulted. -- He collects his
forces, and marches to glory; kills millions, gains his conquest, renews his
quarrels and puts others to the sword. His men are called veterans! What are
ours called? -- A youth, a female, a young nymph may tell.

AND must the scourge of war again cast a gloom over COLUMBIA'S beauteous
surface? Must infernal furies, from distant regions, conspire her ruin? Shall
her own SONS, forgetful of that happiness they have purchased so dearly,
unmindful of an infinite variety of alluring objects, that surround them, grow
wanton in luxury and indolence, and thirst, like tigers, to imbrue their hands
in the blood of any of the human race? GOD forbid! For in that day, the beast
shall again retire to his lair; the bird shall clap its well fledged wing, and
bear itself across the ocean; (HEAVEN grant it there may have a chance to
land!) and the fish shall lie in torpitude, or refuse the angler's bait -- but
all, looking up to that sublime and exalted creature, MAN, bewail the time he
had rule given over them!

BUT, COLUMBIA, this must never be said of your progeny. It has been necessary
they should encounter the bitters -- the calamities of war. It now remains,
that they taste and long preserve the sweets of prosperity. The sylvan bard
shall compose for YOU, his canzonets and roundelays: And the minstrel shall
rehearse them to his tranquil audience, in your silent, green-wood shade. From
the city, the sailor shall quit your beauteous shores with reluctance and with
a sigh. And while old ocean is heaving his barque from his home, as your
lessening turrets bluely fade to his view; he shall climb the mast -- and while
he is snatching a fond review, reflection shall feast his memory with every
pleasurable and pensive sensation. And though separated from his natal clime by
oceans, climes and nations; his choicest hopes and wishes shall dwell in his
native land.

It remains, to authenticate the facts asserted. -- The following first
appeared in a New York paper, from which it was copied in others, in
Massachusetts.
NEW YORK, January 10, 1784.
AN extraordinary instance of virtue in a FEMALE SOLDIER, has occurred, lately
in the American army, in the Massachusetts line, viz. a lively, comely young
nymph, nineteen years of age, dressed in man's apparel, has been discovered;
and what redounds to her honor, she has served in the character of a soldier
for nearly three years, undiscovered. During this time, she displayed much
alertness, chastity and valor: having been in several engagements, and received
two wounds -- a small shot remaining in her to this day. -- She was a
remarkable, vigilant soldier on her post; always gained the applause of her
officers -- was never found in liquor, and always kept company with the most
temperate and upright soldiers. -- For several months, this Gallantress served,
with credit, in a General Officer's family. A violent illness, when the troops
were at Philadelphia, led to the discovery of her sex. She has since been
honorably discharged from the Army, with a reward, THIS she has not received.
-- EDITOR.
and sent to her connexions; who, it appears, live to the Eastward of Boston,
at a place, called Meduncook.

THE cause of her personating a man, it is said, proceeded from the rigor of
her parents, who exerted their prerogative to induce her marriage with a young
gentleman, against whom, she had conceived a great antipathy; together with her
being a remarkable heroine and warmly attached to the cause of her conntry: In
the service of which, it must be acknowledged, she gained reputation; and, no
doubt, will be noticed in the history of our grand revolution. -- She passed by
the name of ROBERT SHURTLIEFF, while in the army, and was borne on the rolls as
such. -- For particular reasons, her name is witheld: But the facts, above
mentioned, are unquestionable and unblemished.

BOSTON, August 1, 1797.
To all whom it may concern.
THESE may certify, that ROBERT SHURTLIEFF was a Soldier in my Regiment, in the
Continental Army, for the town of Uxbridge in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, and was inlisted for the term of three years -- that he had the
confidence of his Officers, did his duty, as a faithful and good Soldier, and
was honorably discharged the Army of the United States.

HENRY JACKSON, late Col. in the American Army.

RESOLVE of the GENERAL COURT -- January 20, 1792.
ON the petition of DEBORAH GANNET, praying compensation for services performed
in the late Army of the United States:

WHEREAS it appears to this Court, that the said DEBORAH GANNET inlisted under
the name of ROBERT SHURTLIEFF, in Capt. WEBB'S company in the fourth
Massachusetts regiment, on May 21, 1782, and did acually perform the duties of
a soldier in the late Army of the United States, to the 23 day of October,
1783; for which, she has received no compensation. And whereas it further
appears, that the said DEBORAH exhibited an extraordinary instance of female
heroism, by discharging the duties of a faithful, gallant soldier; and at the
same time, preserved the virtue and chas^^ty of her sex, unsuspected and
unblemished, and was discharged from the service, with a fair and honorable
character.

THEREFORE, resolved, that the Treasurer of this Commonwealth be, and hereby is
directed to issue his note, to said DEBORAH, for the sum of thirty four pounds,
bearing interest from October 23, 1783.

As it is nothing strange, that any girl should be married, and have children;
it is not to be expected, that one, distinguished, like Miss SAMPSON, should
escape. The greatest distinction lies in the qualification for this important
business. And, perhaps, the greatest requisite for EDUCATION is -- complete
union with the parties, both in theory and practice. This is remarkably
verified in the party spirits that bring on wars and public calamities. They
extend to the remote fire side.

IT is hearsay, that Mrs. GANNET refuses her husband the rites of the marriage
bed. She must, then, condescend to smile upon him in the silent alcove, or
grass plat; as she has a child, that has scarcely left its cradle. It is
possible, she experiences, not only corporal but mental inabilities; and in
mercy to her generation, would keep it in nonexistence. -- But this is not the
part of a biographer. I am sorry to learn, this is mostly female complaint; and
not authentic: For her nearest neighbors assert, there is a mutual harmony
subsisting between her and her companion; which, by the bye, is generally the
reverse with those deprived of this hymenial bliss. All who are acquainted with
her, must acknowledge her complaisant and humane dispositions. And while she
discovers a taste for an elegant style of living; she exhibits, perhaps, an
unusual degree of contentment, with an honest farmer, and three endearing
children, confined to a homely cot, and a hard-earned little farm.

SHE is sometimes employed in a school in her neighborhood. And her first maxim
of the government of children is implicit obedience. I cannot learn, she has
the least wish to usurp the prerogatives of our sex. For, she has often said,
that nothing appears more beautiful in the domestic round, than when the
husband takes the lead, with discretion, and is followed by his consort, with
an amiable acquiescence. She is, however, of opinion, that those women, who
threaten their children with, "I will tell your father" -- of a crime, they
should correct, is infusing into them a spirit of triumph, they should never
know. The cultivation of humanity and good nature is the grand business of
education. And she has seen the ill effects of fighting, enough, to know the
necessity of sparing clubs and cuffs at home. The same good temper, we would
form in our offspring, should be exhibited in ourselves. We should neither use
our children as strangers; nor as the mere tools of fanciful sport. All
tampering and loose words with them, are, like playing, carelessly, with the
lion or tiger, who will take advantage of our folly. -- In short, instructions
should be infused, as the dew distills; and discipline, neither rigid, nor
tyrannic, should rest, like a stable pillar.

HOW great -- how sacred are our obligations to our offspring! Females, who are
the vehicles, by which they are brought into the world, cannot consider, too
seriously, the subject. Let it not be delayed, then, till that love, which
coalesces the sexes, produces an object for experiment. Form a pre-affection
for the sweet innocent, while in embryo -- that it may be cherished, with
prudence, when brought to view. And may we never have it to lament -- that
while any females contemplate, with abhorrence, a female, who voluntarily
engages in the field of battle -- they forget to recoil at the idea of coming
off victorious from battles, sought by their own domestic -- fire-sides! We
have now seen the distinction of one female. May it stimulate others to shine
-- in the way, that VIRTUE prescribes.

THE END.
LIST of such SUBSCRIBER'S NAMES for this Work, as were returned to the
Printers, previously to its coming from the Press.
A
REV. David Avery, Wrentham. Col. Philip Ammidon, Mendon. Mr. Benjamin Allen,
R. I. College. Armand Auboyneau, R. I. College. Jason Abbot, Boylston. Oliver
Adams, Milford. John Whitefield Adams, Medfield. John Wickliffe Adams,
Medfield. Charles Aldrich, Mendon. Ahaz Allen, Mendon. Seth Allen, Sharon.
B
Moses Bullen, Esquire. Medfield. Maj. Noah Butterworth, Wrentham. Capt. Eli Bates,
Bellingham. Doct. Thomas Bucklin, Hopkinton. Mr. Nicholas Brown, Merchant,
Providence. George Benson, Merchant. Providence. Liberty Bates, R. I. College.
John Baldwin, R. I. College. Lemuel Le Bararon, R. I. College. Allen Bourn, R.
I. College. Horatio G. Bowen, R. I. College. Joseph Brown, Byfield. Jason
Babcock, Dedham. Mr. Eli Blake, Wrentham. Isaac Bennett, Wrentham. David Blake,
Wrentham. Henry S. Bemis, Stoughton. George Boyd, Boston. Amos Boyden,
Medfield, Baruch Bullard, Uxbridge. Ebenezer Bugbee, Roxbury.
C
Mr. Nathan Carry, R. I. College. Judah A. Mc. Clellen, R. I. College. Gaius
Conant, R. I. College. Joseph B. Cook, R. I. College. Asa Cheney, Milford.
Ichabod Corbett, Milford. Luther Cobb, Bellingham. John Cobb, Wrentham. Joseph
Cleavland, Wrentham. Joseph Cleale, Byfield. Jabez Chichering, jun. Dedham.
Winslow Corbett, Mendon. Joseph Brown, Byfield. George Crane, Stoughton. Joseph
Curtis, Roxbury. Calvin Curtis, Sharon.
D
Capt. Isaac Doggett, Dedham. Lieut. Samuel Day, Wrentham. Mr. Andrew Dexter,
jun. R. I. College. Paul Dodge, R. I. College. James Dupee, Walpole. Joseph
Daniels, Merchant, Franklin. Mr. John Dummer, Byfield.
E
Capt. Amos Ellis, Bellingham. Mr. Samuel Ervin, R. I. College. James Ervin. R.
I. College. John Ellis, Dedham. Aaron Ellis, Walpole. Asa Ellis, jun.
Brookfield. Ebenezer Estee, Milford. Samuel Elliot, Byfield.
F
Hon. Timothy Farrar, New Ipswich. Amariah Frost, Esquire. Milford. Lieut. Samuel
Fuller, Walpole. Mr. Theodore D. Foster, R. I. College. Drury Fairbanks, R. I.
College. Ebenezer Fales, Walpole. Suel Fales, Walpole. Shubael Fales, Walpole.
Elijah Fisher, Sharon. Ebenezer Foster, Wrentham. William B. Fisher, Wrentham.
G
Rev. Thomas Gray, Roxbury. David S. Grenough, Esquire. Roxbury. Mr. William Green,
R. I. College. Franklin Green, R. I. College. Isaac Greenwood, Providence. Otis
Green, Mendon. Joseph Gay, Wrentham. Ephraim Grove, Bridgewater. John Green,
Medway. Miss Susanna Gay, Wrentham.
H
Alexander Hodgdon, Esquire. Dedham. Maj. Samuel Hartshorn, Walpole. Mr. John P.
Hitchcock, R. I. College. Washington Hathaway, R. I. College. Samuel Hayward,
Milford. Nathan Hawes, Wrentham. David Hartwell, Stoughton.
I
Mr. Thomas P. Ives, Merchant, Providence. James Jones, Byfield. Phinehas
Johnson, R. I. College. Jesse Jossin, Thompson.
K
Mr. Richard King, Byfield. Asa Kingsbury, Franklin. Ambrose Keith,
Northbridge.
L
Mr. Grant Learned, Boston. Laban Lewis, Stoughton. Miss Alice Leavens,
Walpole.
M
Col. Timothy Mann, Walpole. Sabin Mann, Medfield. Capt. Daniel Morse,
Brookfield. Mr. William P. Maxwell, R. I. College. Elias Mann, Northampton.
Windsor Mainard, Mendon. Paul Moody, Byfield. John Messinger, jun. Wrentham.
David Moors, Byfield. Mr. Lewis Miller, Dedham.
N
Mr. John Nelson, Merchant, Milford.
O
Mr. Nathaniel G. Olney, R. I. College. Miss Hannah Orne, Boston.
P
Doctor Elias Parkman, Milford, 6 Copies. Capt. Abijah Pond, Wrentham. Deac.
Jacob Pond, Wrentham. Mr. Eleazar Perry, Merchant, Hopkinton. Samuel Penniman,
Milford. Josiah Penniman, Mendon. Baruch Penniman, Mendon. Abiel Pettee,
Dedham. Adam Ward Partridge, Chesterfield.
R
Benjamin Randall, Esquire. Sharon. John M. Roberts, A. B. R. I. College. Mr. John
Rogers, Merchant, Cumberland. James Reed, Stoughton.
S
Seth Smith, jun. Esquire. Norton, 6 Copies. Ebenezer Seaver, Esquire. Roxbury. Capt.
John Soul, Middleborough, 6 copies. Mr. John Sabin, R. I. College. John
Simmons, R. I. College. William H. Sabin, R. I. College. Jonas Smith, Rutland.
Asa Smith, Brookfield. Lebbeus Smith, Medfield. Samuel Smith, jun. Walpole.
John Shepard, Foxborough. David Southworth, Ward. Oliver Shepard, Stoughton.
Gordon Strobridge, Northfield, (Ver.) Miss Lucinda Smith, Norton.
T
Doct. Ezra Thayer, Swanzey, (N. H.) Daniel Thurber, Mendon. Mr. Alvan Tobey,
R. I. College. James Tallmadge, jun. R. I. College. James Thompson, R. I.
College. Allen, Tillinghast, Merchant, Wrentham. Aaron Thomas, Boylston.
U
Mr. Alvan Underwood, R. I. College. Jonathan Upham, Stoughton.
W
Rev. William Williams, Wrentham. Mr. Edmund T. Waring, R. I. College. Conrade
Webb, R. I. College. William H. Williams, R. I. College. -- Witherspoon, R. I.
College. Nathaniel Willis, Boston. Joseph Ware, Medway. Obed Wheelock, Milford.
Abner Wight, Milford. Moses Woodman, Byfield. Miss Hannah Wight, Foxborough.
ERRATA.
PAGE 6. line 8. after I, read should. (...) 1. 9 for highly r. meanly. -- P.
18. 1. 14 for 1756 read 1656. -- P. 15. last line, for 1796 r. 1797. -- P. 57,
1. 12. after revenue. r. in America. -- P. 168. 1. 5. for absonded r. absended.

The following were returned too late to be inserted in order.
CAPT. JOHN BLISS, Springfield. Lieut. Samuel Bolter, Northampton. Mr. John
Breck, Merchant, Northampton. Mrs. Sarah Chandler, Boston. Jonathan Dwight,
At. at Law, Springfield. Benjamin A. Edwards, Q. M. Northampton. Mr. William
Ely, Springfield. Daniel Fay, Westbury. Jonathan Grout, At. at Law,
Belcherstown. Ebenezer Hunt, jun. M. D. Northampton. Mr. David Hunt, Merchant,
M. D. Northampton. Jacob Hunt, M. D. Northampton. William Hutchens, M. D.
Northampton. John W. Hooker, Springfield. James Ingols, Northampton. Samuel
King, jun. Northampton. Levi Lyman, Esquire. Northampton. Maj. Samuel Lyman,
Northampton. Daniel Lombard, Merchant, Springfield. Lieut. Moses Parsons, jun.
Northampton. Mr. Seth Pomeroy, Northampton. Nathaniel Patten, Hartford. Doct.
George Rogers, Northampton. Solomon Stoddard, Esquire. Northampton. Mr. Nathan
Stores, Northampton. Levi Shepard, Merchant, Northampton. Charles Steel,
Boston. Caleb Smith, Hadley. Jacob Wicker, Northampton.

