THE LAST CONFESSION AND dying speech OF PETER PORCUPINE, WITH AN ACCOUNT OF
HIS DISSECTION.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed, and sold by the Booksellers, MAY 22, 1797.

THE CONFESSION AND Dying Speech of Peter Porcupine, etc.
I WAS born in Old England; my grandfather was a day labourer. He died before I
was born; but I often slept beneath the same roof that sheltered him, and where
his widow dwelt for several years after his death. It was a little thatched
cottage with a garden before the door. Here I and my brothers went every
Christmas and Whitsuntide to spend a week or two, and torment the poor old
woman with our noise and dilapidations. Such was my propensity to vice, that I
could not resist the temptation to pilfer even from my grandmother. In this I
discovered a baseness and a depravity which rogues disavow; for they make it a
point of honor not to steal from each other. My grandfather was no philosopher
-- alas! it would have been well for me if he had been; for then his precepts
as well as examples would have instilled principles into my mind, which would
have preserved me from the ignominous fate I am about to suffer. The legacies
he left, were a large bundle of false keys, a pair of pistols, a dagger and a
masque -- The false keys he used to open locks with, which were not his own --
the pistols were employed to support himself with on the highway -- the dagger
to put an enemy or a suspected friend slily out of the way, and the masque to
keep himself from being known when he was engaged in any of his diurnal or
nocturnal avocations.

My father when I was born, was of the profession of my grandfather -- The
reader will easily believe, from the pursuits of his parents, that he received
no very brilliant education: he was however very ingenious for a man in his
rank of life -- When a little boy, he used to pilfer from other boys their
chuckers, their marbles, and their tops, and these his earnings were
appropriated to the expenses of finishing an education which he had begun under
a set of sharpers, who held their nocturnal revels in a tavern in the
neighborhood. What these men could be expected to teach, he had learnt, and
had besides considerably improved himself in several other branches of the pad.
He understood shop-lifting, pocket-picking, and several other branches of
similar sciences well, and was often chosen to draw plans for successful
burglary; in short, he had the reputation among his kindred fellows, of
possessing experience, cunning, and dexterity, which never fails in England to
give a man weight with those of his own profession.

So much for my ancestors: from whom, if I derive no honor, I have, alas!
inherited a halter.

I had, and I hope I yet have, three brothers -- the eldest is a highwayman,
the second a pickpocket, and the youngest, if alive, is in the service of a set
of money coiners. I was born on the ninth of March, 1766. The exact age of my
brothers I have forgotten; but I remember having heard my mother say, that
there was but three years and three quarters difference between the ages of the
oldest and that of the youngest.

A father like ours, it will be readily supposed, did not suffer us to eat the
bread of idleness. I do not remember the time when I did not earn my living. My
first occupation was in stealing potatoes, turnips and peace from the
neighbors. When I first trudged a field with my small bag and rum bottle swung
over my shoulders, I was hardly able to climb the gates and styles, and at the
close of the day to reach home, was a task of infinite difficulty. My next
employment was stealing fowls, geese, turkeys and ducks. Picking pockets
followed, and hence I arrived at the honor of joining a gang of burglars. My
natural cowardice prevented me from taking to the highway. We were all of us
liars and rogues, and my father used to boast that he had four boys, of whom
the eldest was but fifteen years old, who did as much work as any three pick
pockets in the parish of Farnham.

It would useless and unentertaining to dwell on the rogueries of a country
boy; to lead the reader through gardens and fields, into hen-roosts and
hogstyes, where I first gave specimens of my skill; I shall, therefore, come at
once to the epoch, that gave that turn to my future life, which at last brought
me to the United States and to the gibbet.

It was on the sixth of May 1783, that I sallied forth to seek new adventures.
I was dressed in a suit of clothes, which had been purloined by one of my
father's companions, in order to accompany two or three dames from a common
stew to a fair; but instead of going to the fair, I tricked the lasses and went
to London. In this metropolis I amused myself in picking pockets and shop
lifting, till I enlisted early in the year 1784, and as peace had then taken
place, no great haste was made to send recruits off to their regiments. The
leisure time I had after my enlistment was spent in acquiring as much knowledge
as would aid me in the successful pursuits of getting money without labor, and
in the course of one year which I devoted to it I learnt more than I had ever
done before. My ambition excited in me a wish to be a leader among my brethren
of the long fingered tribe, and unless I had more learning and more ingenuity
than any of them, I could not hope to be successful. This ambition prompted me
to devote all my leisure to books, and being naturally acute, I laid the
foundation of that knowledge and those talents, which I have since my arrival
here, faithfully devoted to the service of the king, my master. Before my
departure for Nova Scotia I was promoted to the rank of a corporal. We set sail
from Gravesend, and after a short passage arrived at Halifax in Nova Scotia. We
staid but a few weeks in Nova Scotia, being ordered to St. John's and New
Brunswick. Here and at other places we remained till the month of September
1791, when the regiment was relieved and sent home. During my stay, however, in
the new World, I again pursued the drift of my genius and inclination and
pilfered wherever opportunity offered. The captain of the company to which I
belonged had some handsome shirts to which I took a longing, and borrowed a few
of them for my own use. In this I was detected, tried by a court martial,
sentenced to receive five hundred lashes well laid on, and to be deprived of
the rank of corporal. The sentence was inflicted with the utmost rigor, and so
severe was the operation that I fainted away at the halberts after receiving
about half of the punishment. The remainder of the sentence was delayed for a
few days, and then was doubly severe as my back had not recovered from the
preceding operation. This will account for the large sears which I now have on
my back. This treatment for so trifling an offense as that of borrowing a few
shirts, determined me to take my leave of the regiment as soon as we returned
to Old England. We landed at Portsmouth on the third of November, and on the
nineteenth of the next month I deserted, after having served not quite eight
years.

London was my object and to that I hastened, and here I gave a full scope to
my propensities. The second day after my arrival I picked the pocket of a
gentleman of five guineas. A few nights after I associated myself with a set of
burglars, and we broke open a shop in Cheapside and robbed it of fifty guineas
worth of goods and about ten guineas in cash. My next attempt was on the house
of a banker, in company with a notorious villain named Jack Trial. We
succeeded and robbed the banker of five hundred guineas. This last robbery
occasioned considerable alarm, and as a large reward was offered for our
apprehension, I determined to take my leave of old England for a time and went
to France in March 1792. Paris opened a new field to me, there I intended to
exert all my ingenuity; but in this prospect I was suddenly disappointed; for
on my arrival at Calais, not having money enough for the journey, I sallied out
one evening, and unluckily picked the pocket of one of the officers of the
police. Unfortunately I was detected in the fact, apprehended, taken before one
of the tribunals, and sentenced to be whipped a la mode militaire. The old
wounds in my back were made to bleed afresh by these cutthroats, and
revolutionists. Had not the government been changed and purged of its former
iniquites I should have escaped so severe a punishment; but to be arrested in
the first step was what I could not, nor ever will forgive. This reception made
me change my determination, and instead of going to Paris, I went into the
country. I boarded at a farm house, and supported myself by dilapidations from
the neighbors. In the neighborhood were I lived, there lived an Abbe, who had
formerly resided in England, where he acquired some knowledge of the English
language. With him I soon became acquainted, and it was from him that I
acquired my knowledge of the French language. I soon discovered in him a
kindred spirit, and we early commenced a partnership, and supported ourselves
genteely at the expense of the neighborhood. After our friendship was
confirmed he informed me, that he was obliged to fly from England for being
concerned in counterfeiting guineas and forging banknotes. My friend the Abbe
and myself passed our days very happily together in this innocent neighborhood
for near six months, till at length it began to be suspected and whispered that
we were the authors of the robberies of which most of them complained. Having
already smarted under the lash of those cursed sans culottes, and cutthroats,
and fearing a detection that might expose me to a similar and perhaps a worse
fate, I suddenly took my leave and went to Havre de Grace. Here I employed
myself in my usual occupation till I scraped together money enough to defray my
expenses to America, for which I determined to embark. I took a passage to New
York and landed there in the month of October 1792.

I have now brought myself to the United States. Alas! it would have been well
for me if I had never set foot in any country of liberty and equality! Being
without money I determined to obtain a support in my customary way, and broke
open a store in William street, out of which I got some cash and some fine
goods. I had, in the short time I remained in that city, acquired sufficient
information to know that this mode of employment would not serve me long; that
I would soon be detected, and my race would soon be at an end. The money I
acquired by the robbery in William street enabled me to take stage for
Philadelphia. Here I remained for a short time and then went to Wilmington. At
this last place I determined to avail myself of my knowledge of the French
language for a support, and became a teacher. The little encouragement I met
with, affording but a scanty subsistence, I left Wilmington and returned to
this city. Here I began to teach the French language, to translate French into
English, and now and then to scribble a paragraph for the Gazette of the United
States.

In the month of July, 1794, Dr. PRIESTLY landed at New York. Knowing that the
persecution of the British government drove him to this country, and knowing at
the same time that this would furnish me with an opportunity to panegyrize that
government and traduce him, and thereby attract the attention of his Britannic
majesty's agents here, and aware that PIT paid well for services rendered him,
I wrote a pamphlet entitled Observations on the Emigration of Dr. JOSEPH
PRIESTLY. No circumstance of my life afflicts me more than this. In this
pamphlet I indulged the rancour of a heart too much devoted to vice, and
libelled a philosopher and a friend to human nature, the recollection of which
embitters my last moments. I abominated his principles because they were
favorable to liberty, and every thing like liberty or republicanism, I held in
detestation from the moment I had a judgment of my own. An affection for my
king was drawn in with my mother's milk, and I have ever cherished a love for
monarchy with as much zeal as I did a hatred for liberty. Poverty and
inclination thus stimulating me I hoisted the bloody flag against Dr. PRIESTLY.
The Observations, as I expected, excited the attention of one of his majesty's
agents. He soon found me out, and we soon understood each other. He told me
that the British cause was languishing in this country, and that some efforts
must be speedily made or it would be lost forever. He observed further, that
the administration was well disposed toward Great Britain, and had a secret
detestation of France since the revolution commenced -- that a dread of the
people only, who were intoxicated with the French Revolution and the Rights of
Man, restrained them from showing their affection for the one and abhorrence of
the other -- that the administration had an aversion from republican doctrines
and principles, and were endeavoring secretly though surely to assimilate the
government to that of Great Britain. -- To effect objects so desirable and so
important to his majesty and his cause, it was necessary to alienate the people
from France and subdue their prejudices against the mother country. -- He
conceived that I had talents which might be successfully employed to this end
-- that I had given an evidence of my capacity in the Observations, and that he
would furnish materials if I would put them into form. He further remarked with
a smile, that I had a talent at misrepresentation and fabrication, which
appeared to him original, and would, if well managed, produce great effects
upon the minds of the people. Flattered by these civilities and strongly
impressed with a desire to serve my king in whatever country I might be
situated, and willing to abandon a mode of life which was attended with so much
risque, I enlisted again in the service of my sovereign. Five hundred guineas a
year was to be my salary, and if success attended my pursuits, the sum was to
be increased. We parted, and he told me at parting, that he would consult some
of his friends in the government, obtain their assistance, and in a few days I
should hear from him again. In a few days I received a packet from him by a
confidential friend of his, containing materials, out of which I formed my
"Bone to gnaw for Democrats," and bank notes to the amount of five hundred
dollars. The bone to gnaw was soon ready for the press. It is not necessary
here to tell the reader how faithfully I improved the hints which were given me
at the interview with his majesty's agent. The five hundred dollars seemed to
have had an influence in brightening my genius of which I thought it
unsusceptible. Falsehood of the most flagrant nature, asserted with the utmost
confidence, and glossed over as speciously as possible constituted the essence
of my first essay. In a few days after the publication the agent again called
upon me, expressed himself well satisfied, and said he would supply me with
further materials -- that a certain Secretary had promised him an ample stock.
He was faithful to his promise, for in a few days I received a large packet,
out of which I formed the second part of the Bone to Gnaw, Plain English, New
Year's Gift, Prospect from the Congress Gallery, and a number of paragraphs for
the Gazette of the United States -- As I mean not to implicate a brother of the
type, I will not mention the conversation with the agent relative to the last
mentioned Gazette.

My productions began to excite attention. The agent paid me a third visit, and
suggested the propriety of coming forth from my obscurity. My fears were great,
I trembled at the idea of being known, lest the falsehoods and calumnies I had
written should excite the resentment of the populace, and I should become a
victim to their rage. He laughed at my fears, told me there was no danger, that
the people were a cowardly set and that I should be supported by some of the
first characters in the government. He said that he would advance me any sum to
procure me a good house, in a central place, that I might have an appearance of
doing business; for, he remarked, if I should be discovered in the place I was,
and being engaged in no ostensible business, it might create a suspicion, that
I was a British emissary, and all our plans would be frustrated. He proposed a
book-store as a proper employment, which would afford a good cover to our
objects. At his solicitation I consented, took a house in a central part of the
city at twelve hundred dollars a year, and opened a book store. He advanced
half a year's rent to my landlord, and wrote to a staunch friend of his in New
York to supply me with books, and that he would be accountable. The books were
sent and I opened my eyes to a new scene. Here I began my Political Censor; but
as my stock of wit was but small my works began to sink in the public
estimation, and it was necessary some expedient should be hit upon to realize
the prospects before me. Having often heard, that persecution was one of the
best means in the world to obtain celebrity, and excite the public attention
and sympathy, I fabricated a letter, which I conveyed to my landlord, in which
his house was threatened, and the severest denunciations were made against
myself. My landlord swallowed the bait -- he brought the letter to me, and I
wrote a pamphlet upon it called a "Scare Crow." At first this letter made
considerable noise, and I had a rapid sale for the pamphlet; but in a few days
the people began to smoke me, and I again began to totter. Some assertions were
made against me in the public prints which it became necessary to contradict,
and therefore, I resolved to give a History of my life and Adventures in which
I blended some truth with much falsehood. A number of publications issued from
the press immediately after the history of my life appeared, and among the
number BRADFORD did me infinite injury. He alone was in possession of some
facts much to my dishonor, and he exhibited them to the world with all the
malice of a French cutthroat. So much did I smart under the facts which
appeared against me that I began to despair. My friend the agent, however,
encouraged me by telling me of the number of friends I had, and by making me
liberal allowances. He told me that the moment was critical, that the
administration was alarmed, that the friends to Great Britain were in
consternation, and that we must persevere in our efforts against France and
against republicanism or we should be undone. That the British treaty had been
carried to be sure, but that the majority was so small as to excite
considerable apprehensions in the administration. That there was great reason
to fear that France would manifest ill temper at our connection with great
Britain and the dissolution of our ties with her, and that plans must be laid
to secure the ground which had been conquered, and to effect a rupture in the
end with the French Republic. He said that the government was ripe for the
event; but the people had such a bias in favor of France, that the experiment
would be too hazardous, unless a greater change could be effected in the public
mind. He suggested the propriety of commencing a daily paper, as a preferable
mode to a monthly work, for accomplishing the object. In support of the
establishment of a daily paper he urged the advantages which would arise to me
from it; that the officers of the government would aid it with all their
influence, and that he would furnish a fund to give it a gratuitous
circulation. I promised to take the proposal into consideration, and requested
him to allow me some time to think of it.

The expected explosion from the French Republic at length took place through
her minister ADET. He suspended his functions by order of the Executive
Directory, and stated the grounds of resentment to the world. Although the
people were much alarmed at this event, the Administration were undismayed --
things were working according to their plans and wishes. To make their purposes
more secure, PINCKNEY had been sent to supersede MONROE. They were well
apprised that the new minister could not be received agreeably to national
etiquette, and the existing state of things, and the refusal would prove a
strong argument to break entirely with the French Republic. The train was well
laid and nothing was wanting but the match of time to give the explosion.

I continued my Censor and occasionally gave a political blunderbuss, till the
meeting of Congress. After Congress were in session a communication was made to
them on French affairs. A long letter signed by the Secretary of State, and
addressed to the minister PINCKNEY accompanied the communication. This letter
was exactly in the style which my friend the agent suggested, and was well
calculated to favor the contemplated rupture. The administration was
determined, my friend told me, (for he was in their confidence) at all events
to break with France, and to form an alliance with great Britain. To this end
the letter was written and published, and to this end all their measures
tended. Encouraged by such flattering appearances, I resolved to publish a
daily paper, that I might contribute my means to accomplish the design, and
accordingly published my proposals. My subscription was rapid and great.
Officers of government, clergymen and tories seemed to vie with each other in
my support. The reverend Mr. Abercrombie assisted me in obtaining
subscriptions, and was always ready with his aid and counsel. He professed
great affection for me and for the cause I was embarked in, and seemed to
relish the obscenities I now and then indulged in, as much as any of my
patrons. No one can accuse him of being starched.

It is unnecessary to state in this place, the temper of my paper -- the
libels, the falsehoods and the indecencies it contained. At one moment I
libelled the Governor, at another Mr. MONROE, and so I went on through the
whole catatlogue of American patriots. Every falsehood which my inveteracy to
the United States for their former rebellion, to the French Republic, and to
republicanism could supply, was dealt out with a lavish hand. Finding that some
little irritation had taken place in the public mind against the depredations
upon our commerce by French cruisers, I determined to try the temper of it, and
if possible by one bold stroke, give a complete ascendancy to the British
interest. To effect this I wrote a letter containing an account of an
association of Democrats to join the French in case of an attempt upon this
country, and to give this letter the appearance of reality I signed it GEORGE
WILSON, sen'r. I employed a confidential friend to copy this letter and to
convey it to my letter-box. Lest it might be supposed a forgery, I took care to
have evidence at hand when I received the letter, to vouch for my having
received it. The letter was published with all imaginable solemnity; but the
effect disappointed me. Instead of seeing a violent tumult, and an immediate
arrestation of the leading Democrats, I was summoned to appear before the Mayor
of the city to answer for the publication. My consternation at this unexpected
turn was indescribable. My coward heart was ready to die within me. Heretofore
I never left my own house but under cover of the night or of a fog, or before I
had previously reconoitered the street, and saw that all was safe; and to be
obliged now to appear in propria personae, and that too before a legal
tribunal, almost petrified me, I felt my heart in my breeches. My clerical
friend and the agent called upon me and bade me be of good cheer. At the office
of the mayor I was obliged to answer a number of interogatories; but contrary
to my expectation, I was treated with great attention by some of the persons
present, which explained the words of my friend the agent when he bade me be of
good cheer. Instead of the punishment which I expected for the forgery, I was
dismissed with politeness, and returned home with a heart as light as a
feather. Finding myself thus patronized, and finding that the interest of the
king my master was substantially supported by men in authority, I determined to
publish another Censor, to which I annexed my last will and testament, or my
last libel upon the patriotic Americans. Little did I then imagine that what
was suggested by a sportive imagination, was a presentiment of my end. This
last effort was too audacious -- it excited general indignation and caused an
information to be lodged against me of a conspiracy against the government. I
was arrested, my papers were seized and the plan discovered, to subjugate this
Country to the power of great Britain. I was tried for high treason, convicted
and sentenced to be hanged and my body to be delivered to the professor of
anatomy for dissection. Thus have I arrived at life's gole, and thus am I
rewarded for an uninterrupted course of infamy and wretchedness. I hope my
unhappy fate will prove a warning to others and that an ignominious end will
make some atonement for the crimes of my life. My object was, and I now
solemnly confess it in the presence of an offended Deity, to re-establish the
British dominion in this country, and to restore the United States again to
their dependence upon great Britain, and to accomplish this I traduced the
character of FRANKLIN and of PAIN, and of every patriot who aided in the
revolution, and have remained faithful to his first purpose. To effect an
object so desirable I sneered at the late revolution and endeavored to throw
disgrace upon it and the actors in it, as my writings will testify. The
Democrats were my abhorrence for they were in the way of my plans. They were
constantly on the watch, and often sounding alarm. Had it not been for their
machinations, my life would not at this moment be so near its close, neither
would the plans of my employers have proved abortive. My last breath shall be
spent in cursing them for foiling me, in cursing the American and French
Revolutions and every thing that looks like republicanism, or liberty and
equality.

"Now heaven fulfill my curses on their heads!
May every purpose of their souls be frustrate!
May infamy and ruin overtake them!
May base captivity and chains overwhelm them!
May shameful crimson from their shoulders start,
Like mine dishonored by the servile scourge!"
EXECUTION AND DISSECTION OF PETER PORCUPINE.
WITH A GLOSSARY, BY THE AUTHOR.
ON Saturday last made his exit, owing to a hempen neck-cloth being drawn too
tightly about his neck, on the public square near the Centre-house, one of
PITT'S hirelings, known by the name of PETER PORCUPINE. He appeared to have had
a presentiment of his fate, whether from an accusing conscience, or from some
intimation given him by his friend Beelzebub, cannot now be known; but such was
his impression of the approaching and awful moment, that he made his last will
and testament, in which he intended some atonement for his life, by bequeathing
his body for dissection. As the causes of diseases are very often discovered by
dissection, and remedies are found out by the ascertainment of the causes, it
seemed to be his opinion, that there either might exist a physical derangement,
by which moral infirmity was excited, and which might be remedied by a
knowledge of the cause; or he deemed a submission of his carcass to the knife,
as all the atonement he could make for the transgressions of his life, and
therefore doomed himself to the exposure and fate of a felon. He was attended
on his visit to the public square by a would be divine, his particular friend
and counselor, and who was converted into an apostolic missionary as suddenly
after the failure in a cashiership, as St. Paul was on his way to Damascus,
though not by the same invisible agent. This pious priest and news-boy
endeavored to comfort him, by talking to him of a paradise, of which he knew
little, and about grace, of which he knew less; but Peter was like Rachel, who
wept over her lost children, and would not be comforted. Despair, the
consequence of an over-load of guilt, had seized him, and the apparent agony of
his mind excited the sympathy of an injured people. Like CLIVE, his eyes longed
for mercy; but like him, despair only was to be found. His fate was the most
eloquent and pathetic lecture on morality and religion, perhaps, that ever was
delivered. BOSSUET, in his famous funeral oration on Mary of Austria, the queen
of France, was not so eloquent, nor so impressive.

Agreeably to his own will and testament, and in conformity to a certain other
decree, his body was delivered to the anatomical professor for dissection,
which exhibited the folloing phenomenon: --

On the back was a cluster of long scars; they appeared like the cicatrices
from deep scarifications: the professor supposed them to have been occasioned
by a cat of nine tails, as he once discovered the same appearance on the back
of a British soldier, who had been severely whipped some time before his death.
On opening the thorax a foetor issued so offensive as to be nearly intolerable.
It resembled the smell from a dog in a state of putrefaction. On removing the
sternum the thoracic viscera exhibited a most extraordinary and unnatural
appearance. The lungs were of a crimson color, composed of three lobes, the
third lobe occupying the place of the mediastinum. They were of enormous size.
On making an incision into them a vapor arose which benumbed the faculties of
the bystanders. On applying a candle near the orifice, it was extinguished. A
mouse was held over the lungs and he instantly expired. These phoenomena led to
an opinion, that the air, which had been contained in the lungs, was of the
same kind with that in the grotto del cani near Naples, rendered famous by the
destruction of dogs, called formerly gas silvestre, but known at present by the
name of the aerial or cretaceous acid. A strong sulphurous stench arose from
the lungs; they were soon removed with a pair of tongs, and thrown into the
vault. The thorax seemed to be exclusively allotted to the lungs, for no other
viscus was to be found. Nothing remarkable appeared about the pleura.

On opening the abdomen the first thing which discovered itself was the spleen,
of an enormous size; it supplied the place of the stomach, extended itself
across the abdomen, and occupied a considerable portion of the hypogastric
region. It adhered to the diaphragm. On making an incision into it, a yellow
mist arose, which tinged and distorted every object; the effluvia had a
remarkable effect on the bye-standers; they no longer saw in each other same
persons; they became fretful and peevish, and would have quarrelled with each
other, had not the professor interposed, and by ordering the windows and doors
to be thrown open, dissipated the mist and restored the persons to their
original appearance. The oesophagus entered at the left orifice, which in the
stomach is known by the name of cardia and the rectum began at the right
orifice know by the name of pylorus. There was but one intestine, which might
be called the rectum, as it formed the anus. It was a straight gut, and had no
valves, by which it appeared that its contents could be discharged either
upwards or downwards.

The liver was of unusual size, and of a sooty color. On its concave side,
beginning at its upper part and extending itself as low down as the fissure,
was the gall bladder, of the dimensions of an ordinary urinary bladder. It was
in a state of extreme distension. On making an incision into it, a mud colored
fluid issued from it extremely fetid. Two ducts communicated with the gall
bladder; one from the oesophagus, and the other from the rectum. On opening the
unequal surface of the liver, a large sac discovered itself, in which was
contained a number of small living animals resembling toads. There was a
communication between this sac and the gall bladder, by means of a duct. On
being exposed to the light, these toad-like animals expired, apparently in
convulsive agonies.

Between the bladder and the anus, a small black substance attracted attention,
which was somewhat larger than a grape-shot. On examination, it was found to be
a heart, enveloped in a pericardium, which at first resisted the knife. After
some difficulty the pericardium was removed, and a fluid resembling coffee
grounds was discharged, which on examination appeared to be a substance similar
to the excrementitious matter from a hog. The heart, which was little larger
than that of a chicken, had a livid appearance, and in many places gangrenous
spots. Both auricles and ventricles, as well as the pulmonary artery, the
aorta, and the venoe cavoe, were charged with a dark colored fluid resembling
putrid bile. From the situation of the heart it might be said literally to have
been in his breeches.

The pancreas, or sweet bread, appeared either not to have existed or to have
been totally obliterated.

The cranium, or scull, almost baffled the efforts of the surgeons, it was of
such immense thickness and solidity. Several saws were ruined by it. -- On
removing it, the dura and pia matter made equal resistance to the scalpel; they
seemed to be formed of corneous matter. The brain was about the size of a
goose's egg. There was no cerebellum; the little which appeared was cerebrum
only. On cutting into the cerebrum it was hollow, and in the cavity were
myriads of small animals, which on examination with a glass resembled
tad-poles. The fluid which cherished them was of a mud color.

The tongue was bifurcated and perforated. At the root of it were two small
bags, the one containing a fluid like that in the gall bladder; the other like
that contained in the spleen. Each of these bags had a duct which entered them
from the oesophagus.

The ears had no lobes -- They appeared to have been pared away by a sharp
instrument.

The foregoing is a short but accurate account of the dissection of PETER
PORCUPINE, and the phoenomena which his carcass discovered. To the ingenious
and the learned will be left the solution of the extraordinary appearances.

GLOSSARY OF THE TERMS OF ART CONTAINED IN THE ABOVE DISSECTION.
Thorax, the breast.

Sternum the breast bone.

Thoracic viscera, the contents of the breast.

The lungs are composed of two lobes in natural cafes; but in the present case
there was one lobe extraordinary, which occupied the place of the mediastinum
-- the mediastinum is a membrane which forms a partition in the breast, and
divides it into two parts.

Gas silvestre, aerial or cretaccous acid, are synonimous terms for fixed air.

Pleura, a membrane which lines the inside of the breast.

Abdomen, lower belly.

Hypogastric region, that part of the body from the navel down to the bottom of
the belly and the hip bones.

Diaphragm, midriff, a fleshy and membraneous substance which forms a partition
between the breast and the belly.

Oesophagus, gullet.

Cardia, left orifice of the stomach.

Pylorus, the right orifice.

Rectum, one of the large guts.

Valve -- The guts have plaits to prevent the contents from passing upwards,
which are called valves.

Pericardium, a membrane that covers the heart; it contains a liquor to
lubricate the surface of the heart.

Auricles and ventricles -- The heart has four cavities; the two upper are
called auricles, and the two lower ventricles.

Pulmonary artery, one of the great blood vessels leading from the heart.

Aorta, the other great blood vessel leading from the heart.

Venae cavae, the large veins which return the blood to the heart.

Dura matter, a strong membrane which lines the inside of the skull.

Pia matter, a fine membrane which covers the brain.

Cerebellum, a portion of the brain which, according to the Shandean
hypothesis, is supposed to be the residence of the understanding.

Cerebrum, that part of the brain which ocupies the upper part of the head.

Lobes -- The lower and soft part of the ear is termed lobe.


