AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT LANSINGBURGH, ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, A. D. 1797, IN
CELEBRATION OF THE TWENTY-FIRST ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY CHAUNCEY LEE, A. M.

LANSINGBURGH: PRINTED BY R. MOFFITT and Co. 1797.

SIR,
YOUR declaration, among a circle of friends, on the 4th of July. of
unwillingness to publish, has hitherto prevented us from applying in form: But
the applications of our fellow-citizens to us have been so numerous and urgent
upon the subject, that we have to request of you a copy of your Oration, for
the press.

Hoping that you will gratify our request, We are, Sir, with respect and
esteem, Your much obliged and very Humble servants, Committee of Arrangements
for the Fourth of July, 1797.
Derick Lane, John Lovett, James Hickok, N. Schuyler, Eli Judson,

Mr. Chauncey Lee.

GENTLEMEN, July 10, 1797.
SENSIBLE of the honor done me by your application, and ready, on every proper
occasion, to subject my own feelings to the wishes and judgment of my friends*
the requested copy, under all its attending disadvantages, is humbly submitted
to your candid disposal.

With sentiments of the highest esteem and consideration, I am, Gentlemen,
Yours, etc. CHAUNCEY LEE.
Messrs. Derick Lane, etc. Committee of Arrangements, etc.



AN ORATION, etc.
Respected Friends, and Fellow-Citizens,
IN attempting to commemorate the Birthday of our country, the glorious
nativity of AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE, my mind is deeply impressed with the
magnitude of the subject, and the great disproportion between my abilities and
my wishes.

The interesting events, which this occasion presents to our view, have long
been the subject of political discussion. Indeed, they will ever afford the
most animating field to the Statesman and Historian, as well as the Poet and
the Orator, while genius and literature exist, or the love of Liberty and
Independence enkindle the fire of patriotism in the American breast. -- A theme
so interesting can never lose the charms of novelty. A field so extensive; so
richly fraught with every national blessing for its fruit; opening and
brightening with the lapse of years, and blooming with increasing fragrance to
the end of time, can never be barren of entertainment -- never cease to yield
an equal harvest of gratitude and joy. The splendour of such a bright
constellation of events, all brought to a point in the AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE as
their common center, like the glorious luminary of Heaven, leads the mind of
the beholder, dazzled with its luster, to the contemplation of the same Divine
Original. Like that, its beams are diffused in every direction. Its light has
already penetrated the dark abodes of despotism and the bright morning of
FREEDOM dawns upon a benighted world.

To what point in the horrizon, then, shall I first direct your view? Amidst
such a vast variety of objects, too interesting to be unnoticed, and yet too
numerous to be recited, by what rule is the selection to be made? -- what guide
shall direct me in the method of arrangement? -- Unversed, as I am, in the
science of government and politics -- unskilled in the arts of oratory --
enfeebled by (...) indisposition, and straitened for time in preparation; I
should have declined the difficult, though honorable part assigned me this day,
but for the interest I feel in the occasion, and the persuasive solicitations
of those whose requests, with me, have the force of commands. These
considerations it is hoped will heartily limit the bounds of expectation. --
Yes, I gather a generous encouragement from the very countenances of my
audience; a pleasing confidence that the imperfections of the speaker will be
hidden and lost in the importance of his subject. This confidence, indeed,
arises to assurance, when, in looking around me, I behold such a number of
tried patriots, who have personally wielded the sword in the bloody contest for
American Freedom, and who must ever, on this anniversary festival, experience a
superior, I had almost said, enviable elevation of sentiment, the most refined
participation of the general joy. To such I could freely commit myself, and
risque the language of patriotism for acceptance, were I but simply to remind
them, that this is the Birthday of American Independence -- the sweet, though
hard-earned reward of all their labors, dangers and wounds, in the cause of our
common country.

To commemorate, with decent expressions of festivity and mirth, events of
great national importance -- such as manifest the distinguishing favor and
goodness of Heaven, and, in their effects, are productive of rich and extensive
blessings to mankind, is a rational and highly-becoming exercise -- an exercise
which duty joins with inclination to enforce. This sentiment we are warranted
to adopt, both from the examples and precepts on sacred record, and the uniform
practice of mankind in all ages and countries.

And, among all the events which dazzle upon the page of American history, in
which is the prosperity of our country more deeply interested, than in the one
we are now convened to celebrate? The FOURTH OF JULY must ever stand foremost
on the list of American festivals. On this day we will annually join our joyful
acclamations with those of our brethren throughout the extensive continent. Nor
is this all: We will hand down this heroic DECLARATION of INDEPENDENCE, a rich
legacy, and firm guarantee to our children's children -- the unborn millions of
posterity shall arise and bless the Day, and every succeeding generation unite
to perpetuate the joy.

Twenty-one years have now elapsed, since the commencement of this joyful era
-- since those immortal Patriots, the members of the first American Congress,
in the face of incensed despotism, and in defiance of the most powerful and
warlike nation in Europe -- though unassisted, unarmed, unallied, and invested
with fleets and armies; with that resolution which surmounted every difficulty
-- with that heroism which braved every danger, and with that firmness and
fortitude which shocked even our enemies, and astonished the world -- after
reciting a lengthy catalogue of our sufferings and wrongs -- boldly renounced
all allegiance to the British Crown, and declared, for themselves and their
bleeding Country, that these (till then) thirteen Colonies, WERE* AND OF RIGHT
OUGHT TO BE, FREE AND INDEPENDENT STATES. -- For the support of this important
declaration, and that they would never recede from their purpose, they mutually
pledged "their lives, their fortunes, and their most sacred honor;" at the same
time addressing a solemn appeal to Heaven for the justice of our cause, and the
vindication of our injured rights.

This declaration has been read to you, and, I doubt not, has excited in every
breast emotions congenial with those from which they originally flowed; a
detestation of tyranny; a conscious dignity of the American character; a spark
of the immortal fire of Seventy-six.

In the happy enjoyment of the fruits of Independence, the copious blessings of
Liberty, Prosperity and Peace, it is with a mixture of pain and exultation, we
look back on the horrors of war, the momentous scenes of danger, difficulty and
distress, through which we have passed; while in these we recount the price of
our blessings, and review the successful struggles of our country, in the
bloody contest for Freedom and Independence.

To trace each interesting occurrence in the various vicissitudes of the war,
would as far exceed the limits of my ability, as of my time; and, indeed, would
be as unnecessary as it is impracticable. So far, however, (...) is necessary
to appreciate the present happiness of our Country, and inspire us with a
becoming sense of gratitude to Heaven, we may, we ought to proceed. It is a
task, on this occasion, as indispensable as it is pleasing: It is a debt we owe
to the honor of our Country, and the smallest tribute of praise we can render
to the goodness and mercy of our God.

With the grand outlines of the animating scene presented in retrospective
view, let us look back to the commencement of the controversy, and glance at a
few of the most engaging circumstances, in that series of astonishing events,
connected with the final triumph of Patriotism, that foundation and top-stone
in the Temple of Liberty, the INDEPENDENCE of AMERICA.

From all which, in application to ourselves and our Country, we must readily
adopt the devout language of the sweet Singer of Israel, and thankfully
acknowledge, If it had not been the LORD who was on our side, now may America
say; if it had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men rose up against
us; then they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against
us. Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us a prey to their teeth: But we
are escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowler; the snare is broken, and
we are escaped. Our help is in the name of the Lord, who made Heaven and Earth.

What but the gracious interposition of Divine Providence, so instantly
combined the dependent and defenseless colonies, from New Hampshire to Georgia,
in the most determined defense of their dearest rights, in opposition to an
unnatural enemy, whose power was both the envy and the dread of Europe? Who but
the God of armies, inspired that spirit of military enthusiasm, which at the
first effusion of American blood, like an electric shock* pervaded the
extensive continent, and fired every breast, from tottering seventy, to
beardless sixteen? -- The Lord God of hosts blew the trumpet, and sounded the
alarm of war. The signal was not given in vain -- the alarm was thoroughly
received. All, of every age and sex, were aroused. The whole country was in
motion, as if actuated by one soul. -- Innumerable as the leaves of Autumn, the
indignant sons of America poured forth in arms to repel the invasions of the
enemy, and avenge the blood of their slaughtered brethren. All was exertion.
All was enterprise. All was courage, while our dearest rights were at stake;
and no alternative presented us but freedom or chains. -- See the hobbling
cripple, shouldering his crutch, in defiance of British thunder! -- See the
tender mother, animating her young sons to battle, with the heroic resolution,
to conquer or to die! -- See the thickening brigades of schoolboys, in the
manual exercise of arms by moonlight, in all the military parade of hostile
banners, wooden muskets, and the martial music of fife and drum! -- See, with
transport see, that illustrious character, raised up by Heaven to be the
Defender, the Savior, and the Father of his Country, the great, the immortal
Washington, "whose head is a Senate, and whose arm is a Host," in obedience to
the call of his country, unsheathe his sword in the cause of Liberty, and lead
forth our undisciplined troops to the field! -- See the armies of our haughty
enemies* after ravaging, plundering and burning many defenseless parts of our
country, at length compelled to pile their arms to American bravery, and
surrender themselves prisoners to those whom so lately they affected to despise
as cowards and paltroons!

But I lose myself, and forget my (...) while indulging the pleasing review.
Sufficient is (...) to add, that the sacred pledge of perseverance, consecrated
by our fathers in Congress, was not forfeited, nor the precious blood and
treasure of our country expenced in vain. Protecting Heaven accepted our solemn
appeal -- the glorious prize for which we contended was won, and the triumph of
Liberty rendered complete, by the final restoration and establishment of Peace,
upon the broad basis of Independence.

But, while celebrating the warlike atchievments of our country, and the
glorious success of our arms, let us once more look back to the desolating
scene of war, and forget not a duty we owe to the memory of the dead. Let us
drop the tear of affection and gratitude over the urn of those brave defenders
of our rights, MONTGOMERY, MERCER, WARREN, WOOSTER, and the long list of their
compatriots, who nobly fell in the field of battle, and sealed our Independence
with their blood. Hail* illustrious shades! Your country's pride and boast!
Victims to the rage of tyranny, martyrs in the cause of Liberty, you fell; but
how noble, how enviable your exit! Yours is the bed of glory, though sleeping in
the dust! Yours the reward of everlasting renown! Your names shall never die.
Your memory, embalmed in the heart of your grateful country, shall be
transmitted down, with love and veneration* to the latest posterity!

We now turn from the calamities of war, to the blessings of Peace, and behold
our country no longer a field of blood, but a land of peace; the field of
agriculture and commerce -- a nursery of the arts and sciences, an asylum for
the oppressed, and at once the envy and admiration of the world.

Peace, however, brought its dangers, as well as war. Victorious over our
enemies in the field, while the pressure of common danger firmly united our
interests and our exertions, our danger next arose from ourselves. That
government, which during the war was duly respected and implicitly obeyed, by
change of circumstances at the return of Peace, became weak and inefficient;
and the separate sovereignties of the States were found incompatible with the
harmony of the Union, and the political happiness of the whole. But, to the
disappointment of our enemies, we were preserved from the threatening danger of
Anarchy.

This important crisis served, in the issue, to prove that America was as
capable of enjoying, as of defending her rights. By an event unknown in any
former age of the world, this memorable era is distinguished. A revolution of
national government, effected in time of peace, by candid consultation, mutual
concessions, and voluntary adoption; with the calmness and deliberation of
reason and philosophy. -- By a convention of our wisest and most enlightened
Citizens, delegated from each of the States, a new constitution of government
was formed, proposed to the States, and by them severally examined and adopted.
The new Government was organized; and, during eight years experience of its
administration, the unrivalled prosperity of our Country, affords the highest
eulogium upon our Federal Constitution.

The beloved WASHINGTON, by the unanimous voice of the millions of America, is
again called from his favorite retirement, and appears at the head of
administration, like the Sun in the midst of the system, the common center of
union and attraction -- the common source of light and happiness. In this
relation we again recognize this wonderful man as the Savior of his Country,
and behold him as great in the Cabinet, as he was glorious in the Field. The
blessing of Peace, procured by his valor and fortitude in the one, has been no
less preserved and continued to us, by his wisdom and firmness in the other. No
man ever deserved so much of his country. No other man ever displayed such
greatness and magnanimity of character, in divesting himself of power; in
relinquishing the highest object of ambition and retiring from the chief
magistracy of a free people, to the state of a private Citizen. -- O
Washington! the brightness of thine example, and the superior luster and
dignity of thy character, are too far beyond the reach of imitation, to be ever
the objects of envy. Laden with the good wishes, the blessings* and the prayers
of thy grateful country; through the calm evening of thy retirement, may thou
long enjoy that sublime satisfaction, peculiarly thine own, of seeing the
happiness of millions, as the issue of all thy labors, cares and dangers* through
a life most eminently devoted to the service of thy country.

Comparing our (...), with that of the European nations, can we my fellow
citizens, help realizing the exellency of our free government, and especially
the rich and important blessings of Peace? There, for years past, we have
beheld the destroying Angel of war raging with the utmost violence, and
spreading desolation, rapine and murder; while unnumbered thousands and
millions of our fellow-men, in those nations which have been for ages immured
in the Bastile of Slavery, are still involved in the shades of ignorance, and
groaning under the iron hand of despotism. -- But what a happy reverse do we
enjoy! And, while hoping in GOD for the continuance of our national peace, what
obligations of gratitude to Heaven are we under! what cause of rejoicing is
this day presented us! what grounds of daily and constant felicitation does
every prospect afford! We will therefore "eat our bread with cheerfulness, and
drink our wine with a merry heart."

But, my friends, while contemplating the respectable and flourishing state of
our nation* the happy administration of our Government, and the excellence of
our Constitution, against which, like an immovable rock of (...), the intrigues
of foreign influence, with the vile plots of internal faction, have dashed
their furious waves in vain; and while we duly appreciate the merits of those
living and departed worthies, as instruments of our political happiness, who,
through storms and tempests, (...) and faction, have conducted us to
Independence, Glory and Empire: -- amidst such a cluster of dazzling objects,
all tending to awaken emotions of national pride: let us carefully guard
against the arrogance of prosperity -- realize our dependence on Heaven, and
our unspeakable obligations to the beneficent Author of all our happiness. This
will sweeten the charms of social (...), (...) every sensation of pleasure by
adding gratitude to joy, and dignify the warm sensibility of the Patriot with
the exalted virtues of the Christian.

With this sublime sentiment in our hearts, let us direct the mental view
toward the extensive landscape of our political happiness, and cast a glance
(for a glance is all we can now indulge) upon the present and future prosperity
of America, together with their probable influence upon the general happiness
of mankind.

This continent which we inhabit, in many striking respects, appears
distinguished from every other quarter of the world. Here the productions of
the earth, and the innate advantages of territorial situation, for agriculture,
commerce, and all the arts of peace, are bestowed with a more munificent hand,
and lay a foundation for superior advances, in every improvement calculated to
promote the happiness of man. The objects in the natural world, the animals,
trees, rivers, lakes and mountains, we see formed upon a more large and liberal
scale. Its habitable territory spreads out to an almost immeasurable extent;
while the whole assemblage presents to the contemplation of the astonished
beholder, a theater for the noblest scenes of Time* and on which the last and
finishing Act of the World's grand drama will be displayed.

By our civil and religious privileges, we are most happily distinguished from
all other nations. The stability of our government, by which all our precious
rights are guaranteed and secured, is tried and proved. Our present Executive,
placed in his important station by the suffrages of his country, uncombined
with the least share of foreign influence in his appointment, is, perhaps, of
all men the fittest and best-deserving to succeed a Washington. Of this, his
firm and dignified conduct, upon the late trying occasion, gives us the fullest
attestation.

Our public revenue arising from the duties of impost, without recurring to
internal direct taxation, is found adequate to the expenses of government and
the ordinary exigencies of State, together with the payment of our national
debt. This, I think, we may with confidence assert, while assured of the fact,
that there is now in the federal treasury the sum of 700,000 dollars of
unappropriated money, the surplus of every public expenditure.

The rewards of industry which our country affords, are such as to spread with
plenty the tables of the poorest class of our citizens. -- New and useful
improvements to facilitate the labor of the husbandman and the artist, are
continually increasing. -- Here genius and literature have ample scope, and the
interests of education meet with liberal encouragement. -- Here the religion of
the Gospel, in its purity, is enjoyed -- the rights of conscience duly
respected -- and toleration and intoleration, those creatures of a national
ecclesiastic establishment, are unknown -- are both discarded and despised, as
alike absurd, and equally inconsistent with the spirit of a free government. --
Here Agriculture and Commerce, the grand pillars of national prosperity, have
fixed their favorite seat. The amazing advantages of inland navigation we
possess, may soon, by the labor of art, be carried to such a pitch of
improvement, as to exceed our present expectations, or conceptions. The
benefits resulting will be proportionate. New cities will be seen suddenly
starting up in the interior wilds of the country, with the rapidity of this
delightful village we inhabit; and these vacant plains, and yonder woody
eminence, be all thickly overspread with the elegant mansions of affluence, and
stored with the richest treasures of commerce.

The rapidity of our population stands unexampled in the history of man. Our
present ratio of increase is such, and such the extent of our territory yet
unsettled, that, with the continuance of peace, it, perhaps, will be but a
moderate calculation, that in fifty years hence, the Sun will daily roll over
as many United States of America, possessed by as many millions of inhabitants.

And, when we consider the connection of our national prosperity with the
general happiness of mankind, already begun, and swiftly progressing toward
Universal Liberty; how pleasing, how unspeakably animating is the prospect!
Reason, as well as tradition and revelation, leads us to expect a more improved
and happy state of human affairs will take place, before the final consummation
of all things. The world has been hitherto gradually improving; light and
knowledge have been gaining ground; and human life, compared with what it once
was, is much the same that a youth approaching to manhood is, compared with an
infant. -- The spirit of Commerce is happily calculated by the Author of
wisdom, to open an amicable intercourse between all countries -- to soften the
horrors of war -- to enlarge the field of science and speculation, and induce
all men to regard each other as brethren and friends. -- In the progress of
light and knowledge, now beaming forth from America, we may contemplate, in a
kind of prophetic view, the arrival of that happy period, when peace, and
friendship, and brotherly-love, shall pervade the great Family of Man. Our
children may see the day, when national differences will forever cease to be
decided by the sword -- when all the nations of the earth, seeing their rights
and interests to be the same, will voluntarily combine to form one GRAND,
UNIVERSAL, FEDERAL REPUBLIC, founded upon a Constitution copied from that of
the United States of America. Happy! thrice happy for the world, in that day,
should a WASHINGTON be found to preside!

How transporting to the heart of every true American, must be the prospect of
so happy a period, especially when viewed as ultimately originating in the
INDEPENDENCE of his Country! -- What dignity does it attach to the present
Anniversary! What exalted motives of rejoicing in the present happiness, and
future glory of America!

THE END.

