DR. LEWIS's ELECTION SERMON, MAY 11, 1797.

THE POLITICAL ADVANTAGES OF GODLINESS.

A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR, AND THE HONORABLE
LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF CONNECTICUT, CONVENED AT HARTFORD ON THE
ANNIVERSARY ELECTION.

MAY 11, 1797.

By Isaac Lewis, D. D. PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN GREENWICH.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON and GOODWIN. 1797.

At a General Assembly of the State of Connecticut, holden at Hartford on the
second Thursday of May, Anno Domini 1797.
ORDERED, That the Hon. JOSEPH P. COOK and Col. EBENEZER MEAD present the
Thanks of this Assembly to the Rev. ISAAC LEWIS, D. D. for his Sermon,
delivered at the anniversary Election, on the 11th of May, instant, before the
General Assembly, and request a Copy thereof that it may be printed.

A true Copy of Record, Examined, By SAMUEL WYLLYS, Sec'ry.

ELECTION SERMON.
1 TIMOTHY iv.8. -- GODLINESS is profitable unto all things, having promise of
the life that now is, and of that which is to come.
IN all situations and conditions of life, true religion is of the first
importance. It is the solace of those, who are placed in the vale of poverty
and affliction; the sweetener of all the unambitious enjoyments, of the middle
walks of private life; and the highest ornament to the persons, and characters
of the rich, the honorable, and the great. Without it, no man can be either
truly, or lastingly happy. Were this divine guest to be banished from the
society of men, this world would become but the abode of folly and
wretchedness; and man, with all his boasted reason and superiority, inferior,
in point of real enjoyment, to the herds who graze the fields.

THE sentiments of St. Paul on this subject, are clearly expressed in our text
and context. After cautioning Timothy to avoid perplexing himself and others,
with the fabulous traditions of the Jews, and their endless genealogies, and
exhorting him, like the athleticks in the Grecian games, to exert his uttermost
labor and diligence, in pursuing and promoting the doctrines and duties of true
piety, as an argument to enforce the ^hole he introduces the words of our text.
Godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that now
is, and of that which is to come.

THESE motives to godliness, though first addressed to Timothy, apply with
equal force and propriety to all men, of every age and condition. The import of
the text is briefly this, "Godliness is every way advantageous. Whoever shall
experience the power of it, will thence derive a rich harvest of gain. Beside
the crown of immortal glory, which it infallibly secures to its possessor, it
will produce the highest satisfaction, of which the human mind is capable, in
the present state of existence. Its advantages are eminent in all stations, and
situations, and in the prosecution of every business, proper to engage the
attention of mankind."

IF then godliness have promises of good to be enjoyed in this life, as well as
in that which is to come, if it be profitable unto all things, we may doubtless
with safety conclude, that effectual aid may be derived from it, in the
administration of civil government; and that, if generally and faithfully
practiced, it would most essentially contribute toward obtaining for, and
securing to a community, all the important ends of its institution.

To illustrate this observation, is the proposed object of the present
discourse. Preparatory to which, a concise view of the nature of godliness, and
of the ends of civil government will first be taken.

GODLINESS is a term used in two senses; the one limited, and the other more
general. In its limited sense, it includes only the duties of piety toward God.
In its general sense, it comprises all the duties prescribed by the christian
religion; those which we owe to our fellow-men, and to ourselves, as well as
those which we owe to God. The apostle, in our text, uses the term in its most
general sense, as appears from the extensive benefits, which, he assures us,
will flow from a faithful practice of its various duties. These duties cannot
now be minutely detailed. It may however be proper to observe in general, that
they may be divided into four classes, the duties we owe to God, to Christ, to
our fellow-men, and to ourselves.

IN the first of these, are comprised supreme love to God, a fixed dependence
on, and a humble trust in him, a cordial submission to his providential
dispensations, together with conformity to his revealed will.

IN the second, are included faith in the mediator, accompanied with a daily
and sincere attention to him, considered as our teacher, our example and
lawgiver, our advocate and intercessor with the father.

IN the third, are contained universal love to mankind, mercy, justice,
beneficence, truth and the forgiveness of injuries.

THE fourth, comprehends the graces of humility, meekness, prudence, fortitude
and self-government.

ALL the before mentioned virtues are briefly comprehended, by our divine
master, in the following expressive words. "Thou shall love the Lord thy God,
with all thy heart, and thy neighbor as thyself" These unitedly constitute
that godliness, which is urged on us in our text, as being every way conducive
to the advancement, of all the important interests of mankind.

BUT in order to determine, how far godliness contributes to the obtainment of
the great ends of civil institutions, it will be necessary to enquire what
those ends are? Or what are the great objects, all governments ought to pursue,
and which all good governments actually do pursue, though with different
degrees of success? These, it is supposed, may be all comprehended in the
following particulars.

1. THE primary object of civil institutions is to prevent those evils, which,
considering the depravity of mankind, would certainly result from a state of
nature.

SELFISHNESS is the predominant principle of fallen man. This, by being
supreme, necessarily excludes the fear of God, and benevolence to our
fellow-men. And among a number of individuals, ununited by any social compact,
would produce a state of constant mutual hostility. In such a situation,
jarring interests would at once enkindle the fire, and constantly fan the flame
of discord; and of course banish peace and security. No protection, except what
may be derived from personal prowess, can be obtained by individuals, in a
state of nature. Life and property are equally insecure. Indeed without some
kind of civil association, the last must be extremely limited. The power of an
individual, unassisted by those arts, which flourish only under the protection
of civil government, is wholly incompetent to the acquisition of more property,
than a bare sufficiency for a scanty subsistence. But admitting the possibility
of acquiring considerable property in a state of nature, still it would only
serve to invite plunder, and lawless invasion. The more one possessed, the
greater would be his danger. And if his strength should prove sufficient, to
resist a single invader, it must unavoidably yield to the superior force of a
combination of those, who would choose to live by rapine, rather than submit to
the toils of daily labor.

THE evils to which men would unavoidably be exposed, in a state of nature, we
may learn from those, which have ever been attendant on revolutions. During
such changes there is ever a period, in which laws lose their influence, and
licentiousness prevails. This reign of anarchy is at its most alarming crisis,
in that stage of a revolution which intervenes, between the destruction of the
old, and the establishment of new principles and maxims of government. It is
probable that no revolution was ever effected in any country, with less of
these evils, than the recent one here in America. In our own State, very few
disorders appeared; owing perhaps principally to the inconsiderable
alterations, which the revolution produced. But in some parts of the union, the
most fatal evils were experienced. Law was no longer a restraint, right no
longer regarded, property was invaded, virtue insulted, chastity polluted, and
life sacrificed, by abandoned ruffians, who, having broken over every
restraint, rioted on the spoils of their innocent neighbors. Under an
inexpressibly more dreadful experience of these, and many other similar evils,
it is well known, one of the principal kingdoms of Europe, has for several
years been groaning.

THESE things have been mentioned, solely with a view of exhibiting a specimen
of what may be expected from a state of nature. To prevent their existence, as
far as possible, to secure to individuals the peaceable possession of life,
liberty and property, is a primary object of civil government. And its tendency
to accomplish this purpose, undoubtedly wrought a coviction of its absolute
necessity, in the minds of men, in the early ages of the world.

2. ANOTHER object worthy of the pursuit of government, is the promotion of the
greatest good of the whole community, so far as that may be effected, without
injury done to others.

PRIVATE interest, or the good of an individual, farther than it may be
considered as involved in the good of the whole, ought not to be, and cannot
consistently be the object of the social compact. As the whole is greater than
its parts, so the good of a community is greater than the private interest of
any individual. And to cause a greater interest to suffer, for the purpose of
advancing a less, is a violation of the order of nature, and of the laws of
equity and reason. A community is but one great family; in which, every member
ought to consider his own interest, as involved in that of the whole; and this
whole ought to swallow up every private or detached interest. As no private
family can be happy, where each member is actuated solely by a principle of
self-gratification; as such a line of conduct will produce a constant clashing
of interests, which will unavoidably issue in contention and animosity; so no
state can enjoy political happiness, where the public good is neglected, and an
attachment to private, becomes the ruling passion. Hence cabals are always
injurious, and ought to be opposed and even despised, as destructive of the
great ends of civil society. They invariably have for their object, some party
design. And the setting up of such an interest as the principal object of
pursuit, is in the nature of it, hostile to public good. Private emolument
cannot be set in competition with public, without endangering the latter. And
to endanger the public good, for any private advantage, is always to sacrifice
the greater interest to the less.

FROM these observations it appears, that the good which ought to be the object
of government is the public good; and that in competition with it, no private
or party interest ought ever to be placed.

BUT it is further to be observed, that although the greatest good of a
community, ought to be the leading object of its government, yet even this is
not to be pursued, by such measures as are injurious to other communities.
Although the interest of an individual may be sacrificed, where it is
absolutely necessary to promote the greatest good of the public, of which he is
a member; yet it by no means follows, that a state or kingdom, in order to
promote its own advantage, possesses a right to adopt such measures, as are
injurious to a sister state. It is as inconsistent with every rule of moral
obligation, for one state to commit injustice against another, as it is for an
individual to rob or plunder his neighbor. All mankind are brethren, the
children of the same common parent. Different states are correlatives of each
other. The great christian law which prescribes our duty toward our neighbors,
considered in our individual capacity, will, if observed, regulate the conduct
of states toward each other.

ALTHOUGH politicians have burdened the science of government, with many
intricacies, which may, not improperly, be called the chicanery of courts; yet,
if inexperience may be permitted to risk an opinion, we should say that it is
reducible to a few plain principles. To love our neighbor as ourselves -- To
do to others as we would that they should do to us, are rules of moral conduct
as applicable to communities, as to individuals. Nor can any reason be assigned
in justification of fraud, injustice, oppression, or cruelty in a body of men,
more than in a single person. On the contrary, where a body of men practice
injustice, the crime is far greater, than a similar act of injustice performed
by an individual: because in the one case, the guilt is confined to a single
subject, and in the other, it extends to a whole community; and because the
evil consequences of public injustice, and the injuries done by it, are far
more extensive, than those of private. When one nation is guilty of injustice
toward another, thousands and millions may feel the injury. It is not in human
power to calculate the evils, which will follow one deliberate act of such
injustice. It will be readily granted, that the evils of private injustice are
many. Among these may be enumerated expensive lawsuits, the disaffection of
families to each other, and all the usual consequences of private hatred. Yet
admitting the worst that can follow, the civil law is a barrier, which will
always check and restrain these evils, and confine them within certain limits.
But when one nation practices gross injustice against another, there is no
common arbiter, either to decide the contention, or to control its destructive
effects. War commonly bursts forth like a sweeping deluge, overwhelming and
confounding the innocent with the guilty; and inflicting on whole countries
greater, and more durable calamities, than any of the usual scourges, by which
heaven corrects the madness of mankind.

THE foregoing observations sufficiently prove, that national injustice is far
more criminal in itself, and far more fatal in its consequences, than private.
And of consequence, that the same moral rule of righteousness, which the
scriptures have prescribed to individuals, and by which they are bound to
regulate their conduct, ought to be adopted by nations, and faithfully adhered
to, in all their treatment of each other. Hence will appear the justice of the
remark before made, that although the greatest public good of a community,
ought to be the end of its government, yet even that object, great and
important as it is, ought never to be pursued, by means, which involve in them,
a violation of the rights of other nations.

BUT notwithstanding the evident truth of this remark, it is to be lamented,
that a policy directly repugnant to the rules of moral justice, has been too
prevalent among all nations. The Roman love of their country, so much the boast
of her citizens and so highly celebrated by her best writers, even in the
purest days of that republic, was but a selfish contracted principle. Its
object was the aggrandizement of their commonwealth, not only without any
regard to the happiness of other nations, but at the expense of their
liberties, privileges and independence. Their love of their country, led them
to destroy, or at least to subjugate every neighboring state, which stood in
the way of the enlargement of their empire, or whose interest was inconsistent
with their own ambitious views. Justly were they characterized by the spirit of
prophesy as a beast dreadful and terrible, and strong exceedingly; as devouring
and breaking in pieces, and stamping the residue with their feet.

IT is with the deepest regret, that truth obliges us to confess, that too
similar to this detestable example, has been the policy of modern, as well as
ancient nations. While the rulers of kingdoms have been careful to inculcate
mutual justice among their subjects, by wise and salutary laws, they appear to
have forgotten that national justice is a virtue; or not to be sensible, that
there is any thing criminal in injuring a neighboring state, where the power
of doing it is possessed, and an opportunity offered. While the private robber,
who forces from an individual a small sum, must expiate his crime on a gibbet,
it has been but too common for one nation to rob another of whole provinces,
not only without censure, but with a tribute of praise for their martialy
atchievments. To this fatal source, the injustice of nations toward each other,
is to be attributed the awful scourge of war, with all its dreadful calamities.
If the cause could once be suppressed, the effect would cease; and the prophecy
of universal peace, so frequently repeated in the sacred writings, meet with an
immediate accomplishment. The instruments of war would then be converted into
implements of husbandry; nation would not lift up sword against nation, nor
would they learn war any more.

THESE few remarks on national injustice have been made, to call to the minds
of this audience, the evils, which must necessarily result from the prevalency
of that unjust policy, which leads a nation to advance her own interest, by
acts of injustice done to others. And likewise for the purpose of explaining in
what sense, the public good ought to be the object of political institutions.
To avoid the evils of a state of nature, and to promote the greatest national
happiness, have been mentioned as the proper ends of government. These, are
considered as including not only the particular objects, which have been
brought up to view in what has been said, but whatever tends to the prosperity
of a nation.

WE will now proceed to enquire, what advantages, in the pursuit of these ends,
may be derived from the practice of godliness.

1. GODLINESS will be productive of national felicity, by securing the fidelity
of rulers.

THAT national happiness and misery, are closely connected with the character
and conduct of those who hold the reins of government, approaches nigh to a
self-evident proposition. At least it is a truth which a very little
argumentation will support, and which has been fully confirmed by all history,
both sacred and profane. The government of an Ahab, and a Manasseh, of a Nero
and a Caligula, afford unequivocal proofs of the misery of a people, destined
to endure the scourge of wicked and tyranical rulers. "When the righteous are
in authority, the people rejoice, but when the wicked bears rule, the people
mourn." An unprincipled magistrate is regardless of the public good, and wholly
under the influence of selfish and mercenary views. In such hands neither the
property, the liberty nor the life of the people are secure. These may, and
most probably often will be sacrificed to the lust, the ambition, the avarice,
and even the caprice of the tyrant. The public good is unspeakably too precious
a deposite, to be betrusted to such men. He who disregards the obligations he
is under to his God, cannot be supposed suitably to feel those which he is
under to his fellow men. He will rather be led to consider his exaltation to
office, as raising him above the restraints, laid upon his unofficed brethren,
and as affording him an opportunity for indulging with impunity, the
selfishness and wickedness of his heart. A ruler destitute of virtue, will
without doubt in a greater or less degree be guilty of malepractice. And a
government badly administered, will produce evils introductory, both to public
and private infelicity. There is an inseparable connection between the moral
character of rulers, and their administrations. If the former be vicious,
corruption will appear in the latter, and a corrupted administration militates
against the very ends of the social compact. And of course is inconsistent with
the happiness of a community. -- The liberties of a nation are always extremely
unsafe, in the hands of vicious rulers; and the miseries which nations have
suffered under the government of such characters, are to be ranked with the
heaviest of divine judgments.

IF then vice in authority be destructive of public felicity, it is but
rational to conclude that virtue exalted to power, must be productive of
directly contrary effects; and that a pious magistracy must afford the most
encouraging prospect, of national happiness. The magistrate, who to the natural
and acquired abilities necessary to prepare him for office, adds the fear of
God, a reverence for the dictates of his own conscience, and that love to his
fellowmen, implied in true godliness, will not fail to make the good of his
constituents, the ultimate object of his political pursuits. His example will
uniformly be in favor of virtue, and his abilities steadily exerted to support
and maintain that "righteousness which exalts a nation, and to discountenance
and suppress that vice which is a reproach to any people." As a legislator, he
will disregard local prejudices and party views, and ever give his voice in
favor of such laws, as he believes to be founded in justice and public utility;
and oppose with firmness, and uncorruptible integrity those of an opposite
tendency. As a judge, his decisions will be guided by law and equity, without
partiality for, or prejudice against any man. In whatever station he is called
to serve his country, he will remember that he is accountable for his conduct
not only to his fellow citizens, but to the supreme ruler of the universe; that
he has a most important trust committed to him; that he is a minister of God,
for good to his people; that the primary design to his honorary appointment,
was to capacitate him to employ all his talents, in promoting and diffusing
happiness through the community; and that he answers the great end of his being
called into office, only so far as he steadfastly pursues this grand object.
And that a greater proportion of happiness will be enjoyed by a people, where
their rulers are actuated by such disinterested motives, than where they are
influenced by selfishness, is too evident to need proof. It is as unnecessary
to prove, that men of piety are not only the most likely to pursue the public
good, but the only characters, from whom we have reason steadily to expect,
such disinterested conduct. Nothing can afford so great a security for the
fidelity of rulers, as godliness. Other motives may for a time produce
unexceptionable conduct. But the influence of these other motives will be ever
uncertain, and at best subservient to selfish views. The public good will
always be abandoned by such a mind, whenever it is considered as directly
opposed to private interest.

No men, in any situation or employment, are so sensible of the obligations
they are under to fidelity as the truly religious. No others so fully perceive
its importance, or are so deeply impressed with a conviction of its necessity.
Religion is a crown of glory to all who possess it. It does not of itself
prepare men for office, either in church or state. But where they are otherways
prepared, the addition of true religion, above every thing, contributes to
their fidelity and usefulness. This observation applies with as much propriety,
and force to the civil magistracy, as to any official characters. Fidelity in
that office, is essential to national prosperity. So that godliness, when it
lives and reigns in the hearts and lives of the magistrates of a country,
contributes directly, and most essentially to the public happiness.

2. GODLINESS is no less salutary to a community, by the influence, which it
has on the great body of the people.

As it secures the fidelity of rulers, so it makes good citizens. If its
practice could once become universal in a nation, it would produce such a
conduct in all ranks, as would issue in general prosperity. So far as national
happiness depends, on the promotion of the social virtues -- on the cultivation
of benevolence, kindness, justice and charity -- on the prevalence of harmony
and tranquillity, the practice of godliness has a direct tendency to its
advancement. Godliness teaches us to do justly, to love mercy and to walk
humbly with God. To owe no man any thing, but to love one another. To render to
all their dues, tribute to whom tribute, custom to whom custom, fear to whom
fear, honor to whom honor is due. And, to comprehend the whole in few words, to
love our neighbor as ourselves. So far as these virtues promote public
happiness, or are any way conducive to the prosperity of a nation; so far the
salutary influence of godliness is indisputable. As it respects the duties of
the second table of the law, it consists in the exercise of these very virtues.
And how far the practice of them actually does contribute to national
prosperity, we may learn from the evils which their opposite vices never fail
to produce. Fraud, injustice, anger, wrath and hatred are most evidently the
bane of social happiness; and in proportion to their prevalency, are invariably
productive of misery. The practice of these virtues then, and consequently of
true godliness, has a direct tendency to promote the public good.

AGAIN, so far as national happiness depends on a suitable conduct in the
members of a community, toward each other, it is directly promoted by
godliness. The circumstance last mentioned, it is well known, has great
influence on domestic happiness. It is essential to the prosperity of a private
family, that the conduct of each member be regulated by the strictest rules of
propriety -- that the heads conduct with a dignity becoming their station;
equally remote from unreasonable austerity on the one hand, and trifling
familiarity on the other -- that children and servants, constantly exhibit
reverence and respect, by an unreserved and cheerful obedience. Imprudence and
folly in the governors of a family, and obstinacy and disobedience in the
inferior members, are utterly destructive of domestic felicity. And why should
not the case be the same with larger communities? The happiness of a nation is
composed of similar ingredients with that, of a private family. And as the
conduct of the several members of the latter, toward each other, has so evident
an influence on their happiness, why must not the prosperity of a nation be
greatly affected, by the mutual conduct of its rulers and ruled? If so,
godliness must certainly promote national felicity. For it influences rulers to
rule in the fear of God, and unofficered citizens to reverence and respect the
magistrates of their country, as ministers of the Most High, appointed for the
good of his people. So far as it extends, it leads every man to conduct
agreeable to his station; to abide in, and faithfully to discharge the duties
of his particular calling, and thus to contribute to the advancement of the
general felicity.

BUT I take the liberty of farther observing, that godliness promotes national
prosperity, as it contributes to an increase of wealth. If any should call in
question the truth of this observation, let me desire him to remember, that
there are few vices but what are luxurious; that they are expensive, and even
prodigal both of time and money; and that those which are most corrupting,
which spread their contagion the most rapidly, which ever have and ever will
prevail where godliness is neglected, are not only such as devour property, but
such as introduce disease, debility, idleness, and even an aversion to every
species of labor, and thus dry up the very sources of national wealth.

ON the other hand, godliness leads to temperance, health, industry and
frugality. It not only retrenches the expenses of extravagance, but it adds to
the stock already possessed, the daily gains of diligence. From the command and
example of her divine teacher, she gathers up the fragments, and suffers
nothing to be lost.

IF, after considering these particulars, any should still be disposed to
doubt, whether a general diffusion of godliness through a nation, would
contribute more to the increase of its wealth, than the unrestrained reign of
vice, let him compare the expenses of the several virtues included in true
godliness, with those of their opposite vices. Let him for instance compare the
expenses of humility, temperance and frugality, with what would be necessary to
support pride, luxury, intemperance and prodigality, and the comparison will
convince him, that it is vice which drains a nation of her wealth. We venture
further to offer it as a decided opinion, that if such a person should judge
with impartiality, he would meet a conviction, that the fashionable vices of
the present day, are far more expensive than the support of government,
together with all the public and private means of literary, moral and religious
instruction. The universal spread of godliness among us, would save this
enormous expense, and thus increase the pecuniary advantages of our nation. So
true is it that godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of the
life that now is, and of that which is to come.

BUT permit me to add, that godliness, above every other principle that can be
named, gives efficacy to the laws of a nation. Among many other ingredients,
necessary to the happiness of a people, a good code of laws will doubtless be
included. But simply the existence of such a system of laws, will be but of
little advantage, unless they are sacredly regarded -- unless they possess a
commanding influence on all ranks of citizens. Laws, that have lost their
influence, neither afford protection to the virtuous, nor lay restraint on the
excesses of the vicious. And laws disregarded and trampled on with impunity
will ever lose their influence. Of consequence, the support of law, by giving
it as extensive an obedience as possible, and by putting its penalty in
execution on delinquents, must be of high importance to national prosperity.
And yet no part of civil government is attended with more, or greater
difficulties. Men of true piety will see, and feel the importance of giving
efficacy to laws, and from the purest motives, throw their whole weight into
that scale. -- They will obey the ordinances of man for the Lord's sake. But
the vicious part of every community are always impatient under the restraints
of law; and ready to violate it, whenever they can flatter themselves of doing
it with impunity. Hence the well known fact, that laws are trampled upon, in
proportion to the increase of vice. The more gross wickedness prevails, the
more are all laws divine and human disregarded. The inference from this fact is
plain, that no principle can give such an efficacious influence to the laws of
a nation, as true godliness. There is a close connection between fidelity to
God, and fidelity to man; he who possesses the former will not neglect the
latter. Consequently the diffusion of true religion through a nation, would in
this respect, be attended with a most happy influence.

BUT it is worthy of further remark, that godliness not only contributes to the
maintenance and support of law, by its influence on the hearts and lives of its
true friends; but the doctrines of revealed religion, have a happy political
effect on all who believe them, even with a speculative faith. The corruptions
of mankind, it is believed, are far more restrained, from an apprehension and
dread of future punishment, than from all the penalties, which sanction the
several codes of human laws. Revealed religion denounces future wrath, not only
against persons guilty of impiety toward God; but against murderers, thieves,
adulterers, perjured persons, and all who commit crimes against society. So far
as divine revelation is believed -- so far as it gains even an historical
assent from mankind, the idea of this future punishment, must operate as a
forcible check to human corruptions. These penalties, admitting the
authenticity of the scriptures, are known by the impenitent to be unavoidable,
and therefore affect the mind as realities. No concealment, no fraud, no
flight, can protect the offender from the vengeance of the judge. If the sinner
dies in impenitency, he must unavoidably suffer the dreadful consequences. But
men can easily escape the penalties of human laws. Under the best executed
government, the probability is that they are actually avoided in more
instances, than suffered by transgressors. The means of escaping civil
punishments are very numerous, and perfectly known to the most vicious part of
every nation. So that human laws are always transgressed with a hope of
impunity. If then all dread of future punishment were totally annihilated, the
strongest support of civil law, would be removed, and very little be left to
restrain the corruptions of the vicious. And the consequence might be an
absolute impossibility of suppprting civil government.

FROM the foregoing observations we may at least conclude, that godliness is
not only highly advantageous, but that, a belief of its doctrines, and
especially those which respect the divine character and future rewards and
0punishments, are essential to the well being, if not to the existence of civil
society. And it is a well known fact that all antiquity were in favor of a
similar sentiment. Not a single legislator has ever attempted to enforce
obedience to his laws, solely on the foundation of civil sanctions. They
universally perceived the insufficiency of these motives, unassisted by those
derived from religion. And as they were strangers to divine revelation, they
formed a substitute, and adapted it, as well as they could, to the
circumstances, the genius, and the prejudices of their people. Lycurgus, Solon,
Numa Pompilius, Capac, and every legislator, at all famed for the wisdom of his
institutions, found it necessary to have recourse to religion; and, in fact,
derived from that source, the principle motives to enforce obedience. This
shows, that in the judgment of these eminent men, the belief of a supreme
Being, and the practice of some religion, are of great importance to the
support of civil government; and that it is in vain to expect that a system of
laws can be maintained for any considerable period, independent of all
assistance of this kind. An opinion, as is confidently supposed, founded in a
very accurate, and extensive knowledge of human nature, and which, we cannot
but presume, will be ever found true, as long as sinful passions and affections
possess such an influence on mankind.

IF then some religion has ever been found necessary to the existence of civil
government; if where the true religion has been unknown, the ablest legislators
have thought it necessary to invent a substitute; if even an historical belief
of the doctrines of revealed religion, have so direct a tendency to support
civil institutions; certainly the reality itself, the general spread of true
piety among all ranks in a commonwealth, must be attended with the most
salutary effects. Its influence on the order, the regularity, the peace, and
the harmony of a community, cannot fail of augmenting its felicity.

WE see then, that beside the spiritual and eternal advantages of true
godliness, which the design of this discourse will not admit of our
considering, there are important benefits to be derived from it in the
administration of civil government; and if generally and faithfully practiced,
it would most essentially contribute toward obtaining for, and securing to a
community all the valuable ends of such an institution.

IF the preceding observations be just, then to maintain, that godliness is of
no importance in a civil point of view -- that gentlemen may be every way as
well qualified, to act in any official character, in the government of a nation
without, as with religion -- that it is a matter of no consequence to the
political happiness of a people, what religious system, or whether any at all
prevails among them, -- to support these, and similar sentiments, not only
tends to the encouragement of immorality, but to the propagation of political
heresy. And in proportion to their prevalence, must be productive of the most
dangerous consequences. Without religion, a sense of moral obligation can never
be preserved. And once destroy a sense of moral obligation, and you strike a
deadly blow at the root of all mutual confidence between the different members
of the community, and invite the spread of those vices, which are most hostile
to the political as well as eternal interest of mankind.

I FEEL a peculiar happiness on this occasion, in being able to confirm these
sentiments, by the authority of that most excellent MAN, that BEST OF PATRIOTS,
whose distinguished talents and eminent abilities, faithfully consecrated to
his country's service, have not only in an unexampled manner endeared him to
his fellow-citizens, but rendered him the object of the veneration of the
world. From that valuable legacy of political experience and sentiment, which
he bequeathed to his country, in his address accompanying his resignation, I
gladly introduce the following passages.

OF all the dispositions and habits, says he, which lead to political
prosperity, religion and morality are indispensible supports. In vain would
that man claim the tribute of patriotism, who should labor to subvert these
great pillars of human happiness, these firmest props of the duties of men and
citizens. The mere politician equally with the pious man ought to respect and
to cherish them. A volume could not trace all their connections with private
and public felicity. Let it simply be asked, where is the security for
property, for reputation, for life, if the sense of religious obligation desert
the oaths, which are the instruments of investigation in the courts of justice?
And let us with caution indulge the supposition, that morality can be
maintained without religion. Whatever may be conceded to the influence of
refined education on minds of a peculiar structure; reason and experience both
forbid us to expect, that national morality can prevail in exclusion of
religious principle.

IT is substantially true, that virtue or morality is a necessary spring of
popular government. The rule indeed extends with more or less force to every
species of free government. Who that is a sincere friend to it, can look with
indifferency on attempts to shake the foundation of the fabric?

I CANNOT conclude this extract, without observing that the sentiments it
contains, in the view of every wise and good man, must add a luster to a
character, already enrolled on the records of deathless fame, and the subject
of a more universal admiration, and more extensive esteem, than any which the
world has hitherto produced. May America preserve in everlasting remembrance
his political counsels -- may they continue, through all succeeding
generations, the fundamental maxims of their government -- may his successors
be all animated by the same spirit of wisdom, patriotism, firmness, and
uncorruptible integrity -- may he in the shades of retirement be constantly
blessed with the special tokens of the divine favor -- may self-approving
reflections on the part he has acted, and the spiritual joys of communion with
God and Christ repay the ceaseless toils and anxieties of his public life --
and when heaven shall call him from his earthly abode, may he be admitted to a
distinguished seat in the paradise above.

PERMIT me to add, that if any thing can console us under the painful idea that
WASHINGTON, no longer directs the helm of our government, it is the pleasing
reflection that we have for his successor, a gentleman, not only of the first
character for literary and political merit, wisdom, firmness and independency
of sentiment, but one, who in the very moment of his inauguration, and in the
presence of both houses of our national legislature, and a most crowded
assembly of all ranks of spectators, See President ADAMS's speech at his
inauguration.
had the fortitude to avow his attachment to the christian religion, and his
fixed determination to consider a decent respect for christianity among the
best recommendations for the public service.

BUT we suspend these pleasing reflections, and proceed to remark, that if the
observations which have been made be just, the importance of supporting
christianity is undeniable. All the political benefits, which can be rationally
expected from any religion ever taught in this world, may certainly be expected
from the christian, and in a much higher degree than from any other, in
proportion to the superior excellency of its moral precepts. The candid enemies
of our faith confess, that the morality taught in the gospel is the most pure,
and the best adapted to the purposes of social happiness, of any moral system
ever published to men. If then some religion be necessary to answer the
purposes of civil government, christianity even on political views ought to be
preferred to all others, as it possesses far the greatest tendency to promote
the important designs already mentioned. If its morals are the purest, its
tendency to promote social happiness is the greatest, and therefore good policy
requires its support.

IT is not however our wish that any thing similar to the religious
establishments of Europe, should be introduced into our country. We hope never
to see our magistrates employed, in prescribing articles of faith; nor in the
exercise of the least coercive power to compel men to adopt this, or that
creed, or submit to any one mode of worship in preference to another. May
liberty of conscience, in this land, be never violated. But if there be
important political advantages to be derived from christianity, which cannot be
so effectually secured by any other means, as appears evident from the
preceding observations, then is it as much the duty of government to endeavor
its preservation, as in any other way to seek the public good. If every
individual be left to choose for himself both with respect to doctrines, and
modes of worship, laws made for the support of public instruction, and the
religious observation of the sabbath, cannot in any proper sense infringe on
liberty of conscience.

IF religion then has a just claim to the protection of government, it must be
peculiarly important to official characters. The more exalted gentlemen are in
office, the more public and extensive their sphere of action, the more
necessary is it, that their whole conduct should exhibit undeniable evidence of
their attachment to religion. The great body of the people look up to them, not
only for examples in every virtue, but for that legislative encouragement to
the cause of religion, on which its general prosperity under God must in a
great measure depend. If godliness be profitable unto all things, if its
political advantages be as great as has been represented, good policy will
certainly lead to a preservation of the laws for the support of morality, to a
maintenance and if need be, to an enlargement of the statutes for the
suppression of vice, and to the appointment of such men to fill the several
offices under our government, as are known to be at least men of unblemished
morals. A steady adherence to this rule would disappoint the hopes of the
wicked, and proportionably encourage those of the virtuous. It would make our
legislature a terror indeed to evil doers, and a praise to them who do well.
Much depends on the conduct of rulers. To support religion, law and liberty, is
theirs. We live in a day when each of these have many foes. When the advocates
of infidelity are loudly boasting of the increase of their numbers -- When
licentiousness is alarmingly prevalent, and when the federal constitution, the
great palladium of our liberties, has been violently attacked. That amidst all
these internal evils, and the dangers which arise from foreign insults and
depredations, our rulers may be directed by unerring wisdom -- that they may
ever possess that firmness and fidelity, which the arduous duties of their
station, and the peculiar difficulties of the day require, is the ardent prayer
of all their pious constituents. And supported by so important an
encouragement, it is hoped, and expected that they will disregard the unfounded
clamours, of the enemies of religion and our country.

BUT besides the support which christianity has a right to expect from
government, it is of the highest importance, that it receive all encouragement
from ever y class of citizens. In this business all should be united, and
extend as far, and as generally as possible the practice of true piety. If
there were no futurity, if the race of men had been made only for this world,
still the universal practice of godliness would be a most desirable object, and
as such must meet the sincere approbation of every friend to his country. And
if so, how inconceivably important indeed is it, when we are assured by a well
authenticated revelation from heaven, that we are all acting not for time only,
or principally, but for the rewards, or the punishments of an eternity. The
motives to the choice and practice of godliness are immensely great. Both
temporal and eternal benefit, the promise of this life and of that which is to
come, are all presented to our view, and placed in a very conspicuous light
before our eyes, and nothing but the grossest stupidity can prevent our feeling
the force of them.

THIS subject leads me further to remark, that although the laws of our land
have excused clergymen from the burdens of civil functions, and left them at
liberty to devote their whole time to the business of their peculiar
profession, yet no body of men are more deeply interested in the prosperity of
their country, or under greater obligations to constant exertions for that
purpose. And happily their duty as christian ministers, and as members of civil
society perfectly coincide. In the former, which is the principal capacity in
which they are called to act, they are pointedly commanded by their divine
Master, to become ensamples to the whole flock over which the Holy Ghost has
made them overseers, and to teach, rebuke and exhort with all long suffering
and doctrine. The first object of their labors is to prepare men for the
kingdom of heaven. This they are to attempt by explaining to them the nature,
and enforcing on them the importance of true godliness, and by persuading them,
if possible, to a faithful practice of it in all its branches. If they can
effect this great purpose, they will not only benefit the souls of men, and
advance the kingdom of the Redeemer in the world, but do a most important
service to civil society. If they can become the happy instruments of leading
those among whom they labor, to forsake sin, to embrace the gospel, to love God
and practice every branch of true piety; they will no doubt obey magistrates,
and submit themselves to every ordinance of man, for the Lord's sake. The more
we promote the interest of religion, the more shall we advance that of civil
society. The more spiritual good we do the souls of men, the more effectual aid
shall we afford to the rulers of our land. Ministers have every argument set
before them, to excite them to diligence and fidelity, drawn from the temporal,
and the eternal interest of men. And in addition to all this, they are further
animated, by a consideration of that future account which they must give of
themselves, before an assembled universe. Though the stupidity of this infidel
age, may often excite in them the complaint of the evangelical prophet "that
they labor in vain and spend their strength for naught," yet let them not be
weary in well doing, but persevere with redoubled diligence, supported by the
glorious hope that their labor will not be in vain in the Lord.

LASTLY, the foregoing observations point out to us all, the sure means of
promoting national happiness. Public virtue, and political prosperity are
intimately connected. Righteousness will exalt, and vice bring ruin on a
people. If then we are true patriots, if it is our glory really to be, as well
as to be esteemed the friends of our country, we shall devote ourselves to the
sincere practice of true godliness; and in our several stations faithfully
endeavor its universal promotion. Enmity to religion is inconsistent with true
patriotism. They who are either publicly or privately undermining the
foundation of piety toward God, are weakening the force of moral obligation,
and aiming a fatal blow against the dearest privileges resulting from the
social compact. If we would wish to be a happy people, to enjoy in peace and
tranquillity the blessings of a most excellent constitution, and to transmit
those fruits of such vast expense of blood and treasure unimpaired to
posterity, it is of the highest importance, that we practice true godliness; as
every other expedient, while that is neglected, will be found utterly
insufficient.

IN one word, the choice and practice of religion is urged on us, by every
consideration which ought to affect a rational mind. Our duty to God, our
country, and ourselves require it -- our interest and happiness for time and
eternity demand it of us. May God, of his infinite mercy grant us all, to
experience it, in all its power, and in all its comforts and consolations, for
the sake of the dear Redeemer.

AMEN.

