STEDFASTNESS IN RELIGION, EXPLAINED AND RECOMMENDED IN A SERMON.

STEDFASTNESS IN RELIGION, EXPLAINED AND RECOMMENDED IN A SERMON, DELIVERED, In
the FIRST PARISH in WEST-SPRINGFIELD, BY JOSEPH LATHROP, D. D. MINISTER OF SAID
PARISH, On the 25th day of August, in the year 1796. It being the Day which
closed the 40th year of his Ministry; and the year, which completed a Century
from the Incorporation of said Parish.

WEST-SPRINGFIELD: PRINTED BY EDWARD GRAY. M,DCC,XCVII.

1. THESSALONIANS, III, 8. FOR NOW WE LIVE, IF YE STAND FAST IN THE LORD.


THE stedfastness of a people in religion, is the life and happiness of their
Minister.

This is the sentiment here expressed -- a sentiment which every good Minister
can realize. His relation to his people commences with a peculiar regard and
friendship. Long acquaintance and uninterrupted harmony with them, continued
labors for them, and repeated kindnesses from them, their candid acceptance of
his Ministry, and his hope that it has been useful among them, will all
contribute to strengthen the attachment. When age or infirmity shall lead him
to contemplate the approaching dissolution of his connection, he will feel a
new concern, lest they turn away from the truth; and an ardent desire, that
they may be more established in the faith, as they have been taught. Under the
decays of bodily strength, and in the prospect of his final remove, he can say,
'Now I live, if ye stand fast in the Lord.'

Your own Minister, my brethren, is not wholly a stranger to such feelings, as
have been described.

The present year completes a century, since a Religious Society was formed in
this place. And this day completes the fortieth year, since my relation to you
commenced. My Ministry has been twice as long, as that of your first Pastor;
and almost five years longer, than that of my immediate predecessor. The day
reminds us of the relation subsisting between us: The length of time, which
this relation has continued, reminds us, that its dissolution is at hand.

Your present attendance in the house of God I have requested, that I might
address you, on some important matters, under the impression, which the day
will naturally make on your minds, as well as my own.

The substance of my exhortation will be that, which the text and the season
suggest, "Stand fast in the Lord.'

I shall illustrate the words in applying them to you.

1. Stand fast in the faith of the Gospel; and repel, with indignation, every
attempt to seduce you from it.

If you believe there is a God who governs the world, and men are accountable
creatures, then you believe there is such a thing as religion. And if there is
any such thing, it must be that which you find in the Gospel. Here every vice
is forbidden, and every virtue inculcated. Here the most powerful arguments are
proposed, and the most effectual assistances offered, to recommend and
encourage a virtuous life. And here the most gracious provision is made to
bring the guilty into a state of pardon, and revive their desponding hopes.
Whoever, therefore, makes light of the Gospel, rejects, in substance, all
religion: He leaves no ground on which his hope can securely stand, and no
information on which his faith can rationally depend. If he discards the idea
of religion, he renounces his rationality, and takes rank among the brutes. If
he frames to himself a religion, different from that taught by revelation, thus
far it must be irrational and absurd; neither consistent with the character of
God, nor adapted to the condition of man.

The honest and upright man, who doubts the divinity of the Gospel, will
carefully examine its evidences, and promptly yield to the conviction which
they bring. Before he ventures to reject the Savior proposed, he will take
time to answer this question, 'To whom shall I go?' What better way of pardon
shall I find -- what better system of virtue shall I contrive, than that which
the Gospel reveals? The serious examination of this question will certainly
lead him to a humble acquiescence in the christian scheme.

If the Gospel is divine and important, unbelief must involve us in awful
guilt. The Savior says, 'If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your
sins.' 'Take heed, therefore, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief in departing from the living God: But exhort one another daily, lest
any be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.'

This is a day, when deism, and the errors which lead to it, appear more
openly, than they have usually done. The errors most remarkably tending to
infidelity are universalism, fatalism, and enthusiasm.

Universalism, or the denial of future punishment, relaxes the morality of the
Gospel, and gives the reins to every lust. Fatalism, or the doctrine that the
volitions and actions of men, whether good or bad, are all precisely fixed and
determined by an eternal and uncontrolable necessity, takes away all sense of
accountableness, and opens wide the door to vice and licentiousness.
Enthusiasm, or a reliance on imaginary revelations, made either to ourselves,
or to other people, supersedes and sets aside the revelation which God has
given us in the Gospel. Thus they all eventually lead to, and usually terminate
in total infidelity.

The open, undisguised appearance of infidelity in the present day is a
consequence of those political convulsions and revolutions, which have agitated
the world, and especially this part of it. A spirit of liberty awakens enquiry,
and emboldens an avowal of sentiments, which once were studiously concealed.
When enquiry is roused, it makes many useful discoveries: but it will often run
to excess. There is, in some minds, a certain vanity, which affects to discard
common opinions, in order to display a superiority of genius. Free enquiry is,
on the whole, favorable to truth; but its first efforts often produce
temporary errors and confusions.

The imigration of foreigners, which is a natural consequence of our national
prosperity, and of the present convulsions in Europe, will be attended with
real danger to the purity of religion. Many of these foreigners, being men of
distinguished education and fortune, as well as of licentious principles and
manners, will introduce and disseminate among us the vices and errors of their
own country. And libertine sentiments are so congenial to the corruptions of
the heart, so slattering to human pride, and so pleasing to the natural love of
novelty, that they easily gain credit and prevail.

As this is a day of danger, he watchful, lest you hear the instructions, which
cause to err from the words of knowledge. Let your minds be impressed with a
sense of the vast importance of religion. Examine and judge for yourselves,
what religion is. And see that its real temper be wrought in your hearts.

When a new sentiment is offered to you, enquire, what is its natural influence
-- whether it encourages virtue, or only emboldens vice -- whether it leads to
repentance of sin and amendment of life, or only pacifies conscious guilt --
whether it would make you better men, or rather set you loose from the
obligations of morality: Never embrace an opinion, which would corrupt your
manners, or defeat the pure and benevolent influence of the Gospel. Remember
that religion is a matter on which depends the happiness of man in his private,
and in his social capacity -- in the present, and in the future life; and let
your regards to it be governed, not by the examples and opinions of men, but by
the sober dictates of reason, and the plain instructions of revelation.

2. As you would stand fast in the Lord, you must maintain a christian
profession, and support the honor of it by a correspondent life.

It is no uncommon thing, that persons when they are called upon to enter into
the church of God, plead in excuse for their neglect, that the members of the
church are as loose and ungodly as many others. And they ask, 'Why should we
join ourselves to such a society, when its members differ little, or nothing
from the men of the world?'

This is, indeed, an insufficient excuse. The obligations of religion lie on
all, to whom the Gospel comes. They arise not from a voluntary profession, but
from the command of God. If one sees corruptions in a church, this is not a
reason, why he should turn away from it, and leave the corruptions to prevail;
but rather a reason, why he should join himself to it and cooperate with his
brethren to rectify what is amiss. It is, however, a known fact, that the loose
conversation of professors discredits religion and obstructs the growth of the
church. Christians are therefore to be blameless, the sons God without rebuke
in the midst of a perverse nation, shining as lights in the world, and holding
forth the word of life.

Walk, my brethen, as men bound for another world -- as men seeking a better
country. If you are absorbed in the cares, addicted to the pleasures, and
conformed to the manners of this world, will it be thought, that there is any
sincerity in your profession? Will not your example corrupt the manners of many
around you? The Apostle speaks -- and he speaks with tears -- concerning some,
who so walk that they are enemies to the cross of Christ.

When I speak to the professors of religion, I mean to comprehend all, who, in
any way, declare their belief of the Gospel; yea, all who have been consecrated
to God. You ought to regard your baptism as a seal of your covenant
obligations, unless you mean to renounce it. And if you renounce this, what do
you less than renounce the Savior? -- Baptism is into Christ.

The Gospel has come to you. You either believe, or disbelieve it. If you
believe it, then profess it, and live agreeably to it. If you mean to reject
it, beware lest that come upon you, which is written in the Prophets; 'Behold,
ye despisers, and wander and perish.'

3. To stand fast in the Lord, is to maintain the power of his religion.

There are some, who have but a superficial religion. They are not willing that
the form of godliness should be discontinued in the world, nor do they intend
to renounce it themselves. But they choose to make their religion an easy
pliant thing, which may comport with their interests and humors, and will not
impose too great restraints. Hence they are carried about with diverse and
strange doctrines. They follow every new sect, hoping to find something which
will please their imagination, and pacify their conscience. They are ever
learning, but never settled in the belief of the truth.

There are some, who flatter themselves, that it is no great matter, what a man
believes, if he only acts agreeably to his belief -- that great strictness in
morals is not required, or may be dispensed with, where there is a regular
attendance on forms, and a warmth of affection in devotional exercises. Thus
they put the means in the place of the end.

There are some, who excuse the corruptions of their heart, and their acquired
habits of vice, under the soft and gentle name of natural desires. And they
imagine, God will never condemn them for following those propensities, which he
has put in them as a part of their constitution. Thus, by making their own
lusts and humors, the standard by which to judge of virtue and vice, they form
to themselves a licentious religion, which tolerates their iniquities, and
calms their fears. They explain away the substance, and leave only the shadow;
and under this they sit with a false delight.

Beware that you indulge no such delusive sentiments. If religion was designed
to prepare you for heavenly happiness, it must form you to a temper capable of
that happiness. As that consists in the enjoyment of God, religion must
transform you into the image of God.

Observe the stated exercises of secret religion, such as self-examination,
meditation and prayer. If these are thrown aside, you cannot experience the
real power of godliness. This consists in pious regards to God, and fixed
resolutions for his service, which can be maintained only by intercourse with
him, and converse with yourselves.

4. A faithful attendance on the ordinances of the Gospel is implied in your
standing fast in the Lord.

Thus the Apostle teaches us: 'Having liberty,' says he, 'to enter into the
holiest by the blood of Jesus, let us draw near with a true heart, in the full
assurance of faith -- Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without
wavering -- Let us consider one another to provoke unto love and good works,
not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together.'

The ordinances, which God has instituted, are highly important, and cannot be
neglected without great dishonor to him, and awful danger to yourselves.

Let me exhort parents to bring their children to baptism. Though of late there
has been a great increase of baptisms, still there are among us some households
unbaptized.

I speak now only to those, who acknowledge the right of infants to baptism;
for this is not a time to bring forward matters of controversy. If you believe
that baptism is an institution of God; and that, under the Gospel, as under
former dispensations of the covenant of grace, children are to be dedicated to
him -- if you recollect, that under the patriarchal, as well as Jewish
dispensation, the seal of God's covenant was to be applied to them -- if you
call to mind, that, in the first creation of man, God ordained that children
should be a seed to himself, and made this ordinance a part of his covenant
with Adam, as the prophet Malachi observes; you will feel yourselves bound to
present your children to God, and to procure for them the appointed token of
their covenant relation to him.

The prosperity of the church greatly depends on the religious education of
children, and the attendant blessing of God. And your consecration of them to
him, in his instituted way, will be a mean of awakening your attention to their
education, and of obtaining his blessing for them.

It is with pleasure, that I have beheld, in months past, the great increase of
communicants at the Lord's table. But still there are many who turn away from
it. Of the youths few take a seat there. I hope there are, among you, my
children, those who really reverence the ordinance of Christ's supper. The
numbers, which I often see sitting around, as serious spectators of the
solemnity, afford a pleasing expectation, that more will draw near, and
Christ's table will be full. If you are detained from this ordinance by
religious fears, your very fears prove your right to it. For a fear of
offending God by an unworthy attendance, will not stop here. It will restrain
you from offending him by other unworthy conduct. And a fear thus operating
indicates a heart prepared to draw near to God.

But if you look on the ordinance with indifference; consider; it is an
institution of Christ designed for the commemoration of his death; and
therefore indifference to it must involve great ingratitude, impiety and guilt.

We wish to see Christ's church increasing, and the young subscribing with
their hands to him. But we wish, that all who name the name of Christ may
depart from iniquity, and walk worthy of him, who has called them to his
kingdom and glory.

Suffer me also, my brethren, to call your attention to the stated worship of
the Lord's day.

That social worship is a divine appointment, adapted to the benefit of civil
society, as well as to the promotion of vital godliness, you will not deny. And
yet it cannot be dissembled, that, in the present day, multitudes treat it with
great indifference. Let not this indifference be seen among you. If you, who
are professors of religion, and heads of families, neglect, and allow your
children to neglect the worship of the sanctuary, it is natural to apprehend,
that indifference to this divine appointment will more and more prevail; and,
perhaps, when a vacancy shall take place among you -- this event is not remote
-- you will have grown so regardless of God's worship, that his house will be
left you desolate. It would be painful to realize, that the next generation
will come forward and grow up without baptism -- without public instruction --
without regard for the sabbath, or for the bible.

Consider the matter as it immediately respects yourselves. Is an aversion to
God's worship consistent with the temper which belongs to heaven? Would not an
attendance upon it assist you in your personal religion, and in the education
of your children? Would not your good example be highly beneficial to those who
are coming after you? Say one to another, 'Come and let us go up to the house
of the Lord.' Let your feet stand within its walls. Let it appear as a city
that is compact together, whither the tribes go up to give thanks to the name
of the Lord.

There is another thing which I beg leave just to mention. It is what must soon
call your attention, unless -- which heaven prevent -- you cease to be a
religious society. I shall not dwell on the subject; but I often think of it
with concern. It is providing a decent and convenient house for divine worship.
Whenever there shall be a vacancy here, to supply it will be exceedingly
difficult -- perhaps impracticable, in the present state of your house of
worship. The building of a meeting house, and the settling of a minister at the
same time, may be attended with such embarrasments, as will much endanger your
peace and tranquillity. Your own prudence will lead you to deliberate, whether
the concurrence of two so important transactions, ought not, if possible, to be
prevented.

5. Your standing fast in the Lord will much depend on the maintenance of
family religion. If this is generally neglected, all religion will soon
disappear. Joshua thought so, when he said to the people of Israel, 'If it seem
evil to you to serve the Lord, choose ye, this day, whom ye will serve. But, as
for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.'

Attend, then, to the religious education of your children, and afford them
your assistance in the things which concern their present usefulness and future
happiness.

Train them up to industry in some honest calling. Restrain their irregular
propensities. Encourage every virtuous disposition. Furnish them with the
necessary means of mental improvement. Walk before them in a perfect way.
Suffer them not to become the companions of fools; but teach them to associate
with the wise. Maintain social worship in your houses, and require their
orderly attendance. This will facilitate your domestic government, and obtain
the divine blessing on your households.

6. The Apostle having expressed his desire, that the Thessalonian believers
should stand fast in the Lord, adds this request, 'The Lord make you to
increase and abound in love one toward another, and toward all men, to the end
he may establish your hearts unblameable in holiness.'

That you may stand fast in Christ, you must cultivate a spirit of candor and
charity, in opposition to bigotry -- a spirit of peace and humility in
opposition to spiritual pride, from whence comes contention.

Regard religion as important; but be most zealous for the substance of it; not
for mere circumstances and appendages. Be steady in your christian profession;
but never condemn those who differ from you, unless the difference affects the
foundation of christianity.

Candor and condescension are essential to a Gospel temper and conduct, and
necessary to the peace and edification of Christian churches.

Hitherto, my brethren, you have maintained a commendable union. I do not find,
that any controversy has ever existed in this church, which has required the
interposition of an ecclesiastical council. 'Let brotherly love continue.'
Dangers have attended you; but, by the good hand of providence, you have been
safely conducted through them. Dangers again may arise; but be at peace among
yourselves, and the God of peace will be with you. 'Mark them, who cause
divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have received, and
avoid them; for they who are such serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their
own belly, and with good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the
simple.'

There is an hypocrisy, which, to serve a party design, affects a zeal for the
purity of the church. This, as long as it can work secretly, under the disguise
of piety, will produce great mischief. Excepting this, there is nothing more
dangerous to the peace of the church, than religious bigotry; by which I mean,
laying such unreasonable weight on certain opinions and forms, as to exclude
from our charity and fellowship all who dissent from us.

Those sects, which set up separate communions, to the exclusion of other
Christians, and are industrious to make proselytes from other churches, that
they may increase a party of their own, are building on a foundation very
different from that which Christ has marked out. Never patronize and encourage
any sect founded on so narrow a basis -- any sect which rears up itself by
materials surreptitiously collected from other buildings.

To undermine one christian society in order to build up another, is the
essence of bigotry, as distinguished from charity. On this principle few
christian churches can exist; for you will find, in the same vicinity, few
Christians who do not, in some things, differ from one another. And if every
disagreement must cause a separation, scarcely two can walk together. And we
find in fact, that societies, erected on this narrow basis, soon totter and
fall into ruins.

In this imperfect state there must be charity and condescension, else there
can be no union and stability in christian churches.

I remind you of these things, though ye know them, and are established in the
present truths. I think it meet, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir
you up by putting you in remembrance, knowing, that shortly I must put off this
tabernacle. And I desire, that, after my decease, ye may be able to have these
things always in remembrance.

The time here allotted us is short. Soon our days on earth will be numbered:
Let us fill them up with usefulness, that we may finish them with joy.

When I look back, I am surprised to see how soon forty years have passed away.
The time which remains to me, and to some of you, will scarcely be perceived.
Let us, who are walking together in the downward path of life, contemplate our
end, and apply our hearts to wisdom.

There are many present in this assembly, who have no recollection of the
commencement of my ministry. Their existence began at a later date. But you, my
friends, will soon find yourselves in the list of the aged. You already begin
to take a share in the business of society. You, perhaps, will have a part to
act in the settlement of another minister. May your hearts be filled with those
pious sentiments, and social affections, which will qualify you for the part
assigned you in this world, and for the happiness proposed to you in the next.

May this christian society, which has stood for an hundred years, still stand
fast in the Lord. The pious zeal of your fathers laid a foundation for the
privileges, which you here enjoy: See that you, with equal zeal, transmit them
to succeeding generations. May they, who shall live an hundred years hence,
recognize your works of piety, as you do theirs, who lived an hundred years ago.

To awaken in us the zeal recommended, and to enforce the advice offered to us,
we will take a view of the origin and progress of this society, and of the
dealings of providence toward it.

The town of Springfield, (of which this town remained a part until 1774) was
settled from Roxbury in the year 1636, just 16 years after the arrival of our
fathers at Plymouth. In the preceding year, plantations were begun in Windsor,
Hartsord and Wethersfield, by adventurers from Dorchester, Newtown, (now called
Cambridge) and Watertown. Gov. Winthrop, in his Journal, says, "In October
1635, about 60 men women and children, went by land toward Connecticut, with
their cows, heifers and swine, and after a tedious and difficult journey,
arrived safe there. -- But the people from Dorchester who removed their cattle
before winter, lost the greatest part of them. Some, however, which came late,
and could not be put over the river, lived well through the winter without any
hay. The people were put to great straits for want of provisions. They ate
malt, grains, and acorns; and they lost near L2000 worth of cattle."

At this time cattle of all kinds were extremely dear. "A good cow was valued
at L25 or L30; a pair of oxen at L40; sheep at 50 s a head."

The reason alleged for these emigrations was, that "all the towns within the
Bay began to be much straitened by their nearness to one another, and by the
great increase of their cattle."

But though the want of room might be the first motive, a spirit of enterprise
strongly co-operated with it: For the emigrations were so large, that the old
towns were thereby exceedingly weakened and diminished. Governor Winthrop says,
"In 1636, Mr. Hooker, pastor of the church of Newtown and the best of his
congregation went to Connecticut and drove thither 160 heads of cattle." And
from Dorchester Mr. Warham the pastor removed with almost his whole church, so
that soon after we find the people in that town deliberating on the formation
of a new church, "a great part of the old one being gone to Connecticut."

The first planters in Springfield were no more than eight men. The number of
women and children I have not been able to learn. Their first intention was to
have settled on the west side of the river, as did the adventurers in the towns
below. Accordingly they began to build in the great meadow, at a place from
that circumstance denominated, and still called House Meadow; but on the
friendly advice of the natives, that the place was subject to inundations, they
changed their purpose, and removed to the other side.

Though they were few in number, yet, animated with a spirit of piety, they
early provided for the settlement of the Gospel Ministry. And within one year
after the plantation began, Mr. Moxon, their first minister, was with them.

The people on Connecticut river generally lived in peace with their Indian
neighbors. The town of Wethersfield, however, in the second year after the
settlement began, met with a severe blow. "Sequin, a head man of the river
Indians, gave lands on the river to the English, that he might sit down by them
and be protected. But when he came to Wethersfield and set up his wigwam, the
people drove him away by force. Resenting the wrong, but wanting strength to
revenge it, he secretly drew in the Pequots, who came up the river, and killed
six men at their work, and three women, and captivated two girls, and destroyed
a horse and twenty cows." As this mischief was in consequence of a provocation
offered on the part of the English, they, by advice from the governor and
magistrates in Boston, instead of prosecuting a war, made a new agreement with
the Indians of the river.

The people in Springfield suffered no molestation from their Indians, until
the year 1675, which was a time of great calamity.

The famous warrior king Philip, who had ever been an enemy to the English,
being driven from his head quarters at Bristol, then called mount Hope, came
with his Indians to the westward; and, having destroyed Brookfield, advanced to
the river, and excited among the Indians here a general disaffection to the
English. The people in this and the northern towns on the river, began to
apprehend danger, and to put themselves in a state of defense. The people in
Springfield, however, relying on the prefessions of the Indians, felt too
secure. Hostilities committed in the towns above, in August and September,
increased their concern; but still they did not realize their danger, until, by
a message from Windsor, they were informed, that 300 of Philip's men had joined
with the Springfield Indians, and were then in the Indian fort on Long Hill,
and that their intention was to destroy the town. This plot was disclosed by
one of the Windsor Indians. On this alarming intelligence, the people fled to
their fortified houses, and thus saved themselves from a general massacre.

In the morning of the 5th of October, O. S. two men, with an intention to
examine the truth of the information from Windsor, set out for the Indian fort;
but were fired upon by the way; one was killed, the other mortally wounded. The
conflagration of the town immediately ensued, in which were consumed about 30
houses, and 20 barns. Only two or three houses escaped: These were fortified.
Assistance was sent from other towns, but arrived too late. Besides the two men
above mentioned, there were several wounded, and one mortally. One woman was
slain. See Mr. Breck's Century Sermon.


One of the men killed in the morning in the way toward the fort, was Mr.
Thomas Miller, from whom descended the family of that name in this parish.

At this time there were some houses in Longmeadow, and a number on this side
of the river, none of which were destroyed. The enemies first object was the
destruction of the principal settlement. Before they could extend their
operations, succors arrived.

But in the spring following, some mischief was done on this side of the river.
In Chicopee-street, so called, about a mile north of the meeting house, the
Indians killed a young man named Pelatiah Morgan; and at the same time,
captivated a lad, who was in company with him. The lad afterward returned.

In the same year, by the best information I can obtain, Mr. Abel Leonard, who
lived near the south bank of Agawam, was shot in his canoe, as he was passing
that river. One of his descendants, of the fifth generation, now dwells on the
same lot.

There is an imperfect tradition of others, captivated, and slain, of whom I
can collect no satisfactory account.

Within the memory of our aged people, some of the houses here were fortified
and garrisoned; and within about 50 years past, watches were occasionally
appointed to patrole our streets, for fear of the enemy.

Happy are we, who sleep in our houses, and go forth to our labors in safety,
and have none to make us afraid.

At what time the settlements on the west side of the river began, I cannot
learn with exactness; but it was probably as early as the year 1660. In the
space of 39 years, the houses in that part of the town, which is now the first
parish in Springfield, had increased from perhaps about 8 to but little more
than 30: and yet in 1664, which was 11 years before, there were, in the whole
town, 73 male inhabitants. There must therefore have been a considerable number
at that time in other parts of the town.

In 1662, there was granted to John Riley, a house lot, on the west side of the
river, conditioned, that he soon erected a house upon it. And two years after,
there was granted to Thomas Cooper, on the south side of Agawam, a house lot,
located with relation to a cellar, which he had already dug.

Within a few years after this, I find grants of house lots in diverse places;
some as far west as Paucatuck-brook.

In 1683 there appears to have been a number of inhabitants here; for, in this
year, on the 18th of March, a boat containing sundry persons, who, on the
Lord's day, were returning from public worship, was overset in the great river,
and three persons were drowned; viz. Reice and John Bedurtha, and Lydia the
wife of Joseph Bedurtha. Another woman, by the name of Rogers, supposed at
first to have been dead, was restored. The first names of Planters, on this
side of the river, which I have been able to find, are Riley and Cooper. Soon
after these are Foster, Jones, Petty, Scot, Barber, Rogers, Miller, Parsons,
Morgan, Fowler, Leonard, Bedurtha, Ely, Bagg, Day, Merrick. These names, most
or all, were here before the parish was incorporated. Some of them are now
extinct -- some are numerous and respectable.


In the year 1696, which was 60 years after the settlement of the town began,
the inhabitants on the west side of the river, making about 30 families, were
incorporated into a distinct parish. In June School a church was gathered, and
the rev'd John Woodbridge was ordained its pastor. He died in June 1618. He was
well remembered by many people, who were living when I came to this place. From
them and others I have learned, that he sustained an amiable character, as a
gentleman, a christian and a minister. He left four sons, who were men of
worthy characters. Two of them were ministers. One settled in Southadley; the
other in a parish of Newhaven.


What was the growth of the parish, and the number of baptisms, admissions and
deaths, during his ministry, I cannot find; for his records, if he hept any,
were lost soon after his death.

The first deacons in this church, Mess. John Barber, and Ebenezer Parsons,
were chosen in 1700. The former died in 1712, aged 70; the latter in 1752, aged
84 years. Eight others have sustained and exercised the deacon's office in this
church; of whom four have deceased. Their ages were 92, 80, 75, and 88 years.
Mess. Joseph Ely, John Ely, Samuel Day and Joseph Merrick.
Four are still living, of whom one is now 87, and one 85 years old. Mess.
Nathaniel Atchinson, and Jonathan White. The deacons of the south church are
all still living. The two first, Mess. John Leonard and Reuben Leonard, were
chosen in 1762, and are now, the former in his 87th, the latter in his 81st
year.


In June, 1702, this meeting house was erected. It arose in the very beginning
of the present century. May the next century, which is just at hand, as early
see a new house rising among you. 'Build unto God a sanctuary, that he may
dwell among you.' And 'be ye all builded together for an habitation to God
through the Spirit.'

In June, 1720, the rev'd. Samuel Hopkins was ordained the second pastor of
this church. He died in October, 1755, in the 62d year of his age, and 36th of
his Ministry. His character is well known, and his memory still dear to the
aged. He was highly esteemed by all his acquaintance. His consort, Mrs. Esther
Hopkins, daughter of Rev. Timothy Edwards, of Windsor died June 1766, aged 72
years -- He left two sons, both now living, one of whom is minister of Hadley;
and one daughter who married to the Hon. J. Worthington, Esquire. LL. D. and died
Nov. 1766, aged 36 years


Within this parish, which then included the whole tract, now called
West-Springfield, there were baptized, during his ministry, 660 persons, and
210 admitted to the Lord's table. Of deaths I cannot find, that he kept any
record. At the time of his death, there were about 200 families within the
limits of the original parish. To this number it had increased in 60 years. The
annual increase was 3 families nearly.

In reviewing our narrative, one thought will naturally strike your minds; and
let it be deeply impressed; that your fathers, from the first settlement of
these towns, and even of the country, were steadfast in the religion of Christ
-- that in their deepest poverty they were zealous to maintain the instituted
worship of God -- and that the care and blessing of providence did remarkably
attend them. 'Therefore, my brethren, dearly beloved, so stand fast in the
Lord.'

After the decease of Mr. Hopkins, the parish was vacant about 10 months. In
March, 1756, I began to preach with you; In July following was invited, and on
the 25th of August was separated to the work of the ministry in this place.

All the ministers, who took a part in the solemnity of my ordination, are
among the dead: and only two Rev. Mess. Mackinstry, and Hopkins of Hadley.
survive of those who constituted the ordaining council, which was uncommonly
numerous.

In 1757, the southern part of the original parish was erected into a distinct
parish, containing about 75 families. In September, 1762, a church was formed,
consisting of Christians of different denominations, who, with great appearance
of candor, waved their distinguishing sentiments, and covenanted to attend on
the same ministry, and commune at the same table. On the week following, the
rev'd. Sylvanus Griswold was ordained their pastor.

A little before the death of Mr. Hopkins, a number of inhabitants in the north
part of the original parish, uniting with a number on the east side of the
great river, were incorporated into one parish; and, in 1752, called and
settled the rev'd. John Mackinstry.

That part which lies on the west side of the river, by a late act of division,
is become a distinct society, and is the third parish in this town. It has a
meeting house; but is destitute of a minister. We hope it will not long remain
so.

When the second, or south parish was incorporated, there remained in this
about 95 families, and 550 souls. Ten years ago the number of families was 154,
and of souls 897. Within the same limits, the families are now 171, and the
souls about 990. Nine families have lately been annexed to this from the south
parish. The present number of families is 180, and of souls about 1050. The
average increase of the parish for 40 years has been 2 families a year. The
progress in the last 10 years has been nearly the same, as in preceding years.
In this period the emigrations have much exceeded the immigrations.

In the first 20 years of my ministry, the number of deaths was 208; the mean
number of souls, I suppose, was about 670; the proportion, something less than
1 to 3. In the space of 30 years, the number of deaths was 346; the mean number
of souls about 724; the proportion a little short of 1 to 2. In the whole
period of 40 years, the number of deaths is 473; the mean number of souls 772;
the proportion nearly 8 to 13, or something less than 2 to 3. In a period of 66
years, the number of deaths will probably be equal to the number of souls
living in the middle of that period; i. e. about 900. In the space of 40 years,
29 persons have been taken from among us by casualty. In the late war, 6
belonging to the parish died in the army, 11 by sickness, and 5 by the sword of
the enemy.


Of the 470 persons, who have died in 40 years, 140 had arrived to the 50th;
III to the 60th; 86 to the 70th; 43 to the 80th; 5 to the 90th; and 4 to the
95th year of their age. 'If a man live many years, and rejoice in them all; let
him remember the days of darkness, for they shall be many.'

The baptisms of children, whose parents were members of this church, have, in
the time of my ministry, been 837. Of these 48 have been baptized since the
beginning of July 1795, which is little more than a year.

Admissions to the Lord's table, including transfers of relation to this from
other churches, there have been 290. Besides those, about 80 have joined
themselves to the church, expressing a doubt of their meetness for the Lord's
table. This church regards all professors, as complete members, and under her
watch; but she exercises indulgence to tender consciences. Of the 290
communicants, 113 have been admitted in the last 10 years; and 35 in little
more than a year. The increase of the church has been much greater in the last
10 years of my ministry, than in any preceding period of the same length. The
increase, since the June of the last year, has been distinguished. The Lord
make you to increase more and more in numbers and in good works.

May the remaining part of my ministry be rendered more useful, than the past;
and through your prayers may I obtain grace to fulfill the ministry, which I
have received of the Lord Jesus to testify the gospel of Christ, and thus
finish my course with joy.

Our relation has hitherto subsisted in comfortable peace and friendship. May
it so continue to the end.

I remember, with gratitude, many kindnesses which I have received; and you
have my ardent wishes and daily prayers for your tranquillity and happiness.

Among the testimonies of your regard and benevolence, there is a recent one
for which you will accept my particular thanks. The benefaction to which I
allude was so liberal and seasonable, and so happily adapted to my exigences,
that it could not but be gratefully felt. It was made with a cheerfulness and
ardour, which add much to its intrinsic worth; and with so great unanimity,
that I confess my self indebted to you all.

May your benevolence awaken in me a greater diligence in your service. May
your union among yourselves be preserved. May peace and wisdom guide all your
steps. May you never want a minister who will heartily feel, ardently pray, and
cheerfully labor for you in the Lord. May the word and spirit of God never be
removed from you, nor from your seed nor from your seed's seed, ever down to
the latest succession of our mortal race.

And now, brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which
is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among them who are
sanctified. And I entreat you for the Lord Jesus sake, and for the love of the
spirit, that you strive together in your prayers and labors for the common
interest of Christ's church, and for the particular interest of this society.
May my remaining services be accepted of the saints, and useful to you all. May
I come to you with joy, and with you be refreshed.

May the God of peace be with you all.

AMEN.

