THE CASE OF THE MANUFACTURERS OF Soap and Candles, IN THE CITY OF NEW YORK,
STATED AND EXAMINED.

TO WHICH ARE PREFIXED, THE LAWS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, CONCERNING
INFECTIOUS DISEASES.

WITH AN ADDITION, IN FORM OF AN APPENDIX; CONTAINING, SEVERAL Documents AND
Papers, RELATIVE TO THESE SUBJECTS.

PUBLISHED BY THE ASSOCIATION OF TALLOW CHANDLERS AND SOAP MAKERS.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY JOHN BUEL, FOR THE ASSOCIATION.

MDCCXCVII.

PREFACE.
AN Act passed by the Legislature during the sitting at Albany last Winter,
concerning the removal of Unhealthy Trades from the City of New York, gave rise
to the present PUBLICATION. After the frequent visitations of this place within
a few years, by Pestilential Distempers, it certainly became an interesting
object to detect the cause of the evil, and whence it originated. Although sick
persons and unhealthy air, are frequently brought from sea into the harbor of
this seat of Commerce by ships, yet an opinion is gaining an establishment
among the citizens, that more dangerous sources of infected air exist among
themselves on shore. The detection of this fact is important, and the
acknowledgment of it by the people of America is very honorable to them. It
being thus admitted that the American Epidemic Fevers were caused by
exhalations from substances on shore, and in large Towns, chiefly from those,
which the industry of man had collected for the purposes of Trade and
Manufacture, it necessarily became an object of enquiry, which of the
substances, so accumulated, emitted pestilential vapors. It will appear to the
reader, that in one of the Laws, printed in this collection, the
Tallow-Chandlers and Soap-makers, are considered as carrying on a business too
noxious to be endured, and extremely detrimental to the public health.
Provision was accordingly made for prohibiting their manufactures within
certain limits. They remonstrated against this regulation, as likely to be
ruinous to some of their number, oppressive to all, and at the same time, not
calculated to do the good expected from it.

The desire to have the matter investigated upon its merits, without favor or
partiality, gave rise to the following argument; in which both the principles
of Science, and the practice of the Arts, are brought forward to show their
business has been unreasonably complained of. They believe the discussion to be
fair and conclusive; and as it involves an investigation, what the peculiar
nature of pestilential air is, as well as its application to the Publishers'
particular occupations, they have undertaken to get it printed and distributed
about. They feel anxious for the propagation of the truth. They feel a concern
for the persons of their trade in the other cities of the United States, who
they fear may be crushed by a policy as cruel as that which lately threatened
themselves with destruction. They flatter themselves this Pamphlet will do
good; and, that this might be more certainly the case they have caused the Laws
of New York, preventive of the Introduction and Spreading of Infectious
Diseases, to be exhibited in one view, and have added a few other matters,
connected with the subject.

It is useful now and then to revise the Laws; and they, at this time, have
thought it proper to lay before the public, on the subject of Infection, the
statutes at large. Like other citizens, they feel a great desire to bring all
matters connected with the healthiness of the Cities of America, and conducive
to their better police, to a just understanding; and if the public can derive
any substantial information or leading hint, from the contents of this
Pamphlet, the compilers will have the satisfaction of believing their labor is
not lost. The great principle they wish to establish, is, that the matter of
Infection is the septic acid vapor, or volatile acid of putrefaction; that
thereupon, and thereafter, regulations about Nuisances, Lazarettos, and
Quarantines, may be made in an exact manner, and not by guess, as they
heretofore have been; for they have no hesitation to believe, and the United
States afford facts enough on the subject, that much of the present system of
preventing and stopping infection, is equally disgraceful to Police, Physic,
and Commerce; and though their late persecution roused their indignation
against a few individuals, they have never ceased to respect decency, and to
labor for the public good.

NEW YORK, March 28th, 1797.
CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I. EXTRACTS FROM THE LAWS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK.
SECTION I. An Act to prevent the bringing in and spreading of Infectious
Distempers. -- Passed 4th May, 1784. SECT. II. An Act to amend the Act,
entitled "an Act to prevent the bringing in and spreading of Infectious
Distempers in this State." -- Passed 27th March 1794. SECT. III. An Act to
prevent the bringing in and spreading of Infectious Diseases in this State. --
Passed 1st April, 1796. SECT. IV. An Act to amend the Act, entitled "an Act to
prevent the bringing in and spreading of Infectious Diseases in this State." --
Passed 10th February, 1797. SECT. V. An Act to amend the law against bringing
in and spreading Infectious Diseases. -- Passed March 6, 1797.
CHAP. II. PROCEEDINGS AT ALBANY.
SECT. I. Petition of the Manufacturers of Soap and Candles. SECT. II. Argument
of their Counsel in favor of the Manufacturers, submitted to consideration of
the members of Legislature at Albany, pending the amendment of the Act of 10th
Feb. 1797. SECT. III. Affidavits, etc. in support of some matters touched upon
in the Argument.
APPENDIX. COLLATERAL EVIDENCE.
SECT. I. Extracts from Maitland's History of London. SECT. II. Letter from the
Secretary of the Agricultural Society of New York, to the President of the
Board of Agriculture in Great Britain. -- From Swords' Magazine.
THE CASE etc.
CHAPTER I. EXTRACTS FROM LAWS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK.
SECTION I. An ACT to prevent the bringing in and spreading of infectious
distempers in this State.
PASSED 4th MAY, 1784.
WHEREAS the Ports of this State are now open to Vessels coming from any
foreign Parts, by means whereof many infectious distempers may be brought into
this State; in order as much as possible to prevent the same,

I. Be it enacted by the People of the State of New York, represented in Senate
and Assembly, and it is hereby enacted by the authority of the same, That all
vessels, of whatever kind they may be, having on board any person or persons
infected with the yellow fever or any other contagious distemper, or coming
from any place infected with such contagious distemper, shall not come into any
of the ports or harbors of this State, or nearer to the City of New York, than
the island commonly called Bedlow's Island, and shall be obliged to perform
quarantine there, or in such other place, and for such time, and in such manner
as the Governor, or person administering the government for the time being, or
in his absence from the said City, as the Mayor thereof shall think proper to
direct and appoint; and that during the time of such quarantine, no person or
persons whomsoever, nor any goods or merchandise whatsoever, coming or imported
in such vessels, shall come or be brought on shore, unloaded or be put on board
of any other vessel within this State, or the neighboring States of New Jersey,
or Connecticut, until such Vessel, persons, goods and merchandise shall
respectively be discharged from such quarantine, by an order from the Governor,
or person administering the government for the time being, or in his absence
from the said City, from the Mayor thereof; and all masters or commanders of
such vessels, and all others who should presume to put on shore, unload or put
on board any other vessel as aforesaid, any person or persons, goods or
merchandise, contrary to the true intent and meaning of this act, having first
had notice thereof, shall forfeit the sum of two hundred Pounds, current money
of this State.

II. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the several
branch Pilots and their respective deputies belonging to this State, shall use
their utmost endeavors to hail every vessel coming into this State from sea,
and shall ask and demand of the master or commander of every such vessel,
whether he has on board any person or persons, sick or infected with the Yellow
Fever, or any contagious distemper, or whether such vessel comes from any place
where infectious distempers prevail; and being answered in the affirmative,
shall immediately give notice to the commander of such vessel of the penalty
aforesaid, and forbid his going any further with his vessel than Bedlow's
Island, and that he is to anchor his vessel there, until he shall have further
directions from the Governor, or person administering the government for the
time being, or in his absence from the said City, from the Mayor thereof; and
shall also forbid such commander from putting on shore any person who belonged
to, or performed the voyage in such vessel, and from unloading or putting on
board any other vessel, any person or persons, or goods and merchandise out of
his said vessel, under the penalty aforesaid; and any branch pilot or such
deputy, neglecting his duty therein, shall respectively forfeit the sum of
fifty pounds for every offense; and if any person or persons shall come on
shore from such vessel (unless first permitted and licenced by the governor, or
person administering ^he government for the time being, or in his absence from
the said city, by the Mayor aforesaid) it shall and may be lawful to use all
necessary force and constraint to compel such person or persons to return on
board the said vessel, or to dispose of him or them in some suitable place, in
order to prevent the infection from spreading.

III. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if the
commander of any vessel, having any person or persons on board, sick or
languishing under any of the aforesaid distempers, or coming from any place
infected therewith, shall not make a true discovery thereof, when thereunto
required as aforesaid, such commander shall forfeit the sum of two hundred
pounds for every such offense; and the Governor, or person administering the
government for the time being, is hereby authorized and empowered, by and with
the advice and consent of the council of appointment, to appoint a Physician to
inspect all vessels which may have on board, or which may be suspected of
having on board, any person or persons infected with a contagious distemper;
and it shall and may be lawful to and for such Physician, and he is hereby
authorized and required, to enter on board all and every vessel and vessels
coming into this State, under the circumstances aforesaid, and there to make
strict search, examination and inquiry into the health, state and condition of
the master, passengers and mariners of such vessels respectively, and to report
his discovery and opinion thereupon without delay, to the governor, or person
administering the government for the time being, or in his absence from the
City of New York, to the Mayor of the said City; and if any person or persons
whomsoever, shall presume to hinder or obstruct the said Physician in
performing the duties required of him by this act, such offender shall forfeit
for every such offense, the like penalty of two hundred pounds lawful money
aforesaid; and the said Physician shall be entitled to, and shall receive from
the commander of every vessel to be visited by him in pursuance of this act,
the sum of twenty-eight shillings for his services in making such examination,
and reporting thereupon.

IV. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That it shall be and
is hereby made the duty of the master and wardens of the port of New York, to
give their utmost aid and assistance in carrying this law into effect, and in
their own names to sue and prosecute for all the penalties which shall arise,
accrue or become forfeited, by virtue of this act; and to apply the same for
the use and support of the Light-house established at Sandy-Hook, for the
security of commerce.

SECTION II. An ACT to amend the Act, entitled, "An Act to prevent the bringing
in and spreading of infectious distempers in this State."
PASSED 27th MARCH, 1794.
I. BE it enacted by the People of the State of New York represented in Senate
and Assembly, That the act entitled "An act to prevent the bringing in and
spreading of infectious distempers in this State," shall extend to all vessels
coming from any port or place whatsoever. And that in the absence of the person
administering the government of this State for the time being, from the cities
of Albany and Hudson, the Mayor of the said cities respectively, or in their
absence, the Recorders of the said cities respectively, shall execute the act
aforesaid in the said respective cities, and upon Hudson's river opposite to
the said cities respectively, and within one mile above and below the same, and
two or more justices of the peace residing in any town in this State, bordering
or lying upon any port or harbor of this State, shall also execute the said
act, in such towns respectively, and upon the waters opposite to the same towns.

II. And be it further enacted, That it shall be lawful for the said persons
hereby authorized to execute the said act, so far as respects vessels coming
into the ports and harbors of this State, and also for any two or more justices
of any of the inland towns of the State, to take effectual measures to prevent
the introduction and spreading of any infectious distemper into any part of the
State by land, and for that purpose to stop, detain, and examine any person
coming from any place infected with any such distemper; and if there be good
cause to suspect any person to be infected as aforesaid, it shall be lawful for
the person and persons herein before authorized to execute this act, and the
act aforesaid, to cause every such person to be sent out of the State, not
being an inhabitant of this State, or kept in such place as will not expose the
inhabitants of the same to receive and take such infectious distemper; and
further to authorize and appoint any such person or persons under him or them,
to and in the execution of this and the act aforesaid, as he or they may deem
proper, and also to do every other act and thing which may be thought necessary
to carry into effect the object of this and the act aforesaid, as fully as if
the same was herein particularly expressed and provided for.

III. And be it further enacted, That it shall be lawful for the treasurer of
this State, for the time being, and he is hereby required, out of any moneys
not otherwise appropriated, from time to time to pay such sum and sums of money
as the person administering the government of this State, for the time being,
shall by warrant under his hand and seal, direct to be applied in and about the
execution of this act, and the act aforesaid, not exceeding the sum of one
thousand pounds in any one year.

IV. And be it further enacted, That it shall and may be lawful for the person
administering the government of this State for the time being, by and with the
advice and consent of the council of appointment, to appoint such Physician in
the cities of Albany and Hudson, for the purposes aforesaid, as they may think
necessary and proper; and the Physician who shall in pursuance of the said act,
examine any vessel coming from a foreign port, shall be entitled to, and
receive from the commander thereof, the sum of three pounds, instead of the sum
mentioned in the said act.

V. And be it further enacted, That it shall and may be lawful for the person
administering the government for the time being, from time to time to
appropriate the island commonly called and known by the name of Governor's
Island, for the purpose of erecting buildings, or setting up tents thereon, for
the reception or accommodation of any person or persons infected, or supposed
to be infected with any such distemper as aforesaid, or any other sick or
disordered person or persons, and their necessary attendants; any lease, grant
or demise made, or to be made, by the regents of the university notwithstanding.

SECTION III. An ACT to prevent the bringing in, and spreading of infectious
diseases in this State.
PASSED 1st APRIL, 1796.
BE it enacted by the People of the State of New York, represented in Senate
and Assembly, That a person practicing physic shall be appointed Health Officer
for the city of New York, and that seven persons shall be appointed
commissioners of the Health Office for the said city, and by which several
names of office the said persons shall be respectively known in the law.

And be it further enacted, That all vessels arriving in the port of New York,
from parts beyond the sea, having on board forty passengers, all vessels
arriving in the said port, having on board a person sick with a fever, all
vessels arriving in the said port on board of which a person may during the
time such vessels were at the foreign port from which they last sailed, or
during their passage from thence to the port of New York, have died of a fever,
and all vessels arriving in the said port from places, where at the time of
their departure, an infectious disease prevailed, shall be subject to
quarantine of course. That it shall be lawful for the person administering the
government of this State, from time to time, whenever, and as he shall judge
advisable, to issue his proclamation, declaring what other vessels to be
described as coming from the countries, islands, or ports, therein to be
mentioned, shall also be subject to quarantine. That it shall in like manner be
lawful for him to issue his proclamation, assigning and limiting the places or
spaces where all vessels subject to quarantine, shall, on their arrival within
the said port, be brought to anchor, and remain until they shall have been
visited and examined by the said Health Officer, and by him reported to some
one of the said Commissioners to be free from infection. That it shall in like
manner be lawful for him to issue his proclamation, prohibiting or regulating
the intercourse by land or ferries between this State and such places within
any other of the United States where he shall be informed an infectious disease
does prevail. That all persons offending in the premises shall be liable to be
punished as for a misdemeanor, by fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of
the Court having thereof cognizance; and moreover it shall be lawful for the
said commissioners to cause any vessel subject to quarantine, which before she
shall have been so visited, examined and reported as aforesaid, shall be
brought to anchor elsewhere within the said port of New York; and all vessels,
although not described in this act, or in such proclamation as above mentioned,
as vessels subject to quarantine, having on board a person sick with a disease
which in the judgment of the Health officer there shall be reason to apprehend
is infectious, or having on board articles which may be apprehended to contain
infection, to be removed to and brought to anchor within the said places or
spaces so to be assigned and limited, and to cause all persons and articles
which may have been landed, to be arrested and seized, and to be returned on
board such vessel, or removed to the Lazaretto herein after mentioned; and it
shall also be lawful for them to cause all persons who shall come into this
State, contrary to the prohibition or regulations in such proclamation as last
mentioned to be arrested, and if well, to be conveyed to the place out of this
State from whence they last came, or if sick, to be removed to the said
Lazaretto.

And be it further enacted, That the said Health Officer shall without delay,
visit and examine all vessels subject to quarantine, and whenever he shall
judge any such vessel to be free from infection, he shall so report her to some
one of the said commissioners, and he shall be entitled to receive from the
master of every vessel so to be visited by him, if coming from a foreign port,
the sum of three pounds, and if coming from a port within the United States the
sum of thirty two shillings for his services therein; and the commissioners
shall cause him at all times when he shall require it, to be furnished with a
convenient boat, and with men sufficient to row the same; and to that end if
they shall deem it most convenient, it shall be lawful for them to contract
with any person for that purpose. And in order that the said Health Officer may
be enabled the better to perform the examination of vessels subject to
quarantine, it shall be lawful for him to put all such questions to the persons
on board any such vessel as shall be needful and proper to that end, and the
persons to whom such questions shall be put, shall respectively, truly
administer the same on oath, and which oath he is hereby authorized to
administer accordingly; and every person swearing falsely in the premises shall
be considered as liable to the pains and penalties for wilful and corrupt
perjury.

And be it further enacted, That it shall be lawful for the person
administering the government of this State to cause a building suitable to
serve for a Lazaretto, the expense whereof, exclusive of the moneys to be
expended for the purchase of lands, if any shall be purchased, not to exceed
the sum of two thousand pounds, to be erected on Nutten Island, or on other
lands which may be deemed more eligible, and which other lands he is hereby
authorized to purchase for the people of this State, for the reception of
persons and articles arriving in a vessel subject to quarantine, and by the
Health Officer, or the said commissioners, ordered or permitted to be removed
from on board such vessel, and for the reception of all persons within the said
city sick with an infectious disease, and who it may be necessary to have
removed to such Lazaretto.

And be it further enacted, That the said Health Officer shall be physician to
the said Lazaretto, and the commissioners of the Health Office shall in other
respects have the superintendance thereof, and employ mates, nurses and
attendants, and provide bedding, clothing, fuel, provisions, medicines, and
such other matters as shall be requisite therein; and it shall be lawful for
them to make reasonable and prudential needful rules and orders for the
government and management thereof.

And be it further enacted, That all persons removed to the said Lazaretto,
shall be liable to pay a reasonable sum for their board, medicine and
attendance therein, and if any of them deemed to have sufficient means shall
refuse to pay such sum, the same shall be recovered from them by the said
commissioners by suit in their own name.

And be it further enacted, That it shall be lawful for the said Health Officer
whenever he shall judge it necessary to prevent infection to cause any bedding
and clothing arriving in a vessel subject to quarantine to be destroyed.

And be it further enacted, That the said Health Officer shall for his services
as Physician to the said Lazaretto, and the said commissioners shall for their
services be entitled from time to time to such annual sum as the Legislature
shall judge reasonable.

And be it further enacted, That it shall be lawful for the person
administering the government to grant warrants on the treasury in favor of the
following persons, that is to say -- In favor of the person or persons whom he
shall employ as superintendant or superintendants to erect the said Lazaretto,
the requisite sums for that purpose not to exceed in the whole the said sum of
two thousand pounds above mentioned. In favor of the commissioners of the
Health Office to be expended by them in the execution of their trust by virtue
of this act, such sums as the said person administering the government shall
from time to time judge necessary, not to exceed in the whole, the sum of one
thousand pounds in any one year, and in favor of the vendor of any lands which
may be purchased whereon to erect the said Lazaretto, the amount of the
consideration money for such lands.

And be it further enacted, That every person practicing physic in the said
city, who shall attend a patient sick with a fever, deemed by him to be
infectious, shall forthwith make report in writing of the case of such patient,
to some one of the commissioners of the health office, upon pain of forfeiting
fifty dollars for every neglect; to be recovered with costs of suit, by action
of debt in any court of record, in the name of the Commissioners of the Health
Office, and be applied when recovered, to the relief of the poor in the said
Lazaretto.

And be it further enacted, That it shall be lawful for the Mayor, Aldermen and
Commonalty of the City of New York in Common Council convened, from time to
time as they shall judge advisable, to make bye-laws, ordinances, rules and
orders for filling up or raising, or for reducing or levelling any lot or lots
within the said city, and for cleansing and scouring the streets, allies,
passages, curtilages, yards, cellars, vaults, sinks and other places within the
said city, and for regulating all manufactories of soap, candles, vellum, glue,
leather, or starch, and all other manufactories, and all works, trades or
businesses, causing noxious effluvia or vapor, in respect to the manner in
which, and the places or spaces within, the limits of the said city, where such
manufactories, works, trades, or businesses shall be carried on or used, and
whereby to preserve general health in the said City, and for removing or
destroying all offensive or putrid articles of substances, which may be stored
or otherwise collected, and generally for preventing all other nuisances within
the said city, under such penalties of fines and forfeitures as shall be
reasonable, and in the cases wherein no fine or forfeiture shall be expressed,
the persons offending in such cases shall be punishable as for a misdemeanor,
by fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court, and also to enjoin on
and commit to the commissioners of the health office and every of them such
duties and authorities for the more effectual execution of every bye-law,
ordinance, rule and order, to be made in this behalf as shall be necessary.
Provided, nevertheless, That no such bye-law, ordinance, rule or order shall
remain in force longer than for twelve months from the day of the making
thereof, unless the same shall be allowed of, or confirmed by the person
administering the government of this state.

And Whereas, the removal of such manufactories, works, trades or businesses as
are above intended, from the places where the same are now used or carried on,
may be attended with expense to the proprietor thereof; to the end therefore,
that reasonable compensation on that account may be made to such proprietor,

BE it further enacted, That whenever and as often as the Mayor, Aldermen and
Commonalty of the City of New York, shall order the removal, in virtue of this
act, of any of the before described manufactories, trades or businesses from
the places in which, at the time of passing this act, the same shall be used or
carried on, it shall and may be lawful for the said Mayor, Aldermen and
Commonalty of the said City of New York, to treat and agree with the respective
owners or proprietors of such manufactories, trades or businesses, respecting
the compensation to be paid for such expenses, and if any such owners or
proprietors shall refuse to treat and agree in manner aforesaid, then and in
such case, it shall and may be lawful, to and for the said Mayor, and Recorder,
and any two or more of the said Aldermen, by virtue of this act, by a precept
under their hands and seals to command the Sheriff of the said City and County
of New York, to impanel and return a jury of freeholders, to appear before the
Mayor's Court of the said City, at any term not less than three weeks from the
date of such precept, to enquire into, and ascertain the reasonable
compensation, which under all the circumstances of the case, should be made to
such owners or proprietors, for the expenses of such removal as aforesaid,
which said jury being first duly sworn, faithfully and impartially to enquire
into and ascertain such compensation, shall proceed to ascertain the same; and
the sum found by their verdict, shall be paid by the said Mayor, Aldermen and
Commonalty of the said City of New York, to the said owners or proprietors, and
shall be deemed as part of the contingent expenses of the said city.

And be it further enacted, That in addition to the provisions aforesaid, if
the owner or occupant of any lot shall refuse or neglect after convenient time
to fill up, raise, reduce, or level such lot in such manner, as the same shall
by any such bye-law, ordinance, rule or order, be required to be filled up,
raised, reduced or levelled, it shall then be lawful for the said Mayor,
Aldermen and Commonalty, to cause such lot to be so filled up, raised and
levelled, and the amount of the moneys which they shall advance for that
purpose, with lawful interest for the same, shall be deemed a lien on such lot,
and shall be recoverable by them as for moneys advanced for the use of the
defendant by suit against the then, or any future occupant or owner of such lot
at their election.

And be it further enacted, That the act, entitled "An Act to prevent the
bringing in and spreading of infectious distempers in this State," passed the
4th day of May, 1784, except the second section thereof, and the act to amend
the said act, passed the 27th day of March, 1794, shall so far as respects the
City and County of New York, be repealed. Provided, That such repeal shall not
be deemed to annul the appointment lately made of a physician to inspect
vessels, in pursuance of the said act first mentioned, but the said physician
shall be and hereby is declared to be by force of such appointment, the Health
Officer intended in this act.

SECTION IV. An ACT to amend the Act, entitled, "An Act to prevent the bringing
in and spreading of Infectious diseases in this State."
PASSED 10th of FEBRUARY, 1797.
BE it enacted by the People of the State of New York, represented in Senate
and Assembly, That there shall be three persons appointed Commissioners of the
Health Office of the City of New York, who shall assemble from time to time, as
occasion may require, at the Health Office, for the dispatch of the business to
them entrusted: and that the said Commissioners, together with the Health
Officer, for the time being for the said City, and who by virtue of his office,
shall always be a member of the said office, or a majority of them shall be,
and hereby are invested with all and singular the powers granted to the
Commissioners of the Health Office for the said City, in and by the said act,
entitled, "An Act to prevent the bringing in and spreading of Infectious
diseases in this State;" and that from and after the appointment of the said
three Commissioners, all the powers vested in the present Commissioners of the
Health Office, shall cease.

And be it further enacted, That it shall be lawful for the said Commissioners
and Health Officer, or a majority of them, from time to time, as they shall
judge advisable, to make and execute rules and orders for cleansing and
scouring the streets, allies, passages, curtilages, sewers, yards, cellars,
vaults, sinks and other places within the said city, and for removing all
offensive or putrid articles, or substances which may be stored or otherwise
collected within the said City, and all necessary expenses in carrying the said
rules and orders into effect, shall be deemed as part of the contingent
expenses of the said City, and shall be raised by the Mayor, Aldermen and
Commonalty of the said City, as the other contingent expenses of the said City
are raised: Provided, nevertheless, that all such rules or orders shall be
reported to, and may be suspended or repealed at any time, by the person
administering the government of this State.

And be it further enacted, That all coasting vessels coming from any place
south of Cape May, although not subject to quarantine of course, shall be
liable to examination, if the Health Officer shall deem it expedient, by some
fit person to be by him deputed, who shall have such reasonable compensation
for his services, and paid by the Commissioners, as they shall deem right; and
that quarantine shall in all cases continue as many days as the Commissioners
shall deem necessary; and that no vessel hereafter arriving in the port of
New York, otherwise, and subject to quarantine of course, shall be exempted
from such quarantine, by reason of having previously touched or entered at any
port within the United States, unless such vessel shall have remained in such
port for the space of ten days.

And be it further enacted, That upon complaint being made in writing by the
Health Officer, or either of the said Commissioners, to the Wardens of the port
of New York, charging any of the pilots of the said port with a breach of any
of the rules and regulations, prescribed by or in pursuance of this act, or of
the act, entitled, "An act to prevent the introduction and spreading of
Infectious diseases in this state," it shall be the duty of the said Wardens,
forthwith to suspend such pilot or pilots from piloting any vessel, until he
shall have entered into a recognizance in the sum of two hundred dollars, with
sufficient security before a magistrate, to appear and answer to the offense,
at the then next Court of General Sessions of the peace, to be held in and for
the City and County of New York.

And be it further enacted, That from and after the first day of July next, no
person shall dress sheep or lamb skins, or manufacture glue, nor shall any
soap-boiler, or tallow-chandler, or starch-maker, or maker or dresser of
vellum, carry on any of their processes or operations of their said trades,
which produce impure air, or offensive smells, such as trying or melting of fat
or tallow, boiling soap, fermenting grain, or other substances for starch,
washing, fermenting, or oiling skins, or vellum, at any place within the the
city of New York, south of the south side of Grant-street, and of the south
side of the said street continued until it intersects the easterly side of
Mulberry-street, and south of the west line, from the intersection aforesaid,
continued to Hudson's river, under the penalty of one hundred dollars, for each
offense, to be recovered in an action of debt, with costs of suit, by any
person who shall sue for the same in the Court of Common Pleas, called the
Mayor's Court, of the said city, one half whereof shall be to the use of the
plaintiff, and the other half shall be brought into the said court, and by the
order thereof, paid to the treasurer or chamberlain of the said city, to be
disposed of to the use of the poor thereof, in such manner as the Mayor,
Aldermen and Commonalty of the said city, shall from time to time direct.

And be it further enacted, That it shall be lawful for the Mayor, Aldermen and
Commonalty of the said City of New York, to treat and agree with such of the
owners or proprietors of the manufactories, trades, or business, prohibited as
aforesaid, for the taking down, removal and replacing the vessels and fixtures
used in such manufactures and trades, in such part of the said city, in which
such manufactories and trades may by this act be established and prosecuted,
and in case no agreement can be made with the owners or proprietors of any such
manufactories, or persons prosecuting such trades as aforesaid, then and in
such case, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Mayor and Recorder,
and any two or more of the said Aldermen, by virtue of this act, by a precept
under their hands and seals, to command the sheriff of the said City and County
of New York to impannel and return a jury of twelve freeholders to appear
before the Mayor's Court of the said City at any term, not less than three
weeks from the date of such precept, to inquire into, and ascertain the
reasonable compensation which should be made to such owners or proprietors, for
such taking down, removal and replacing, as aforesaid, which said jury being
first duly sworn faithfully and impartially to enquire into and ascertain such
compensation, shall proceed to ascertain the same; and the sum found by their
verdict, shall be paid by the said Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the said
City of New York, to the said owners or proprietors, and shall be deemed as
part of the contingent expenses of the said City, to be raised and levied, and
collected, as the other contingent expenses of the said City, are levied,
collected and paid. Provided always, that after such decision by the jury, it
shall be optional with the said Mayor, Aldermen, and Commonalty, either to pay
the amount of the compensation found by the jury, or within one month
thereafter, at their proper expense, to take down, remove and replace, such
vessels and fixtures in such place as the owners and proprietors thereof shall
direct, and in such part of the said city, as by this act, such manufactories
or trades as aforesaid may be established.

SECTION V. An ACT to amend the Law, to prevent the bringing in and spreading
of infectious Diseases in this State.
PASSED 6th MARCH 1797.
WHEREAS it is represented to the Legislature that there are certain
manufactures of Soap and Candles in the City of New York, whose works are so
situated, and whose business is so carefully managed, as neither to endanger
the health nor be offensive to their neighbors, Therefore,

BE it enacted by the People of the State of New York, represented in Senate
and Assembly, That the person administering the government of this State, with
any two of the commissioners of the Health-Office, may in writing under their
hands, permit all such manufacturers of Soap and Candles to remain and exercise
their said trades, within the City of New York, to the southward of the bounds,
or line designated in the fifth section of the act entitled, "An act to amend
the act, entitled an act to prevent the bringing in and spreading of infectious
diseases in this State," any thing in the act to the contrary notwithstanding.
Provided nevertheless, that such permits may, in the discretion of the persons
having authority to give the same, be granted to such Starch-makers whose
manufactories are not situated to the southward of fresh water, which
certificate shall remain in force until the person administering the government
of this State, and any two of the said commissioners shall by writing under
their hands, supercede the same, on its appearing to them that such permission
has been abused, and ought to be withdrawn; and until notice in writing, that
the same is superceded, has been served on the person in whose favor the
certificate was granted, or left at his or her dwelling house, and a copy of
such notice fixed up in the clerk's office of the said city: Provided
nevertheless, that no Tallow shall be rendered within the said limits,
prescribed by the act above mentioned, from the fifteenth day of May, to the
first day of November in each year.

And be it further enacted, That the street, called in the said act
Grant-street, was intended and shall be construed to mean Grand-street: and
that the street therein called Mulberry-street, was intended, and shall be
construed to mean Mulberry-street, as the same streets are delineated on a map
of the city of New York, lately published by David Longworth in the said City.

CHAPTER II. PROCEEDINGS AT ALBANY.
SECTION I. TO THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND
ASSEMBLY -- THE MEMORIAL OF THE SUBSCRIBERS, MANUFACTURERS OF SOAP AND CANDLES
IN THE CITY OF NEW YORK:
Respectfully Shows,

That when grievances beset themselves and their fellow-citizens, of a nature
susceptible of legislative remedy, they conceive they have a right of
presenting memorials and petitions, exhibiting the grounds and causes of their
complaint, and praying for relief.

That your Memorialists have read with great concern and alarm, the act,
entitled, an act to amend the act, entitled an act to prevent the bringing in
and spreading of infectious diseases in this State, passed the tenth day of
February, one thousand seven hundred and ninety seven, whereby Soap-boilers and
Tallow-chandlers are prohibited, after the first day of July next, from
carrying on any processes or operations of their trades; and the trying and
melting of fat or tallow, and the boiling of soap within the limits mentioned
in the said act, interdicted under a severe penalty.

That by the provisions of the said act, the Manufacturers of Soap and Candles
are reduced to the hard necessity of either discontinuing their business, or of
removing beyond Grand and Mulberry Streets; a forlorn dilemma, which in one
case terminates in certain distress, and in the other, notwithstanding the
compensation contemplated in the act, will be attended with the ruin of the
greater part of your Memorialists, and with great difficulty and embarrassment
to the rest.

That convinced as your Memorialists are, that private interest should not be
set in opposition to public good, they would meet the impending calamity with
firmness, and bear it with fortitude, were it true that their occupations were
productive of sickness or diffused pestilence through the air of their
neighborhood. Nay, if this was the case, so far are your Memorialists from
wishing to continue as they are from selfish motives, that rather than poison a
street or a neighborhood, they would of their own accord either remove or shut
up their works.

That believing there is a misconception concerning the nature of the vapors
of their manufactories, and that owing to some remote analogies, these
exhalations, though innocent, have been classed with others which are indeed
noxious in a high degree; and confident at the same time, that the Legislature
are willing to investigate the subject to the bottom, and search out the whole
truth; your Memorialists crave permission to be heard on the merits of their
application by a candid enquiry into facts.

That as by reason of the remoteness of the Legislature from their place of
residence, they were not apprised of what was doing soon enough to make
opposition to the bill during its progress, they are desirous of exhibiting at
this time such evidence, to show the harmless nature of their occupation, as
if, had it been possible to have produced in due season, would, they trust,
have satisfied the Legislature that it was superfluous o^ needless to have
included them within the act.

Your Memorialists, therefore, respectfully ^equest that they may, at such time
as shall be assigned for the purpose, be heard by Counsel at the bar of the
House in support of this, their Memorial; and if thereafter, it shall seem safe
and proper, the aforesaid act, as far as it respects Soap-Boilers and
Tallow-Chandlers* may be repealed.

And your Memorialists as in duty bound, Shall ever pray, etc.
SECTION II. REMARKS ON SOME LATE PROCEEDINGS O^ THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE
OF NEW YORK, RELATIVE TO THE REMOVAL OF CERTAIN TRADES AND MANUFACTURES FROM
THE THICKLY SETTLED PARTS OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK, IN AN APPLICATION OF THE
MITCHILLIAN DOCTRINE OF SEPTIC FLUIDS TO THE PROCESSES CARRIED ON IN SEVERAL
BRANCHES OF HANDICRAFT BUSINESS, PARTICULARLY THE MAKING OF SOAP AND CANDLES;
BEING THE SUBSTANCE OF THE ARGUMENT EMPLOYED AT ALBANY IN MARCH, 1797, TO
PROCURE THE REPEAL OF PART OF THE PRECEDING LAW, (OF THE 10th OF FEBRUARY,
1797.)
LIKE a calm observer, their Counsel said he had beheld on several occasions,
the legislature engaged on subjects of a chemical nature. The most important of
all these, the prevention of infectious and contagious distempers had again and
again been agitated by the Representatives of the People. Regulation had
succeeded to regulation, and project given way to project in such rapid
succession, that he hoped before this time, by the joint efforts of those who
were engaged in the reforms, a system of rules well-digested and complete in
their more material parts, would have been elaborated. He was afraid, however,
that a great deal was yet necessary to be done. He was also apprehensive there
had been some things done, which it had been better to have left undone.

He alluded to the Act passed during the present Session, entitled, "an act to
amend an act, entitled, 'an act to prevent the introduction and spreading of
infectious distempers within this State," which, as the Memorials,
Remonstrances and Petitions presented to the Legislature, sufficiently express,
is considered in some of its parts as bearing extremely and unnecessarily hard
upon a valuable and industrious body of Citizens.

The Petitioners for relief from the oppression of that Law, as well as
himself, were inhabitants of the City of New York. He trusted they were all
guided, and governed by the same desire of rendering their place of abode
comfortable and wholesome. The respirable quality of the atmosphere they lived
in, was a matter of eminent concern to them all.

From vitiated air, had it of old been believed, that epidemic distempers
derived their origin; though in the times of rudeness and superstition, it had
been considered as a mark of piety to refer all visitations and calamities of
this sort to the anger of the gods, or at least to the displeasure of Heaven.
This short way of philosophising was in no wise calculated to satisfy the
curiosity of an enlarged mind. By degrees however, after a series of
observations, extended from the 400th year before the Christian Era, quite to
the present day, it had become established as a settled fact, that those wide
wasting diseases, the plagues of ancient times, by which several seaports and
country places in the United States, ^ad within a few years, been dreadfully
afflicted, were mostly connected with a pestilential condition of the air.

To comprehend how the wholesomeness of the atmosphere should be destroyed,
either by a privation of that portion of it, which ministers incessantly to the
support of life, or by letting loose vapors and exhalations of a nature noxious
enough to poison the animals who live and move ^n it, required an extent of
experimental research, which all the accumulated industry of the past ages, had
never until very lately accomplished. It now was admitted on all hands, that
though something of an unfriendly composition, might be formed in the clouds,
by the association of the particles of one kind of air with those of another,
yet the principal mischief arose in the form of steam from substances on or
near the surface of the Earth.

Since then the explosion of the astrological motion of the malign aspect and
influence of the stars, and other bodies above their heads, the eyes of mankind
were turned downward in search of the cause of the inconvenience they endured,
from some source beneath their feet. After a course of various observations and
experiments, it had been discovered, that the greatest degree of vitiation
which the atmosphere manifested by its operation upon the human frame,
proceeded not from earthy or metallic bodies, but was a somewhat emitted from
certain animal and vegetable substances during putrefaction, and floating about
in a volatile form.

What the nature of these new aerial fluids was, had remained for a long time
utterly unknown. Since, however, the dead body of an animal or plant,
disappeared almost entirely by exposure to wind and weather, and left but small
traces of its former existence behind, doubts had been entertained concerning
the vulgar notion of their return to earth, as they seemed rather to be
resolved into air. The perfect transparency of such a fluid, as it reflected no
light, put it out of the power of the Eye to examine what it was, even when
assisted by the most perfect glasses. Its yielding and impalpable nature evaded
examination by feeling and handling, and eluded the nicest exercise of the
sense of touch. Thus its want of visible and tangible properties had rendered
an examination of its peculiar nature, for a great while, very imperfect. And
even since the introduction of vessels of glass into laboratories, it had not
been possible to investigate thoroughly their history, in any other way than by
attending to their combinations with other bodies by means of Chemical
Attraction.

In attending to the changes which plants and animals underwent after death, it
at an early day had become apparent that the air into which they were converted
was not always of a hurtful kind; that some species of both classes of beings
would rot without causing any mischief at all, while other individuals of
either sort, while they underwent corruption, were, though not always, yet
frequently noxious; and at best, of a suspicious character. Mankind, by
attending to the subject, in all possible ways, had discovered at last, that
some putrefying substances would afford no pestilential air at all, and others
that were capable of yielding it, would only do so under certain circumstances.

But before the human mind had progressed far enough, to come to any definite
conclusion on the subject, camps had been desolated, armies cut off, and cities
depopulated by pestilence. In contemplating these distressing events, though it
was obvious enough, the morbid cause must have originated locally, or have been
generated on the spot, both in the field and garrison; still so great had been
the reluctance of mankind in settled and domestic life, to allow their city or
place of residence to be unhealthy, that in the history of all ancient and
modern plagues, a belief has almost universally prevailed, of their
introduction from some foreign place. The Yellow-fever of New York, and the
other commercial cities of America, for instance, if you might give credit to a
multitude of testimony, had been always imported from some distant parts,
commonly from the West Indies; the inhabitants of those Islands agreed among
themselves in disclaiming its origin there; but differed whether it was of
Asiatic descent, from the climate of Siam, or of African production in the
latitudes of Guinea. Had the Malays or the negroes the custom of reading our
performances, and writing books of their own, they would doubtless feel an
equal desire to wipe away these aspersions, and contrive stories as plausible
as many of ours, to countenance its introduction by some infected Traveller
from Ethiopia, or sickly Sailor from the Philippine Islands -- In like manner,
the Athenians of old, though surrounded on the land side by their Peloponnesian
foes, and grievously incommoded on a thousand accounts, as they were cooped up
within their citadel and walls, flattered themselves the plague they suffered
was imported into their harbor from Egypt. A late sensible Traveller had
observed that it never arises in Cairo spontaneously, and affirms it is always
introduced from Constantinople. The people of this Turkish capital, comfort
themselves it did not spring up originally there, but was brought from the
northward, by certain foggy or unwholesome winds that had blown across the
morasses in the neighborhood of the Euxine. -- These prejudices which had been
fostered and cherished in most seaport towns, by the spirit of commerce, were
at this hour, happily wearing away. It redounded inexpressibly to the honor
Americans to be the first to cast them off. Those pestilential outcasts, whom
nobody would own, but whom every body sent as vagrants and vagabonds from
country to country, were beginning to obtain an acknowledged and legal
settlement. They were the monstrous offspring of our vices. Deformed and
hideous as they were, the parentage and filiation was ours, and as we begat
them, we should not refuse to own them. If the reports, which, until a few
years, had invariably prevailed, were traced there could not be found a spot or
corner of the civilized globe, which gave birth to them. If on the other hand,
attention was given to facts, there was not a city or town in the United
States, whether seaport or mid-land, nor a house or habitation in either,
wherein Pestilential Diseases might not arise. The truth is, they might and did
arise in most places, where corruption and nastiness abounded, and of course
were generally, not of foreign derivation, but of domestic origin.

Thus pestilential vapors might be produced from some of the bodies of plants
and animals, or some parts of them, undergoing disorganization, on the surface
of the earth, which being made volatile under certain circumstances, so
contaminated the atmosphere as to cause endemic and epidemic distempers.

He remarked, that this offspring of putrefaction, though too attenuated to
affect the sight, or the touch, was attracted by other bodies. This was
particularly the case with respect to the ashes afforded by wood burned upon
the hearths of dwelling houses, and by the plaster, which constituted their
walls. Long ago had it been known, that the scraping of the matters collected
near doors, in ditches, yards, outhouses and stables, as well as the decayed
walls and old rubbish of dwelling-houses, were exceedingly useful in the
fabrication of saltpeter. This was so well known and understood, that under
the administration of the late kingdom of France, the manufacturers of the
article, were not only incorporated in the city of Paris by their sovereign,
but were allowed to take away from demolished buildings, as much of the old
mortar as they pleased, to encourage the domestic production. And
notwithstanding the fuel of that vast city was chiefly wood, such had been the
accumulation of putrid vapors in the salt-petre-beds, that the Academy of
Sciences, who were directed to examine and report on the subject, had
recommended the mingling of imported pot-ash with the crude materials, as a
means of procuring saltpeter in the most expeditious way, and in the most
abundant quantity. See Appendix, Note A.


In these alliances then, which putrid vapors form with alkaline salt and
calcarious earth, they had been subjected to the most rigorous examination, and
analized with scrutinizing exactness. It had accordingly been proved by trials
made on the effluvia steaming directly from corrupting substances, that they
were arrested by chalk See Appendix, Note B.
and soda, as well as by the the substances enumerated; and thus, he concluded,
the observations of housekeepers corroborated the experiments of philosophers,
and both received confirmation from the processes of the salt-petre-makers.

The sum of the testimony from these three sources, was, that pot-ash and lime,
saturated or neutralized the putrid exhalations they attracted; that being both
of them of alkaline nature, they showed by their analysis, the material they
had drawn from the air, was of an acid quality; and that this acid, which, with
the saline ground, formed common nitre, and with the earthy basis, constituted
calcarious nitre, was the Acid of Putrefaction. See Appendix, Note C.


As far as the almost innumerable mass of facts on these and similar subjects,
had been stripped of foreign and advantitious circumstances, and generalized in
a scientific and logical manner, there existed the most cogent evidence, that
the production just named, and some of its modifications, formed the
pestilential poison; that under the medical names of Human Effluvia, and Marsh
Miasmata, and he scarcely knew how many other titles, was commonly called in
popular phrase, infection or contagion: the operation of which, occasioned such
mortality and terror among the people, and which the Legislature had with such
laudable solicitude, been engaged in guarding against.

He had judged it the more necessary to bring forward to notice, the facts
tending to show the exact and precise nature of pestilential fumes: because
through the whole course of his reading and conversation, they appeared to be
considered as unknown combinations of elementary atoms, equally unknown;
mysterious and inexplicable things engendered from the chaos of organic
dissolution; productions so equivocal, it was hard to know what to call them;
surpassing, as some believed, all mortal comprehension, and lying far beyond
the limits of human understanding.

If his attempt to state what it was, had been successful, then might we be
considered as having caught nature in her work-shop, examined her collection of
raw materials and discovered which of them she employed in this fearful
manufacture, which like the poisoned shirt of Hercules, enwraps the wearer too
closely to be shaken off. Then both the philosopher and the statesman would
have clews to guide them through the labyrinths of Science and Legislation.

From whatever substance, therefore, the acid of putrefaction was produced, it
would be killed in the egg by lime See Appendix. Note G.
and alkalis, if they are present. They could quell, subdue, overpower it. They
were the Ichneumons which destroyed the unhatched and yet harmless Crocodile.
If they were not at hand, the newborn Monster, fostered and nurtered by heat,
acquired the fury of a Dragon, soon took wing, and flew about the Land.

It might, perhaps, be thought a digression from the subject under discussion,
if he dwelt at large upon the trades, occupations and employments wherein
sickly exhalations are generated. Rammazzini had written well on this subject
before him. Instead, therefore, of going the round of a particular enumeration,
he should just observe that this Septic Poison might be considered as
experimentally proved to exist in city and in country, in the houses where
domestic animals, both birds and quadrupeds were kept, and discharged their
dung and urine; in Privies and the receptacles of human ordure; in grave-yards,
and the earth surrounding the buried Bodies of Men; in clothing, bedding and
furniture impregnated with secreted matter and perspiration; in the corrupted
blood and offal of beasts slain for the market; in the skinny and lean parts of
animals, particularly rotten hides, beef and fish; in putrefied wheat, coffee,
cabbages, and certain other vegetable substances; and in that mixture of these
and other dangerous materials, which formed the evaporating, foulness of the
New York streets, and the dismal collection along the riverside.

This pestilent acid is most easily disolved in water. Traveling in company
with this guide, it gradually soaked through the earth on which cities were
built, insinuated itself into the recesses, whither this all-pervading fluid
found its way, and took up its abode or gained admittance into cisterns, wells
and fountains. Even here its alkaline foes attacked and seized it. They
grappled with it, and held it fast, until the contending champions could be
brought up to daylight, and viewed as they lay clenched in close encounter.
After the conflict and effervescence which always attended their meeting was
over, the two friends for a while were commonly victorious; but exhausted and
overpowered at length, their salutary efforts were but of little avail, and
poison predominated in the Reservoirs. See Appendix, Note D.


To an observing mind, the history of man presented an abundance of similar
truths. He presumed almost every person had learned from the newspapers a
description of the dungeon of Olmutz, where the unfortunate La Fayette lingered
in captivity. The victim of a vindictive policy, he there received little
consolation from human friendship* still he was not without a friend. The lime
which cemented the stones of his dismal apartment, attracted the deadly vapors
which threatened his life, and formed with them the nitrous efflorescence,
which crept along the walls.

The bills of mortality showed that large and crowded cities were unfriendly to
the rearing of children to manhood. Was it wonderful? The infant inhaled
pestilence with the air which first expanded his little lungs, absorbed it at
every pore, swallowed it with the tainted milk of the mother's breast. The
water which slaked his thirst, and the food that supported his strength, were
contaminated with the same mischievous ingredient. And this operating in so
many ways upon his tender frame, brought it to a premature dissolution* unless
it should be hardy enough to become seasoned by degrees to the poison, and grow
insensible of its effects. What hapened to the child, happened also to the
parents. The air, the earth, the water; food, clothing, bedding, all became
more or less tinctured with septic matter, produced in a great degree from
substances collected by their own hands, employed with the most perverse of
possible industry, in forming the tissue of this domestic manufacture.

The Soap-Makers and Tallow-Chandlers of the City of New York, were considered
by the bill, which had been passed during the present sessions, as contributing
largely to the mass of pestilential vapors. These useful citizens considered
themselves aggrieved by the judgment the Legislature had passed upon the
business they followed. They felt a confidence the effluvia from their
manufactories, did not impair the health, far less destroy the lives of their
fellow-citizens. If the occupation did, like THE UPAS-TREE, spread around the
spot where Soap and Candles are made, desolation and death, they would not only
submit to the imputation and its inconveniences without a murmur, but in a
public-spirited manner, would applaud the justice of the statute.

He should examine the subject in two ways. First, Upon its Principles: and
Secondly, Upon its actual operation; and he had little doubt it would appear
upon discussion, to be a harmless occupation generally, and even capable
sometimes, of counteracting the effects of contagious and infectious vapors.

From the facts heretofore adduced, he believed there would be little need of
stating additional evidence to prove that Lime and Potash were constantly
engaged in baffling the powers of pestilence, and fighting the battles of
health. Those articles formed a large part of the materials with which the
manufacturers alluded to, carry on their business. It would be a most
remarkable discovery, that a law of nature, which acts uniformly in other
instances, in making these exhalations submit to alkaline dominion, should fail
to operate, or should suspend its efficacy as to this. But there was no such
irregularity known to exist. The septic acid fumes which infected the air of
the inland country, oftentimes as much as of seaports, and made, in proportion
to numbers, as great havoc in interior towns, as in any place whatever, yielded
to the coercion of Potash around the letch-tubs of Cobus's kill, as well as in
the soap-works in our capital. Nor was the Lime, which was always employed to
give sharpness to the ley, inactive in other respects. So far from remaining
idle, it had no sooner whetted the weapons of its ally, than it prepared to
attack, though with feebler powers, the common enemy both of themselves and of
mankind. He might appeal to the knowledge which many of the members of the
Legislature had of the method of managing Pot-ash-works, whether ever a
pestilential distemper was generated there? There was no such thing known. The
demon of pestilence would be instantly arrested on showing his face there, and
so closely confined and guarded, that he never could escape and prowl about for
human prey any more. The lixiviation of ashes then, and the extraction of its
alkali, seemed to be excused on every consideration, from having any agency in
this destructive work, both in town and country.

Here, however, it had been alleged, that the Fat which constitutes the other
part of the soap, and the whole of some sorts of candles, putrefied and emitted
exhalations of a quality so deleterious, that a wise policy should prohibit the
carrying on the processes, for which the oily parts of animals were collected,
and by which these alarming vapors were supposed to be extricated. If this
charge could be supported, then indeed ought the law to be carried forthwith
into execution. But he did not know any facts which countenanced such an
opinion. The true interpretation of them led to an opposite conclusion. He then
proceeded to examine them.

The distillation of animal fat in close vessels, saving the sebacic acid, gave
no volatile salt at all; far less any fluid possessing the qualities complained
of. Its constitution was such, that the peculiar ingredient which became the
basis of noxious airs, and without which, the truly pestilential compositions
could not be formed, resided not in it. Hence though it might become rancid and
smell disagreeably, the effluvium was not poisonous. From the nature of the
material, every house-wife knew, that though the fat might smell as bad as the
lean, it did not turn to rottenness in the same manner.

Again, repeated observation had assured us, that on the escape of the noxious
ingredient from animal substances decaying in large heaps, as happened in the
public burial ground of the city of Paris a few years ago, the residuary
portion turned to lumps of fat, almost as firm as sperma-ceti. This fact was so
well established, that economical projects had been formed to decompound the
carcases of animals under water, in such a manner, that while the pestilential
matter inherent in the blood, skin, brawn and muscles, gradually escaped into
the water, the residue of the lean parts turned to fat. Need he dwell upon the
statement of other facts of this sort, which the periodical publications of
Europe for several years past, have announced to the world so often?

Further, it was in the power of art to imitate these processes of nature. The
operation was as easy as al^ost any in chemistry, by driving off the specific
portion, whence pestilential air was generated, to convert a bit of the leanest
beef into fat or tallow. During the continuance of life, the harmless atoms,
which by their binary union, constitute fat, restrained the disorganizing
efforts of their partner; but when the partnership among the ingredients of a
muscle was dissolved by death of the animal to whom it had belonged, pestilence
sallied forth, free from restraint, and disclaimed his greasy connection. It
was to the gentle, but firm operation of this very fat, so much complained of,
or of the elements from which it might be formed, that the pestilential matter
of our bodies, is in a good degree, held in bondage during life, and prevented
from exercising those destructive powers upon its own constitution, which on
its enlargement, act with deadly malignity upon others. The whole of the
phenomena of the composition of living muscles, and the decomposition of dead
ones, held forth this truth, that neither oily substances, nor the materials of
them, contained pestilential poison, or its essential ingredients.

Besides, New York afforded monuments enough of the efficacy of oil, even under
the disadvantageous form of mixture with metallic bodies into paint, to evince
its power of arresting infectious vapors. Look at them (continued he) in their
filthy birth-places, the bottoms of the slips and docks. See them aim at the
timber of the vessels, that at low water are grounded there in the mud. Behold
the oil quit its union with the white-lead with which it had been mixed, and
turn black by destroying the acid, which was endeavoring to eat through to the
planks. View these pestilential steams as they rise and exert their destructive
effects upon the neighboring houses. Direct your eyes to the blackened
sign-boards, where the oil has so long withstood their assaults, See Appendix,
Note E.
that scarcely a letter of the inhabitant's name is legible. Enter the rooms,
and see the vapors, which the oil has so firmly resisted, thicken, destroy the
birds in their cages, and doom their owners to the grave. He added, that these
facts, which were as public as the market, and obtruded themselves upon the
notice of every passenger, would, if fairly interpreted, bear witness to the
solidity of his argument.

Once more: it was well known that several acids, and particularly the acid of
putrefaction, was decomposed very readily by fat and greasy bodies, and that so
rapidly, as with many sorts of oils, to burst into flame. This capacity of
acids, to combine with animal fats, was so well understood, that acid soaps had
been manufactured. But the experience of mankind had long ago shown, that they
were unfit for rendering substances clean. They had accordingly been discarded
from the arts, through practical conviction, not theoretical opinion. Could a
soap, he asked, compounded of fat and a pestilential acid, neuteralize and
remove infection from tainted clothes? What but an alkali could drag it from
its retreat, entangled at was with the woof, and intertwisted, as it were, with
the filiaments of the cloth? It was the ultimate and irrefragable proof of a
principle, when inferences and deductions from it, coincided with common sense
and the experience of ages. The true reason why Alkalis are preferred as the
bases of Soaps, was, that they deterged the excreted matters which stick to our
garments, whose acidity when accumulated and concentrated by extreme frowziness
and long lying or wearing, first reduced the fabric to rottenness and rags, and
then turned to pestilence. He thought the history of prisons afforded ample
confirmation of this conclusion.

These considerations led to the conviction that oils and fats were not
capable, from their composition and nature, to afford pestilential air; that
they either neutralized or decompounded acids, and thereby weakened or deadened
the Power of Contagion.

Lime, Pot-Ash and Fat, thus were antidotes to contagion, in their distinct and
separate forms. -- The cleanliness and health attendant on the combination of
them into Soap, was so evident to every body, that there was no need of
offering a word on that part of the subject. Though he could not pass it over,
without remarking, that it was a very curious and singular event in the annals
of Legislation, that a Manufacture, whose ingredients, whether considered
separately or in composition, were laboring with an effect, which almost
exceeded calculation to diminish the causes and frequency and violence of
epidemic fevers, should, in the present state of science, and near the close of
the eighteenth Century, and in a American Republic too, be treated by a
Legislature as an internal hot-bed of infection!

He proceeded in the second place, to enquire whether the reasoning he had used
was bottomed on experience? In order to determine this, he exhibited a few
examples to show that men might deal in oil and fat in all their forms, both
vegetable and animal, externally and internally, without being subject to
plague, yellow-fever, or any distemper that resembles them.

He said, the whale fishery afforded instructive evidence to this point. That
industrious and enterprising body of people who sent from Nantucket, vessels
and seamen to make war on the inhabitants of the ocean, knew that the effluvium
of animal oil was not pernicious. They found their huge prey in all latitudes
between the region where Disko borders upon the Arctic Circle, and that where
in the opposite hemisphere, Georgia, the extreme of habitable land, stretches
toward the South Pole; and in all longitudes betwixt the tract of Eastern Ocean
which separates Madagascar from the African Coast, westward to the parallel
where Juan Fernandes, rises above the waves of the Pacific. Through this
extensive range, the Whalemen took on board their blubber, and either subjected
it during the voyage to the operation of fire, whereby it might be separated
from the skin and membranes, or brought it home barelled up in large junks, to
be tried or melted in their houses on shore. Such a vessel was filled with the
exhalations of oil, putrefying in the casks and smoking from the boilers. The
men, their clothing, the oars of their boats, yea, the deck they tread upon,
seemed to be penetrated through and through with them. Yet strange as it might
appear, these voyages were among the most healthy which are performed. It was a
rare thing to lose a man during a run of eighteen months or two years, by
sickness. However common distempers might be in the navy, in the transport, and
in the merchant-service, there was no instance known of a putrid or malignant
fever, caused by stinking oil or its vapors, sweeping off the crew of a
whaleman.

He observed that the customs of the Caffrarians, nasty and disgusting as they
were, afforded, among many other instructive particulars, an example of the
harmlessness of fat and oil. The rank and horrible grease with which they
besmeared their bodies, never excited fevers, nor pestilential distempers. On
considering the poisonous atmosphere of Java, which the young civilized
Hottentot, mentioned by Rousseau, had been accustomed to breathe, our wonder at
his determination to rejoin his countrymen, at the Cape of Good Hope, ought
almost to turn to a sentiment of approbation* when we reflect, that as he had
long lived with his naked skin exposed to the corroding vapors of Batavia* he
longed to be once more a member of a society, whose customs would permit him,
to shield himself from Pestilence by Unction with Grease.

The Jewish rites, which were detailed with so much minuteness in the book of
Leviticus, were quoted as perfectly conformable to the principle under
consideration. Their sin-offering of ignorance was made by taking all the fat
of a bullock, the fat that covers the inwards, and all the fat that is upon
the inwards, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, which is by
the flanks and the cawl above the liver; -- this was ordered to be burned by
the priest upon the altar, and might be done amidst the people; but the skin of
the bullock and all his flesh, with his head, and with his legs, and his
inwards, and his dung, even the whole bullock shall he carry forth WITHOUT THE
CAMP, into a clean place, WHERE THE ASHES ARE POURED OUT; and burn him on the
wood with fire; WHERE THE ASHES ARE POURED OUT, there shall he be burnt. Such
were the regulations of MOSES for atonement of the sin of ignorance in priests;
and with variations of young bullocks, kids of the goats, and lambs, was
conducted in much the same manner for the same sin in the congregation, the
rulers and the people. He knew not of any mention of pestilential diseases
caused by the effluvia of burning fat, in any of these and other numerous
sacrifices of this pe^^liar people, though it was probable the inconveniences
arising from the consumption of the other parts at, or near the altar, might
have brought the Jews to the practice of carrying them among the ashes without
the camp. Had the fumes from the fat, been of a destructive nature, the priests
must have soon expired beside the victims. It was not probable that under a
theocracy, where the ministers of religion were held in such high reverence, a
duty would have been assigned them, the performance of which was unavoidably
attended with the inhalation of noxious and deadly air. So far from it was the
practice reckoned, that it was called "a sweet savor." He believed it would be
sound policy to let the Manufacturers of Soap and Candles remain where they
are; and while they were happy in offering peace offerings and
trespass-offerings with their fat, and laboring to purify and illuminate the
city, the RULERS might order what processes upon the other parts of animals,
the PEOPLE should carry on WITHOUT THE CAMP.

The fumes of animal oils, were thus (he continued) harmless in their
operation, while they were putrefying, boiling in kettles, and burning in the
open fire; and so were the fats themselves, when in either their mild or rancid
state, they were daubed upon the human skin.

Nor were their effects less remarkable when considered as articles of diet.
There was an ancient story that the gift of the Olive was judged more
beneficial to mankind, than that of the Horse. The oily product of this
vegetable and of several others, entered very largely into the food of the
Southern Nations. The Esquimaux of the North regaled himself when hungry, with
a draught of the oil of a Sea-Dog or a Whale, and this without detriment, even
when it was in a mok rank and offensive state. These examples might suffice to
give an idea of the operation of fatty and oily substances upon the stomach and
bowels. He must omit the regular Dietetic consideration of them, as such a
discussion would lead him too far from his purpose.

Yet it had been urged, after all this, that if these Manufactures were not
pestilential, they were intolerable nusances; that they generated impure air,
and ought to be turned out of town.

It was true, he allowed, that in the sense of the word nuisance as a term at
common law, these Manufactures might be so badly conducted as degenerate to
nusances. This had been frequently the case in England, and indictments had
been brought and proved against them. But the application of this term and the
meaning commonly annexed to it, showed that there must be something capable of
being seen or smelled, or both, in the air, according to common acceptance, to
proceed upon in a complaint of nuisance. If the Eyes and the Nose were not
offended by smoke and stench, then it was generally believed that things go on
well enough. He believed there were few or no instances of indictments found,
where the transparency of the air was complete, and where the nostrils were not
saluted by bad odours. Yet, so the thing was, and it was of great importance to
be understood, that an effluvium of a most fetid nature might exist, without a
particle of infection: And, on the other hand, as the history of most epidemics
evinced, an exceedingly virulent and destructive condition of the atmosphere
did exist, with scarcely any sensible qualites at all. The former were the
nusances which had usually been contemplated in common law. The latter in which
the interests of society were infinitely more concerned, had been passed over
as of no moment whatever. He wished this matter was understood by Grand Juries.
It would be their duty to present a pestilential state of the air, however free
from opacity and odor, as the greatest of nusances, and find bills against all
places and things which produced it. This probably would never happen until
they should be convinced that though a pestilence might be accompanied
accidentally with haze or stench, yet its most formidable effects were felt
when neither the sight nor the smell gave any evidence of its presence. It went
about unseen, and approached like a thief in the night. It was, however, within
the jurisdiction of our Courts, and ought to be treated with the rigor of
stern justice. Then should we not be afraid for the pestilence that walks in
darkness, nor for the destruction that awaiteth at noonday.

If still, while the great sources of mischief and misery were left unregarded,
a few Manufacturers and Tradesmen must be selected from the rest and offered up
as a sacrifice to such undiscriminating policy, why proscribe them by statute?
If their occupations are nusances, they must be either of a public or of a
private nature. On proof of their being public nusances, the common law
provides that the sheriff may enter with his Posse Comitatus and abate them. If
an individual offends by erecting or continuing a private nuisance, the
aggrieved neighbor has his remedy in a civil action for the recovery of
damages. By this innovation, the trial of fact, nuisance or no nuisance, by a
Jury of the vicinage, was taken away, and a new tribunal instituted to decide
upon the rights, properties and privileges of freemen. The citizens asked if
this was done in the spirit of deliberate and careful Legislation? They were
importunate to know what deep researches their Representatives had made in
these inquiries, beyond the Magistrates of the cities of Europe, and the
Philosophers of both hemispheres?

All this, it would be said, was true in theory, but not capable of being
reduced to practice. On complaints made, Grand Juries were slow in finding
bills, and traverse Juries reluctant to bring in a verdict to their neighbors
detriment. That, however true the doctrine was in the abstract, there was vast
difficulty, often an impossibility, of carrying the principle into effect.
Therefore, there grew a necessity to adopt some other mode of managing these
matters. In short, Jurors, it was alleged, would not do their duty, and some
other persons must be got who would. Suppose jurors as delinquent as they are
stated to be, and that Commissioners of Nusances have in some instances their
use, there was no need of them in the present case. It had been proved already,
and there were certificates and opinions enough, besides, if there was any need
of them, to satisfy every mind, that the Manufacture of Soap and Candles might
be carried on in the City without endangering the Health of the People. And as
to the offensive and suspicious part of their business, these Tradesmen would
voluntarily, without murmuring, and without public expense, render their crude
tallow and butcher's Fat, in some remote place, where nobody would be annoyed
by the vapors they emit.

He was aware it had been alleged, the vapors these substances emit rendered
the air impure, and processes affording impure air ought to be prohibited, lest
the health of the Citizens be injured by it. The meaning of this word, (one of
the words of the act) he said was so vague and general, that it was hard to
find out its particular application. It might signify air loaded with smoke or
dust, or any thing which spoils its clearness, and mingles with it foreign
matter. These, indeed, rendered the atmosphere sooty and dirty. It might be
interpreted to express the exhaustion of the respirable part of the
atmospherical mass, the empyreal or pure air, and consequently leaving the
residue deprived of its vital portion; and in this sense of the word, the
burning of all fuel, the calcining of metals, the formation of vinegar and all
acids, were processes exceedingly productive of impure air. Or it might intend
that odorous bodies made air impure by diffusion of their particles abroad, and
then camphor and tallow, ambergris and rotten eggs, the rose and the tan-vat,
the tar-pot and the solutions of sulphur and phosphorus, all contributed to the
impurity of the air. Or it might mean, lastly, that something of a destructive
nature, not to be smelled or seen* was diffused through the air, and rendered
it impure; then the formation of fixed air, ammoniacal air, inflammable air,
phlogisticated air, dephlogisticated nitrous air, and septic acid air, and of
every other sort of air, except empyreal air, was a process, whereby impure,
that is non-respirable air, is evolved. Each of these aerial productions was
constantly mingled, in a greater or less quantity, with the common atmosphere,
especially that of cities, and every one of them in its pure and unmixed state,
was either directly noxious, or at best, possessed no life-exciting power.

The truth was, that vital air in its pure form, was found by sufficient
experiments, to be too keen and stimulant for the purposes of health and
longevity. To guard against this exhausting effect of an atmosphere too pure,
the Author of Nature had tempered it so that to about one fourth of air of a
vivifying quality, there were added three fourths of an air possessing no
properties of a kind adapted to regenerate the pulmonic blood, and keep the
heart in motion. Three fourths of the air we are obliged always to breath, was
impure already, and mankind lived the longer for it. Less than one fourth of
vital air would answer the purposes of life very well. When the purity of air
was talked of then, if it meant mere and undiluted vital air, it meant a
condition of things inconsistent with the natural constitution of this world;
if it meant the ordinary atmospheric mixture, then it meant that salubrious
state of it, wherein three quarters were already phlogisticated or foul.

Thus, considerably less, he concluded, than a quarter-part of pure air in the
atmosphere, would answer the wants of animals. There were only certain
processes in nature and the arts, and they were very well understood, which
destroyed the respirability of the atmosphere. There were a thousand things of
the volatile and odorous kind, which though diffused through the air, and
thickly too, seemed not to lessen its respirability in the least, or in any
measureable degree, nor to possess any thing hurtful. There were other things
of a volatile, though not odorous nature, that might do vast mischief by
inducing fevers, without rendering the atmosphere unfit for breathing; and some
that might at once possess qualities directly deleterious to man, and
destructive to vital air. The septic acid exhalations, rising from certain
putrefying bodies, were of this latter kind. Though their pestilent qualities
were so dismally known by their effects, yet as their transparency, tenuity,
and want of obviously sensible properties, rendered it difficult to catch and
analyze them, so they have scarcely ever been taken into the account, in
estimating the impurity of air. See Appendix, Note F.
To make language precise, that constitution of the atmosphere which brings on
plagues, and other distempers of a similar nature, ought to be designated by
the term "pestilential*" rather than "impure."

He did not pretend to doubt that the Legislature might wholly forbid and
prohibit particular manufactures. Consequently they might limit, modify and
direct the method of carrying them on. The power of regulating trades and
mechanic arts, among other things, unquestionably resided with these
representatives of the sovereignty of the people. But, he believed, it was
equally clear, that though the Legislature possessed this power, they were
under a high and solemn obligation to employ discretion in the use it. It was
was a great misfortune, when Legislatures meddled with what they had better let
alone. It lessened respect for the laws, and disposed the citizens to neglect
or break them. The spirit of a free government made a voluminous statute book
necessary. A complicated mass of laws, was one of the consequences of complete
civil liberty. Where little or nothing was left to the will of individuals,
legal provisions must be very minute, and extend to the detail of things. On no
pretense whatever then, should the code be swelled needlessly, or laws enacted
upon wrong principles.

There was proof before the Legislature of the laborers at manufactories of
Soap and Candles, having a remarkable exemption from the Plague of Philadelphia
in 1793. The same sort of evidence was afforded by three several manufactories
of similar articles, within the limits of the Plagues of New York, in 1795 and
1796. It had been remarked with surprise, and talked of as an unaccountable
thing, in Great Britain and Ireland, that during the rage of Epidemic fevers,
the people who followed these branches of business generally escaped, and
oftentimes many of their neighbors also. Accordingly the police of the best
regulated cities of Europe, had not treated these manufacturers as stirrers up
of pestilence in their municipal regulations. He thought it might be collected
from the relations of travelers, that the pestilential distempers in some
parts of the Turkish dominions, were connected with a scanty supply or total
want of Soap. The detection of the composition and nature of pestilential
vapors had explained these facts, and furnished a principle which cleared up
the doubt and mystery of the whole subject. See Appendix, Note H


He called upon those whom it concerned, to see now what had been done.
Notwithstanding all this testimony the Legislature had pronounced against these
artists, and forbidden their manufactures to be carried on, but beyond certain
limits, because they were nusances and generated impure air. This savored a
little of legislating upon words; while the great body of facts, and the
principle which pervaded the whole evidence, and the true interpretation of the
phenomena, seemed to be overlooked. A public regulation which was wrong in
principle, could not be expected to command universal respect. It was an
unhappy occurrence when the People complained of the Laws; but it was likewise
unhappy, that they should ever have reason to complain.

SECTION III. AFFIDAVITS, etc. IN SUPPORT OF SOME MATTERS TOUCHED UPON IN THE
ARGUMENT.
Affidavit of EDWARD WADE.
THAT I have followed the business of a Tallow Chandler, for upwards of fifteen
years in London; and the business of Tallow Chandler and Soap boiler, near
twelve years in New York, and have always experienced the same to be very
healthful to myself and large family; in the year 1795, when the Yellow fever
raged so much in New York, great numbers died in Catharin^ Street where I live,
and carry on my business, but my family and near neighbors escaped the
contagion; my two sons, John and Charles, who worked constantly at the
business, never experienced a greater share of health than at that time, I was
but poorly for a few days, but by choice took to working over the tallow-pan,
and soon found myself much better; therefore as a means in the hands of Divine
Providence, I and my family owe the preservation of our health and lives, from
the healthfulness of the business, as none of us moved from home the whole time
of the sickness.

Affidavit of JEREMIAH CONNER, Tallow-Chandler, and Soap Boiler.
THAT he has worked for Mr. Andrew Morris, at the Soap and Candle Manufactory
for the space of eight years and a half, past, during which time has enjoyed
good health, except for three weeks in the month January, 1793, which was
occasioned by a severe cold. And this deponent further says, that he knows of
no instance of any person employed in the said manufactory, to be sick in the
said term of eight years and a half; and further says, that during the last
Summer and Fall, there was a number of masons, carpenters and laborers
employed by Mr. Morris at building, adjoining the manufactory, and has not
known or heard of either of them being sick during the Summer or Fall, that
they went through the said manufactory constantly, and when at work at said
building, the windows of the manufactory were open on them, that they continued
building, during the whole of the sickness, although the Fever prevailed in
every direction: And this deponent further says, that there is nothing putrid
suffered to remain in said manufactory; and that he never has thought, nor
does he now think the said business prejudicial or injurious to health having
never known or heard of an instance, that any person's health was impaired
thereby.

Affidavit of WILLIAM EAGLESON, Tallow Chandler, and Soap Boiler.
THAT for the time of three years and upwards, in which he worked at the said
business of Tallow Chandling and Soap boiling in the City of Philadelphia in
the State of Pennsylvania, he enjoyed an uninterrupted degree of good health,
nor does he recollect of a single days illness. That during the time the
malignant fever raged in Philadelphia, he resided near the drawbridge in
Dock-street, where the fever seemed to rage most; that People died in every
direction; that next door to the store and workhouse, where the deponent
carried on business, seven persons died; that he the deponent visited his
friends and acquaintances when they were ill with the fever, but it never took
any effect on him; that the family in which he then lived, consisted of five
persons, and that during the sickness as aforesaid, they enjoyed a good state
of health, and carried on the said business of Tallow Chandling and Soap
boiling without interruption, and visited their friends without receiving any
injury; that for two years and upwards since, he has resided in the City of
New York, has carried on said business, and never thought the said to be
injurious or prejudicial to his health, or any person employed therein, and
further says not, except that he has every reason to think it a healthy
employment.

Affidavit of JOHN LIONS.
THAT he has been employed as a clerk to Mr. Andrew Morris, Soap boiler and
Tallow Chandler, of said City, and in whose house he resided from the 22d. day
of May 1795, to the 6th day of September 1796, when the deponent's business to
Ireland occasioned him to leave his employ: that during said space, he enjoyed
good health, and is assured, that it has not been impaired, or received any
injury whatever from the said Andrew Morris's manufactory, through which he
has had a constant recourse -- And this deponent further says, that he has
observed the said Andrew Morris and family, and all those employed by him in
said manufactory, that they were remarkably healthful during the said space
aforesaid, that even at the time of the dreadful sickness of 1795, not one of
them were a day sick to his knowledge; and that he this deponent understood the
said business, besides being not unwholesome, to be in a great measure, a
preservation against similar diseases, which was of some consolation to this
deponent, during the above mentioned mortality, as it is well known that
numbers of the people of some of the neighboring streets, fell victims to it:
and further this deponent says not.

Affidavit of THOMAS JAMES, Tallow Chandler and Soap Boiler.
THAT he has worked at, and followed the Tallow Chandling business in London
for the term of twelve years, during which time he enjoyed a perfect state of
health, and has every reason to believe the above business in a great measure
facilitated the good health he then enjoyed; for at the expiration of the above
time, he quitted the said business and followed that of a Wax Chandler; and in
a little time found his health much impaired, on which, he frequently visited
Tallow Chandlers' shops, and does believe he received benefit therefrom, and
the said deponent further says, that he entered again into the aforesaid
business of a Tallow Chandler, and has followed the same together with Soap
Boiling, for seven years last past in the City of New York, during which time
he and his family enjoyed a good state of health.

Affidavit of HERCULES HERON.
THAT he has for eleven years immediately last past, exercised the calling of
Soap boiler and Tallow Chandler in the City of New York, and also for a number
of years at different periods before that time, and has never since perceived,
that it was any way dangerous to the health of himself and family, or any
persons employed therein, and that he uniformly enjoyed a good state of health,
exept in the year 1795, when the malignant fever prevailed in this City, he was
taken ill by assisting putting Dr. Ab^el in his coffin; but on resuming his
employment as aforesaid, his health was again re-established.

Affidavit of DANIEL FAGAN Soap boiler and Tallow Chandler.
THAT he has worked at said business mostly, for the space of twenty-two
years, during which time he has enjoyed good health; except at one time some
years back, when he had the fever and ague in the State of Pennsylvania, and at
other intervals has been troubled with a cold; and this deponent further
says, that he has always understood and believed said business to be
wholesome, and has not known any person whose health had been injured or
impaired by any effects occasioned thereby. And this deponent further says,
that the factory in which he now works, belongs to Mr. Andrew Morris of said
City, in which he has worked off and on, for 9 years past, that it is the
cleanliest he ever worked in; that he has during the above mentioned period of
twenty two years, worked in many houses both in Pennsylvania and New York. And
further this deponent says not.

Affidavit of ROBERT ADAMS, Bricklayer.
THAT during the sickness which prevailed in the city of New York in the fall
of last year, he employed a number of masons, bricklayers and laborers to work
in an adjoining building to the works of Mr. Andrew Morris, Tallow Chandler and
Soap boile^, in the first ward of the said City, and that the fever prevailed
most in that part of the City, but that neither himself nor any of the persons
employed by him were taken sick; that he and they were passing through said
works continually, and never received any injury in their health; that they
continued at that place employed during the whole of said season. And further
says not.

Affidavit PATRICK COCHRAN, Hair-dresser.
THAT he resides in the upper part of the house wherein Mr. John Collis also
resides, and has resided there from the 1st of May last; that the yard of said
house is adjoining the manufactory of Mr. Andrew Morris, Tallow Chandler and
Soap boiler; that he has daily passed through the yard of said house, and has
never at any time seen maggots come from said manufactory, although the windows
of said manufactory are continually exposed to his view; and this deponent
further says, that during the time of the sickness in this City, last Fall and
Summer, an apprentice boy of his caught the prevailing fever, (as he supposes,)
by shaving a Mr. Mc Keig, that lived next door to his work-shop in
Front-street, that the said boy slept in the workshop of this deponent, and
after having taken sick, was removed to his dwelling house above mentioned,
where he died, and was the first person in said house at that time sick of the
fever. And farther says not.

APPENDIX.
NOTE A. Process of making Saltpeter in Germany and France. From MASSEY'S
Treatise.
"THE common peasants in France and Germany, who are almost all
Saltpetre-makers, scrape together the muck and offals of their farm-yards, and
throwing them under open sheds, suffer them to lie, till they find they will
answer their end. Though they know little of the use of putrefaction, they take
care to promote this process, by drenching them with urine, or muck-water; and
frequently turning them over, by which means they are brought to maturity, much
sooner than the larger nitre-beds. These materials, with the wood-ashes their
hearths supply, (if the latter are not added before) are thrown into a large
tub, and water is poured upon them, which runs out through a hole stuffed with
straw at the bottom of the vessel. Thus simply do they procure their Leys, in
the boiling of which their women and children are chiefly employed." -- Thus
this business is harmless and healthy, because the potash keeps down the septic
acid, which would otherwise rise in vapor and infect the air.

NOTE B. CHAPTAL's Experiment, showing that the vapor from putrid blood, is of
the septic (nitric) or infectious kind. [Elements of Chemistry, p. 105.]
TWENTY-five pounds of chalk, well washed in warm water, and exposed to the
exhalation of bullock's blood in putrefaction during eleven months, afforded
nine ounces of the nitrate (septate) of lime, in a dried state; and three
ounces one gross of crystals of nitrate (septate) of potash, or common nitre."
-- Evincing the precise and noxious nature of this effluvium.

NOTE C. Character of the Nitric (Septic) Acid, -- from FOURCROI's Philosophy
of Chemistry, p. 82.
"NITRIC Acid, liquid, white, caustic, of a strong nauseous smell, formed of
azote (septon) and oxygen, inflaming sulphur, charcoal, zinc, tin, and oils,
yielding to combustible bodies, various portions of oxygen, and thus giving
birth to nitrous acid, nitrous gas, or nitrous oxyd, destroying colors,
burning and turning yellow, vegetable and animal substances, converting them
into acids, decomposing ammoniac, PRODUCED BY PUTREFYING ANIMAL MATTER, forming
nitrats with earths and alkalis, remaining slightly united with metallic oxyds
and tending to acidisy them." -- "Nitric (septic) Acid, to the production of
which it is well known how much animal substances contribute, in artificial
nitre-pits, arises from the union of oxygene with azote (septon.) Ibid. p. 188.

NOTE D. Impregnation of Water with (Septic) Nitric Matter. From BERGMAN'S
Analysis of Waters.
"SNOW-WATER contains a small quantity of salited lime, together with some
slight vestiges of nitrous acid, etc." "RAINWATER is generally contaminated
with the same substances as the former, but in GREATER QUANTITY, etc." --
"WELL-WATER, besides a large quantity of the abovementioned substances, often
afford GYPSUM and NITRE:" -- "LAKE-WATERS are less clear than any of the
former, etc. they sometimes contain all the substances above recited; and
besides, are generally vitiated by an ANIMAL or VEGETABLE EXTRACT:" --
"MARSH-WATERS have less motion, and therefore are less clear, more heavy, and
more VITIATED by EXTRACTIVE MATTER, etc."

NOTE E. From CHAPTAL's Chemistry, p. 133, etc.
"THE action of the Nitric (septic) Acid on most inflammable matters, consists
in nothing more than a continual decomposition of this acid." -- "The nitric
(septic) acid when mixed with oils, renders them thick, and black, converts
them into charcoal, or, inflames them, according as the acid is more or less
concentrated, or in greater or less quantity." -- "The facility with which this
acid is decomposed, renders it one of the most active, because the action of
acids upon most bodies is in consequence of their own proper decomposition." --
THUS OILY SUBSTANCES DECOMPOUND THE MATTER OF INFECTION.

NOTE F. Impossibility of finding out Pestilential (Septic) Air by means of the
EUDIOMETER.
NITROUS GAS and smoking-nitrous acid, are both of them, in the forms in which
we see and handle them, artificial productions. They can preserve their form
and constitution in close vessels only. So great is their attraction for the
principle of acidity, that they decompound vital air with great rapidity,
whenever they meet with it, attracting to themselves its oxygen, and setting
loose its caloric, or matter of heat. From the greediness with which they
absorb the base of pure air, they very soon become highly oxygenated, and turn
to septic acid or septic acid vapor, pale, colorless, and in its sparse or
dilute form, affecting the smell in a very small degree, or not at all.
Availing themselves of this tendency of nitrous gas, to become septic acid on
its union with oxygen, the Chemists have invented the Eudiometer, an instrument
calculated to measure what proportion of vital air is destroyed by a given
quantity of nitrous gas mixed with it. The process going on in the Eudiometer,
is the very one by which infected air is formed; and nothing but an additional
quantity of it is wanting to contaminate the air of the experimenter's chamber,
and make him sick or kill him. If now the matter of pestilence, or volatile
septic acid, already exists in the atmosphere, and constitutes a portion of the
air taken into the Eudiometer for trial, in sickly seasons, it is impossible
that nitrous gas should enable us to detect it there. Pestilential air is
nitrous gas saturated with oxygen and volatilized by heat; that is to say, the
same sort of fluid which is produced in the Eudiometrical experiment; and as
nitrous gas only measures the quantity of oxygen air decompounded, pestilential
air will remain untouched and unchanged by it; seeming to lie quite beyond its
reach. Hence we may understand why, upon principle, the Eudiometer should be
incapable of ascertaining a pestilential condition of the atmosphere, or giving
any notices about it; and wherefore, in practice, experiments with that
instrument, have never advanced our knowledge or enlarged our ideas on this
point. The difficulty which has attended the inquiry into the true history of
the fluids which have azote (septon) for their basis, seems to have arisen
thus: a parcel of saltpeter was taken and decompounded by a stronger acid in a
close vessel; an acid called thence the nitrous, came over into the receiver,
and separated itself into two portions, a quantity of oxigene gas, which was
suffered to escape, and a portion of smoking acid which was condensed and
stopped up for use. Its production, thus, was artificial, and it was always
kept bottled up in a forced and unnatural manner. All this time, so strong was
its attraction for oxygen, that the greatest care was necessary to prevent by
the closest stoppers, any communication between them. From this fuming acid,
the nitrous gas for experiments, was usually obtained; a production more
artificial than the former, and incapable of existing so long a time in the
open air. Now it is remarkable, that the attention philosophers has in a great
degree been directed to these artificial productions, while the natural
compounds of septon and oxygene have received but a moderate share of attention.

These natural compounds are septic oxyd and septic acid; the former of which,
always, and the latter very often exists in an aerial or volatile form. These
are capable of maintaining their condition unaltered, under all modifications
of the atmosphere. Their production, their abundance, their activity, their
relations to other bodies, their decomposition, occupy an ample space in the
field of philosophy, the surveying and cultivating of which, will afford
employment for a great number of hands. Their attractions and affinities ought
to be watched with the utmost care; and although the Eudiometer may not be
adapted to direct our views in these respects, there are many other aids of
which the diligent observer may avail himself. The explos^n of this region, by
following the footsteps of nature, must be allowed to be the most safe and
sure. Very many, who have engaged in the undertaking, have been careless, and
gone so far astray, that their performances contain but a small amount of
valuable information. If they will leave alone, their smoking nitrous acid and
nitrous gas, and attend to the history of the septic oxyd and acid, they will
proceed in natural order and method, and make vastly greater progress.

NOTE G. From BUILTON's "Means of procuring Saltpeter," etc.
THE nitrous (he means the nitric) acid is generated in the atmosphere by the
help of the azote, or vitiated air, which is disengaged from animal or
vegetable substances, when in a state of putrefaction. If, therefore, instead
of throwing sand on the ground in stables, etc. and building or plaistering
their walls with fat earth or clay, the ground were to be covered with marle,
or calcareous stone, and the walls, within and without, plaistered with the
same, beat and tempered with water, in the form of mortar, in five or six
months time, the ground and also the plaster of the walls, would be found
sufficiently changed with saltpeter to be lixiviated with advantage. -- By
following the course of nature, it is possible to establish artificial
nitre-beds: it is only necessary to build walls of calcarious stone, and
instead of mortar, to make use of calcareous marle, tempered with water; these
walls should be plaistered over with the same kind of mortar, to the thickness
of about two or three inches. If the walls are built in the neighborhood of
dung-hills, or other heaps of filth, they will generate saltpeter so quickly
that they may be lixiviated twice a year. -- The substances he mentions as
affording nitrous acid, are the filth of cities, such as the contents of
necessary-houses, the refuse of slaughter-houses, the sweepings of the streets,
dead animals of all sorts, etc.

NOTE H. Efficacy of Pot-ash to destroy putrid vapors.
The eye of an observer frequently meets with facts which illustrate and
confirm this principle. -- In Mr. Gaine's Almanac for 1797, (a compilation
containing much prudential and economical matter) there is a GOOD FAMILY
RECEIPT, by which any meat, ever so stinking, may be made as sweet and
wholesome in a few minutes, as any meat at all. The receipt is as follows: Take
some white ley, that is, boil some clean ashes in water; let it stand till it
settles; pour this off as clear as rock-water; boil your meat in this three or
four minutes, or till it is sweet, then wash it and dress it in any way, and no
person could discover it had ever been fetid, or stinking. -- This will be
found a useful communication to the army and navy, where a solution of pot-ash
may be used, instead of the white ley. -- I have learned, that some of the
hucksters in the city of New York, make a practice of buying up stinking beef,
and tainted meat of all sorts, at the public sales, (our buyers and sellers do
not consider this sale of damaged provisions as injurious to the public health)
for a very low price, and of sweetening them by washing and soaking in
Soap-boiler's ley. They find that a few pails full of ley will restore to
eatable condition, a barrel of stinking meat, which, by this operation of the
pot-ash, is restored to a sound state, and sells for as good a retail price as
if it had never been corrupted at all. -- Can there be any thing more decisive
as to the effect of this alkaline salt, in damping the pestilential fumes
already risen, and preventing the extrication of more?

Extract of a Letter from professor MITCHILL, to Sir JOHN SINCLAIR, dated
New York, 28th Nov. 1796, on Manures.
IF septic fluids are so very abundant in the air as they are proved to be,
especially in large cities, situated and regulated as many of those in the
United States are, and at the same time, if they were so easily absorbed as
experience shows they may be, that their bad effects should not be more
frequently felt, and mortality greater than that which prevails at present be
the consequence?

It soon appeared to me, that the pot-ash thrown into the streets with the
dissolved soap which had been employed in washing, was possessed of qualities,
enabling it to attract and attach these vapors, and existed in quantity
sufficient to take a vast volume of them out of circulation. My ideas were
reduced to a sort of system on the subject, by the following estimate of my
friend Mr. SAMUEL RUSSEL of this City.

The city of New York contains 60,000 inhabitants. One pound of hard or
bar-soap is required to wash the clothes of ten persons for one week. The
consumption of soap, therefore by the citizens, will be 10/60,000=6,000 pounds
a week. Strangers, sailors and other transient persons may be supposed, on an
average, to amount to 5000, which will make the weekly consumption 500 pounds
more. The quantity used up for cleaning houses, furniture, etc. and by barbers,
scourers, etc. may be estimated as an additional 500. The whole weekly
consumption thus amounts to 6,000+500 +500=7,000lbs. The yearly consumption
will consequently be 7,000x52=364,000lbs. One third of the whole weight of soap
is alkaline salt, consequently the quantity of pot-ash expended and thrown away
in the city of New York, is 3/7000=2,333 lbs. every week, or 121,333 lbs.
upwards of 54 tons per annum.

Such an amount of pot-ash is capable of counteracting the effect of an
exceedingly great bulk of pestilential fluids, by attracting them to itself,
destroying their aerial form, and thereby constituting saltpeter. If, as
CHAPTAL computes, (Elements of Chimistry, etc.) one hundred grains of pure
nitre contain thirty parts of septic acid, joined to sixty-three of pot-ash*
and seven of the water of christallization, then, upon the supposition that the
whole of the alkali thrown into the streets is converted to nitre, there must
be an addition of septic acid, equal to 30/100th parts of the whole, to
neutralize the salt; that is to say, 121,333 +30/100=36,400lbs. or more than 16
tons of skeptic acid, requisite to turn such a mass of alkali to saltpeter;
and in the same proportion for any smaller quantity.

In the foregoing estimate, the whole quantity of soap is reduced to hard soap
for the following reason. Soft soap is sold at a much lower rate than hard,
because it is much weaker. It is therefore used in families more extravagantly,
and it is presumable, that the same quantity of alkali is expended as there
would be if hard soap, and none else, was used.

But the solutions of soap poured into the gutters are not the only sources
whence the pot-ash is derived; for the wood ashes of hearths, exposed, as it
is, in yards, cellars, and ash-holes, or cast into the streets, furnish a large
additional portion of alkali. The fact I am about to mention shows at once, the
reality of such a process, and the existence of septic acid in our houses. On
the lower floor of a rear building, in the city of New York, the back part of a
closet was a thin brick wall. On the outside of this wall, in the yard, the ash
house was built. The only separation between the ashes put there and the
closet, was the narrow partition of bricks. Their substance was so porous,
that, in the course of time, a saline effloresence was observed on the bricks
within the closet near the floor. On examination, the pot-ash, which had
apparently penetrated through the wall, in a state of solution, was found to be
changed to nitre, by a combination with septic acid, which it had doubtless
attracted from the air of the room.

In these ways does it seem, that a considerable proportion of the mischief is
prevented which would be caused by such noxious steams, if left to float about
at large. If the scrapings of this city were employed in the manufacture of
saltpeter, they would unquestionably afford a large quantity of it. But, as
they are generally sold to the farmers for manure, it is worth the while to
examine.

From Maitlands History of London. Page 611. TALLOW CHANDLERS.
THIS society was incorporated by letters patent of the 2d. of Edward 4th anno
1463 by the name of the Master, and Keepers, and commonalty of the art and
mystery of Tallow Chandlers of the City of London.

This company is governed by a Master, four Wardens and thirty eight
Assistants, with livery of 170 members, who when admitted pay a fine of L 15
each. They have a stately Hall on Dowgate-hill to manage their affairs in.

Page 611. SOAP MAKERS.
THIS society was incorporated by letters patent of the 13th of Charles I. 16th
May Anno 1630 by the name of the Master, Wardens and commonalty of Soap makers
of London.

They consist of a Master, two Wardens, and eighteen Assistants, but have
neither livery or hall.

FINIS.

