ORATION, DELIVERED AT WHITESTOWN, ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, M.DCC.XCVII.

PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OF A RESPECTABLE PART OF THE AUDIENCE.

BY THOMAS MOORE.

WHITESTOWN: PRINTED BY LEWIS and WEBB -- 1797. --

An ORATION, etc.
FOR what purpose, fellow-citizens are we assembled? For no less than the
commemoration of that illustrious period, when the dawning genius of America,
burst through the gloom that overspread its political horizon; and exhibited to
the world, that splendid prologue to its future greatness, the declaration of
Independence.

The bounded imaginations of the satellites of tyranny, could not calculate on
such an event; the daring measure astonished their contracted hearts: it was
reserved for Americans alone, to plan, and to execute so noble a project.

Let us contemplate, with seriousness, the causes of this important event;
important to us, to Europe and posterity.

Tyranny, and superstition, uniting their corrupted streams, had for ages
overwhelmed the verdant plains of Europe; except here and there a free town, or
petty republic, emerging like an island in the ocean; ^^^eving the disgusted
eye of sympathetic philanthropy.

Our forefathers in Britain, a hardy race, for centuries, with various
success, stemmed this devastating torrent; resisting as became freemen, the
bold encroachments of prerogative, and the more insidious attempts o^ a
monopolizing and ambitious hierarchy.

The best institutions may be perverted, the purest principles misconstrued; or
cruelty and persecution, had never been decorated with the mild robe of
christianity. --

The manly spirit of our ancestors revolted at the fulsome ceremonies of ^he
church, and disdained to address the Great Author of nature, with the absurd
mummery of fantastical parade: this excited the mean vengeance of their
opponents, for bigotry and superstition are inseparable; and being unable to
convince, they determined to persecute.

We are all acquainted with the sequel.

The first settlers of this country, arrived, after encountering incredible
hardships and difficulties at Plymouth, in New England; there with the most
unexampled fortitude and perseverance, they with the loss of half their
numbers, effected a settlement on that then inhospitable shor(...) and laid the
corner stone of America(...) importance. Illustrious, independent souls! Could
you have foreseen the high destinies of your country, the pleasing prospect had
alleviated your cares, soothed your anxiety, and softened your rugged labors in
the wilderness! But your virtues are rewarded by that impartial Being who could
alone form a just estimate of your merits, and posterity will remember you with
gratitude.

Their virtues were the foundation of our happiness, their prudence of our
prosperity. Recently escaped from the fangs of oppression, they were naturally
averse to, and abhorred every species of tyranny* united closely by their
mutual wants, dangers and distresses, benevolence was necessary. Impelled by
their rigid sat to the most circumspect economy, and unabating industry, the
vices of the indolent and luxurious were unknown amongst them: -- their
children copied the fair examples, and industry, hospitality and frugality were
characteristics of their offspring. Proprietors of the soil cleared by their
own labor, no grinding landlord extorted with unrelenting severity an unequal
share of the fruits of their exertions. No preposterous hereditary distinctions
insulted their understanding, and impressed them with artificial ideas of
dignity. Education being almost equally diffused amongst them, and being, from
the nature of their situation, obliged to turn their minds to various objects;
they acquired a degree of acuteness and penetration peculiar to themselves, and
utterly unknown to the yeomanry of Europe. Being distant from the principal
seat of government, they became early accustomed to the regulation of their
internal affairs; and chose their provincial legislators from amongst the most
virtuous and enlightened of their neighbors; so that in fact, they were
republicans in principle, in practice, and by habit, long before they burst the
bonds of usurpation, and assumed an elevation station among the nations of the
earth.

The population of the colonies increased beyond the most sanguine
expectations; aided by numerous emigrations from Europe, they advanced by rapid
strides to importance; and soon became a considerable mart for the manufactures
of Britain; who received their produce in return, mutually enriching each
other. They voluntarily assisted the Mother Country in a severe conflict with
France, and the Colonial and Britannic troops, in friendly unison, vanquished
the legions, and crushed the aspiring hopes of the House of Bourbon.

Had Britain consulted her true interest she had been tenaciously cautious of
breaking this to her so necessary a connection. But the short sighted councils
of tyranny, accelerated their own disgrace. For this generous assistance, for
this noble cooperation, how were we rewarded? Inflated with wealth and
prosperity, proud of her victories, intoxicated with success, a success to
which we had so largely contributed, discovering by the effectiveness of our
assistance the strength of our resources, she determined to force from us the
means of supporting her overgrown importance; in the most unconstitutional
manner, she determined by her parliament to tax the colonies.

The moderation, with which we resisted her first unjust attempts to subjugate
us, are as notorious as her haughty perseverance in urging her despotic claims.
-- Blinded by the artful insinuations of an ignorant, infatuated and flagitious
ministry, deaf to the energetic remonstrances of a Chatham, a Burke, a Fox, and
a Bar; who in vain attempted to rend the film of prejudice from the eyes of
Britain. The brilliancy of wit, the fertility of genius, the subtilty of logic,
the solidity of reason, though fighting under the banner of justice, were
shamefully defeated. The javelin of truth fell blunted from the shield of
corruption, who uplifting her remorseless arm, severed the fraternal ties that
bound us together.

Reiterated insults, roused at length the dormant spirit of America; who
appealing to the God of battles, sustained alone, and unsupported, the attacks
of a great and powerful nation, the mistress of the ocean: from the
commencement of the glorious struggle, to the capture of Burgoyne, who led on
its best appointed army. Astonishing spectacle! a band of husbandmen, without
any discipline, but the love of order, animated by the spirit of liberty and
independence, warmed by patriotism, impelled by honor, instigated by sublime
domestic affection, feeling for posterity, erected their daring crests against
the proud standard of oppression, and nobly prevailed.

From this period, the affairs of America assumed a promising aspect, aided by
the victorious arms of France, and guided by the unerring councils of that
accomplished general, consummate statesman, and most virtuous citizen, the far
famed Washington; the surrender of a second British army at York-Town,
completed our triumph.

It were superfluous, to detail with historical minuteness, the progress of the
war. The most important events are impressed on all our memories, the
beneficial effects are felt by all.

Many of you, doubtless, were actors in the magnificent drama, many of you have
bled in the awful cause. Ye firm supporters of our rights, ye bulwarks of
liberty; the grateful remembrance of your ^^^severing labors, your undaunted
(...) your manly fortitude, are deeply engr^^^^ on the breast of America, and
can nev^r be obliterated!

We will imitate your virtues, we will teach our children to lisp your praises,
we will not be unworthy of our ancestors.

The mercenary assassins of Germany, those dealers in human blood, were
confounded at your heroism; they were prepared to think meanly of you, and
deemed you an easy conquest: dearly have they paid for imbruing their
sacrilegious hands in the blood of freemen.

The horrid savage was instigated against you, the tomahawk and the scalping
knife, worthy engines of despotism, were introduced into your peaceful
habitations; t^^ helpless female, and the wailing infant, swept undistinguished
to the grave. All nature blasted by the withering malignity of man. Even the
perfidious defection of your degenerate brethren, who under the flimsy veil of
loyalty, endeavored to conceal the blackness of their polluted hearts, was of
no avail.

The genius of America, like the majestic oak, which derives stability from the
whirlwind, and thrives in the storm; rose superior to the shocks of fortune,
and strengthened in adversity.

France caught the sparks of liberty on the plains of America, which have
kindled a conflagration, that has dazzled the universe; and made the despots of
Europe tremble on their thrones: they combined indeed, to smother the rising
flame, but instead of quenching, have fanned the devouring fire; that threatens
to consume them.

The leaders of that surprising revolution, deeming the rude rabble of France,
unfit, as yet, to bear the full glare of light, were for softening it with a
monarchy tint; and formed the incongruous project of blending the pageantry of
a court, (...) republican simplicity. To effect this th(...) abolished the
order of nobility, and admitted the people to a share in the government with
the hereditary executive. But the ancient edifice of the monarchy, being
deprived of its accustomed prop; after tottering awhile, suddenly gave way, and
crushed its feeble representative in the mighty ruin. Amiable, ill-fated Capet,
thou falledst a victim to thine own credulity, and the malignity of party!

The promoters of this system abandoned it, and their country together; seeking
amongst strangers, that repose which was denied them at home.

Amongst the principal of these, we count the illustrious and unfortunate La
Fayette; whose unmerited sufferings are regretted by us all, whose virtues are
too well known to derive luster from eulogium. The democratic faction rose in
the struggle, and in spite of the dreadful anarchy that prevailed, in the midst
of insurrections, massacres, and internal convulsions, directed the wildness of
the storm with incredible dexterity. Faction destroyed faction, revolution
succeeded revolution; yet unmoved by the treachery of their chiefs, or the
crimes of their mo(...)entary rulers, the brave defenders of their country
remained firm at their post, and wherever the standard of liberty was unfurled,
the nations fled before it.

They beat the Prussians out of their tactics, the impotent monarch of the two
Indies, the king of Spain was glad to compound for his tottering diadem by
basely deserting his allies, and joining the enemy.

The executive of Holland was driven from his strong holds, although he called
in the ocean to protect him.

Italy the garden, once the mistress of the world, notwithstanding its Alpine
ramparts, notwithstanding the exertions of the venerable Wurmser, has shared
the fate of its neighbors.

Austria alone has made a noble stand; and England through the medium of its
immense riches, and decided naval superiority, remains the most formidable
enemy of the republic.

Liberty, sacred liberty! We share in thy triumphs, but deprecate thine abuse.
Alas! the intoxicating cup of prosperity is fraught with mischief.

France, who has so nobly and successfully resisted oppression, seems to be
deviating from her first principles, aiming at universal empire, and even
^^^ghts are insults the friendship of America; to whose smiling scenes let us
turn our eyes from the disgusting horrors of Europe.

"While guilty Europe's blood, stained empire's fall,
"While heaven incensed lets loose the infuriate G^ul,
"Thy States in phalanx firm, a sacred band,
"Safe from the mighty wreck unmoved shall stand."
The revolution in this country, has happily produced the most beneficial
effects; we had not such difficulties to contend with as our brethren in
France; brethren I say, for I still hope, that our unhappy differences may,
through the wisdom and moderation of our rulers be adjusted, and our ancient
friendship renewed.

We were predisposed by habit and education for the simplicity of a republic,
they were sunk in ignorance and superstition; they passed abruptly from the
extreme of despotism to the most wanton licentiousness. We had not yet felt the
rod of oppression, although it was suspended over our heads.

Hence, after experiencing the ill effects of an inefficient disjointed
government, we adopted with almost perfect unanimity, and without the least
tumult, our present happy system; which unites the vigor of the monarchic, the
wisdom of the aristocratic, and the purity of the democratic forms without
their inconvenience: wisely placing at the head of our affairs, the well tried
Washington, who has conducted their administration in a manner worthy of
himself, and raised his grateful country to a pitch of unexpected prosperity:
May he experience in his beloved retreat but half the happiness he has
conferred on us, and ample indeed will be his recompense!

On the magnanimous resignation of that truly great man, whose merits are above
praise; we sagaciously selected from the band of patriots, for the two first
offices of government, distinguished characters worthy of their respective
trusts; who bore a conspicuous share in the solemn transaction we are assembled
to commemorate. One was a distinguished advocate for the glorious measure, the
other actually drew up the declaration of Independence itself.

With such directors at the helm, we may fairly trust that the honor and
interest of America will not be trifled with. In the mean time, let us not be
lulled into a fatal security, but watch with a jealous eye over that
inestimable prerogative of the people, the freedom of election, ^he main-spring
of our government. It w^^^ preserve inviolate our sacred union, the palladium
of our liberties; if we are faithful to ourselves; possessing the greatest
advantages of situation, inhabiting an unbounded territory, speaking the same
language, governed by the same laws, animated by the same spirit: who shall
presume to calculate the extent of grandeur this fortunate country may arrive
at? Let us then sedulously endeavor to promote its interests with which our own
are inseparably interwoven: Let each bring a stone to the mighty pyramid --
remembering always that virtue is the soul of a republic; let us watch over the
morals of the rising generation, and cherish in their tender minds the love of
their country.

And may the Almighty shield with his protecting arm the opening prospects of
America.

May the Tree of Liberty that was planted here, encircle the universe with its
branches; and the assembled nations, rejoicing beneath its peaceful shade, with
rapture celeb^^^e the anniversary of this happy day.

THE END.

