THE MORAL STORY TELLER. UNITING PLEASURE WITH INSTRUCTION. Nothing is inserted
that has not its foundation in TRUTH.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY JOHN BABCOCK. 1797.

An extensive variety of Cheap Histories, and other small Books, for sale by
JOHN BABCOCK, near the Bridge, Hartford. They are offered as low, by the
quantity, as at any store in America.

THE MORAL STORY TELLER.
FILIAL AFFECTION.
MANLIUS, The Roman dictator, having exercised great violence and cruelty over
the citizens, was cited at the expiration of his office to answer for his
conduct. Among other things that were laid to his charge, he was accused of
treating with barbarity (...) of his own sons. Ma^lius, it seems, had no other
cause of complaint against this (...) in his having an impediment in his
speech. For this reason he was banished for from the city, from his home, and
the company of those of his own age and fortune, and condemned to servile
works, (...) prison like a slave. All were highly, exasperated against so
severe a dictator, and (...) human a father, except the son himself, who, (...)
with filial piety and under the greatest concern that he should furnish matter
of accusation against his father, resolved upon a most extraordinary method to
relieve him. One morning, without apprising any body, he came to the city armed
with a dagger, and went directly to the house of the tribune Pomponius, who had
accused his ^^ther. Pomponius was yet in bed. He sent up his name, and was
immediately admitted by the tribune, who did not doubt but he was come to
discover to him some new instances of his father's severity. After they had
saluted each other, young Manlius desired a private conference; and as soon as
he saw himself alone with the tribune, he drew out his dagger, presented it to
his breast, and declared he would stab him that moment, if he did not swear in
the form he should dictate, "Never to hold the assembly of the people for
accusing his father." Pomponius, who saw the dagger glittering at his breast,
himself alone without arms, and attacked by a robust young man, full of a bold
confidence in his own strength, took the oath demanded of him, and afterward
confessed, with a kind of complacency in the thing, and a sincerity which
sufficiently argued he was not sorry for what he had done, that it was that
violence which obliged him to desist from his enterprise.

CONSCIENCE.
A JEWELLER, a man of a good character, and considerable wealth, having
occasion in the way of of his business to travel at some distance from the
place of his abode, took (...) with him a servant, in order to take care of
(...) portmanteau. He had with him some of his best jewels, and a large sum of
money, to which his servant was likewise privy. The master having occasion to
dismount on the road, the servant watching his opportunity, took a pistol from
his master's saddle, and shot him dead on the spot: then rifled him of his
jewels and money, and hanging a large stone to his neck, he threw him into the
nearest canal. With this booty he made off to a distant part of the country,
where he had reason to believe that neither he nor his master were known. There
he began to trade in a very low way at first, that his obscurity might screen
him from observation, and in the course of a good many years, seemed to rise by
the natural progress of business, into wealth and consideration; so that his
good fortune appeared at once the effect and reward of industry and virtue. Of
these he counterfeited the appearance so well, that he grew into great credit,
married into a good family, and by laying out his sudden stores discreetly, as
he saw occasion, and joining to all an universal affability, he was admited to
a share of the government of the town, and rose from one post to another till
at length he was chosen chief magistrate. In this office he maintained a fair
character, and continued to fill it with no small applause, both as governor
and a judge; till one day as he sat on the bench with some of his brethren, a
criminal was brought before him, who was accused of murdering his master. The
evidence came out full, the jury brought in their verdict that the prisoner was
guilty, and the whole assembly waited the sentence of the president of the
court (which he happened to be that day) with great suspense. Mean while he
appeared to be in unusual disorder and agitation of mind; his color changed
often; at length he arose from his seat and coming down from the bench, placed
himself just by the unfortunate man at the ba^^, to the no small astonishment
of all present. "You see before you," said he, addressing himself to those who
had sat on the bench with him, "a striking instance of the just awards of
heaven, which this day, after thirty years concealment, presents to you a
greater criminal than the man just now found guilty." Then he made an ample
confession of his guilt, and of all (...) aggravations. "Nor can I feel,"
continued he, "any relief from the agonies of an awakened conscience, but by
requiring that justice be forthwith done against me in the most public and
solemn manner."

We may easily suppose the amazement of all the assembly, and especially of his
fellow-judges. (...), they proceeded, upon his confession, to pass sentence
upon him, and he died with all the symptoms of a penitent mind.

Mr. D. F^^rdyce, in his dialouges on Education, vol. ii. p. 401, says the
above is a true story, and happened in a neighboring state not many years ago.

GAMING.
THE late colonel Daniel, who took great pleasure in giving advice to young
officers, guiding them in their militay functions, the management of their
(...) etc. whenever he was upon the article of ^^aming, he used always to tell
the following story of himself, as a warning to others, and to show that a
little resolution may conquer this absurd passion. In Queen Anne's wars, he was
an ensign in the English army then in Spain: but he was so absolutely possessed
by this evil, that all duty, and every thing else that prevented his gratifying
his darling passion, was to him most grievous: he scarcely allowed himself time
for rest; or if he slept, his dreams presented packs of cards to his eyes, and
the rattling of dice to his ears: -- his meals were neglected, or if he
attended them, he looked upon that as so much lost time; swollowed his meat
with precipitance, and hurried to the dear gaming-table again. In one word; he
was a professed gamester. For some time, fortune was his friend: and he was so
successful, that he has often spread his winnings on the ground, and rolled
himself on them, in order that it might be said of him, "he wallowed in gold."
Such was his life for a considerable time; but as he ^ath often said, and I
dare say every considerate man will join with him, "it was the most miserable
part of it." -- After some time he was ordered on the recruiting duty, and at
Barcelona he raised one hundred and fifty recruits for the regiment; though
this was left entirely to his sergeant, that he might be more at leisure to
attend to his darling passion. After some changes of good and ill-luck, fortune
declared so openly against him, that in one unlucky run, he was totally stripped
of the last farthing. In this distress he applied to a captain of the same
regiment with himself, for a loan of ten guineas; which was refused with this
speech, "What! lend my money to a professed gamester! No, Sir, I must be
excused: for of necessity I must lose either my money or my friend; I therefore
choose to keep my money." With this taunting refusal he retired to his lodging,
where he threw himself on the bed, to lay himself and his sorrows to a
momentary rest, during the heat of the day. A bug, gnat, or some such vermin,
happening to bite him, he awoke; when his melancholy situation immediately
presented itself to him. Without money! and no prospect how to get any to
subsist himself and his recruits to the regiment, then at a great distance from
him? and should they desert for want of pay, he must be answerable for it; --
and he could expect nothing but cashiering for disappointing the queen's
service. He had no friend, for he whom he had esteemed so had not only refused
to lend him money, but had added taunts to his refusal. He had no acquaintance
there! and strangers he knew would not let him have so large a sum as was
answerable to his real necessity. This naturally led him to reflect seriously
on what had induced him to commence gamester, and this he presently perceived
was idleness. He had now found the cause, but the cure was still wanting: how
was that to be effected so as to prevent a relapse? Something must be done,
some method must be pursued so effectually to employ his time, as to prevent
his having any to throw away at gaming. It then occurred to him, that the
adjatancy of the regiment was to be disposed of, and this he determined to
purchase, as a post the most likely to find him a sufficient and laudable way
of passing his time. He had letter of credit to draw for what sum he pleased
for his promotion in the army; but not to throw away idly, or to encourage his
extravagancy. This was well: but the main difficulty remained, and he must get
to the regiment before he could take any steps toward the intended purchase,
or draw for the sum to make it with. While he was endeavoring to fall upon
some expedient to extricate himself out of (...) his friend, who had refused
him in the morning, came to pay him a visit. After a very cool reception on the
colonel's (...) the other began by asking him, what (...) he intended to take
to relieve (...) from the anxiety he plainly (...) him all that he had thought
upon that head, and the resolution he had made of purchasing the adjutancy as
soon as he could join the regiment: his friend then getting up and embracing
him, said, "My dear Daniel, I refused you in the morning in that abrupt manner
in order to bring to a sense of the dangerous sit^ation you were in, and to
make you reflect seriously on the folly of the way of life you had got into. I
heartily rejoice that it has had the desired effect. Pursue the laudible
resolution you have made, for be assured that IDLENESS AND GAMING ARE THE RUIN
OF YOUTH. My interest, advice, and purse, are now at your command; there, take
it, and please yourself with what is necessary to subsist yourself and recruits
to the regiment. This presently bro't the colonel off the bed; and this
afternoon's behavior entirely obliterated the harshness of his friend's
morning refusal; he now viewed him in the agreeble light of a sincere friend,
and for ever after esteemed, and found him such. In short, the colonel set out
with his recruits for the regiment, where he gained great applause for his
success, which, as well as his commission, he had well nigh lost by one
morning's folly: he immediately solicited for, and purchased, the adjutancy;
and from that day forward never touched cards or dice, but, as they ought to be
used, merely for diversion, or to unbend the mind after too close an attention
to serious affairs.

FRIENDLY ADVICE TO OFFICERS.
VICE AND VIRTUE.
AMONG the dancers of the palace in the reign of Abbas the great, king of
Persia, there was a young maid named Idris, whom the master of the revels, on
the report of her charms, had sent for from Casbin to Ispahan. Her mother being
of the same profession, she had followed the fame way of life: but as she
honorably distinguished herself from her female companions, she demonstrated
that virtue is practicable in every situation of life, however slippery or
dangerous it may be.

Scarcely had Idris appeared on the theater of the capital, but she found
herself beset by the grandees, who strove to please her by the same means that
had won others in that station. One exhausted all his rhetoric in commending
her shape and manner. Another extolled the form of her face, her complexion,
and the regularity of her features. A third, to give weight to the encomiums he
had bestowed on her voice, repeated an air he had heard her sing, and declared
his distraction to arrive at that grace with which she gave life to the words.
A fourth, boasting his precision and skill in dancing, exhibited instantly some
of the attitudes he had learned of her. A first-rate Sir Fopling gave her a
list of the pretty women he had deserted from the moment he first saw her. A
young man, by birth entitled to become a Mollah, silently displayed his figure
and his dress. An old finger^r of the public money dazzled her eyes with a
diamond of the first water, and offered it, besides the perquisites of the
contracts, which it was his custom to bestow upon his mistress. An officer of
the crown made a pompous description of the presents with which he had
recompensed the friendship of the little Zaki. In fine, every one exerted his
faculties and his address in order to gain the preference over his rivals.

But Idris was not to be caught by such baits. At the palace, at assemblies, in
the public walks, and in all places, the discourse turned upon the new dancer.
Every one talked of her beauty, her wit, and her engaging behavior, and, which
was more than they had said of any other of her profession, they agreed in
acknowledging her to be very virtuous. It is the property of none but the most
exalted virtue to gain the respect and admiration of young courtiers. Mahmut
conceived a high opinion of Idris's virtue, from the extraordinary effect it
produced.

Mahmut bore among the lords of the court the same character which Idris
maintained among the dancers of her sex: proof against the defects of his
equals, and the vices of his station. As soon as he began to appear in the
world, he became sensible of the ridiculousness of that noisy, obstreperous
giddiness, which most young people of quality affect; and being happily,
prejudiced against the idle (...) he saw them ^^ad, he took care not to follow
their example, yet without seeming to condemn them. While their days were
divided between the toilet, the table, visits, and gaming, he spent the morning
in his closet among his books, or those whose conversation could instruct him
better. In the afternoon he frequented the manufactories and working places
about the palace; talked with the ablest hands in the several arts; and
observed, with the utmost attention, how they proceeded in their works. In the
evening he was at some or other of the public entertainments, which he enjoyed
with a moderation that is ever inseparable from taste and discernment. After
which he repaired to some of the most brilliant assemblies of Ispahan, as well
to avoid a singularity that would have rendered him odious, as to acquire a
greater share of the complaisance and politeness which reigned in them. --
Mahmut's wit, and the use he made of it, rendered him superior to those who
were his equals in birth; and besides the advantage of a good figure and
graceful air, he distinguished himself no less among them by his natural and
acquired talents. Idris could not behold this amiable Persian without emotion:
she shunned all her importunate suitors, and complacency fancying him free from
all their faults, she secretly wished that the beauty which they had so highly
extolled might make an impression on him. Her wishes were met more than half
way; Mahmut soon let (...) know that he loved her most passionately, and her
answer to his declaration, on account of its singularity, deserves to be given
entire.

"Doubtless you give the name of love." said she, with a charming smile, "to
that which is only an effect of your taste for novelty; I will not my lord, go
farther at present on this head; it is your business to fix my judgment. I will
ingenuously confess, though it will give you some unfavourable opinion of me,
if you are not the man I take you to be, that I am not displeased at your
liking me. -- But if ever I see occasion to alter the idea I have conceived of
you, hope not that I shall in the least indulge my inclination. I shall not
take it ill if you give your heart to a woman more virtuous than I, therefore
do not complain of your lot if I dispose of mine in favor of any man whom I
may find superior to you in virtue."

Mahmut struck with admiration, and overflowing with joy, loboured to rise to
such a pitch as might oblige Idris to be constant to him. He applied himself
with fresh vigor to acquire the arts and sciences necessary for a man in his
station. He made it his business to relieve indigent merit and unfortunate
virtue. His humanity, generosity, capacity and modesty, were equally
conspicuous; and Idris abundantly rewarded him for all the pains he took to
please her. Praise, grounded on truth, and coming from the mouth of so charming
a person, filled the tender Mahmut's heart with joy and satisfaction. He read
in the eyes of his beauteous mistress how dear he was to her: he talked of his
passion, and described its violence. Idris listened to him with pleasure, vowed
she would make him a just return, and thus animated him to give her no occasion
to repent her engagement. In the overflowings of their hearts, which none but
true lovers can know and feel all the sweetness of, they laid open to each
other the most secret recesses of their souls. Mahmut was grieved when he took
leave of Idris, nor could she bear his absence without a visible concern. They
always parted under the greatest impatience to meet again.

Between two neighbors so powerful as the Grand Signior and the king of
Persia, there can be no long peace: a war soon broke out, and Mahmut was
obliged to set out for the army. He waited upon Idris, ^o deplore with her the
dire necessity that forced them asunder; but whilst he lay at her feet he durst
not disclose to her all his grief. The fortitude of the fair one daunted him;
he was afraid of lessening himself in her esteem, by discovering any weakness.
Idris perceived the conflict in his breast, and loved him for it more intensely.

Mahmut had not been gone a month when he gave way to his desire of an
interview with Idris. He slipped away privately from the army, and with the
help of relays, which he provided on the road, he was at the gates of Ispahan
before they mised him in the camp. -- Alighting at the house of one of his old
servants he disguised himself in the apparel of a peasant, that he might not be
known in the city; and, impatient of an interview with his Idris, he flew to
her house.

The charming maid was sitting at her balcony, as Mahmut was advancing, and
knew him, notwithstanding his disguise. Grieved to see him thus neglect his
glory and his duty, she ran directly to her closet, charged her slave to admit
no visitor whatever. She melted into tears at the weakness of her lover; but
soon recovered herself, and wrote him the following billet:

Idris to the peasant.
"Friend, I know thou art to be forthwith at the army. Call upon Mahmut, and
tell him from me that I desire him to remember the conditions on which the
heart of Idris is to be secured."


Mahmut was too much confounded with these words to ask any questions of the
slave that delivered him the billet. He went back to his domestic's house, to
put off his disguise; and fluctuating between admiration, grief, and fear, he
repaired again to the army with as much haste as he had traveled up to
Ispahan. His chief study being to make amends for the fault he had committed,
he behaved the rest of the campaign with so much ardour, bravery, and conduct,
that he was deservedly promoted to a higher post, which the king conferred on
him, with the most honorable eulogies, at the head of the army. Idris wrote him
a congatulatory letter on his promotion, in which without mentioning his
weakness, she gave him to understand that she had forgiven him.

Mahmut, transported with joy, hastened back to Ispahan, as soon as the army
was ordered into winter quarters, and listened to no other considerations but
his esteem for the virtuous girl: he entreated her to complete his happiness in
becoming his wife. "Your wife, my lord!" cried Idris, with an emotion that at
once discovered the tenderest passion and concern for the glory of her lover;
-- "what! would Mahmut forget himself so far? In disposing of your heart you
may indeed consult nothing but your inclinations; but when the question is to
choose a partner in your dignity and fortune, you hold both. I have the deepest
sense of gratitude for this signal testimony of your esteem; but what will your
relations say? What will all Persia say, whose eyes are, upon you, and who see
nothing in me but the mean profession I was bred to? No, Mahmut, it must not
be; I see my error, I am ashamed of my weakness; I that am ready to sacrifice
my life were it necessary to preserve your glory, cannot be instrumental myself
in sullying it."

Sentiments like these made the passionate Mahmut only more pressing. "What are
those things," said he, "which create so great a disparity between us? An
instant may deprive me of them; but the dowry which you will bring me charming
Idris, is a blessing that depends not on ^^en nor fortune." In (...) these
words his countenance began to be clouded with grief; fresh denials drove him
to despair; he drew his poniard, and was going to plunge it into his breast.
The tender Idris could hold out no longer. "Ah! Mahmut," cried she, "stop your
hand and live; tomorrow I shall be yours, grant me this short respite." She
could utter no more, tears put an end to her surprise, and stopped her breath.

The news of their marriage soon took wind, and those who envied him the
possession of so much beauty, abused him for his meanness; while the sober and
thinking part of the world extolled her virtues, and only lamented that her
birth and fortune had not rendered them more conspicuous and attracting. She
was presented to the king, who was charmed with her person, and finding her
heart and her sentiments would not disgrace the highest quality, conferred a
title and place at court.

CHASTITY.
LUCRETIA was a lady of great beauty and noble extraction: she married
Collatinus, a relation of Tarquinius Superbus, king of Rome. During the siege
of Ardea, which lasted much longer than was expected, the young princes passed
their time in entertainments and diversions. One day as they were at supper, at
Sextus Tarquin's, the king's eldest son, with Collatinus, Lucretia's husband,
the conversation turned on the merit of their wives: every one gave his own the
preference. "What signify so many words?" says Collati^^s; "you may in a few
hours, if you please, be convinced by your own eyes how much my Lucretia excels
the rest. We are young: let us mount our horses, and go and surprise them.
Nothing can better decide our dispute than the state we shall find them in at a
time when, most certainly they will not expect us." They were a little warmed
with wine. "Come on, let us go," they all cried together. They quickly galloped
to Rome, which was about twenty miles from Ardea, where they find the
princesses, wives of the young Tarquins, surrounded with company, and every
circumstance of the highest mirth and pleasure. From thence they ride to
Collata, where they saw Lucretia in a very different situation. With her maids
about her, she was at work in the inner part of her house, talking on the
dangers to which her husband was exposed. The victory was adjudged to her
unanimously. She received her guests with all possible politeness and civility^
Lueretia's virtue, which should have commanded respect, was the very thing
which kindled in the breast of Sextus Tarquin a strong and detestable passion.
Within a few days he returned to Collatia, and upon the plausible excuse he
made for his visit, he was received with all the politeness due to a near
relation, and the eldest son of a king. Watching the fittest opportunity, he
declares the passion she had excited at his last visit and employed the most
tender entreaties, and all the artifices possible to touch a woman's heart; but
all to no purpose. He then endeavored to extort her compliance by the most
terrible threatenings. It was in vain. She still persisted in her resolution;
nor could she be moved, even by the fear of death. But, when the monster told
her, that he would first dispatch her, and then having murdered a slave, would
lay him by her side, after which he would spread a report, that having caught
them in the act of adultery, he had punished them as they deserved; this seemed
to shake her resolution. She hesitated, not knowing which of these dreadful
alternatives to take, whether, by consenting to dishonor the bed of her
husband, whom she tenderly loved; or, by refusing, to die under the odious
character of having prostituted her person to the lust of a slave. He saw the
struggle of her soul; and seizing the unluckly moment, obtained an inglorious
conquest. Thus Lucretia's virtue, which had been proof against the fear of
death, could not hold out against the fear of infamy. The young prince, having
gratified his passion, returned home as in triumph.

On the morrow, Lucretia, overwhelmed with grief and despair, sent early in the
morning to desire her father, and her husband to come to her, and bring with
them each a trusty friend, assuring them there was no time to lose. They came
with all spead, the one accompanied with Valerius, (so famous after under the
name of Publicola) and the other with Brutus. The moment she saw them come, she
could not command her tears; and when her husband asked her if all was well:
"By no means," said she, "it cannot be well with a woman after she has lost her
honor. Yes, Collatinus, thy bed has been defiled by a stranger: but my body
only is polluted; my mind is innocent, as my death shall witness. Promise me
only, not to suffer the adulterer to go unpunished: it is Sextus Tarquinius,
who last night, treacherous guest, or rather cruel foe, offered me violence,
and reaped a joy fatal to me; but if you are men, it will be more fatal to
him." All promised to revenge: and, at the same time, tried to comfort her with
representing, "That the mind only sins, not the body; and where the consent is
wanting there can be no guilt." "What Sextus deserves," replies Lucretia, "I
leave you to judge; but for me, though I declare myself innocent of the crime,
I exempt not myself from punishment. No immodest woman shall plead Lucretia's
example to outlive her dishonor." -- Thus saying, she plunged in her breast a
dagger she had concealed under her robe, and expired at their feet.

PARENTAL AFFECTION.
ZALEUCUS, prince of the Locrians, made a decree, that whoever was convicted of
adultery, should be punished with the loss of both his eyes. Soon after this
establishment, the legislator's own son was apprehended in the very fact and
brought to a public trial. How could the father acquit himself in so tender and
delicate a conjuncture? Should he execute the law in all its rigor, this would
be worse than death to the unhappy youth: should he pardon so notorious a
delinquent, this would defeat the design of his salutary institution. To avoid
both these inconveniences, he ordered one of his own eyes to be pulled out,
and one of his son's.

FILIAL AFFECTION.
AMONG an incredible number of illustrious men who were falsely accused and put
to death by Nero, the cruel emperor of Rome, was one Bareas Soranus, a man, as
Tacitus informs us, of singular vigilance and justice in the discharge of his
duty. During his confinement, his daughter Servilia was apprehended and brought
into the senate, and there arainged. The crime laid to her charge was that she
had turned into money all her ornaments and jewels, and the most valuable part
of her dress, to defray the expense of consulting magicians. To this the young
Servilia, with a flood of tears, replied, "That she had indeed consulted
magicians, but the whole of her inquiry was to know whether the emperor and
senate would afford protection and safety to her dear and indulgent parent
against his accusers. With this view, said she, I presented the diviners, men
till now utterly unknown to me, with my jewels, apparel, and the other
ornaments peculiar to my quality, as I would have presented my blood and life,
could my blood and life have procured my father's liberty. But whatever this my
proceeding was, my unfortunate father was an utter stranger to it, and if it is
a crime, I alone am the delinquent."

She was, however, together with her father, condemned to die, but in what
manner history is silent.

VALERIUS MAXIMUS likewise relates a very singular fact upon this subject. A
woman of illustrious birth had been condemned to be strangled. The Roman
praetor delivered her up to the triumvir, who caused ^^r to be carried to the
prison, in order to her being put to death. The jailer, who was ordered to
execute her, was struck with compassion, and could not resolve to kill her. He
chose therefore to let her die of hunger. Besides which he suffered her
daughter to see her in prison; taking care, however, that she bro't her nothing
to eat. As this continued many days, he was surprised that the prisoner lived
so long without eating; and suspected the daughter, upon watching her, he
discovered that she nourished her mother with her own milk. Amazed at so pious,
and at the same time so ingenious an invention, he told the fact to the
triumvir, and the triumvir to the praetor, who believed the thing merited
relating in the assembly of the people. The criminal was pardoned; a decree was
passed that the mother and daughter should be subsisted for the rest of their
lives, at the expense of the public, and that a temple sacred to piety should
be erected near the prison.

EDUCATION.
EUGENIO is just out of his minority, and in the twenty-second year of his age;
he practices the man with all that virtue and decency that makes his father's
acquaintance covet his company; and indeed they may learn by his discourse the
art of good reasoning, as well as the precepts of religion from his example. --
He is an entertaining companion to the gay young gentlemen his equals; and yet
divines and philosophers take a pleasure to have Eugenio amongst them. He is
caressed by his superiors in honor and years; and though he is released from
the discipline of parently education, yet he treats the lady his mother with
all the affectionate duty that could be desired or demanded of him ten years
ago; his father is content to see his own youth outshone by his son, and
confesses that Engenio already promises greater things than Agathus did at
thirty.

If you ask whence these happy qualities arise, I grant there was some
foundations for them in his very nature, there was something of a complexional
virtue mingled with his frame; but it is much more owing to the wise conduct of
his parents from his very infancy, and the blessings of Divine Grace attending
their labors, their prayers, and their hopes.

He was trained up from the very cradle to all the duties of infant virtue, by
the allurements of love and reward, suited to his age; and never was driven to
practice any thing by a frown or a hasty word, where it was possible for kinder
affections to work the same effect by indulgence and delay.

As fast as his reasoning powers began to appear and exert themselves, they
were conducted in an easy track of thought, to find out and observe the
reasonableness of every part of his duty, and the lovely character of a child
obedient to reason and to his parents will; while every departure from duty was
shown to be so contrary to reason, as laid an early foundation for conscience
to work upon: conscience began here to assume its office, and to manifest its
authority in dictates, and reproofs, and reflections of mind peaceful, or
painful, according to his behavior. When his parents observed this inward
monitor to awake in his soul, they could better trust him out of their fight.

When he became capable of conceiving of an Almighty and invisible Being, who
made this world and every creature in it, he was taught to pay all due regard
to God his Maker; and from the outhority and love of his father on earth, he
was led to form right ideas (as far as childhood permitted) of the power,
government, and goodness of the universal and supreme father of all in heaven.

He was informed why punishment was due to an offense against God or his
parents, that his fear might become an useful passion to awaken and guard his
virtue; but he was instructed, at the same time, that where he heartily
repented of a fault, and returned to his duty with new diligence, there was
forgiveness to be obtained both of God and man.

When at any time a friend interceded for him to his father, after he had been
guilty of a fault, he was hereby directed into the doctrine of Jesus the
mediator between God and man ^and thus he knew him as an intercessor, before he
could well understand the notion of his sacrifice and atonement.

In his younger years he passed but twice under the correction of the rod; once
for a fit of obstinacy and persisting in a falsehood; then he was given up to
severe chastisement, and it dispelled and cured the sullen humor forever; and
once for the contempt of his mother's authority he endured the scourge again,
and he wanted it no more.

He was enticed sometimes to the love of letters, by making his lesson a reward
of some domestic duty; and a permission to pursue some parts of learning was
the appointed recompense of his diligence and improvement in others.

There was nothing required of his memory but what was first (as far as
possible) let into his understanding; and by proper images and representations,
suited to his years, he was taught to form some conception to things described,
before he was bid to learn the words by heart. Thus he was freed from the
danger of treasuring up the cant and jargon of mere names, instead of the
riches of solid knowledge.

Where any abstruse and difficult notions occurred in his course of learning,
his preceptor postponed them till he had gone through that subject in a more
superficial way; for this purpose he passed twice through all the sciences; and
to make the doctrines of Christianity easy to him in his childhood, he had two
or three Catechisms composed by his tutor, each of them suited to his more
early or more improved capacity, till at twelve years old he was thought fit to
learn that public form, which is more universally taught and approved.

As he was inured to reasoning from his childhood, so he was instructed to
prove every thing, according to the nature of the subject, by natural or moral
arguments, as far as years would admit: and thus he drew much of his early
knowledge from reason or from revelation by the force of his judgment, and not
merely from his teachers, by the strength of his memory.

His parents were persuaded indeed that they ought to teach him the principles
of virtue while he was a child, and the most important truth of religion both
natural and revealed, before he was capable of deriving them from the fund of
his own reason, or of framing a religion for himself out of so large a book as
the Bible. They thought themselves under the obligation of that divine command,
"Train up a child in the way that he should go, and when he is old he will nor
depart from it." And therefore from a child they made him acquainted with the
Holy Scriptures, and persuaded him to believe that they were given by the
inspiration of God, before it was possible for him to take in the arguments
from reason, history, tradition, etc. which must be joined together to confirm
the sacred canon, and prove the several books of the Bible to be divine. --
Thus, like Timothy, "he continued in the things which he learned, and had been
assured of knowing of whom he had learned them." Yet as his years advanced,
they thought it requisite to show him the solid and rational foundations of his
faith, that his hope might be built upon the authority of God, and not of men.

After he arrived at fifteen, he was suffered to admit nothing into his full
assent, till his mind saw the rational evidence of the proposition itself; or
at least till he felt the power of those reasons which obliged him to assent,
upon moral evidence and testimony, where the evidences of sense or of reason
were not to be expected. He knew that he was not to hope for mathematical
proofs that there is a pope at Rome, that the Turks have dominion over Judea,
that St. Paul wrote an Epistle to the Romans, that Christ was crucified without
the gates of Jerusalem, and that in three days time he rose from the dead; and
yet that there is just and reasonable evidence to enforce and support the
belief of all these facts. Where truths were too sublime for present
comprehension, he would never admit them as a part of his faith till he saw the
full evidence of a speaking God and a divine revelation.

His tutor never imposed any thing on him with a magisterial air, but by way of
advice recommended to him such studies and such methods of improvement, as his
experience had long approved; he gave frequent hints of the danger of some
opinions, and the fatal consequences of some modish and mistaken principles. He
let him know generally what sentiments he himself embraced among the divided
opinions of the age; and what clear and comprehensive knowledge, what
satisfaction of judgment, serenity of mind, and peace of conscience were to be
found in the principles which he had chosen; but he exhorted his pupil still to
choose wisely for himself, and, in common and sacred affairs, to frame his own
sentiments by just rules of reasoning: -- though Eugenio did not
superstitiously confine his belief to the opinions of his instructor, yet he
could not but love the man that indulged him such a liberty of thought, and
gave him such an admirable clue, by which he let himself into the secrets of
knowledge, human and divine: thus, under the happy influences of so prudent a
supervisor, he traced the paths of learning, and enjoyed the unspeakable
pleasure of being his own teacher, and of framing his opinions himself. By this
means he began early to use his reason with freedom, and to judge for himself,
without a servile submission to the authority of others; and yet to pay a just
and solemn deference to persons of age and experience, and particularly to
those who were proper and appointed guides of his youth, and who led him on so
gently in the paths of knowledge.

He was not kept a stranger to the errors and follies of mankind, nor was he
let loose amongst them, either in books or in company, without a guard and a
guide. His preceptor let him know the gross mistakes and iniquities of men,
ancient and modern, but inlaid him with proper principles of truth and virtue,
and furnished him with such rules of judgment, as led him more easily to
distinguish between good and bad: and thus he was secured against the infection
and the poison, both of the living and the dead.

He had early cautions given him to avoid the bantering tribe of mortals, and
was instructed to distinguish a jest from an argument, so that a loud laugh at
his religion never puts him nor his faith out of countenance. He is ever ready
to render a reason of his Christian hope, and to defend his Creed; but he
scorns to enter the lists with such a disputant that has no artillery but squib
and flash, no arguments beside grimace and ridicule. Thus he supports the
character of a Christian with honor: ^he confines his faith to his Bible,
thinks as freely as that vain herd of Atheists and Deists, who arrogate the
name of Free-thinkers to themselves.

You will enquire, perhaps, how he came to attain so manly a conduct in life at
so early an age, and how every thing of the boy was worn off so soon. Truly,
besides other influences; it is much owing to the happy management of Eraste,
(the name of the lady his mother) she was frequent in the nursery, and inspired
sentiments into his childhood becoming riper years. When there was company in
the parlour, with whom she could use such a a freedom, she brought her son in
among them, not to entertain them with his own noise and tattle and
impertinence but to hear their discourse and sometimes to answer a little
question or two they might ask him. When he was grown up to a youth, he was
often admitted into the room with his father's acquaintance, and was indulged
the liberty to ask and enquire on subjects that seemed to be above his years:
he was encouraged to speak a sentence or two of his own thoughts, and thus to
learn and practice a modest assureance. But when the company was gone, he was
approved and praised if he behaved well, or received kind hints of admonition
that he might know when he had been too silent, and too forward to speak. Thus,
by enjoying the advantage of society above the level of his own age and
understanding, he was always aspiring to imitation; and the excesses and
defects of his conduct were daily noticed and cured.

His curiosity was ^ratified abroad with new sights and scenes as often as his
parents could do it with convenience, that he might not stare and wonder at
every strange object or occurence; but he was made patient of restraint and
disappointment, when he seemed to indulge an excessive desire of any needless
diversion. If he sought any crimial pleasures, or diversions attended with
great danger and inconvenience, the pursuit of them was absolutely forbidden;
but it was done in so kind a manner, as made the guilt or peril of them appear
in the strongest light, and thereby they were rendered hateful or formidable,
rather than the objects of wish or desire.

When Eugenio first began to go a broad in the world, his companions were
recommended to him by the prudence of his parents; or if he chose them himself,
it was still within the reach of his tutor's observation, or the notice of his
father's eye: nor was he suffered to run aloose into promiscuous company, till
it appeared that his mind was furnished with steady principles of virtue, till
he had knowledge enough to defend those principles, and to repel the assaults
that might be made upon his faith and manners.

Yet it was hardly thought fit to trust him to his own conduct for whole days
together, lest he should meet some temptations too hard for his virtue, till he
had gained resolution enough to say no boldly, and to maintain an obstinate
refusal of pernicious pleasures. He was told before hand how the profane and
the lewd would use all the arts of address, and how subtilely they would
practice upon good humor with powerful and tempting importunities. This set
him ever upon his guard; and though he carried his sweetness of temper always
about with him, yet he learned to conceal it wheresoever it was neither proper
nor safe to appear. By a little converse in the world, he found that it was
necessary to be positive, bold, and unmovable in rejecting every proposal
which might endanger his character or his morals; especially as he soon became
sensible that a soft and cold denial gave courage to new attacks, and left him
liable to be teased with fresh solicitations. He laid down this therefore for a
constant rule, that where his reason had determined any practice to be either
plainly sinful, or utterly inexpedient, he would give so firm a denial, upon
the principles of virtue and religion, as should for ever discourage any
farther solicitations. This gave him the character of a man of resolute virtue,
even among the rakes of the time, nor was he ever esteemed the less on this
account. At first indeed he thought it a happy victory which he had gotten over
himself, when he could defy the shame of the face of vice and infidelity: he
found the shortest way to conquer this foolish shame was to renounce it at
once; then it was easy to practice singularity amidst a profane multitude. And
when he began to get courage enough to profess resolute piety without a blush,
in the midst of such company as this, Agathus and Eraste then permitted their
son to travel abroad, and to see more of the world, under the protection of
their daily prayers. His first tour was through the neighboring counties of
England; he afterward enlarged the circuit of his travels till he had visited
foreign nations, and learned the value of his own.

In short, the restraints of his younger years were tempered with so much
liberty, and managed with such prudence and tenderness, and these bonds of
discipline were so gradually loosened as fast as he grew wise enough to govern
himself, that Eugenio always carried about with him an inward conviction of the
great love and wisdom of his parents and his tutor. The humors of the child
now and then felt some reluctance against the pious discipline of his parents;
but now he is arrived at man's estate, there is nothing that he looks back upon
with greater satisfaction than the steps of their conduct, and the instances of
his own submission. He often recounts these things with pleasure, as some of
the chief favors of heaven, whereby he was guarded through all the dangers and
follies of youth and childhood, and effectually kept, through Divine Grace
opperating by these means, from a thousand sorrows, and perhaps from
everlasting ruin.

Though he was released some years from the strictness of parental government,
yet he still makes his parents his chosen friends: and though they cease to
practice authority upon him, and absolute command, yet he pays the utmost
deference to their counsels, and to the first notice of their inclinations. You
shall never find him resisting and debating against their desires and
propensities in little common things of life, which are indifferent in
themselves; he thinks it carries in it too much contempt of those whom God and
nature require him to honor. Whenever he enters into any important action of
life, he takes a filial pleasure to seek advice from his worthy parents; and it
is uneasy to him to attempt any thing of moment without it. He does not indeed
universally practice all their sentiments, but he gains their consent to follow
his own reason and choice.

Some of the wild young gentlemen of the age may happen to laugh at him for
being so much a boy still, and for showing such subjection to the old folks,
(as they call them:) with a scornful smile they bid him "Break off his
leading-strings and cast away his yokes of bondage." But for the most part he
observes, that the same persons shake off all yokes at once, and at once break
the bonds of nature, duty, and religion: they pay but little regard to their
superior in heaven, any more than those on earth, and have forgotten God and
their parents together. "Nor will I ever be moved (says he) with the reproaches
of those who make a jest of things sacred as well as civil, and treat their
mother and their Maker with the same contempt."

LOVE.
THE intentions of Erastus are very honorable; he has a passionate fondness for
Isabella, which is easily discovered in the advantageous picture he gives of
her; yet there appears one feature wanting to finish the portrait: he says
nothing of the character and disposition of her mind. These are not what affect
him. Her beauty, her graceful air, her lively gaiety, have irresistible charms;
these are enough for him, and he imagines there can be no greater happiness
than the possession of so lovely a person. While under the beams of her eyes,
he is transported with ecstasy; but when she is absent, languishes and pines in
restless uneasiness. Is not this love? Erastus thinks it is; and believes he is
more passionately in love than any other man upon earth: but I see from whence
his error springs; he mistakes for love what is only a corporeal appetite.

NEVER did love appear more ardent than between Lysander and Daphne.
Innumerable obstacles stood in their way, over which their courage enabled them
to triumph. Bolts, bars, and walls secured the fair prisoner. Three or four
prudish jailors with a devout twang of the nose exhorted her to continence; and
proposing themselves for an example, invited her to sigh like them for no other
husband than the spouse in the Canticles: but the ladder delivered her at once
from the cloisters and these lectures. Lysander, whose father at the same time
was endeavoring to disinherit him, preferred the interest of his heart to that
of his fortune, and the possession of Daphne to the ties of blood. He fled with
her to vow at the foot of the altar an eternal fidelity. -- The first year is
not yet past, and Lysander is already false. Daphne weeps, sighs, and laments:
however, she has comforters who may one day help her to revenge his perfidy.
But what can be the cause of this sudden change? Lysander and Daphne had
mistaken for love the powerful impulses of a warm constitution. This deceived
them, and as they are both impatient and impetuous spirits, their vexations and
disappointments are as keen as their appetites are violent.

CALISTA was young and beautiful, blessed with an uncommon share of solid sense
enlivened by the most sprightly wit. Agathocles exceeded her very little in
point of age; he was well made, brave, and prudent. He had the good fortune to
be introduced at Calista's, where his looks, wandering indifferently over a
brilliant circle, soon distinguished and fixed upon her: but endeavoring to
recover himself from the short ecstasy which his first glance produced, he
immediately reproached himself as being guilty of rudeness and disregard to the
rest of the company; and this fault he endeavored to repair, by looking round
upon other objects. Vain attempt! they are attracted by an irresistible charm,
and again turned toward Calista. He blushed as well as she, whilst a sweet
emotion hitherto unfelt played about his heart and disconcerted all his looks.
They both became at the same time more timid and more curious. With pleasure he
gazed at Calista, and yet could not do it without trembling: whilst she,
secretly pleased with this flattering preference, looked at him by stealth.
They were both afraid, but especially Calista, of being caught by the other in
the fact, and both were so almost every moment. The hour of separation came,
and they thought came too soon. They made painful reflections on the rapidity
of time. Imagination, however, did not suffer a total separation to take place:
for the image of Calista was deeply engraven on the mind of Agathocles, and the
lineaments of his person were as strongly impressed on that of Calista. They
both appeared less cheerful the rest of the day; a lively and interesting
sentiment, whatever it was, employed their minds, which no amusement could
banish. It was two days before they saw each other again; and though during
this interval their whole time had been filled up, either by business or
recreations, they both felt a languid anxiety which rendered every thing
insipid, a void in their minds which we want words to define, and of which they
knew not the cause; but discovered it the very instant at their meeting; for
the perfect contentment, the soothing delight, which they tasted in the
presence of each other, would not suffer them to be longer ignorant of the
cause of their melancholy. Agathocies now collected himself, and assumed the
courage to address Calista; he accosted her with the most polite and obliging
expressions, and for the first time enjoyed the happiness of a particular
conversation with her. He had hitherto seen only her exterior charms: he now
discovered the beauties of her mind, the integrity of her heart, the dignity of
her sentiments, and the delicacy of her wit; but what still more delighted him,
was the pleasing hope that she did not think him unworthy of her esteem. From
this time his visits became very frequent; in every one of which he discovered
some new perfection. This is the characteristic of real merit; it is a gainer
by being laid open to the inspection of a judicious eye. A man of understanding
will soon be disgusted with the wanton, the foolish, and the giddy: but if he
has conceived a passion for a woman worthy of himself, time, so far from
weakening his attachment, can only serve to increase and strengthen it.

The fixed inclination of Agathocles made him now sensible, that which he felt
for Calista was love; and that of the most tender and passionate kind. This he
knew; but Calista was still unacquainted with it, or at least had never learnt
it from his lips. Love is timorous and dissident: a bold and daring suitor is
not the lover of the lady he addresses; the only object of his love is
pleasure. At last he took the resolution to lay open his heart to Calista, but
not in the studied language of a romantic passion. "Lovely Calista," said he,
"ingenuously, it is not merely esteem that engages me to you; but the most
passionate and tender affection. I feel that I cannot live without you. Can you
without reluctance resolve to make me happy? I have hitherto loved without
offending you, this is a tribute which your merit demands; but may I flatter
myself with the hope, that you will make me some small return?" A coquette
would have affected to be displeased; but Calista not only heard her lover
without interruption, but answered him without severity, and permitted him to
hope. Nor did she put his constancy to a needless trial. The happiness for
which he sighed was deferred no longer than was proper, to make the necessary
preparations. The marriage-settlements were easily adjusted, for in these,
sordid interest had no share; this solemn contract chiefly consisted in a
mutual exchange of hearts, and this was already performed. What will be the lot
of this newly wedded pair? I will venture to foretell that it will be the
happiest that mortals can enjoy on earth. No pleasure is comparable to that
which affects the heart; nor does any other affect it with such exquisite
delight as the pleasure of loving and being beloved. To this tender union of
souls we can never apply the words of Democritus, that "the pleasure of love is
only a short epilepsy." He without doubt had the sensual pleasure in his
thought, which is so different from love, that the enjoyment may be without the
passion, and the passion without the enjoyment. Their love, will be constant.
This I dare prophesy, and I know the cause: their passion is not founded on the
dazzling charms of beauty, they are both the friends of virtue: they love each
other on this account; their love, therefore, will last as long as their
virtue, and the continuance of that is secured by their union: -- for nothing
can secure our perseverance in the paths of wisdon so effectually as having
incessantly a loving and beloved example walking before us. Their felicity can
never be disturbed unless by those disasters and misfortunes from which their
mutual tenderness cannot shelter them: but supposing these should full to their
share, they would then only partake of the common lot of mankind. Those who
have never tasted the tender delights of love are equally exposed to
disappointment; and the l^ver is at least a gainer, with respect to those
pleasures which are of great account in the estimation of the value of life.
Add to this, that love will greatly diminish the sense of their misfortunes. It
has the peculiar virtue of rendering the sufferings of two wellpaired hearts
less acute, and their delights more exquisite. It would seem as if by
communicating their distresses, each one felt but half their weight; while on
the contrary, satisfactions are doubled by the participation. -- As a squadron
of soldiers is with more difficulty defeated in proportion to its closeness, so
the happy pair resist ^he attacks of trouble and adversity with so much the
more strength and success as they are firmly united.

LUXURY.
WHEN Cyrus had received an account that the Lydians had revolted from him, he
told Croesus, with a good deal of emotion, that he had almost determined to
make them all slaves. Croesus begged him to pardon them: "But" says he, "that
they may no more rebel, or be troublesome to you, command them to lay aside
their arms, to wear long vests and buskins, i. e. to vie with eack other in the
elegance and richness of their dress. Order them to sing and play on the harp,
let them drink and debauch, and you will soon see their spirits broken, and
themselves changed from men to women, so that they will no more rebel, or give
you uneasiness;" and the event answered the advice.

The luxury of Capua destroyed the bravest army which Italy ever saw, flushed
with conquest, and commanded by Hannibal. The moment Capua was taken, the
moment the walls of Carthage trembled. They caught the infection, and grew fond
of pleasure; which rendered them effeminate, and of course an easy prey to
their enemies.

IT is to the victory over Antiochus, and the conquest of Asia, that Pliny
dates the corruption of the manners of the Roman commonwealth, and of the fatal
change that happened in it by introducing at Rome, with the riches it brought
thither, a taste for luxury and voluptuousness. Asia conquered Rome by its
vices. Foreign riches put an end to the love of industry and the ancient
simplicity which had been the principles of its honor and strength. Luxury,
which entered Rome as in triumph, with the superb spoils of Asia, brought with
it in its train all kinds of disorders and crimes, made more havoc than the
most numerous armies could have done, and, in that manner avenged the conquered
globe. Thus the face of the state was changed, virtue, valor, and
disinterestedness were no longer esteemed; the opposite vices prevailed, and
the government from just and wise became tyrannical and insupportable.

WHAT is the subtle secret poison which thus lurks under the pomp of luxury and
the charms of pleasure, and is capable of enervating at the same time both the
whole strength of the body, and the vigor of the mind; It is not very
difficult to comprehend why it has this terible effect. When men are accustomed
to a soft and voluptuous life, can they be very fit for undergoing the fatigues
and hardships of war? Are they qualified for suffering the rigor of the
seasons, for enduring hunger and thirst, for passing whole nights without sleep
upon occasion, for going through continual exercise and action, for facing
danger and dispising death? The natural effect of voluptuousness and delicacy,
which are the inseparable companions of luxury, is to render them subject to a
multitude of false wants and necessities, to make their happiness depend upon a
thousand trifling conveniences and superfluities, which they can no longer be
without, and to give them an unreasonable fondness for life on account of a
thousand secret ties and engagements that endear it to them, and which by
stifling in them the great motives of glory, of love for their country, render
them fearful and cowardly, and hinder them from exposing themselves to dangers
which may in a moment deprive them of all those things wherein they place
felicity.

MAGNANIMITY.
THE inhabitants of Privernum being subdued and taken prisoners after a revolt,
one of them being asked by a Roman senator, who was for putting them all to
death, what punishment he and his fellow captives deserved, answered with great
intrepidity, "We deserve that punishment which is due to men who are jealous of
their (...), and think themselves worthy of it." Plautinus perceiving that his
answer exasperated some of the senators, endeavored to prevent the ill effects
of it, by putting a milder question to the prisoner: "How would you behave,
says he, if Rome should pardon you?" "Our conduct, replied the generous
captive, depends upon yours. If the peace you grant be an honorable one, you
may depend on a constant fidelity on our part; if the terms of it be hard and
dishonorable, lay no stress on our adherence to you." Some of the judges
construed these words as menaces; but the wiser part finding in them a great
deal of magnanimity, cried out, that a nation whose only desire was liberty,
and their only fear that of losing it, was worthy to become Roman. Accordingly
a decree passed in favor of the prisoners. Thus the bold sincerity of one man
saved his country, and gained it the privilege of being incorporate into the
Roman ^tate.

FRIENDSHIP.
WHEN Damon was sentenced by Dionysius of Syracuse to die on a certain day, he
begged permission, in the interim, to retire to his own country, to set the
affairs of his disconsolate family in order. This the tyrant intended
peremtorily to refuse, by granting it, as he conceived, on the impossible
conditions of his procuring some one to remain as hostage for his return, under
equal forfeiture of life. Pythias as heard the conditions, and did not wait for
an application upon the part of Damon; he instantly offered himself as security
for his friend, which, being accepted, Damon was immediately set at liberty.
The king and all the courtiers were astonished at this action; and therefore
when the day of execution drew near, his majesty had the curiosity to visit
Pythias in his confinement. After some conversation on the subject of
friendship, in which the tyrant delivered it as his opinion that selfinterest
was the sole mover of human actions; as for virtue, friendship, benevolence,
love of one's country, and the like; he looked upon them as terms invented by
the wise to keep in awe and impose upon the weak. "My lord," said Pythias, with
a firm voice and noble aspect, "I would it were possible that I might suffer a
thousand deaths, rather than my friend should fail in any article of his honor.
He cannot fail therein my lord: I am as confident of his virtue as I am of my
own existence. -- But I pray, I beseech the gods, to preserve the life and
integrity of my dear Damon together: oppose him, ye winds, prevent the
eagerness and impatience of his honorable endeavors, and suffer him not to
arrive till by my death I have redeemed a life a thousand times of more
consequence, of more value, than my own; more estimable to his lovely wife; to
his precious little innocents, to his friends, to his country. O leave me not
to die the worst of deaths in my Damon." Dionysius was awed and confounded by
the dignity of these sentiments, and by the manner in which they were uttered:
he felt his heart struck by a slight sense of invading truth; -- but it served
rather to perplex than undeceive him. The fatal day arrived. Pythias was
brought forth, and walked amidst the guards with a serious, but satisfied air,
to the place of execution. Dionysius was already there; he was exalted on a
moving throne, that was drawn by six white horses, and fat pensive and
attentive to the prisoner. Pythias came, he vaulted lightly on the scaffold,
and beholding for some time the apparatus of his death, he turned with a placid
countenance, and addressed the spectators: "My prayers are heard," he cried,
"the gods are propitous; you know, my friends, that the winds have been
contrary till yesterday. Damon could not come, he could not conquer
impossibilites; he will be here tomorrow, and the blood which is shed today,
shall have ransomed the life of my friend. O could I erase from your bosom
every doubt, every mean suspicion, of the honor of the man for whom I am about
to suffer, I shall go to my death even as I would to my bridal. Be it
sufficient in the mean time, that my friend will be found noble, that his truth
is unimpeachable; that he will speadily prove it: that he is now on his way,
hurrying on, accusing himself, and adverse elements, and the gods: but I haste
to prevent his speed; executioner, to your office." As he pronounced the last
words, a buz began to rise among the remotest of the people; a distant voice
was heard; the crowd caught the words, and Stop Stop the execution, was
repeated by the whole assembly: a man at full speed; the throng gave way to his
approach: he was mounted on a steed of foam: in an instant he was off his
horse, on the scaffold, and held Pythias straightly embraced. "You are safe," he
cried, "you are safe, my friend, my beloved friend, the gods be praised, you
are safe. I now have nothing but death to suffer and am delivered from the
anguish of those reproaches which I gave myself, for having endangered a life
so much dearer than my own." Pale, cold, and half speechless in the arms of his
Damon, Pythias replied in broken accents -- "Fatal haste! -- Cruel impatience!
-- What envious powers have wrought impossibilities in your favor? -- But I
will not be wholly disappointed. -- Since I cannot die to save, I will not
survive you." Dionysius heard, beheld, and considered all with astonishment.
His heart was touched, he wept, and leaving his throne, he ascended the
scaffold. "Live, live, ye incomparable pair!" he cried, "ye have borne
unquestionable testimony to the existence of virtue! and that virtue equally
evinces the existence of a God to reward it. Live happy, live renowned: and, O!
form me by your precepts, as ye have invited me by your example, to be worthy
of so sacred a friendship."

GENEROSITY.
THE conduct of the wa^ against Falisci being committed to the care of
Camillus, the Roman dictator, he besieged Falerii, their capital city, and
surrounded it with lines; but at so great a distance from their walls, that
there was sufficient room for the besieged to take the air without danger. The
Falisci had brought from Greece the custom of committing all their children to
the care of one man, who was to instruct them in all the branches of polite
literature, to take them out a walking with him, and see them perform the
exercises proper for their age. The children had used often to walk with their
master without the walls-of their city before the siege; and the fears of an
enemy, who kept quiet and as such a distance, were not great enough to make
them discontinue their exercise afterward. But the present schoolmaster
proved a traitor. He at first led the youths only along the walls, then he
carried them a little farther; and at length, when a favorable opportunity
offered, he led them through the guards of the Roman camp, quite to the
general's tent. As they were the children of the best families in the place,
their treacherous leader, when he come into (...) presence, addressed him thus:
"With these children I deliver the place (...) besieg^ into your ^ands; they
were committed to my care and (...), but I prefer the friendship of Rome to my
employment at (...)" Camillus, (...) with horror at the (...), and looking on
him with a menacing air: -- "Traitor, says he, you do not address yourself with
your impious present either to a general or a (...) that resemble you; we have
indeed no express and formal alliance with the (...) that which nature has
established between all men both does, and shall (...) between (...). War has
its rights as well as peace; and we have learned to make it with no less
justice than (...). We are in arms, not against an age which is spared even in
cities taken by assault, but against men armed like ourselves; men, who,
without any previous injury from us, attacked the Roman camp at Veii. Thou, to
the utmost of thy power, have succeeded them by a new and different kind of
crime; but for me, I shall conquer, (...) Veil, by Roman arts, by valor,
works, and perseverance."

The traitor was not dismissed with this reprimand only: Camillus caused him to
be stripped, and to have his hands tied behind him; and arming the young
scholars with rods he ordered them to drive him back into the city, and to
scourge him all the way, which no doubt they did with a good will.

At this sight the (...), who had been inconsolable for the loss of their
children, raised cries of joy: they were charmed to such a degree, with so
uncommon an example of justice and virtue, that in an instant they entirely
changed their disposition in respect to the Romans, and resolved that moment to
have a peace with such generous enemies. Accordingly they sent deputies first
to the camp, and afterward to Rome; where, when they had audience of the
senate, they addressed themselves to it in these terms: "Illustrious fathers,
conquered by you, and your general, in a manner that can give no offense to
gods and men, we come to surrender ourselves to you; and we assure ourselves,
than which nothing can be more glorious for victors, that we shall live happier
under your government, than under our own laws. The event of this war has
brought forth two excellent examples for mankind. You, fathers, have preferred
justice to immediate conquest; and we, excited by that justice which we admire,
voluntarily present you the victory.

HAPPINESS.
MONIMA was a lady whom all Greece admired, not so much for her beauty, though
confessedly exquisite, as for her wisdom and prudence. Mithridates, king of
Pontus, who, excepting Alexander, was the greatest of kings, having fallen
desperately in love with her, had forgotten nothing that might incline her to
favor his passion: he sent her at once fifteen thousand pieces of gold; but
her virtue was proof against every attack. She refused his presents till he
gave her the quality of a wife and queen, sent her the royal tiara or diadem;
an essential ceremony in the marriage of the kings of those nations. Nor did
she then comply without extreme regret. A more humble station was what she
would much rather have chosen; but her friends, dazzled with the splendour of a
crown, and the power of Mithridates, who was at that time every where
victorious, and at the height of his glory, insisted on her acceptance of so
advantageous an offer. She complied, and the world thought her happy; but they
were greatly mistaken. That unfortunate princess passed her life in continual
sadness and affliction, lamented her fatal beauty that instead of an husband
had given her a master, and instead of procuring her an honorable abode and the
endearments of conjugal society, had confined her in a close prison, under a
guard of barbarians; (...) removed from the delightful regions of Greece she
only enjoyed a dream of that happiness with which she had been flattered, and
really lost that solid and substantial good she possessed in her own country.
But her misery was not yet complete. Mithridates, who for thirty years had
maintained a war against the Romans, was at last defeated by Lucullus in the
plains of Cabirae. Even at this battle fortune sec^^ed to smile on him as
formerly, so he had greatly the advantage in the (...) but, on a sudden,
fortune, (...), wealth, and every thing the (...) calls great, forsook him, in
short, he was so completely conquered in a third (...) obliged to make his
escape on (...) and without a single servant ^o attend him. (...) this defeat
and supposing that his (...) would fall into the hands of Lucu^^^^, jealously
(...) cruelty prompted him to send her orders to die by the hands of (...) the
eunuch. When this messenger of death arrived and had signified to the princess
the order of Mithridates, which favored her no (...) than to leave her at
liberty to choose the kind of death she thought most gentle and (...), taking
the diadem from her hand, (...) it round her neck, and hung herself up by it;
but that wreath not being strong enough, and breaking, she cried out, "Ah,
fatal trifle, you might at least do me this mournful office." Then throwing it
away with indignation, ^he presented her neck to Bacchidas, who dispatched her
with one resentless stroke. As for (...) though he recovered his kingdom again,
he did not long enjoy it; for being driven by Pompey to his son Pharnaces, he
there (...) which (...) then living himself abandoned by all the world, and
that even his son would no^ suffer him to (...) where he could, retired to his
apartment, and after giving poison to such of his wives and daughters (...)
were with him at the time, he took the same himself; but when he perceived that
it had not its effect upon him, he had (...) to his sword.

WORLD.
ALMET, the dervise, who watched the sacred lamp to the sepolchre of the
prophet, as he one day rose up from the devotions of the mor^ing, which he had
performed at the gate of the temple, with his body, turned toward the ^ast,
and his forehead on the earth, (...) before him a man in splendid apparel (...)
by a long (...), who gazed steadfastly at him with a look of mournful
compla^^^^^ and (...) desired, to speak, but unwilling to offend.

The (...) a short silence, advanced, (...) him with the calm dignity which
(...) upon humility, requested (...) his purpose. (...) and as I expect nothing
in the future but the vanities of the past, I do not wish that the future
should arrive. Yet I tremble lest it should be cut off; and my heart sinks when
I anticipate the moment in which eternity shall close over the vacuity of my
life, like the sea upon the path of a ship, and leave no traces of my existence
more durable than the furrow which remains after the waves have united. If in
the treasures of thy wisdom, there is any precept to obtain felicity, vouchsafe
it to me: for this purpose I am come: a purpose which yet I feared to reveal,
lest, like all the former, it should be disappointed." Almet listened with
looks of astonishment and pity, to this complaint of a being in whom reason was
known to be a pledge of immortality: but the serenity of his countenance soon
returned; and, stretching out his hand toward heaven, "Stranger," said he,
"the knowledge which I have received from the prophet I will communicate to
thee."

As I was sitting one evening at the porch of the temple, pensive and alone,
mine eye wandered among the multitude that was scattered before me; and while I
remarked the weariness and solicitude which was visible in every countenance, I
was suddenly struck with a sense of their condition. "Wretched mortals," said
I, "to what purpose are ye busy? If to produce happiness, by whom is it
enjoyed? Do the linens of Egypt, and the silks of Persia, bestow felicity on
those who wear them, equal to the wretchedness of vonder slaves whom I see
leading the camels that bring them; Is the fineness of the texture, or the
splendour of the tints, regarded with delight by those to whom custom has
rendered them familiar? Or can the power of habit render others insensible of
pain, who live only to traverse the desert: a scene of dreadful uniformity,
where a barren level i^ bounded only by the horizon; where no change of
prospect, or variety of images, relieves the travellor from a sense of toil and
danger, of whirl-winds, which in a moment may bury him in the sand, and of
thirst, which the wealthy have given half their possessions to alley? Do those
on whom hereditary diamonds sparkle with unregarded luster gain from the
possession, what is left by the wretch who seeks them in the mine; who lives
excluded from the common bounties of nature, to whom even the vicissitude of
day and night is not known, who sighs in perpetual darkness, and whose (...)
one mournful alternative of (...) and labor. If th^se are not happy who
possess in proportion at these are wretched who bestow, how vain a dream is the
(...) of a sudden influence from above. The streets and the crowds of Mecca
disappeared; I found myself sitting on the declivity of a mountain, and
perceived at my right hand an angel, whom I knew to be Arozan, the minister of
reproof. When I saw him, I was afraid, I cast mine eye upon the ground, and was
about to desperate his anger, when he commanded me to be silent. "Almet," said
he, "thou have devoted thy life to meditation, that thy counsel might deliver
ignorance from the mazes of error, and deter presumption from the precipice of
guilt; but the book of nature thou have read without understanding. It is again
open before thee; look up, consider it, and be wise."

I looked up and beheld an enclosure, beautiful as the gardens of paradise, but
of a small extent. Through the middle there was a green walk; at the end a wild
desert, and beyond impenetrable darkness. The walk was shaded with trees of
every kind, that were covered at once with blossoms and fruit; innumerable
birds were singing in the branches; the grass was intermingled with flowers,
which impregnated the breeze with fragrance, and painted the path with her
beauty: on one side flowed a gentle transparent stream, which was just heard to
murmur over the golden sands that sparkled at the bottom; and on the other were
walks and bowers, fountains, grottos, and cascades, which diversified the scene
with endless variety, but did not conceal the bounds.

While I was gazing in a transport of delight and wonder on this enchanting
spot, I perceived a man stealing along the walk with a thoughtful and
deliberate pace: his eyes were fixed upon the earth, and his arms crossed on
his bossom: he sometimes started as if a sudden pang had seized him; his
countenance expressed solicitude and terror; he looked round with a sigh, and
having gazed a moment on the desert that lay before him, he seemed as if he
wished to stop, but was impelled forward by some invisible power; his features,
however, soon settled again into a calm melancholy; his eye was again fixed on
the ground; and he went on as before, with apparent reluctance, but without
emotion. I was struct with this appearance; and turning hastily to the angel,
was about to enquire what could produce such infelicity in a being surrounded
with every object that could gratify every sense; but he prevented my request:
"The book of nature, said he, is before thee; look up, consider it, and be
wise." I looked, and beheld a valley between two mountains that were craggy and
barren; on the path there was no verdure, and the mountains afforded no shade;
the sun burised in the zenith, and every spring was dried up; but the valley
terminated in a country that was pleasant and fertile, shaded with woods and
adorned with buildings. At a second view I discovered a man in the valley;
meagre indeed and naked, but his countenance was cheerful, and his deportment
active; he kept his eye fixed, upon the country before him, and looked as if he
would run, but that he was restrained, as the other had been impelled, by some
secret influence: sometimes, indeed, I perceived a sudden expression of pain,
and sometimes he stopped (...), as if his foot was pierced by the asperities o^
the way: but the sprightliness of his countenance instantly returned, and he
pressed forward without appearance of repining o^ complaint.

I returned again toward the angel, impatient, to enquire from what secret
source happiness was derived, in a situation so different from that in which it
might have been expected but he again prevented my request: "Almet," said he,
"remember what thou have seem and let this memorial be written upon the tablets
of thy heart. Remember, Almet, that the world in which thou art placed, is but
the road to another, and that happiness depends not upon the path, but the end,
the value of this period of thy existence is fixed by hope and fear. The wretch
who wished to linger in the garden, who looked round upon its (...) with
terror, was destitute of enjoyment, because he was destitute of hope, and was
perpetually tormented by the dread of (...) that which (...) he (...) not
enjoy: the (...) of the (...) had been (...) till it was not heard, and the
flowers had so often recurred that their beauty was not seen; the river glided
by unnoticed; and he feared to lift his eye to the prospect, lest he should
behold the waste that circumscribed it. But he that toiled through the valley was
happy, because he looked forward with hope. Thus, to the sojourner upon earth,
it is of little moment whether the path he treads be strewed with flowers or
with thorns, if he perceives himself to approach those regions; in comparison
of which thorns and the flowers of this wilderness lose their distinction, and
are both alike impotent to give pleasure or pain.

"What then has eternal wisdom unequally distributed? That which can make every
station happy, and without which every station must be wretched, is acquired by
virtue; and virtue is possible to all. Remember Almet, the vision thou have
seen; and let my words be written on the tablet of thy heart, that thou may
direct the wanderer to happiness, and justify God to men."

While the voice of Azoran was yet sounding in my ear, the prospect vanished
from before me, and I found myself again sitting at the porch of the temple.
The sun was going down, the multitude was retired to rest, and the solemn quiet
of midnight concurred with the resolution of my doubts to complete the
tranquillity of my mind.

Such, my son, was the vision which the prophet vouchsafed me, not for my sake
only, but for thine. Thou have sought felicity in temporal things, and
therefore thou art disappointed. Let not instruction be lost upon thee, as the
seal of Mahomet in the well of Aris: but go thy way, let thy flock clothe the
naked, and thy table feed the hungry; deliver the poor from appression, and let
thy conversation be above. Thus shall thou rejoice in hope, and look forward to
the end of life as the consummation of thy felicity.

Almet, in whose breast devotion kindled as he spoke returned into the temple,
and the stranger departed in peace.

VIRTUE AND VICE.
AN eminent citizen, who had lived in good fashion and credit, was, by a train
of accidents, and by an unavoidable perplexity in his affairs, reduced to a low
condition. There is a modesty usuly attending faultless poverty, which made him
rather choose to reduce his manner of living to his present circumstances, than
solicit his friends, in order to support the show of an estate, when the
substance was gone. His wife, who was a woman of sense and virtue, behaved
herself on this occasion with uncommon decency, and never appeared so amiable
in his eyes as now. Instead of upbraiding him with the ample fortune she had
bro't, or the many great offers she had refused for his sake, she redoubled all
the instances of her affection, while her husband was continually pouring out
his heart to her in complaints, that he had ruined the best of women in the
world. He sometimes came home at a time when she did not expect him, and
surprised her in tears; which she endeavored to conceal, and always put on an
air of cheerfulness to receive him. To less^n their expense, their eldest
daughter (whom I shall call Amanda) was sent into the country, to the house of
an honest farmer, who had married a servant of the family. This young woman was
apprehensive of the ruin which was approaching, and had privately engaged a
friend in the neighborhood to give her an account of what passed from time to
time (...) her father's affairs. Amanda was in the bloom of her youth and
beauty, when the lord of the manor, who often called in at the farmer's house
as he followed his country sports, fell passionately in love with her. He was a
man of great generosity, but from a loose education had contracted a hearty
aversion to marriage. He therefore entertained a desing upon Amanda's virtue,
which at present he thought fit to keep private. -- The innocent creature, who
never suspected his intentions, was pleased with his person, and having
observed his growing passion for her, hoped, by so advantageous a match, she
might quickly be in a capacity for supporting her impoverished relations. One
day as he called to see her, he found her in tears over a letter she had just
received from her friend, which gave an account that her father had lately been
stripped of every thing by an execution. The lover, who with some difficulty
found out the cause of her grief, took this occasion to make her a proposal. It
is impossible to express Amanda's confusion when she found his pretensions were
not honorable. She was now deserted of all her hopes, and had no power to
speak; but rushing from him in the utmost disturbance, locked herself up in her
chamber. He immediately dispatched a messenger to her father with the following
letter:

SIR,
I HAVE heard of your misfortune, and have offered your daughter, if she will
live with me, to settle on her four hundred pounds a year, and lay down the sum
for which you are now distressed. I will be so ingenuous, as to tell you that I
do not intend marriage; -- but if you are wise, you will use your authority
with her not to be too nice, when she has an opportunity of saving you and your
family, and of making herself happy.

I am, etc.


This letter came to the hands of Amanda's mother; she opened and read it with,
great surprise and concern. She did not think it proper to explain herself to
the messenger; -- but desiring him to call again the next morning, she wrote to
her daughter as follows:

"Dearest child,
YOUR father and I have just now received a letter from a gentleman who
pretends love to you, with a proposal that insults our misfortunes, and would
throw us to a lower degree of misery than any thing which is come upon us. How
could this barbarous man think that the tenderest of parents would be tempted
to supply their wants by giving up the best of their children to infamy and
ruin? It is a mean and cruel artifice to make this proposal at a time when he
thinks our necessities must compel us to any thing; but we will not eat the
bread of shame, and therefore we charge thee not to think of us, but to avoid
the snare which is laid for thy virtue. -- Beware of pitying us: it is not so
bad as you have perhaps been told. All things will yet be well, and I shall
write my child better news.

I have been interrupted. I know not how I was moved to say things would mend.
As I was going on I was startled by a noise of one that knocked at the door,
and had brought us an unexpected supply of a debt which has long been owing!
Oh! I will now tell thee all. It is some days I have lived almost without
support, having conveyed what little money I could raise to your poor father.
-- Thou will weep to think where he is, yet be assured he will ^^on be at
liberty. That cruel letter would have broke his heart, but I have concealed it
from him. I have no companion at present besides little Fanny, who stands
watching my looks as I write, and is crying for her sister; she says she is
sure you are not well, having discovered that my present trouble is about you.
But do not think I would thus repeat my sorrows to grieve thee. No, it is to
entreat thee not to make them insupportable, by adding what would be worse than
all. Let us bear cheerfully an affliction, which we have not brought on
ourselves, and remember there is a power who can better deliver us out of it
than by the loss of thy innocence. Heaven preserve my dear child.

Thy affectionate mother --


The messenger, notwithstanding he promised to deliver this letter to Amanda,
carried it first to his master, who, he imagined, would be glad to have an
opportunity of giving it into her hands himself. His master was impatient to
know the success of his proposal, and therefore broke open the letter privately
to see the contents. He was not a little moved at so true a picture of virtue
in distress; but at the same time was infinitely surprised to find his offers
rejected. However, he resolved not to suppress the letter, but carefully sealed
it up again, and carried it to Amanda. All his endeavors to see her were in
vain, till she was assured he brought a letter from her mother. He would not
part with it but upon condition that she would read it without leaving the
room. While she was perusing it, he fixed his eyes on her face with the deepest
attention; her concern gave a new softness to her beauty, and when she burst
into tears, he could no longer refrain from bearing a part in her sorrow, and
telling her, that he too had read the letter, and was resolved to make
reparation for having been the occasion of it. My reader will not be displeased
to see the second epistle which he now wrote to Amanda's mother.

MADAM,
"I AM full of shame, and will never forgive myself, if I have not your pardon
for what I lately wrote. It was far from my intention to add trouble to the
afflicted; nor could any thing but my being a stranger to you, have betrayed me
into a fault, for which, if I live, I shall endeavor to make you amends as a
son. You cannot be unhappy, while Amanda is your daughter: nor shall be, if any
thing can prevent it which is in the power of,

Madam, Your most obdient humble servant --.


This letter he sent by his steward, and soon after went up to town himself to
complete the generous act he had now resolved on. By his friendship and
assistance Amanda's father was quickly in a condition of retrieving his
perplexed affairs. To conclude, he married Amanda, and enjoyed the double
satisfaction of having restored a worthy family to their former prosperity, and
of making himself happy by an alliance to their virtues.

THE following letter is written with such an air of sincerity, and affords so
worthy an example to every person in the same circumstances, and under the same
temptation, that I cannot resist the pleasure of adding it to this collection.
It is from a young lady of small fortune ^o a gentleman who had made a
declartion of his passion for her: but the inequality of their fortunes made
him think he could not answer it to the world, if he pursued his designs by way
of marriage, and, therefore had made proposals of gaining her upon other terms.

SIR,
AFTER very much perplexity in myself, and revolving how to acquaint you with
my own sentiments, and expostulate with you concerning yours, I have chosen
this way; -- by which means I can be at once revealed to you, or, if you please
lie concealed. If I do not within a few days find the effect which I hope from
this, the whole affair shall be buried in oblivion. But, alas! what am I going
to do, when I am about to tell you that I love you? But after I have done so, I
am to assure you, that with all the passion which ever entered a tender heart,
I know I can banish you from my sight forever, when I am convinced that you
have no inclinations toward me but to my dishonor. But, alas! Sir why should
you sacrifice the real and essential happiness of life to the opinion of a
world, that moves upon no other foundation but professed error and prejudice?
You all can observe, that riches alone do not make you happy, and yet give up
every thing else when it stands in competition with riches. Since the world is
so bad that religion is left to us silly women, and you men act generally upon
principles of profit and pleasure, I will talk to you without arguing from any
thing but what may be most to your advantage, as a man of the world. And I will
lay before you the state of the case; -- supposing that you had it in your
power to make me your mistress or your wife, and hope to convince you that the
latter is more for your interest, and will contribute more to your pleasure.

We will suppose then the scene was laid, and you were now in expectation of
the approaching evening wherein I was to meet you, and be carried to what
convenient corner of the town you thought fit, to consummate all which your
want on imagination has promised you in the possession of one who is in the
bloom of youth, and in the reputation of innocence: you would soon have enough
of me, as I am sprightly, young, gay an ^airy. When fancy is sated, and finds
all the promises it made itself false, where is now the innocence which charmed
you? The first hour you are alone you will find that the pleasure of a
debauchee is only that of a destroyer? he blasts all the fruit he tastes; and
where the brute has been devouring, there is nothing left worthy the relish of
man. Reason resumes her place after imagination is cloyed; and I am, with the
utmost distress and confusion, to behold myself the cause of uneasy reflections
to you, to be visited by stealth, and dwell for the future with the two
companions, (the most unfit for each other in the world) solitude and guilt. --
I will not insist upon the shameful obscurity we should pass our time in, nor
run over the little short snatches of fresh air and free commerce which all
people must be satisfied with, whose actions will not bear examination, but
leave them to your reflections, who have seen much of that life of which I have
but a mere idea.

On the other hand, if you can be so good and generous as to make me your wife,
you may promise yourself all the obedience and tender^ess with which gratitude
can inspire a virtuous woman. Whatever gratifications you may promise yourself
from an agreeable person, whatever compliances from an easy temper, whatever
consolations from a sincere friendship, you may expect as the due of your
generosity. What at present in your ill view you promise yourself from me, will
be followed by distaste and satiety; but the transports of a virtuous love are
the least part of its happiness. The raptures of innocent passion are but like
lightning to the day, they rather interrupt than advance the pleasure of it.
How happy then is that life to be, where the highest pleasures of sense are but
the lowest parts of its felicity.

"Now am I to repeat to you the unnatural request of taking me in direct terms.
I know there stands between me and that happiness, the haughty daughter of a
man who can give you suitably to your fortune. But if you weigh the attendance
and behavior of her who comes to you in partnership of your fortune, and expect
an equivalent, with that of her who enters your house as honored and obliged
by that permission, whom of the two will you choose? You, perhaps, will think
fit to spend a day abroad in the common entertainments of men of sense and
fortune, she will think herself ill used in that absense, and contrive at home
an expense proportioned to the appearance which you make in the world. She is
in all things to have a regard to the fortune which she brought you, I to the
fortune to which you introduced me. The commerce between you two will eternally
have the air of a bargain, between us of a friendship; joy will ever enter into
the room with you, and kind wishes attend my benefactor when he leaves it. Ask
yourself, how would you be pleased to enjoy for ever the pleasure of having
laid an immediate obligation on a greatful mind? -- Such will be your case with
me. In the other marriage you will live in a constant comparison of benefits,
and never know the happiness of confering or receiving any.

"It may be you will, after all, act rather in the prudential way, according to
the sense of the ordinary world. I know not what I think or say, when that
melancholy reflection comes upon me: but shall only add more, that it is in
your power to make me your grateful wife, but never your abandoned mistress.

T."


I know not how to conclude this subject more affectingly than with the
following elegy, describing the sorrow of an ingenuous mind on the melancholy
event of a licentious amor. By this single example we may collect this
important truth, that true pleasure is only to be found in the paths of virtue,
and every deviation from it will be attended with pain and remorse, enless by
frequent repetition the mind becomes callous and totally lost to every humane,
tender, and virtuous sensation; and then the very pleasure we receive in the
practice of vice is in itself a punishment, because while that pleasure
continues there is no hope of leaving it.

WHY mourns my friend! why weeps his down cast eye?
That eye where mirth, where fancy used to shine,
Thy cheerful meads reprove that swelling sigh;
Spring never enameled fairer meads than thine.
Art thou not lodged in Fortune's worm embrace?
Were thou not formed by nature's partial care?
Blessed in thy song, and blessed in every grace
That wins the friend or that enchants the fair?
Damon, said he, thy partial praise restrain;
Not Damon's friendship can my peace restore;
Alas! his very praise awakes my pain,
And my poor wounded bosom bleeds the more.
For oh! that nature on my birth had frowned!
Or fortune fixed me to some lowly cell!
Then had my bosom 'scap'd this fatal wound,
Nor had I bid these vernal sweets farewell.
But led by Fortune's hand, her darling child,
My youth her vain licentious bliss admired;
In Fortune's train the siren Flattery smiled,
And rashly hallowed all her queen inspired.
Of folly studious, even of vices vain,
Ah vices gilded by the rich and gay!
I chased the guileless daughters of the plain,
Nor dropped the chase till Jessy was my prey.
Poor artless maid! to stain thy spotless name,
Expense and art, and toil, united strove;
To lure a breast that felt the purest flame;
Sustained by virtue, but betrayed by love.
Schooled in the science of love's mazy wiles,
I clothed each feature with affected scorn;
I spoke of jealous doubts, and fickle smiles,
And, feigning, left her anxious and forlorn.
Then while the fancied rage alarmed her care,
Warm to deny and zealous to disprove;
I bade my words the wonted softness wear,
And seized the minute of returning love.
To thee, my Damon, dare I paint the rest;
Will yet thy love a candid ear incline?
Assured that virtue, by misfortune pressed,
Feels not the sharpness of a pang like mine.
Nine envious moons matur'd her growing shame;
Ere while to flaunt it in the face of day:
When scorned of virtue, stigmatized by fame,
Low at my feet desponding Jessy lay.
"Henry, she said, by thy dear form sabdu'd,
See the sad relics of a nymph undone!
I find, I find this rising sob renewed:
I sigh in shades, and sicken at the sun.
Amid the dreary gloom of night I cry,
When will the morn's once pleasing scenes return?
Yet what can morn's returning ray supply,
But foes that triumph, or but friends that mourn!
Alas! no more that joyous morn appears
That led the tranquil hours of spotless fame;
For I have steeped a father's couch in tears,
And tinged a mother's glowing cheek with shame.
The vocal birds that raised their matin strain,
The sportive lambs, increase my pensive moan,
All seem to chase me from the cheerful plain,
And talk of truth and innocence alone.
If through the garden's flowery tribes I stray,
Where bloom the jasmines that could once allure,
Hope not to find delight in us, they say,
For we are spotless, Jessy; we are pure.
Ye flowers! that well reproach a nymph so frail,
Say, could ye with my virgin fame compare?
The brightest bud that scents the vernal gale,
Was not so fragrant, and was not so fair.
Now the grave old alarm the gentler young,
And all my fame's abhorred contagion flee;
Trembles each lip, and faulters every tongue,
That bids the morn propitious smile on me.
Thus for your sake I shun each human eye!
I bid the sweets of blooming youth adieu;
To die I languish, but I dread to die,
Lest my sad fate should nourish pangs for you.
Raise me from earth; the pains of want remove,
And let me silent seck some friendly shore,
There only banished from the form I love,
My weeping virtue shall relapse no more.
Be but my friend; I ask no dearer name;
Be such the need of some more artful fair;
Nor could it heel my peace, or chase my shame,
That pity gave, what love refused to share.
Force not my tongue to ask its scanty bread;
Nor hurl thy Jessy to the vulgar crew;
Not such the parent's board at which I fed!
Not such the precept from his lips I drew!
Happily, when age has silvered over my hair,
Malice may learn to scorn so mean a spoil;
Envy may slight a face no longer fair;
And pity welcome to my native soil."
She spoke -- nor was I born of savage race;
Nor could these hands a niggard boon assign;
Grateful she clasped me in a last embrace,
And vowed to waft her life in prayers for mine.
I saw her foot the lofty bark ascend;
I saw her breast with every passion heave;
I left her -- torn from every earthly friend;
Oh! my hard bosom, which could bear to leave.
Brief let me be; the fatal storm arose;
The billows raged; the pilot's art was vain;
Over the tall mast the circling surges close;
My Jessy -- floats upon the watery plain;
And -- see my youth's impetuous fires decay;
Seek not to stop reflection's bitter tear;
But warn the frolic, and instruct the gay,
From Jessy floating on her watery bier!
FRATERNAL AFFECTION.
IN the beginning of the sixteenth century, the Portugese carracks sailed from
Lisbon to Goa, a very great, rich, and flourishing colony of that nation in the
East Indies. There was no less than twelve hundred souls, mariners, passengers,
priests, and friars, on board one of these vessels. The beginning of their
voyage was prosperous; they had doubled the southern extremity of the great
continent of Africa, called the cape of Good Hope, and were steering their
course northeast, to the great continent of India, when some gentlemen on
board, who, having studied geography and navigation, (arts which reflect honor
on the possessors) found in the latitude in which they were then sailing a
large ridge of rocks laid down in the sea-charts. They no sooner made this
discovery, than they acquainted the captain of the ship with the affair,
desiring him to communicate the same to the pilot; -- which request he
immediately granted, recomended him to lie by in the night, and slacken sail by
day, until they should be past the danger. It is a custom always among the
portuguese absolutely to commit the failing part, or the navigation of the
vessel to the pilot, who is answerable with his head for the safe conduct or
carriage of the king's ships, or those belonging to private traders; and he is
under no manner of direction from the captain, who commands in every other
respect.

The pilot being one of those self-sufficient men who think every hint given
them from others in the way of their profession derogatory from their
understandings, took it as an affront to be taught his art, and instead of
complying with the captain's request, actaully crowded more sail than the
vessel had carried before. They had not sailed many hours, but just about the
dawn of day, a terrible disaster befell them, which would have been prevented if
they had lain by. The ship struck upon a rock. I leave to the reader's
imagination, what a scene of horror this dreadful accident must occasion among
twelve hundred persons, all in the same inevitable danger; beholding with
fearful astonishment, that instantaneous death which now stared them in the
face!

In this distress, the captain ordered the pinnace to be launched, into which
having tossed a small quantity of biscuit and some boxes of marmalade, he
jumped in himself with nineteen others, who with their swords, prevented the
coming in of any more, lest the boat should sink. In this condition they put
off into the great Indian ocean, without a compass to steer by, or fresh water
but what might happen to fall from the heavens, whose mercy alone could deliver
them. After they had rowed to and fro four days in this miserable condition,
the captain, who had been for some time very sick and weak, died; this added,
if possible, to their misery, for as they now fell into confusion, every one
would govern, and none would obey. This obliged them to elect one of their own
company to command them, whose orders they implicitly agreed to follow. This
person proposed to the company to draw lots, and cast every fourth man
overboard; as their small stock of provisions was so far spent, as not to be
able at a very short allowance to sustain life above three days longer. -- They
were now nineteen persons in all: in this number were a friar and a carpenter,
both of whom they would exempt, as the one was useful to absolve and comfort
them in their last extremity, and the other to repair the pinnace in case of a
leak or other accident. The same compliment they paid to their new captain, he
being the odd man, and his life of much consequence. He refused their
indulgence a great while; but at last they obliged him to acquiesce, so that
there were four to die out of the sixteen remaining persons.

The three first, after having confessed and received absolution, submitted to
their fate. -- The fourth, whom fortune condemned, was a Portugese gentleman
that had a younger brother in the boat, who seeing him about to be thrown
overboard, most tenderly embraced him, and with tears in his eyes besought him
to let him die in his room, enforcing his arguments by telling him that he was
a married man, and had a wife and children at Goa, besides the care of three
sisters, who absolutely depended upon him; that as for himself, he was single,
and his life of no great importance: he therefore conjured him to suffer him to
supply his place. The elder brother, astonished and melting with this
generosity, replied, that since the divine Providence had appointed him to
suffer, it would be wicked and unjust to permit any other to die for him,
especially a brother, to whom he was so infinitely obliged. The younger,
persisting in his purpose, would take no denial: but throwing himself on his
knees, held his brother so fast, that the company could not disengage them.
Thus they disputed for a while, the elder brother bidding him be a father to
his children, and recommended his wife to his protection, and as he would
inherit his estate, to take care of their common sisters; but all he could say
could not make the young man desist. This was a scene of tenderness that must
fill every breast susceptible of generous impressions with pity. At last the
constancy of the elder yielded to the piety of the other. He acquiesced, and
suffered the gallant youth to supply his place, who being cast into the sea,
and a good swimmer, soon got to the stern of the pinnace, and laid hold of the
rudder with his right hand, which being perceived by one of the sailors, he cut
off the hand with his sword; then dropping into the sea, he presently caught
hold again with his left, which received the same fate by a second blow; thus
dismembered of both hands, he made a shift notwithstanding to keep himself
above water with his seer and two stumps, which he held bleeding upwards.

This moving spectacle so raised the pity of the whole company, that they cried
out, He i^ but one man, let us endeavor to save his life; and he was
accordingly taken into the boat, where he had his hands bound up as well as the
place and circumstances could permit. -- They rowed all that night and the next
morning: when the sun arose, as if heaven would reward the gallantry and piety
of this young man, they descried land, which proved to be the mountains
Mozambique, in Africa, nor far from a Portuguese colony. Thither they all safe
arrived, where they remained until the next ship for Lisbon passed by and
carried them to Goa.

At that city, Linschoton, a writer of good credit and esteem, assures us, that
he himself saw them land, supped with the two brothers that very night, beheld
the younger with his stumps, and had the story from both their mouths as well
as from the rest of the company.

CHASTITY.
CHIOMARA, the wife of Ortiagon, a Ganlish prince, was equally admirable for
her beauty and chastity. During the war between the Romans and the Gauls, A. R.
563, the latter were totally defeated on Mount Olympus. Chiomary, among many
other ladies, was taken prisoner, and committed to the care of a centurion, no
less passionate for money than women. He, at first, tried to gain her consent
to his in infamous desires; but not being able to prevail upon her, and subvert
her constancy, he thought he might employ force with a woman who misfortune had
reduced to slavery. Afterward, to make her amends for that treatment, he
offered to restore her liberty; but not without ransom. He agreed with her for
a certain sum, and to conceal this design from the Romans, he permited her to
send any one of the prisoners she should choose to her relations, and assigned
a place near the river where the lady should be exchanged for gold. By accident
there was one of her own slaves among the prisoners. Upon him she fixed: and
the centurion soon after carried her beyond the advanced posts, under cover of
a dark night. The next evening two of the relations of the princess came to the
place appointed, whither the centurion also carried his captive. When they
delivered him the Attic talent they had brought, which was the sum they had
agreed on, the lady, in her own language, ordered those who came to receive her
to draw their swords and kill the centurion, who was then amusing himself with
weighing the gold. Then, charmed with having revenged the injury done her
chastity, she took the head of the officer, which she had cut off with her own
hands and hiding it under her robe, went to her husband Ortiagon, who had
returned home after the defeat of his troops. As soon as she came into his
presence, she threw the centurion's head at his feet. He was strangely
surprised at such a sight; and asked her whose head it was, and what had
induced her to do an act so uncommon to her sex? With a face covered with a
sudden blush, and at the same time expressing her fierce indignation, she
declared the outrage which had been done her, and the revenge she had taken for
it.

During the rest of her life, she steadfastly retained the same attachment for
the purity of manners which constitutes the principal glory of the sex, and
nobly sustained the honor of so glorious, bold, and heroic an action.

THE IMPOSTERS.
By Don Manuel, Prince of Spain.
VULGAR errors maintain their ground, because men have not spirit enough to
detect them. It is common for us to praise or condemn against our own
conviction, and to adopt idle opinions, lest we appear to have less taste and
discernment than those who invented them. Imposture, however, has but its day,
and perhaps it may be a long one; but it must give way at last, and truth will
shine out with a redoubled luster.

Three sharpers, having found means to be introduced to a king, told him that
they could weave a brocade of exquisite workmanship, and of so rare a property,
that it would be invisible to any person who was either base born, dishonored
by his wife, or had been guilty of any villainy. The king desirous to possess
so great a rarity, gave them a kind reception, and allotted them a palace to
carry on the manufacture. He furnished them with money, gold, silver, silk and
all other materials. They fixed up their looms, and reported that they were all
day employed upon the web. After some time, one of them waited upon the king,
and acquainted him that the work was begun, and that the brocade would be the
most beautiful in the world, as his majesty might be convinced, if he would
condescend to come and see it alone. The king, to prove the reality of their
pretentio^s, instead of going himself, sent his chamberlain, but without
dropping any hint of the danger of an imposition. The chamberlain went: but
when the weavers told him the property of the brocade, he had not courage
enough to say that he did not see it, but told the king that the work went on,
and that the piece would be of unparalleled beauty. The king sent another
nobleman, who, from the same motive, made the same report. After that he sent
many others, who all declared they had seen the piece. At length the king went
himself, and upon entrance observed that their whole conversation turned upon
the success of their work; one saying, "here is a noble foliage!" another,
"what a grand design!" a third, "how beautiful is this color!" But as he saw
nothing all this time except the loom, and as he could not suspect the report
which had been brought him by so many courtiers without any variation, he was
struck to the heart, and began to doubt of the legitimacy of his own birth.
However, he thought it most prudent to express himself highly pleased with the
goodness and beauty of this master piece of art. At the end of three days, he
sent of his steward, who, that he might not lose his honor, praised the work
even more extravagantly than the king had done. -- This redoubled the king's
vexation; and he and all the courtiers remained in the utmost doubt and
perplexity; no one daring to confess that this famous piece was a non entity to
him.

In this state the affair continued, till upon occasion of a great festival,
some courtiers pressed his majesty to have robes made of this silk in honor of
the day. When the weavers came to the presence chamber, and were acquainted
with the king's purpose, they insisted that none could make up the brocade so
well as themselves, pretended that they had bro't it with them curiously
wrapped up, and busied themselve as if they were unfolding it. They also took
measure of his majesty, handled their scissors, and practiced all the motions
of persons busy in cutting out. On the festival day they returned, pretended
they brought the robe, made as if they were trying it on, and at length told
his majesty that it fitted him, and adorned him beyond imagination. The king,
credulous and confounded, walked down stairs, mounted his horse, and began the
solemn cavalcade, in which he showed himself to the people; who having heard
that he who could not see the brocade must be a villian, a bastard, or cuckold,
unanimosly declared, that they saw it, and extolled the magnificence of it. At
length a Moor, who belonged to the king's stables, could not help crying out,
"The king is in his shirt, the king is naked." The ice was now broke. The next
person to him said the same, and the confession of not seeing this imaginary
brocade, was soon made by every mouth; till at last the king himself and all
his courtiers, encouraged by the multitude, divested themselves of their fears,
and ventured to own the deception. Upon this orders were given to apprehend the
sharpers; but they had very wifely taken care of themselves, and made off with
the money, gold, silver, silk, and other valuables, with which the king had
supplied them. Thus many erroneous opinions prevail in the world, from the
dread of incuring the censure of singularity, though the singularity should be
ever so reasonable.

PRUDENCE.
IN the reign of king Charles the second there was a young lady, whom I shall
call Prudentia who was the reigning toast of that gallant age, and equally
admired by the men of pleasure and the men of wit; her soul was as lovely as
her person: with her beauty she was strictly modest, with her wit she was
discreet and good-natured. Among her numerous train of admirers, none seemed so
agreeable and deserving her esteem as the young lord Amiable, who, incapable of
any base designs, gave such assurances of his love, that Prudentia easily
surrendered her heart. Prudentia's aunt, who was her guardian, and loved her as
her own child, was pleased with a conquest which would so much contribute to
the honor and happiness of her niece; she readily consented to the match, and
the nuptials were celebrated with mutual joy. As this was a match not maid up
by treaty, but by free choice and inclination, they did not fall into that
modish coldness and complaisant indifference people of fashion are soon apt to
do. My lord was a man of u^^sual sweetness and affability of temper, which,
when joined to that of Prudentia's, must necessarily make him happy with his
wife; yet his easiness, and credulity of the generosity of some of his
companions had like to have lessened his domestic felicity, but the discretion
of Prudentia prevented it. My lord had contracted a most intimate acquaintance
with one Mr. Maskwell, a man of pleasing conversation, which served only to
conceal the tricking gamester and the designing pander. To render himself more
powerful with men of quality he made himself instrumental to their follies or
their vices. Though lord Amiable was not inclined to any of those vices
Maskwell was procurer of, yet this wretch had cunning enough to draw him into
all. With drinking, his health soon began to be impaired; with losses his
temper was ruffled; with wenching, that fondness and cordial love he used to
show to his lady, began to cease. Prudentia was not a little concerned at this
conduct: she too well knew all his vices; yet discreetly thought that any
violent opposition would but heighten the mischief: she took care to make home
as easy to him as possible: studious of obliging, she never disgusted him by
harsh reproaches and satirical reflections on his conduct; neither, though
careful to please him, did she run into an extreme of fondness; she was not
fond when she thought it would be disagreeable; for she knew that a wife
without discretion my make the tenderest endearments the most troublesome.
Prudentia was gay or fond as she found her lord in the temper to receive
either; and, without letting him know that she had information of his gaming
abroad, would propose a game of cards at home with such company as she thought
would most please him, and never forgot to include Mr. Maskwell.

Sometimes her proposal was accepted; and by that means she found out the
sharper, the pander, the flatterer, and the villain, in the silver-tongued Mr.
Maskwell.

It happened that Mrs. Thoughtless, a beautiful lady, who had married my lord's
brother, was extremely uneasy at being informed of her husband's keeping
company with women of the town, and in danger of being ruined by sharpers at
gaming: she came one day to my lord to complain of his brother's bad conduct
and falsehood to her bed: she cried, she raved, and threatened not to live a
moment with him longer. My lord did what he could to pacify her, but all in
vain; my lady succeeded better, who taking this opportunity to show my lord his
own foibles, thus addressed herself to her sister: "I fancy, dear sister, you
want a little discreet good humor to reclaim your husband; beauty and wit will
not avail without discretion; there is a passive kind of virtue nessary to show
him his folly, it must not be done with ill nature and constant reproaches on
his conduct, which I am afraid is your method. If my lord Amiable was guilty of
such follies, which I dare affirm he never will, I should myself act as I
advise you. You have beauty enough to please a husband, have therefore an equal
desire to do it: be the more studious of his humor as he is more faulty in his
conduct, and let your affability show his injustice in wronging you: the
mistresses the men visit exert all their little arts to please them, for gain
only, without honor, without conscience, and without love: why then should not
a virtuous woman show as great a desire to please her husband as as these
artful jilts do to please a gallant."

Mrs. Thoughtless was pleased with her advice: my lord approved of it and was
secretly touched to the soul for his transgressions against so incomparable a
wife, who had acted what she spoke, and had more personal charms than the woman
his false friend had introduced him to. When he had recollected himself, he
proposed that his sister should bring her husband to dinner the next day; and
that his lady should repeat what she had already said, and he was assured that
it would have and excellent effect. It was agreed on; but with this discreet
caution of Lady Amiable, that her discourse should be directed to my lord, to
take off any suspicion that it was intended for Mr. Thoughtless. The next day
they met, and my Lord Amiable saw himself prudently attacked by his lady for
his real faults, while she seemed only to take them for imaginary ones. To what
she had said before, she added some reflections on the ill choice men of
quality make of their acquaintance, among whom are the merry, laughing
buffoons, who lead them into all the vices of the age, under the false preteuce
of friendship; at which words, looked at her lord in the most tender manner,
she concluded, "These, my lord, are wretched friends, who lead you into such
evil; on the contrary, the friendship between man and wife is cemented by
virtue, love, and interest, and cannot be dissolved without destroying the
happiness of both. Let not then, my lord, any false friends deceive you to your
ruin. I desire a continuance (...) your love only so long as I continue to
deserve it." At these last words, my lord, overcome with the gentle reproach,
flung himself about her neck, and amidst a thousand kisses, promised mutual
love. These transports were followed by the like in my lady's brother and wife,
who owned himself a convert to virtue and matrimonial affection.

Thus what neither beauty nor wit could effect, discretion did: their lives
afterward were prosperous, and their deaths happy: Good Humor only teaches
charms to last,
Still makes new conquests and improves the last.
Love, raised on beauty, will like that decay;
Our hearts may bear its slender chains a day,
As flowery bands in wo^tonness are worn,
A morning's pleasure, and at evening torn;
This binds in ties more easy and more strong
The willing heart, and only holds it long --
POPE.

CONSTANCY.
SIR William Askew, of Kelsay, in Lincolnshire, was blessed with several
daughters. His second, name Anne, had received a genteel education; which, with
an agreeable person, and good understanding, rendered her a very proper person
to be at the head of a family. -- Her father, regardless of his daughter's
inclination and happiness, obliged her to marry a gentleman who had nothing to
recommend him but his fortune, and who was a most bigoted papist. No sooner was
he convinced of his wife's regard for the doctrines of the reformation from
popery, than, by the instigation of the priests, he violently drove her from
his house, though she had borne him two children, and her conduct was
unexceptionable. -- Abandoned by her husband, she came up to London, in order
to procure a divorce, and to make herself known to that part of the court who
either professed, or were favorers of protestantism: but, as Henry VIII, with
consent of parliament, had just enacted the law of the six articles, commonly
called the bloody statute, she was cruelly betrayed by her own husband; and
upon his information, taken into custody, and examined concerning her faith.
The act above mentioned denounced death to all those who should deny the
doctrine of transubstantiation; or, that the bread and wine made use of in the
sacrament was not converted, after consecration, into the real body and blood
of Christ; or maintain the necessity of receiving the sacrament in both kinds;
or affirm, that it was lawful for priests to marry; that the vows of celibacy
might be broken; that private masses were of no avail; -- that auricular
confession to a priest was not necessary to salvation. Upon these articles, she
was examined by the (...) a priest, the lord mayor of London, and the bishop's
chancellor; and to all their queries gave proper and pertinent answers; but not
being such as they approved, she was sent back to prison; where she remained
eleven days to ruminate alone on her alarming situation, and was denied the
small consolation of a friendly visit. -- The king's council being at Greenwich
she was once more examined by chancellor Wriothesley, Gardener, bishop of
Winchester, Dr. Cox, and Dr. Robinson; but not being able to convince her of
her supposed errors, she was sent to the Tower. It was strongly suspected, that
Mrs. Askew was favored by some ladies of high rank; and that she carried on a
religious correspondence with the queen. -- So that the chancellor Wriothesley,
hoping that he might discover something that would afford matter of impeachment
against that princess, the earl of Hertford, or his countess, who all favored
the reformation, ordered her to be put to the rack: but her fortitude in
suffering, and her resolution not to betray her friends, was proof against that
diabolical invention. Not a groan, not a word could be extorted from her. The
chancellor, provoked with what he called her obstanacy, augmented her tortures
with his own hands, and with unheard of violence: her courage and constancy
were invincible; and these barbarians gained nothing by their cruelties, but
everlasting disgrace and infamy. As soon as she was taken from the rack she
fainted away; -- but being recovered, she was condemned, to, the flames. Her
bones were dislocated in such a manner, that they were forced to carry her in a
chair to the place of execution. While she was at the stake, letters were
brought her from the lord chancellor, offering her the king's pardon if she
would recant. But she refused to look at them; telling the messenger, that "she
came not thither to deny her lord and master." The same letters were also
tendered to three other persons, condemned to the same fate; and who, animated
by her example, refused to accept them. Whereupon the lord mayor commanded the
fire to be kindled; -- and, with savage ignorance, cried out Fiat justitia, Let
gustice take its course. The faggots being lighted, she commended her soul,
with the utmost composure, into the hands of her Maker; and, like the great
founder of the religion she professed expired, praying for her murderers, July
16, 1546, about the 25th year of her age.

TREACHERY.
ATHELBERT, the last king of the EastAngels, was of a very amiable temper, a
fine person and great virtues. The goodness of his nature, and the humility of
his mind, the regard he showed to religion in his actions, and justice in his
administration, rendered him the delight of his people, who wanted nothing to
complete their happiness but an heir to succeed to the crown in case of his
decease. -- He was young; had been bred to letters, and being fond of books,
had not been susceptible of any impression from beauty; perhaps, the reigning
passion of the age, inclining to celibacy, might have contributed, in some
measure to his insensibility. The universal desire and common good of his
people, the distraction and convulsions the kingdom would be exposed to for
want of an heir, were the topics used by the nobility and bishops, which
induced him to call a council to consider of the matter. It being their
unanimous opinion that it would be best for him to marry; Athelrida, the
daughter of Ossa, king of Mercia, a princess of great beauty and merit, was
immediately fixed on as a suitable match. The young king, not long after set
out with a splendid retinue, accompanied by count Oswald, the chief of his
council, and the person who had first named the lady to the king. Being arrived
on the borders of the Mercian territories, they waited for a safe conduct, and
the consent of the lady's father, who was then keeping his court at Hertford.
On the reception of this message a council was held to consider on the manner
in which Athelbert should be treated. The courtiers, who easily perceived the
intentions of their monarch, and thinking this a fine opportunity to annex the
hingdom of East Angles to that of Mercia, determined to murder Athelbert and
seize his dominions. The more effectually to accomplish this villainous design,
he was invited with the greatest show of friendship to a conference with Ossa,
under the pretense of settling the preliminaries of his marriage; and going
thither without any attendants, was seized in his way by Guimbert, and
privately beheaded. The young princess, shocked at her father's perfidious
cruelty, sent the earliest notice of this catastrophe to the nobility who
waited for the return of the king. Unable to revenge his death, and fearful of
the like fate, they immediately mounted their horses, and made the best way to
their own country. Athelbert's corpse and head were buried at first by Offa's
order in an obscure place on the banks of the Lugge, but were afterward
removed to Fernley, since called Hertford, the cathedral of which city is
dedicited to his honor.


