THE PRINCIPLES OF ELOQUENCE; ADAPTED TO THE PULPIT AND THE BAR. BY THE ABBE
MAURY.

THE FIRST AMERICAN EDITION.

Translated from the FRENCH; with additional Notes, BY JOHN NEAL LAKE, A. M.

Neque vero mi^i quidquam praestabilius videtur, quam posse dicendo tenere
hominum coetus, mentes allicere, voluntates impellere quo velit: unde autem
velit, deducere. CICERO. We must not judge so unfavorably of Eloquence, as to
reckon it only a frivolous art, that a declaimer uses to impose upon the weak
imagination of the multitude, and to serve his own ends. It is a very serious
art; designed to instruct people; suppress their passions and reform their
manners; to support the laws; direct public councils, and to make men good and
happy. FENELON. ALBANY: PRINTED BY LORING ANDREWS and Co. FOR THOMAS, ANDREWS
and PENNIMAN, Sold at their Bookstore, No. 45, State-Street, Albany; by I.
THOMAS, in Worcester; by THOMAS and ANDREWS, in Boston, and by THOMAS, ANDREWS
and BUTLER, in Baltimore. -- 1797.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND BEILBY, LORD BISHOP OF LONDON.
MY LORD,
WHATEVER relates to the subject of Eloquence in general, and to the Eloquence
of the Pulpit in particular has a peculiar claim to be dedicated to one, who,
in addition to his other eminent qualities, has exhibited, both from the Pulpit
and the Press, so distinguished a model of the excellence and commanding
influence of this art.

Should this translation, with the accompanying notes and illustrations,
chiefly derived from authors of celebrity, serve to promote in the English
reader, and particularly in students for the Pulpit or the Bar, an attention to
those principles which may conduce to their future usefulness in life, my
utmost wishes will be gratified.

I have the honor to be, my Lord, Your Lordship's most obedient, And most
humble Servant, JOHN NEAL LAKE.

PREFACE BY THE TRANSLATOR.
THE name of the Abbe MAURY has become so distinguished not only in France,
but also in this and other countries of Europe, that his literary productions
will, probably, attract a degree of attention corresponding with that, which
his public character and conduct have excited.

As a member of the Constituting National Assembly, it was his lot to step
forward at an epoch, which will for ever remain memorable in the annals of
France.

IN the midst of those contests and recriminations, which prevailed among the
different orders of which that assembly was composed, the Abbe MAURY stood
forth as the champion of the Church, and of Aristocracy. His eloquence and
abilities elevated him to distinguished importance amongst his brethren, while
his undaunted spirit acquired fresh energy from the number, the abilities, and
the attacks of his opponents: thus, though repeatedly foiled, yet like an
expiring hero in the field of battle, he was determined not to yield, but with
his latest breath.

His zeal and talents shone conspicuous in this crisis of public affairs; and
we are informed, that he has since received from the hands of his Holiness at
Rome, the reward of a strenuous defense of a tottering church.

BUT not only has the Senate borne witness to his abilities: the Press, also,
super-adds its testimony in various literary productions.

ELOQUENCE, the subject of that work, which is here presented in an English
dress, appears to have occupied his maturest tho'ts; and the justice and
enlargement of his ideas upon this subject mark the success, with which he has
pursued it.

To boast of his attaining to originality of thought on a subject, which has
been so frequently and so ably discussed, would, doubtless, be presumptuous: to
insinuate that he has written a complete system, would be to contradict his own
professions; but, to acknowledge, that he has thrown out a variety of useful
hints, and that in his manner of discussion, he is lively and interesting, is
no more than to pay him that tribute, to which his merit may justly lay claim.

THE following Dissertation is only one of several, which M. MAURY has given
to the public. There are also collected in one volume the Panegyrics of S.
LOUIS and of FENELON; Reflections on the Sermons of BOSSUET; and the Panegyric
of S. AUSTIN.

IN these he has discovered the talents of an Orator, particularly in that
species of the art styled Panegyric, to which the French have ever shown more
attachment than the English A late publication has since appeared, and been
attributed to the Abbe, consisting, chiefly, of speeches delivered by him in
the National Assembly.


IN the work now offered to the public, and which seems the most material for a
young speaker to peruse, the Abbe has prescribed those rules, and suggested
those observations, by which he appears to have been guided in his own
compositions.

IN confirmation of the good opinion, which the translator has conceived of M.
MAURY'S performance, he transcribes, with pleasure, the remarks of the MONTHLY
REVIEWERS on those discourses, of which the following translation constitutes
the first:

The first of these discourses relates to various parts of the Eloquence of the
Pulpit, and does great honor to the taste, judgment, and feelings of the
ingenious author. His reflections on CICERO, DEMOSTHENES, BOSSOET, FENELON,
TILLOTSON, MASSILLON, BOURDALOUE, SAURIN, BRIDAINE, etc. are sensible and
solid; and his precepts and rules are every way adapted to form the taste of a
young Orator to that affecting simplicity, which disdains all frivolous
ornaments, and has no other object in view than to touch and to persuade.

This discourse is followed by two Orations that were delivered before the
French Academy in honor of St. Louis, and Fenelon; another in honor of St.
Augustine, delivered in the General Assembly of the French Clergy; and a piece
entitled, Reflections on the Sermons of Bossuet last published." All these are
excellent in their kinds. Monthly Review, vol. lvii. p. 309.


THE testimony of an eminent literary character now living, were liberty
allowed to transcribe it, and mention his name, would add strength to the
foregoing observations.

THE Editor feels himself constrained to apologize for the part he has taken.
He began, at first, to peruse and translate Abbe MAURY'S performance on the
Eloquence of the Pulpit and the Bar, in the course of his private studies, and
merely with a view to his personal improvement.

SOME elucidations from English authors naturally occurred to his mind, which
he has, accordingly, annexed. But it was not till afterward, and in compliance
with the wish of those, whose judgment he respects, that he thought of
submitting the whole to public view. He cannot be insensible that imperfections
may discover themselves to the eye of rigid criticism; while, at the same time,
he would indulge a hope, that the time and pains employed will render this
translation of the Abbe's sentiments not wholly unacceptable to the young
student and reader, for whose use it is principally designed.

IT will appear, on perusal, that the Abbe MAURY'S predilection for French
Preachers and Orators gives a tincture of severity to his censures on the
English; and that, in one or two instances, his zeal for the Romish Church
embitters his language with regard to the conduct and writings of some
Protestants.

EVERY man has his partialities. For the prejudices of education, country,
connexions, great allowances must, and, by every liberal mind, will be made.
This is an age of free enquiry; and, in proportion as this spirit prevails, we
shall say with the poet,

-- Veniam petimus
Dabimusque vicissim.
FREE liberty must, therefore, be allowed to every reader to judge for himself
what degree of regard is to be paid to a few passages, wherein the Abbe gives
such an unbounded preference to some of his favorite French Catholic
Preachers, above those of the Protestant Church, and the English nation.

To the works of eloquent French writers recommended by M. MAURY, perhaps it
will be no discredit to add as a model of Pulpit-Eloquence, the sermons of the
late Rev. CHARLES CHAIS, Pastor of the French Church at the Hague. The Sermons
of the Rev. C. CHAIS were printed in 1790, in two volumes; for a character of
which, the reader is referred to the Appendix to the seventy-eighth volume of
the Monthly Review, and the Appendix to the third volume enlarged.


FOR English authors and preachers, the reader is referred to several of the
notes annexed to the following translation.

OF those who have written professedly on the subject of Eloquence, the student
may profitably peruse CICERO, QUINTILIAN, and LONGINUS among the ancients; and
such modern authors as WARD, GIBBON, FORDYCE, CAMPBELL, BLAIR, and POLWHELE; to
which may be added ROLLIN, and FENELON.

CONTENTS.
Sect. I. DESIGN of this discourse Page 1 Sect. II. Description of the
Eloquence of the Pulpit Page 2 Sect. III. Of the Means of persuading a large
Assembly Page 3 Sect. IV. Advantages of an Orator's studying himself Page 6
Sect. V. Of Rhetorical Composition Page 7 Sect. VI. Of the Plan of a Discourse
Page 10 Sect. VII. Of Plans drawn from the Text Page 15 Sect. VIII. Of the
Progression of the Plan Page 18 Sect. IX. Of the Injury Wit does to Eloquence
Page 20 Sect. X. Of the Exordium Page 24 Sect. XI. Of the Explication of the
Subject Page 27 Sect. XII. Of the Production of Ideas Page 29 Sect. XIII. Of
the Eloquence of the Bar Page 33 Sect. XIV. Of Cicero Page 39 Sect. XV. Of
Demosthenes Page 43 Sect. XVI. Of Boss^et Page 51 Sect. XVII. Of Interrogation
Page 58 Sect. XVIII. Of the Eloquence of Bridaine Page 63 Sect. XIX. Of the
Choice of Subjects Page 69 Sect. XX. Of Panegyrics Page 73 Sect. XXI. Of
Vincent de Paul Page 80 Sect. XXII. Of describing Characters Page 86 Sect.
XXIII. Of Compliments Page 88 Sect. XXIV. Of a direct Address, and Rhetorical
Dialogue Page 93 Sect. XXV. Of an Ardent Style Page 98 Sect. XXVI. Of Epithets
Page 103 Sect. XXVII. Of the Necessity of an Orator's refining his Style Page
105 Sect. XXVIII. Of a Proper Selection of Words Page 108 Sect. XXIX. Of
Metaphors Page 111 Sect. XXX. Of Technical Expressions Page 116 Sect. XXXI. Of
Dignity of Style Page 119 Sect. XXXII. Of Transitions Page 121 Sect. XXXIII. Of
a copious Style Page 124 Sect. XXXIV. Of Harmony of Style Page 128 Sect. XXXV.
Of Variety of Style Page 132 Sect. XXXVI. Of Perspicuity Page 133 Sect. XXXVII.
Of striking Passages Page 137 Sect. XXXVIII. Of common Places Page 139 Sect.
XXXIX. Of Oratorial Preparation Page 141 Sect. XL. Of Oratorial Precautions
Page 144 Sect. XLI. Of Hypothesis Page 146 Sect. XLII. Of Egotism of Style Page
148 Sect. XLIII. Of Bourdaloue Page 153 Sect. XLIV. Of Massilion Page 155 Sect.
XLV. Of Saurin Page 159 Sect. XLVI. Of English Eloquence: Richardson,
Bolingbroke, Fox, Boyle's Lecture Clarke Page 167 Sect. XLVII. Of Tillotson
Page 178 Sect. XLVIII. Of Barrow, Young, Maddox, etc. State of Pulpit Eloquence
among the English. Page 187 Sect. XLIX. Of M. Thomas, and the Revolution he
effected in the Style of Rhetorical Composition Page 192 Sect. L. Of the Use of
the Holy Scriptures Page 195 Sect. LI. Of the Fathers of the Church Page 201
Sect. LII. Of Quotations from Profane Authors Page 206 Sect. LIII. Of the
Studies of a Preacher Page 208 Sect. LIVE. Of Pathos Page 211 Sect. LV. Of the
Pathos of Fenelon. Page 213 Sect. LVI. Of other pathetic Orators: Bourdaloue,
Flavian, Las Casas, Cheminais, Ken, Grosvenor, Stern, etc. Page 214 Sect.
LVII. Of the Peroration Page 219 Sect. LVIII. Of Memory Page 225 Sect. LIX. Of
the Action of an Orator Page 229 Sect. LX. Of Motives to excite the Emulation
of Christian Orators Page 236
THE PRINCIPLES OF ELOQUENCE.
SECTION I. Design of this Discourse.
IN presenting the public with this feeble production, I propose, with a just
diffidence of my own abilities, to lay before them some observations which have
occurred to me in the course of my reading, or oratorial compositions,
respecting the art of Eloquence, which it is the study of my life to cultivate.

THEY were written at first merely for my own private use. If I have sometimes
given a decided opinion, I entreat the reader to remember that I speak to him
with freedom yet without presumption, and that I myself am far from considering
the result of my observations as laying down rules of the art.

THE general idea which I form, at first view, of the eloquence of the pulpit
is this.

SECTION II. A Description of the Eloquence of the Pulpit.
A MAN of sensibility discovers his friend about to take a step contrary to his
interest or duty. He is desirous of opposing it, but he is afraid of repelling
confidence by a hasty contradiction. He gently insinuates himself into his
mind. He does not, at first, oppose. He enquires. He is not regarded. He
requires only to be heard, and instantly he states his reasons, and offers
convincing arguments with modest diffidence. -- No answer is returned. He then
complains, not of obstinacy, but of silence. He meets all objections and
refutes them. Animated by the tender zeal of friendship, he is far from
attempting to shine by his wit, or to dishearten by his reproaches. He speaks
only the language of affection. At length assured of having arrested the
attention of his friend, he uncovers the precipice under his feet, and shows
him all its depth, in order to alarm his imagination, that weakest, and yet
most predominant of our faculties.

HE thus succeeds in moving him. He now descends to entreaty, and gives an
unrestrained vent to his sighs and tears. -- The work is done; the heart
yields, and his friend is fully persuaded. They both embrace; and it is to the
eloquence of friendship that reason and virtue are indebted for the honor of
victory.

CHRISTIAN ORATORS! behold your model. Let that compassionate man who should be
affected with sympathetic tenderness in order to convince, be you; and that
friend who should be moved in order to be undeceived, be your auditory.

SECTION III. Of the Means of persuading a large Assembly.
IT is only necessary, in fact, for the Orator to keep one man in view amidst
the multitude that surrounds him; and, excepting those enumerations which
require some variety in order to paint the passions, conditions, and
characters, he ought merely, while composing, to address himself to that one
man, whose mistakes he laments, and whose foibles he discovers. This man is, to
him, as the genius of Socrates LACTANTIUS observes ( de origin erroris ii.
14.) that "SOCRATES affirmed that there was a demon or tutelar angel constantly
near him, which had kept him company from a child, and by whose beck and
instruction he guided his life." -- See a farther account in the life of
Socrates, New Biographical Dictionary, See, also, Universal History, vol. i.
page 103. and Turret. L^stit. Theolog vol. i. p. 616, 617.
standing continually at his side, and, by turns, interrogating him, or
answering his questions. This is he whom the Orator ought never to lose sight
of in writing, till he obtains a conquest over his prepossessions. The
arguments which will be sufficiently persuasive to overcome his opposition,
will equally control a large assembly. The very aspect of a large assembly,
engaged in some debate of moment, and attentive to the discourse of one man, is
sufficient to inspire that man with such elevation and warmth, as both gives
rise to strong expressions, and gives them propriety. Passion easily rises in a
great Assembly, where the movements are communicated by mutual sympathy between
the Orator and the Audience. BLAIR'S Lectures, vol. ii. p. 54, 4to.


THE Orator will derive farther advantages from a numerous concourse of people,
where all the impressions made at the time will convey the finest triumphs of
the art, by forming a species of action and re-action between the auditory and
the spe^^^^^. It is in this sense that Cicero is right in saying that no man
can be eloquent without a multitude; to hear him Orator sine multitudine
audiente eloquens esse non potest, Brutus 338.
The Auditor came to hear a discourse: -- the Orator attacks him; accuses him;
makes him abashed; addresses him, at one time, as his confident, at another, as
his mediator, or his judge. See with what address he unveils his most concealed
passions; with what penetration he shows him his most intimate thoughts: with
what energy he annihilates his best framed excuses! -- The culprit repents.
Profound attention, consternation, confusion, remorse, all announce that the
orator has penetrated, in his retired meditations, into the recesses of the
heart. Then, provided no ill timed sally of wit follow to blunt the strokes of
Christian eloquence, there may be in the church two thousand Auditors, yet
there will be but one thought, but one opinion: and all those individuals
united form that ideal man whom the Orator had in view while composing his
discourse.

SECTION IV. Advantages of an Orator's studying himself.
BUT, you may ask, where is this ideal man, composed of so many different
traits, to be found, unless we describe some chimerical being? Where shall we
find a phantom like this, singular but not outre, in which every individual may
recognize himself, although it resembles not any one? Where shall we find him?
-- In your own heart. -- Often retire there. Survey all its recesses. There,
you may trace both the pleas for those passions which you will have to combat,
and the source of those false reasonings which you must point out. To be
eloquent, we must enter within ourselves. The first productions of a young
Orator are generally too far fetched. His mind, always on the stretch, is
making continual efforts, without his ever venturing to commit himself to the
simplicity of nature, until experience teach him, that, to arrive at the
sublime, it is, in fact, less necessary to elevate his imagination, than to be
deeply impressed with his subject.

IF you have studied the sacred books; if you have observed men; if you have
attended to writers on morals who serve you instead of Historians; if you have
become familiar with the language of Orators; make trial of your Eloquence upon
yourself: become, so to speak, the Auditor of your own discourses; and thus, by
anticipating the effect which they ought to produce, you will easily deliniate
true characters; you will perceive, that, notwithstanding the shades of
difference which distinguish them, all men bear an interior resemblance to one
another, and that their vices have an uniformity, because they always proceed
either from weakness or interest. In a word, your descriptions will not be
indeterminate: and the more thoroughly you shall have examined what passes
within your own breast, with more ability will you unfold the hearts of others.

SECTION V. Of Rhetorical Composition.
THESE general principles are insufficient. Let us, then, pass on to
particulars, and apply the rules of art to the composition of a discourse.

"IT is an arduous undertaking," says the Roman Orator, to appear before a
numerous assembly which listens to our discussion of the most important
subjects, since there is scarcely any one who will not more nicely and rigidly
observe the faults than the beauties of our discourses; for whenever we speak
in public, judgment is pronounced upon us. Magnum quoddam est ^^us atque ^^nus
suscipere atque profiteri se esse, omnibus silentibus, (...) ^^^xi^^is de
(...), magno in co^ventu bominum audiendum. Adest enim fere (...) qui^ ^^utius
atque acrius vitia in dicente qua^ recta videat, quoties enim dicimus, toties
de nobis judicatur. Brutus. 27. 125. M. Maury's translation of the former part
of the above quotation is periphrastic rather than just. The English
translation is (...) the French, which is also followed in some other
quotations.




INDEED, besides the natural talents which Eloquence requires, and the want of
which application never supplies, every Orator, who wishes to give satisfaction
to his Auditory, must join to the instruction which he has derived from his
preparatory studies, an intimate knowledge of the subject which he proposes to
discuss. He must meditate on it for a considerable time in order to perceive
all its principles, and to discover all its relations. The foundation of all
that can be called Eloquence, is good sense and sol^^ thought. Let is be the
first study of pub-Speakers in addressing any popular Assembly, to be
previously masters of the business on which they are to speak; to be well
provided with matter and argument; and to rest upon these the chief stress.
This will always give to their discourse an air of manliness and strength,
which is a powerful argument of persuasion. Ornament, if they have genius for
it, will follow of course. BLAIR'S Lectures, vol. ii. p. 49.
. It is by this operation, purely intellectual, that we collect, according to
the expression of Cicero, "a forest of ideas and subjects, Sylus rerum as
s^^^^ntiarum comp^r^^^^ est. De Orat. 29.
," the accumulation of which excites in the Orator a certain eagerness to
write, or rather constrains him to deliver by himself the thoughts that occur
to his mind; and afterward renders his matter more copious, and his
composition more energetic and perfect. If, at such moments, he would avoid the
labor of the memory, he should write as fast as he composes.

WHEN the Orator has once collected the principal proofs, which are like the
materials of the building, he quickly makes himself master of his subject; he
already discerns the whole of the discourse through those detached ideas which
(...) and work, as soon as he directs them to one point.

THIS disposition costs the Orator little; for the discourse, says Fenelon, is
the proposition unfolded, and the proposition is an abstract of the discourse
Letter on Eloquence, addressed to the French Academy, p. 180, in Stevenson's
translation.


IN pointing out this method of study, it is my endeavor to conform to it,
while, in writing, the different desultory reflections which I have suggested
on the principles of Oratory, begin now, of their own accord, to arrange
themselves in to proper order.

Do you feel when composing, notwithstanding these precautions, the languor of
an exhausted imagination? -- Quit your retirement. -- Converse upon your
subject with an intelligent friend. By communicating to him your first
thoughts, you will thereby extend the circle of your ideas; and in such moments
of enthusiastic fervor, some fortunate strokes will escape you which you had
searched for in vain in the retirement of the closet.

SECTION VI. Of the Plan of the Discourse.
HAVE you thoroughly investigated the principles, and dived, if I may so speak,
to the bottom of your subject? It is here where art begins. It is time to fix
your plan.

THIS is generally the part which costs much labor, and which very much
influences the success of the discourse.

We may censure the method In all kinds of Public Speaking, nothing is of
greater consequence than a proper and (...). Though the method be not laid down
in form, no discourse, of any length, should be without method; that is, every
thing should be found in its proper place. Every one who speaks, will find it
of the greatest advantage to himself to have previously arranged his thoughts,
and classed under proper heads in his own mind, what he is to deliver. This
will assist his memory, and carry him through his discourse, without that
confusion to which one is every moment subject, who has fixed no distinct plan
of what he has to say. And with respect to hearers, order in the discourse is
absolutely necessary for making any proper impression. It adds both force and
light to what is said. It makes them accompany the Speaker easily and readily,
as he goes along; and makes them feel the full effect of every argument which
he employs.

In every sort of oration, a clear method is of the utmost consequence; but in
those embroiled and difficult cases which belong to the Bar, it is almost all
in all. Too much pains, therefore, cannot be taken in previously studying the
plan and method. If there be indistinctness and disorder there, we can have no
success in convincing; we leave the whole cause in darkness. BLAIR'S Lectures,
vol. ii. p. 53, 54, 83. See also the same author's judicious sentiments in
favor of division in sermons, p. 170.


of divisions as a fatal restraint on Eloquence; let us, nevertheless, adopt it
without fearing to diminish the energy of rhetorical movements, while it
directs them with greater exactness. Genius needs to be guided in its progress,
and the curb: which preserves it from wandering restrains, by salutary checks,
and renders it the greatest service. It is thus that genius becomes
strengthened and increased, when it proceeds under the guidance of reason and
judgment The following observations exactly correspond with the sentiment of
our Author: Nothing can contribute more toward bringing the powers of (...) to
their ultimate perfection, than a severe judgment equal in degree to the genius
possessed. For the greater are the strength and vivacity of the imagination
which gives birth to those ideas, the greater must be that wisdom and prudence
which are requisite to moderate the fire of imagination, and (...) its (...)
when it becomes too during. Reason ought to be stronger than genius, in order
to know how far enthusiasm may go. The judgment and prudence which should
belong to such a (...) for the improvement and balance of his genius, ought
themselves to be brought to their utmost perfection by the ministration of art,
without which nothing exact o^ regular can be produced. Reflections on
ARISTOTLE'S "Art of Poetry,. 16, 17. In order to render the pr^f^ctions of
genius regular and just, as well as elegant and ingenious, the discerning and
coercive power of judgment should mark and restrain the excursions of a wanton
imagination; in other words, the austerity of reason should blend itself with
the gaiety of the graces. The proper office of judgment in composition, is to
compare the ideas which imagination collects; to observe their agreement or
disagreement, their relations and resemblances; to point out such as are of a
homogeneous nature; to mark and reject such as are discordant; and finally, to
determine the truth and utility of the inventions or discoveries which are
produced by the power of the imagination. This faculty is, in all its
operations, cool, attentive, and considerate. It canvasses the design, ponders
the sentiments, examines their propriety and connection, and reviews the whole
composition with severe impartiality. Thus it appears to be in every respect a
proper counterbalance to the rambling and volatile power of imagination.

Essay on Genius, B. I. ^. 1. p. 8, 9.


THE hearer who knows not whither we are conducting him, soon wanders. The plan
is so necessary in order to fix his attention, that it remains no longer a
question whether the Orator ought to point it out to him.

IS this plan (as indispensably requisite to be composed with method as to be
heard with effect), ill conceived, obscure, and indeterminate? there will be in
the proofs an inevitable confusion, the subjects will not be clearly
distinguished, and the arguments, instead of affording each other a mutual
support, will interfere "A sermon," says Mo^s. CLAUDE, should clearly and
purely explain a text, make the sense easy to be comprehended, and place things
before the people's eyes so that they may be understood without difficulty.
This rule condemns embarrassment and obscurity, the most disagreeable thing in
the world in a pulpit. It ought to be remembered, that the greatest part of the
hearers are simple people, whose profit, however, must be aimed at in
preaching: but it is impossible to edify them, unless you be very clear. As to
learned hearers, it is certain, they will always prefer a clear before an
obscure sermon; for, first, they will consider the simple, nor will their
benevolence be content if the illiterate be not edified; and next, they will be
loath to be driven to the necessity of giving too great an attention, which they
cannot avoid, if the preacher be obscure. The minds of men whether learned or
ignorant, generally avoid pain; and the learned have fatigue enough, in the
study, without increasing it at church. ROBINSON'S translation of CLAUDS, on
the composition of a sermon, vol. 1. p. 11.


.

THE more you study your plan, the greater enlargement you give to your
subject. Statements which, at first, seemed sufficiently copious to embrace the
substance of a discourse in all its extent, scarcely form a subdivision fertile
enough when you are acquainted with the method of expanding your ideas.

FAR from a Christian Orator be those plans which dazzle by a sophistical
singularity, a far-fetched antithesis, or a subtle paradox; plans neither
sufficiently distinct to be retained, nor sufficiently important to be filled
up, and which only hold out vain and useless speculations; plans built either
upon undistinguishing epithets, which open no field for argument, or upon
pretenses more suited to an episode than to the division of a sermon. Let those
uniform and corresponding subdivisions between the two branches of a discourse
be especially discarded, which form a puerile contrast equally unworthy of an
art so noble, and a ministry so august.

AVOID such dazzling faults. Give me a plan simple and rational. Your proofs,
clear and distinct, will imprint themselves on my memory; and I shall render to
your Eloquence the best of all homages if I retain a lasting remembrance of
what I have heard; for the best sermon is that which the hearer most easily
recollects The judicious FENELON animadverts with a becoming severity, on the
preacher's perversion of these words, I have eaten ashes like bread. Psalm. cii.
9, who discovered his aim to be to dazzle his hearers and to amuse them with
points of w^it, or puzzling riddles, and he observes that instead of the
preacher's laying down quaint conceits for the subject of his discourse, he
ought in the division of a sermon to give such a one (...) naturally arises
from the subject itself, and may impart light and just order to the several
parts; such a division as may easily be remembered, and at the same time help
to connect and retain the whole; a division, in fine, that may show at once the
extent of the subject of all its parts. Dialogue concerning Eloquence, p. 4, 6,
7. The same writer also observe^ that there should be nothing refined or far
fetched in a Christian Orator's instructions; nor should he be setting up for
wit and delicacy of invention when he ought to speak with the utmost
seriousness and gravity, out of regard to the authority of the Holy Spirit
whose words he borrows. Ibid. p. 146.

"What" says he, could we think of a preacher who should, in the most affected
jingle of words, show sinners the divine judgment hanging over their heads, and
hell open under their feet? there is a decency to be observed in our language
as in our clothes. A disconsolate widow does not mourn in fringes, ribbons and
embroidery; and an apostolical minister ought not to preach the word of God in
a pompous style, full of affected ornaments (or quaint conceits.) The Pagans
would not have endured to see even a comedy so ill acted.

Letter to the French Academy, p. 176.


SECTION VII. Of Plans drawn from the Text.
EVERY Orator possessed of original ideas, without ever attempting to astonish,
will have new and striking plans, merely by attending to the scope of his own
genius.

PLANS are frequently singular and whimsical, especially when they are drawn
from the text. This irksome restraint scarcely ever succeeds in moral
discourses.

MASSILON has sketched out the division of his sermon on confession, where we
find so many beauties in detail, upon a passage in the Gospel. He takes for his
text that verse of St. John, John, chapter v. verse 3.
There was a multitude of blind, halt, and withered. MASSILON compares the
sinners, who surround the confessionals French -- les tribunaux de la penitence.
to the sick people who were upon the side of the pool of Jerusalem; and he
shows the analogy of those corporeal infirmities with the most usual abuse
which renders confessions of no utility.

There were blind people; defect of knowledge in the examination. There were
halt; insincerity in the confession. There were impotent folk, withered; want
of sorrow in the repentance.

THIS application is doubtless ingenious; but it is too far fetched. The
excellent taste of MASSILON only yields this once to the temptation of drawing
a very artificial plan from the analysis of his text. Methinks the censure of
Doctor BLAIR applies to this quaint division of Massilon's discourse, when he
remarks, that the defects of most of the French sermons are these: from a mode
that prevails among them of taking their texts from the lesson of the day, the
connection of the text with the subject is often unnatural and forced; and their
applications of Scripture are fanciful rather than instructive." -- He farther
remarks, "that their method is stiff and cramped by their practice of dividing
their subject always either into three, or two, main points; and their
composition is in general too diffuse, and consists rather of a very few
thoughts spread out, and highly wrought up, than of a rich variety of
sentiments. Admitting, however, all these defects, it cannot be denied, that
their sermons are formed upon the idea of a persuasive, popular Oration; and
therefore, (he adds,) I am of opinion they may be read with benefit. BLAIR'S
Lectures, vol. ii. p. 119.


HE has made a happier use of the famous passage, It is finished, in his sermon
on the Passion. But this interpretation is not his own, it having been
previously unfolded in various monastic pieces.

IT appears to me that the method of adapting the text to the plan can hardly
ever be successfully made use of in instructions purely moral; and that it
succeeds much better in mysteries Fr. (...) les Mysteres. The Author probably
means here, the solemn services of the Church, such as feasts, fasts,
communions, etc.
, in funeral orations and panegyrics, where the text will not suit the
discourse unless it makes known the subject, and, at least indirectly,
comprehends the division.

IT is easy to find in the holy Scripture verses consonant to the principal
idea which we intend to express; and we are always pleased with the Orator for
those successful applications which, in some measure, render sacred the plan he
has chosen I must confess I always disliked a forced text. Have you not
observed that a preacher draws from a text whatever sermons he pleases? he
insensibly warps and bends his subject to make the text fit the sermon that he
has occasion to preach. This is frequently done, but I cannot approve of it.
Dialogues concerning Eloquence, p. 146.
.

SECTION VIII. Of the Progression of the Plan.
WHETHER it be a moral subject that is discussed, or one's talents be exercised
upon panegyrics or mysteries, it is always necessary to observe a specified
progression in the distribution of the plan, in order to impart an increasing
force to the points adduced, to give weight to the argument, and energy to the
rhetorical movements. It is as rare as it is difficult to render both parts of
a sermon equally excellent, because the same resources seldom present
themselves to the imagination of the Orator. The latter, however, ought to
excel the former. Eloquence always declines when it ceases to rise. It is
therefore to the second branch of the division that the most persuasive
arguments and pathetic sentiments ought to be reserved.

CICERO, whose plan is very distinct in all his Orations, although seldom
announced in the exordium, adopts a method very favorable to the advancement
of his proofs, which obliges him to be surpassing himself continually by fresh
efforts in proportion as he proceeds in the difficulties of his subject.

OPEN his Orations. He at once denies the fact which is opposed to him; and
afterward he proves, that, by taking its truth for granted, nothing could
thereby be concluded against his client.

I SHALL only quote here two striking examples of this excellent method.

In defending Archais who had been his preceptor, and of whom he always speaks
with the most lively gratitude, Cicero thus divides his Oration; I shall prove
that Archais is a Roman citizen; and that, if he were not, he would be very
deserving to be one.

THE plan of the Oration in favor of Milo is no less forcible. "Milo," says
he, has not slain Clodius; if he had slain him, he would have done well. The
mind of man cannot reason with more perspicuity and energy.

NOR are we to conclude that Cicero proceeds thus accidentally on some
particular occasions. In his "Oratorial divisions," in that charming dialogue
where this great man submits to an examination upon this art, by answering all
the questions which his son puts to him upon Eloquence, Cicero establishes, as
a fixed rule, this manner of dividing the discourse. He says. It is thus you
ought to reason; you must either deny the fact that meets you, or if you admit
it, you must prove that the consequences which your opponent has drawn do not
result from it Aut ^^a con^^^^endum est ut quod ob^^citur factum neges out
illud quod factum fa^^^re neges (...) vim habere, atqu^ id esse quod
adver^^rious criminetur. Parag. 29, 101.
. I am aware how seldom it is that we can follow this course in our pulpits,
where the subjects discussed are not always doubtful, but the more we imitate
this method, the nearer we shall arrive at perfection.

SECTION IX. Of the Injury Wit does to Eloquence.
TO all those rules which art furnishes for conducting the plan of a discourse,
we proceed to subjoin a general rule from which Orators, and especially
Christian Orators, ought never to swerve.

WHEN such begin their career, the zeal for the salvation of souls which
animates them, does not render them always unmindful of the glory which follows
great success. A blind desire to shine and to please is often at the expense of
that substantial honor which might be obtained, were they to give themselves
up to the pure emotions of piety which so well agree with the sensibility
necessary to Eloquence.

IT is unquestionably to be wished that he who devotes himself to the arduous
labors which preaching requires, should be wholly ambitious to render himself
useful to the cause of religion. To such, reputation can never be a sufficient
recompense: But if motives so pure have not sufficient sway in your breast,
calculate, at least, the advantages of self-love, and you may perceive how
inseparably connected these are with the success of your ministry.

IS it on your own account that you preach? Is it for you that religion
assembles her votaries in a temple? You ought not to indulge so presumptuous a
thought. However, I only consider you as an Orator. Tell me then; what is this
you call Eloquence? Is it the wretched trade of imitating that criminal,
mentioned by a poet in his satires, who balanced his crimes before his judges
with antitheses -- Crimi^a rasis
Librat in antithetis.
PERS. Sat. 1. l. 85, 86.
? Is it the puerile secret of forming jejune quibbles? of rounding periods? of
tormenting oneself by tedious studies in order to reduce sacred instruction
into a vain amusement? is this, then, the idea which you have conceived of that
divine art which disdains frivolous ornaments, which sways the most numerous
assemblies, and which bestows on a single man the most personal and majestic of
all sovereignties? Are you in quest of glory? -- You sly from it. Wit alone is
never sublime; and it is only by the vehemence of the passions that you can
become Eloquent Mr. HUME judiciously observes that productions which are merely
surprising, without being natural, can never give any lasting entertainment to
the mind.... Too much ornament is a fault in every kind of production. Uncommon
expressions, strong flashes of wit, pointed similies, and epigrammatic turns,
especially when they recur too frequently, are a disfigurement rather than any
embellishment of discourse. As the eye, in surveying a Gothic building, is
distracted by the multiplicity of ornaments, and loses the whole by its minute
attention to the parts; so the mind in perusing a work overstocked with wit, is
fatigued and disgusted with the constant endeavor to shine and surprise. This
is the case where a writer overabounds in wit, even though that wit, in itself,
should be just and agreeable. But it commonly happens to such writers, that
they seek for their favorite ornaments, even where the subject affords them
not; and by that means have twenty insipid conceits for one thought which is
really beautiful. HUME'S Essays, (...) p. 240, 241. I like none of those witty
turns which have nothing in them that is either solid, natural or affecting,
and which tend neither to convince, nor paint, nor persuade. All such tinsel
wit (as that of Isocrates) must appear still more ridiculous when it is applied
to grave and serious matters. You ask, will you then allow of no antitheses?
Yes, when the things we speak of are naturally opposite one to another, it may
be proper enough to show their opposition. Such antitheses are just, and have a
folic beauty, and a right application of them is often the most easy and
concise manner of explaining things; but it is extremely childish to use
artificial turns and windings to make words cla^^^ and play one against
another. At first, this may happen to dazzle those who have no taste; but they
soon grow weary of such a silly affectation. It looks very strange and awkward
in a preacher to set up for wit and delicacy of invention, when he ought to
speak with the utmost seriousness and gravity; out of regard to the authority
of the Holy Spirit whose words he borrows. FENELON'S Dialogues concerning
Eloquence, dial. ii. p. 96, and dial. iii. p. 146.

To form a just notion of TULLY'S eloquence, we must observe the harangues he
made in his more advanced age. Then, the experience he had in the weightiest
affairs, the love of liberty, and the fear of those calamities that hung-over
his head, made him display the utmost efforts of his eloquence. When he
endeavored to support and revive expiring liberty, and to animate the
commonwealth against Antony his enemy, you do not see him use points of wit and
quaint antitheses: he is then truly eloquent. Every thing seems artless, as it
ought to be when one is vehement; with a negligent air he delivers the most
natural and affecting sentiments, and says every thing that can move and
animate the passions. Ibid, dial. ii. p. 54.

POPE justly observes,
"True wit is nature to advantage dressed,
"What often was thought, but never so well expressed;
"Something, whose truth convinced at sight we find,
"That gives us back the image of our mind.
"As shades more sweetly recommend the light,
"So modest plainness sets off sprightly wit,
"For works may have more wit than does them good,
"As bodies perish through excess of blood."
Essay on Criticism, l. 300. The judicious FENELON also remarks, from S^.
AUSTIN, that in the apostle PAUL wisdom did not seek after the beauty of
language, but that the beauties of language offered themselves, and attended
his wisdom. Dialogues concerning Eloquence, dial. iii. p. 106.


.

RECKON up all the illustrious Orators. Will you find among them conceited,
subtle, or epigrammatic writers? No; these immortal men confined their attempts
to affect and persuade; and their having been always simple is that which will
always render them great. -- How is this? you wish to proceed in their
footsteps, and you stoop to the degrading pretensions of a Rhetorician? And you
appear in the form of a mendicant soliciting commendations before those very
men who ought to tremble at your feet! Recover from this ignominy. Be eloquent
by real, in^^ead of being a more declaimer through vanity. And be assured that
the most certain method of preaching well for yourself, is to preach usefully
to others.

SECTION X. Of the Exordium.
WIT pleases in an epigram or a song, but it never produces great effects in a
numerous assembly. True Eloquence proscribes all those thoughts which are too
refined or far-fetched to strike the people; for, indeed, what else is it than
a brilliant stroke affecting and enlivening a multitude, which, at first view,
merely presents to the Orator in extended and motionless heap, and which so far
from participating the sensations of him who speaks, scarcely grants him a cold
and strict attention?

THE beginning of a discourse ought to be simple and modest, in order to
conciliate to the preacher the good will of his auditory. The Exordium,
nevertheless, deserves to be studied with the greatest care. It is proper to
confine oneself in this part to the unfolding of a single idea which may
include the whole extent of the subject. It is here where indications of the
plan should be quickly made known; where the leading aim of the discourse
should be pointed out without filling up too much room; where lucid principles
should discover the deep reflection of the Orator who is capable of obtaining,
at once, a commanding influence, over all his hearers The first quality of an
Exordium is brevity. This, however, has a proper measure, for as it ought not
to be excessively long, so neither should it be too short, the middle way is
best. If the Exordium were too short, it would oblige the hearer to enter too
soon into the matter without preparation enough; and excessive length would
weary him; for it is with an auditor, as with a men who visits a palace, he
does not like to stay too long in the court, or first avenues, he would only
view them transiently without stopping, and proceed as soon as possible to
gratify his principal curiosity. ROBINSON'S CLAUDE, vol. ii. p. 469. M. CLAUDE
farther observes that an Exordium should be clear, cool and grave; engaging and
agreeable; connected with the text or subject to be discussed; simple and
unadorned; not common, and sometimes figurative: his illustration of these
points well deserves perusal. Ibid, p. 469 -- 480.


.

SUCH is the art of BOSSUET, when, that he might strike the mind forcibly, he
says, at the beginning of his funeral Oration for Henrietta of England, that he
will in one single woe deplore all the calamities, and in one single death,
show the death and the emptiness of all human grandeur.

WHATEVER does not lead toward the principal points of a sermon is useless in
an Exordium. Let us, therefore, in this part of the discourse, avoid subtle
reflections, quotations, essays, common places, and even tropes and metaphors.

"WE must not then," says the Roman Orator, depart from the familiar sense of
words, lest our discourse appear prepared with too much labor. In exordienda
caus^^ servandum est ut ^sitata sit verborum cons^^^ud^, ut non appara^a oration
esse videatur. Ad Heronnium, lib. i. 7.
Let us proceed to our design by the shortest course. Every thing here ought to
be adapted to the subject, since, according to the expression of Cicero, "The
Exordium is only its porch." Aditus ad causam. Brutus.
Let us not imitate those prolix rhetoricians, who, instead of entering at once
on their subject, turn and turn again on all sides, leaving their hearers
uncertain of the matter which they are going to handle.

THE Exordium does not properly begin till the object and design of the
discourse are discovered.

SECTION XI. Of the Explication of the Subject.
NO sooner is the subject stated, than we must hasten to define it. This
precaution is to be regarded especially in treating on metaphysical subjects,
such as Providence, Truth, Conscience, etc. He is sure to wander in vague
speculations who neglects to be guided, at first, by clear ideas. It is
certainly hazardous to rise too much in those preparatory parts; and experience
every day teaches us to be distrustful of eloquent introductions.

IT is, nevertheless, necessary strongly to fix the attention of a wandering
congregation; and I do not see that we violate the rules of art in surprising
the hearer by an unexpected stroke which may draw him off from his own
thoughts, provided that this sudden emotion do not beguile his expectation, and
that the Orator always proceeds in the enlargement of his subject.

"I WANT discourses," says MONTAIGNE, which make an immediate attack upon the
strong hold of doubt; I desire good and solid arguments at first sight.
Montaigne is right. Nothing is more important and difficult than to become
masters of our own Auditory, and to enter upon our subject with a movement that
may affect them.

SENECA opens the first scene of his tragedy of Troy with a sublime soliloquy;
and three verses suffice for his immediately interesting every heart. We
behold, at a distance, the city of Troy consumed by the flames; and Hecuba, in
chains, alone upon the theater, pronounces, with a sigh, these eloquent
expressions, Ye princes who confide in your power, ye who rule over a numerous
court, ye who dread not the inconstant favor of the gods, and ye who indulge
yourselves in the soothing repose of prosperity, behold Hecuba, behold Troy!
Quicum^ve regno fidit, et magna potens,
(...) Au^^, n^c lev^^ m^^it Deos,
A^^m^m^^ re^us cr^dulum ^^^tis debit
M^ videat et te Troja!......

VIRGIL describes this affecting scene, when he says,
Vidi Hecubam, centumque (...), Friamumque per aras
Sanguine foedantem, quos ipse sacrave: at, ignes.
Aeneid, lib. ii. l. 501. And again,
Hic Hecuba, et natae nequicquam altaria circum,
Praecipites atra ceu tempestate columbae,
Condensae et divum amplexae simulachra tenebant.
L. 515, etc.
Who does not then retire within himself, and seriously reflect upon the
dangers of his fate? It is thus that a great Orator should engage the heart. It
is thus he should enrich the beginning of his discourse, provided that the
sequel deserve also to be heard after the Auditors have been elevated to such a
pitch.

SECTION XII. Of the Production of Ideas.
IT is this continual propagation of great ideas, by which they are mutually
enlivened; it is this art of incessantly advancing in composition that gives
strength to Eloquence, rapidity to discourse, and the whole interest of
dialogue to an uninterrupted succession of ideas, which, were they disjointed,
would produce no effect, but languish and die.

THE progression which imparts increasing strength to each period is the
natural representation of those transports of soul which should enliven
throughout the compositions of the Orator. Hence it follows, that an eloquent
writer can only be formed by a fertility and vastness of thought.

DETACHED phrases, superfluous passages, witty comparisons, unprofitable
definitions, the affectation of shining or surprising at every word the
extravagance of genius, these do not enrich but rather impoverish a writer as
often as they interrupt his progress. The thoughts with which good authors
embellish their discourses are plain, natural, and intelligible; they are
neither affected nor far fetched, and as it were, forced in, in order to make a
parade of wit, but always rise out of the subject to be treated of, from which
they seem so inseparable, that we cannot think the things could have been
otherwise expressed, at the same time that every one imagines he would express
them the same way. ROLLIN'S Belle Lettres, vol. ii. chap. iii. 2, Art. ii. p.
106. See also what ROLLIN says of Shining Thoughts, vol. ii. p. 126.

So FENELON tells us that there is much gained by losing all superfluous
ornaments, and confining ourselves to such beauties as are simple, easy, clear,
and seemingly negligent. Letter to the French Academy, p. 196.

See also KNOX'S judicious remarks, Essays, No. 15.

And BLAIR, Lect. xviii. p. 384.


LET, then, the Orator avoid, as most dangerous rocks, those ensnaring sallies
which would diminish the impetuosity of his ardour. Without pity on his
productions, and without ever regretting the apparent sacrifices which it will
cost him, let him, as he proceeds, retrench this heap of flourishes which
stifles his Eloquence instead of embellishing it, and which hurries him on
forcibly, rather than gracefully, toward his main design.

IF the hearer find himself continually where he was; if he discover the
enlargement, the return of the same ideas, or the playing upon words, he is no
more transported with the admiration of a vehement Orator; it is a florid
declaimer whom he hears without effect. He does not even hear him long. He
also, like the Orator, makes idle reflections on every word. He is continually
losing sight of the thread of the discourse amidst those digressions of the
Rhetorician who is aiming to shine while his subject languishes. At length,
tired with this redundancy of words, he feels his exhausted attention ready to
expire with every breath.

MISTAKEN man of genius! were thou acquainted with the true method of attaining
Eloquence, instead of disgusting thy hearer with thy insipid antitheses, his
attention would not be at liberty to be diverted. He would partake of your
emotions. He would become all that you mean to describe. He would imagine that
he himself could discover the plain and striking arguments which you laid
before him, and, in some measure, compose your discourse along with you. His
satisfaction would be at its height, as would be your glory. And you would find
that it is the delight of him who hears, which always ensures the triumph of
him who speaks. What formed the distinct character of Father MASSILLON'S
Eloquence was, that all his strokes aimed directly at the heart, so that what
was simply reason and proof in others, was feeling, in his mouth. He not only
convinced, he affected, moved, and melted his hearers. He did not confine
himself to discover only the injustice and unreasonableness of vice; he showed
it in such a hideous and hateful light, that you could no longer suffer
yourself to be under the empire of such a cruel tyrant; you could no longer
consider it in any other light than that of a sworn enemy of your felicity.
Entering into a holy indignation against yourself, you would appear to yourself
so blind, so unjust, so miserable, that you would see no other remedy than that
of falling into the arms of virtue. Sermons composed in this taste cannot (...)
of being heard with extreme attention; every one sees himself in the lively and
natural pictures in which the preacher paints the human heart, and discovers
its most secret springs of action. Every one imagines the discourse is
addressed to him, and thinks the Orator meant him only. Hence the remarkable
effects of his instructions: no body after hearing him stopped to praise, or
criticize his sermon. Each auditor retired in a pensive silence, with a
thoughtful air, downcast eyes, and composed countenance, carrying away the
arrow which the Christian Orator had fastened in his heart. These silent
suffrages exceed the loudest applauses. When Father Massillon had preached his
first advent at Versailles, Louis XIV. said these remarkable words to him,
Father, I have heard many fine Orators in my chapel, and have been much pleased
with them; but as for you, always when I have heard you, I have been very much
displeased with myself. A finished encomium, which does equal honor to the
taste and piety of the monarch, and the talents of the preacher. Preface to
MASSILLON'S Sermons. As a confirmation of this account of Massillon's
Eloquence, Voltaire tells us that when he was preaching that sermon entitled
"the small number of the elect," and which he considers as equal to any thing
of which either ancient or modern times can boast, toward the close of the
discourse the whole Assembly were moved; by a sort of involuntary motion they
started up from their seats; and such indications of surprise and acclamations
were manifested as disconcerted the Speaker, while they imparted an increased
effect to the discourse.

ENCYCLOPEDIE, Art. Eloquence.


"A GOOD judge of the art of Oratory," says CICERO, need not hear an Orator in
order to judge of his merits. He passes on; he observes the judges conversing
together -- restless on their seats -- frequently enquiring in the middle of a
pleading whether it be not time to close the trial and break up the court. This
is enough for him. He perceives at once that the cause is not pleaded by a man
of Eloquence who can command every mind as a musician can produce harmonious
strains by touching the strings of his instrument.

BUT if he perceive, as he passes on, the same judges attentive -- their heads
erect -- their looks engaged, and apparently struck with admiration of the
speaker, as a bird is charmed with the sweet sounds of music: if, above all, he
discover them most passionately affected by pity, by hatred, or by any strong
emotion of the heart; if, I say, as he passes on, he perceive these effects,
though he hear not a word of the Oration, he immediately concludes that a real
Orator is in this assembly, and that the work of Eloquence proceeds, or rather
is already accomplished. Itaque intelligens dicendi existimator non assidens et
attent^ audiens, sed uno adspectu et praeteriens de Oratore saepe judicat.
Videt oscitantem Judicem, loquentem cum altero, nonnunquam etiam circulantem,
mittentem ad boram; quaesitorem ut dimittat rogantem: intelligit Oratorem in e^
causa non adesse qui possit animis Judicum admovere orationem tanquam fidibus
manum. Idem si praeteriens adspexerit, ^rectos intuentes Judices, ut avem cantu
aliquo, sic illos viderit oratione quasi suspe^sos ^eneri; (...) id quod maxim
^p^^esi, misericordia, adio, motu animi aliquo perturbatos esse vehementius: ea
si prae^eriens, ut dixi, adspexerit, si nihil audierit, tamen Oratorem versari
in illo judicio, et oratorium fieri aut perfectum jam esse profect^ intelliget.


SECTION XIII. Of the Eloquence of the Bar.
THE BAR is an excellent school for imparting that rhetorical propagation to
ideas, which is one of the most difficult secrets in the art of Oratory.

I HAVE attended the Courts: I have heard some eloquent Advocates, and a great
number of those ^^ippan^ Orators, whom Cicero styles not Orators, but
practitioners of a great volubility of speech. Non Oratores, sed operarios
lingua celeri et exercitata. Brutus, 18, 83.


I ACKNOWLEDGE, however, that I have often admired Advocates indifferent enough
in other respects, who possessed, in the highest degree, the valuable talent of
arranging their proofs methodically, and of imparting progressive energy to the
reasoning. This kind of merit, as usual at the Bar as it is scarce every where
else, is also much less remarked there; whether it be reserved to gentlemen of
the profession to be thoroughly sensible of its value in the opening of a
cause; or whether it be that arguments becoming more gradually forcible in
juridical discussions, an adherence to the natural order is sufficient for the
pleader to state them to advantage. "The best advice," says M. ROLLIN, that can
be given to young people who are designed for the Bar, is to take for the model
of their style, the solid foundation of Demosthenes, embellished with the
graces of Cicero, so that the severity of the former may be softened by the
graces of the latter; and that the conciseness and vivacity of Demosthenes may
correct the luxuriancy, and perhaps the too loose way of writing with which
Cicero is reproached. ROLLIN'S Belle Lettres, vol. ii. chapter iii. 3, Art. ii. p.
262 -- 266. See the various useful remarks of the same author on "the Eloquence
of the Bar," vol. ii. chapter iii. 3, throughout.




THERE are, at this time, the most distinguished talents at the Bar: but there
has been a complaint for a long while, and justly, of a sad declension. Mr.
KNOX finds occasion to observe, that the Eloquence of the Bar is greatly
degenerated from that liberal oratory which immortalized Cicero. See his
strictures on this subject in his Liberal Education xx. p. (...).


THE Chancellor D'A^U^^^EAU, who, in discharging the functions of his public
employment, has acquired the greatest renown in this age, is universally
esteemed a man of extraordinary abilities; a profound lawyer; a correct and
elegant writer. But I am not aware that the public opinion allows him the same
superiority as an Orator, although he has handled many subjects worthy of the
highest strains of Eloquence. This illustrious magistrate was not as yet
possessed of all the strength of his genius when he employed himself on
subjects of a rhetorical nature; and it would be doing him injustice to judge
of his talents by a small number of discourses which were the earliest
productions of his youth.

ADVOCATES, in general, do not take sufficient pains with their causes. They
are more copious than vehement; and many of them sacrifice glory to vanity, by
lengthening out their pleadings, that they may engross more attention from a
public audience.

BUT it is not enough to show oneself; it is necessary to be held in admiration
when one wishes to become celebrated.

NOR ought it to be concealed, that literary men, who are accustomed to write
with more care, have a marked superiority over Advocates, whenever they assume
their profession.

Neither LE MAITRE, nor PATRU "PATRU was the first," says Voltaire, who
introduced correctness and purity of language in pleadings. He obtained the
reputation of a most exact speaker and excellent writer, and was esteemed so
perfectly knowing in grammar and his own language that all his decisions were
submitted to as oracles. Born 1604, died 1681. Biog. Dictionary.
occupy the first place at the French Bar. This honor is reserved for
PELISSON, PELISSON composed three famous pleadings on behalf of Fouquet, who
had been his patron, and Superintendant of the Finances, but afterward
disgraced. Voltaire says, they resemble those of the Roman Orator, the most of
any thing in the French language. They are like many of Cicero's Orations; a
mixture of judicial and state affairs, treated with an art void of ostentation,
and with all the ornaments of an affecting Eloquence. General Biog. Dict.
Pelisson was one of the finest geniuses of the seventeenth century. He excited
the admiration of all around him: his "Preface to the works of Sarrasia," is
reckoned a masterpiece in its way. "He was," says Voltaire, "an indifferent
poet, but a man of great eloquence and learning.

New Biog. Dict.
who has deserved immortal fame by composing his memoirs for the
superintendant Fouquet: but above all for ARNAUD, who has, himself, surpassed
all Advocates in "The apology for the English Catholics," accused of a
conspiracy against King Charles II. in 1678. Read that eloquent discussion.
What tears will not Arnaud draw from you upon the death of the virtuous
Viscount Stafford! An Orator, without attempting to be one, he does not
discover any design to affect you; but, by the simple recital of facts, merely
by logical arguments, by the depositions of the witnesses upon which the
Catholics were condemned, he irrefragably proves their innocence, he moves your
compassion for the fate of the unfortunate persons, whose misfortunes he
recounts, and he stamps with perpetual infamy the memory of the famous Oats,
who invented that absurd calumny. M. Maury expresses himself like a zealous
Catholic. It must, at the same time be owned, that much of the virulence of
party animosity between Protestants and Papists distinguished the transactions
of the reign of Charles II. The trial and conviction of the Jesuits and of
Stafford, with all the concomitant circumstances attending these events, have
given rise to a difference of opion respecting the innocence or guilt of that
unfortunate nobleman. -- Without deciding on the subject, the reader is
referred to Hume's History of England; also to Titus Oates's Narrative of the
Popish Plot, with other Tracts on the same subject, 1679.
Never was moral demonstration carried farther. Nor ought we to forget that in
this work Arnaud justifies the Jesuits whom he hated, and defends their cause
with a zeal as noble as affecting.

IT were doubtless to be wished, that this celebrated Arnaud had always
selected subjects equally proper for the display of his talents. He was only in
his twenty-eighth year when Des Carts consulted him on his "Physical
Meditations," and was astonished at the depth of his genius. He was born with
the spirit of a warrior. The works he composed were chiefly polemical. But he
deserves to be ranked amongst the most eloquent men of (...) was a most
profound grammarian, and that he equalled Ma^bra^^^ in metaphysics. Boileau
esteemed him as (...) or^^^e in poetry; he remained constantly attached to him
notwithstanding his long misfortunes; and afterward rendered homage (...) the
merit of this illustrious exile, in his epitaph for Bourdaloue, whom he styles,
"after Arnaud, the most illustrious man in France." After this brief sketch of
the Eloquence of French Advoc^^^ it will afford the reader no unpleasing
comparison if he turn (...) thoughts to the English Bar. The Editor confesses
that he sho^ deem it a reflection on the gentlemen of the learned profess^^^
were he to circumscribe the number of eloquent men among th^^ within as narrow
bounds as the Abbe does those of his nation. The English Bar has long continued
to be a school for Eloque^^ There, some of our greatest Statesmen and
Parliamentary O^^^ have been formed for eminence. While the names of Harc^^
Hardwicke, Blackstone, and others, are left on record, and (...) men who still
exist are mentioned, as Mansfield, Thurlow, (...) borough, Pit, Ers^ine, and
others, the reputation of the (...) Bar is secured, and the noblest patterns
are presented for the ^^^ation and laudable emulation of others of the same
learned (...) who are rising into public notice and estimation.




SECTION XIV. Of Cicero.
IT would be a vain attempt to excuse the distance so perceptible between the
Advocates of the French Bar, and the Orators of the Roman Senate, by suggesting
the different interests which were entrusted to them. Cicero, I know, has
sometimes had the glory of being styled "the Defender of the Republic:" But did
he not often undertake causes of less importance? and are not most of his
Orations devoted to the affairs of his fellow-citizens? This great man wanted
not an extraordinary Auditory in order to display all the riches of his genius.
He was more eloquent when he pleaded before the Roman people, than when he
spoke in the presence of Caesar.

HIS Oration for Ligarius is written in a charming style; but it is not
considered as the most eloquent of his works. Cicero requests the life of
Ligarius of an usurper, as if he were imploring the clemency of a lawful
sovereign. The commendations which he lavishes on Caesar in the ingenious
conclusion of his speech, seem to justify the reproaches which he received from
the stoic Brutus, after the death of the Dictator, in that famous letter where
Brutus accuses him of flattering Octavius, and which is justly ranked amongst
the chief productions of antiquity.

IT is in his Orations against Verres; against Cataline; in his second
Philippic; in the conclusions of all his speeches; it is in his treatises of
"the Orator," and "of illustrious Orators," that we find the Eloquence of
Cicero. All his writings ought to be the manual of Christian Orators.

THE rapidity with which he composed his immortal discourses, notwithstanding
the multiplicity and importance of the concerns which oppressed him, did not
prevent him from bestowing on his style a perfection so uncommon, that it is as
easy to understand his Orations, as it is difficult, and perhaps even
impossible to translate them well. His example evidently proves that our
Advocates should not justify their inattention to Elocution by the inevitable
avocations of their profession.

IT was during a very short interval, and amidst the agitation of a civil war,
that Cicero published his famous Orations against Marc Antony, which he called
his Philippics.

WE are at a loss to conceive how he could retain sufficient freedom of mind,
after the death of Caesar, and in the sixty-fourth and last year of his life,
to compose those fourteen discourses with which he finished his rhetorical
career.

BRUTUS, whose taste was as severe as were his morals, openly disapproved, in
the writings of the Roman Orator, of this inexhaustible exuberance, this
copiousness, always elegant and harmonious, which sometimes, perhaps, enervated
his vigor; and the told Cicero himself that his Eloquence wanted reins.
Posterity has thought with Brutus. Of CICERO, Abp. (...) the following remarks
in his Dialogues: he observes, that "Tully said those were very few complete
Orators who knew how to seize and captivate the heart;" and he (...) that even
this Orator was sometimes (...) respect, as the rhetorical flowers with which
he embellished his harangues were more calculated to amuse the fancy than to
touch the heart: he observes farther, that we should distinguish between (...)
orations which Tully composed in his youth, (and which have frequently this
defect, while they discover much of his moving and persuading (...)) (...)
those harangues which we made in his more advanced age, for the necessities of
the (...). In these, he displays the utmost efforts of his eloquence. He (...)
and (...). With a negligent air he delivers the most natural and affecting,
sentiments, and says every thing that can more and animate the passions.
FENELON'S Dialogue li. p. 52, 54. CICERO, as an Orato, is thus characterized by
Dr. BLAIR: In all his orations there is high art. He begins generally with a
regular exordium; and with much preparation and insinuation prepossesses the
hearers, and studies to gain their affections. His method is clear, and his
arguments are arranged with great propriety. His method is indeed more clear
than that of Demosthenes, and this is one advantage which he has over him: we
find every thing in its proper place. He never attempts to more till he has
endeavored to convince; and in moving, especially the softer passions, he is
very successful. No man that ever wrote, knew the power and force of words
better than Cicero. He rolls them along with the greatest beauty and pomp; and,
in the structure of his sentences, is curious and exact to the highest degree.
He is always full and flowing, never abrupt. He is a great amplifier of every
subject; magnificent, and in his sentiments, highly moral. Though his manner i^
on the whole, diffuse, yet it is often happily varied, and suited to the
subject. When a great public object abused his mind, and demanded indignation
and force, he departs considerably from that loose and declamatory manner to
which he inclines at other times, and becomes exceedingly cogent and
vehement.... This great Orator, however, is not without his defects. In most of
his orations there is too much art, even carried to the length of ostentation.
He seems often to aim at obtaining admiration, rather than at operating
conviction. Hence, on some occasions, he is shewy rather than solid; and
diffuse, where he ought to have been pressing. His sentences are, at all times,
round and sonorous; they cannot be accused of monotony, for they possess
variety of cadence; but from too great a study of magnificence, he is sometimes
deficient in strength. Though the services which he had performed to his
country were very considerable, yet he is too much his own panegyrist. Ancient
manners which imposed fewer restraints on the side of decorum, may, in some
degree, excuse, but cannot entirely justify his vanity.

BLAIR'S Lectures, vol. ii. p. 28.


IT is not, surely, to be ascribed to any principle of taste, but to the fear
of displeasing Augustus, who had shamefully sacrificed his benefactor Cicero,
that Virgil and Horace were cowardly enough never to make mention in their
poetry of this Orator, as celebrated in the present day as is Rome itself.
Virgil, especially, ought not to have forgotten him when celebrating the
privileges of the Roman people. But the assassin of Cicero was upon the throne;
and the courtly poet did not scruple to make a sacrifice to Augustus of one of
the most glorious monuments of his country, in yielding the palm of Eloquence
to the Orators of Greece, in preference to the Consul of Rome. Ora^u^^ (alii)
nielius causas, etc. The passage referred to by our Author, is to be found in
Aeneid, lib. vi. 1. 849, and stands thus in connection: Excudent alii spirantia
mollius era:
Credo equidem, vivos ducent de marmore vultus;
Orabunt causas melius, etc.
Tu regere imperio populos, Roman, memento.
Hae tibi erunt arts; pacisque imponere morem,
Parcere subjectis, et debellare superbos.
IN ENGLISH.

"Let others better mould the running mass
"Of metals, and inform the breathing brass,
"And soften into flesh a marble sace:
" Plead better at the Bar, etc.
"But Rome, it is thine alone with awful sway
"To rule mankind and make the world obey;
"Disposing peace and war thy own majestic way.
"To tame the proud, the fettered slave to free:
"These are imperial arts, and worthy thee!"
DRYDEN.


SECTION XV. Of Demosthenes.
NOTWITHSTANDING the decision of Virgil, learned men have not passed judgment
unanimously between Cicero and Demosthenes. These two Orators hold nearly an
equal rank. The opinions of learned men, have indeed been various, as M. Maury
intimates, respecting the intrinsic and relative merits of Cicero and
Demosthenes. Out of a variety which might be mentioned, the following
observations are selected: QUINTILIAN says, Quorum ego virtutes plerasque
arbitros similes, consilium, (...), praeparandi, probandi rationem; omnia
denique, quae sunt inventionis. In eloquendo est aliqua diversitas; de^fior
ille, (Demosthenes) hie (Cicero) (...) concludit (...); hic (...) acumine
^^^per; his frequenter et p^^dere; illi nihil ^^tr^^i p^test; ^uic nihil
adj^ei; curae plus in hoc; in illo naturae -- c^de^^^^ ve^o in hoc quidem; quod
ille et prior (...), et (...) par^e Ci^er^^^^, qu^ntue est, focit. ^am mihi
vide^^r (...). Tullius cum se totum ad imitationem G^^corum ^ontulisset,
effinxisse vim Demosthenes, copiam Pla^^^ (...) ^^^cratis.

QUINT. lib. x. c. 1. LONGINUS, also, draws the following comparison on this
subject, when he says to this effect: My dear Tereatianus, Cicero himself
differs not in any respect more than in what I have mentioned, from Demosthenes
Demosthenes is concisely, Cicero is diffusely, sublime. Demosthenes, who burns
and (...) down all before him with an irresistible violence, rapidity, strength
and fury, may be compared to an hurricane or a thunderbolt: but Cicero's
Eloquence, I apprehend, resembles some overwhelming conflagration, that spreads
and destroys all before it, retains an intense and inextinguishable (...),
breaks out in different forms in different places, and is nourished by
inexhaustible supplies of fuel.

FENELON (...) a (...) judgment with Quintilian: I will go farther, and (...)
not afraid to say that I think Demosthenes a greater Orator than Cicero. I
protest there is no man admires Cicero more than I do. He embellishes every
thing he handles. He is an honor to speech; and makes that happy use of words
that no on^ else could. He has a vast variety of wit. He is even ^one^se and
vehement when he (...) to be so against Cataline, V^^^e^, and (...). But we may
perceive some finery in his discourses. His art is wonderful; but still we
discern it. While he is concerned for the safety of the republic, he does not
forget that he is an Orator, nor does he let others forget it.

DEMOSTHENES (...) transported, and to have nothing in (...) naturally falls
into it without reflecting. He in above admiration. He uses speech, as a modest
man does his clothes, only to cover himself. He thunders; he lightens; he is
like a torrent that hurries every thing along with it. We cannot criticize him,
for he is master of our passions. We consider the things he says, and not his
words. We lose sight of him: we think of Philip only who usurps every thing. I
am charmed with these two Orators; but I confess that Tully's prodigious art
and magnificent Eloquence affect me less than the vehement simplicity of
Demosthenes.

FENELON'S Letter to the French Academy, iv. p. 182. -- See also the parallel
which this author draws between these two Orators, in his Dialogues of the
Dead, i. and ii. M. ROLLIN, remarking on this passage, says, These reflections
of the Abp. are extremely rational and judicious; and the closer we examine his
opinion, the more we find it conformable to good sense, right reason, and the
most exact rules of true rhetoric. But whoever would take upon him to prefer
Demosthenes' Orations to those of Cicero, ought, in my opinion, to possess
pretty near as much solidity, force, and elevation of mind, as Demosthenes must
have had to compose them. Whether it be owing to an old prepossession in favor
of an author we have constantly read from our tender years; or that we are
accustomed to a style which agrees more with our manners, and is more adapted
to our capacities, we cannot be persuaded to prefer the severe austerity of
Demosthenes to the insinuating softness of Cicero; and we choose to follow our
own inclination and taste for an author who is, in some measure, our friend and
acquaintance, rather than to declare, upon the credit of another, in favor of
one that is almost a stranger to us.

ROLLIN'S Belle Lettres, vol. ii. chapter iii.. 3. p. 261. Mr. HUME joins with
those critics who give the preference to Demosthenes. Speaking of the charms of
Cicero's Eloquence, he says, Some objections I own, notwithstanding his vast
success, may lie against some passages of the Roman Orator. He is too florid
and rhetorical; his figures are too striking and palpable; the divisions of his
discourse are drawn chiefly from the rules of the schools; and his wit disdains
not always the artifice even of pun, a rhyme, or jingle of words. The Grecian
addressed himself to an Audience much less refined than the Roman Senate or
Judges. The lowest vulgar of Athens were his sovereigns, and the arbiters of
his Eloquence. Yet is his manner more chaste and austere than that of the
other. Could it be copied, its success would be infallible over a modern
Assembly. It is rapid harmony, exactly adjusted to the sense: it is vehement
reasoning, without any appearance of art: it is disdain, anger, boldness,
freedom, involved in a continued stream of argument. And of all human
productions, the Orations of Demosthenes present to us the models which
approach the nearest to perfection.

HUME'S Essays, xii. vol. i. p. 120, 121. Mr. KNOX observes, that Many critics
have employed their talents in making comparisons between Demosthenes and
Tully. All of them agree in attributing to the former conciseness, and to the
latter diffusion: and, according to this judgment, they have not hesitated to
give the preference to the Athenian. The concise vehemence of Demosthenes
carried all before it by violence; the prolixity of Cicero gained ground by the
soft arts of insinuation. The effect of the former was sudden and irresistible;
that of the latter, comparatively weak and dilatory.

KNOX'S Essays, vol. i. No. 44. p. 204. Dr. BLAIR shall bring up the rear in
the list of those critics who have compared Cicero and Demosthenes. The
character of the latter is vigor and austerity; that of Cicero is gentleness
and insinuation. In the one, you find more manliness; in the other, more
ornament. The one is more harsh, but more spirited and cogent; the other more
agreeable, but withal, looser and weaker.

BLAIR'S Lectures, vol. ii. p. 30.


(...) has an unquestionable advantage over his rival in literature and
philosophy, but he has not wrested from him the scepter of Eloquence. He
himself regarded Demosthenes as his master. He praised him with all the
enthusiasm of the liveliest imagination. He translated his works; and, if his
translations had reached us, it is probable, that Cicero would have placed
himself forever below Demosthenes.

IT is the irrefragable force of the reasoning; it is the irresistible rapidity
of the rhetorical movements, which characterize the Eloquence of the Athenian
Orator. When he writes, it is to give strength, energy, and vehemence to his
thoughts. He speaks, not as an elegant writer who wishes to be admired, but as
a passionate man tormented by truth; as a citizen menaced with the greatest
misfortunes, and who can no longer contain the transports of his indignation
against the enemies of his country.

HE is the champion of Reason. He defends her with all the strength of his
genius: and the rostrum where he speaks becomes the place of combat. He at once
conquers his auditors, his adversaries, his judges. He does not seem to
endeavor to move you: hear him, however, and he shall cause you to weep upon
reflection. He overwhelms his fellow citizens with reproaches; but, then, these
are only the interpreters of their own remorse.

DOES he refute an argument? He does not discuss it. He proposes a single
question for the whole answer, and the objection no longer appears.

DOES he wish to stir up the Athenians against Philip? It is no more an Orator
who speaks: it is a General; it is a King; it is a Prophet; it is the Tutelar
Angel of his country. And when he threatens his fellow citizens with slavery,
we think that we hear from a distance the noise approaching of the rattling
chains which the tyrant is bringing them.

THE Philippics of Demosthenes, and his famous Oration "pro corona," in favor
of Ctesiphon, are justly admired; but I apprehend that the learned, and
Christian Orators read but little of his other works; his discourse on the
peace, his first and second Olynthiac, his Oration of Chersonesus, and many
other masterly productions truly worthy of his genius. In these too much
forgotten writings, and which seem to be of no service to the reputation of
Demosthenes, we might be able to find sufficient claims to justify his fame,
were all his other productions of Oratory unknown.

IT is enough to repeat here one single passage. --

THE enemies of Demosthenes, (certain writers without talents, Aeschines
excepted, who presumed to consider themselves as his rivals because they set
themselves up for Orators in Athens,) accused him of seeking, in his
discourses, rather his own reputation, than the public good. This great man,
abused for a long while without complaining, deigned at length to confute their
clamours in the presence of all the Athenian people. He thus addresses them in
his Oration of Chersonesus:

I AM so far from regarding all those contemptible Orators as citizens
deserving of their country, that, should any one say to me this moment, And
thou, Demosthenes, what services have thou rendered to the Republic? I would
neither, O Athenians, speak of the expenses I have incurred on behalf of my
fellow-citizens in the discharge of my employments, nor of the captives whom I
have redeemed, nor of the gifts which I have presented to the city, nor of all
the monuments which will one day testify my zeal for my country; but this is
the answer I should make: My conduct has always been the reverse of the maxims
of these Orators. I could, doubtless, have followed their example, and like
them, have flattered you. But I have always sacrificed my personal advantage,
my ambition, and even the desire of pleasing you. I have addressed you so as to
rank myself below other citizens, and to exalt you above the other people of
Greece. O Athenians! permit me now to bear this witness of myself. No; I never
indulged the expectation of attaining the first place among you, were I even to
make you the lowest of mankind.

IT is to those enemies, and to the sad necessity of crushing them with all the
weight of his genius and virtue, that Demosthenes is indebted for this sublime
passage, one of the finest strokes of his Eloquence.

IT would be very easy to multiply similar quotations, when speaking of this
Orator. But it, is not my design to prevent public speakers from reading him. I
invite them, on the contrary, to learn him by heart; and to transfuse his
energy, his vigor, and his coloring, into their own Eloquence. The Abp. of
Camhray gives us his sentim^nts of Demosthenes in the following terms:
Demosthenes moves, warms, and captivates the heart. He was too sensibly touched
with the interest of his country, to mind the little glittering fancies of
Isocrates. Every Oration of Demosthenes is a close chain of reasoning, that
represents the generous notions of a soul who di^^ ^i^^ any thought that is not
great. His discourses gradually increase in force by greater light and new
reasons, which are always illustrated by bold figu^es and lively images. One
cannot but see that he has the good of the republic entirely at heart, and that
nature itself speaks in all his tra^^ports; for his artful address is ^o
masterly that it never appears* Nothing ever equalled the force and vehemence
of his discourses. Dialogues concerning Eloquence, Dial. i. p. 20. M. ROLLI^
paints the character of this Orator by the following extract of the sentiments
of Quintilian and Dion. Halie^r^ass^s: Demosthenes, among Orators, is the
standard, which every one must necessarily follow who aspire^ to true
Eloquence. His ^tyle is so strong, so ^lose, and nervou^; it is every where so
just, so exa^^ly concise, that there is nothing too much or too little. (...)
^istinguishes the Eloquence of Demosthenes, is, the impotu^sity of the
expression, the choice of words, and the beauty of the disposition; which being
supported throughout, and accompanied with force and sweet^ess, keeps the
attention of the judges perpetually fixed. Aeschines, indeed, is bright and
solid; he enlarges and amplifies, but is often close; so that his style, which
at first seems only flowing and sweet, d^scovers itself upon a nearer view to
be v^hen^^^t and empha^ic, in which Demosthenes surp^^^es him.

M. Rollin then re^^^s us to Cicero's celebrated judgment of Demosthe^es.
(Orat. n. 23, et 104, et ep. ad Brut. n. 35,) and to the sent^m^nts of M. de
Toureil, after which he gives us his own, as follow: What is there, then, in
his Orations that is so admirable, and has forced away the universal and
unanimous applause of all ages?) Is Demosthenes an Orator who amuses himself
barely with tickling the ear, by the sound and harmony of periods; or does he
impose upon the mind by a florid style and snining thoughts? Such Eloquence
may, indeed, dazzle and charm, the moment we hear it; but the impression it
makes is of a short duration. What we admire in Demosthenes, is the plan, the
series, and the order and disposition of the Oration; it is the strength of the
proofs, the solidity of the argument^, the grandeur and nobleness of the
sentiments, and of the style; the vivicity of the turns and figures; in a word,
the wonderful art of representing the subjects he treats, in all their ^ustre,
and displaying them in all their strength. But that which distinguishes
Demosthenes still more, and in which no one has imitated him, is, that he
forgets-himself so entirely; is always so scrupulous in avoiding every thing
that might look like a show or parade of wit and genius; and so careful to make
the Auditor attend to the cause, and not to the Orator, that no exp^ession,
turn or thought, ever escape him, which are calculated merely to shine. This
reservedness, this moderation, in so fine a genius as Demosthenes, and in
topics so susceptible of graces and elegance, raises his merit to its highest
pitch, and is superior to all encomiums.

ROLLI^, v. ii. c. iii. 3, p. 251, 252. Dr. BLAIR makes the following remarks
on the style of Demosthenes: His Orations are strongly animated; and full of
the impetuosity and fire of public spirit. They proceed in a continued strain
of inductions, consequences, and demonstrations founded on sound reason. The
figures which he uses are never sought after; but always rise from the subject.
He employs them sparingly indeed; for splendor and ornament are not the
distinctions of this Orator's composition. It is an energy of thought peculiar
to himself, which forms his character, and sets him above all others. He
attends much more to things than to words. We ^arget the Orator, and think of
the business. He warms the mind, and impels to action. He has no parade and
ostentation; no methods of insinuation; no labored introductions; but is like
a man full of his subject, who, after preparing his audience by a sentence or
two for hearing plain truths, enters directly on business.... The style of
Demosthenes is strong and concise, though sometimes, it must not be dissembled,
harsh and abrupt, His words are very expressive; his arrangement is firm and
manly; and far from being unmusical. Negligent of lesser graces, he seems
rather to have aimed at that sublime which lies in sentiment. His action and
pronunciation are recorded to have been uncommonly vehement and ardent; which,
from the manner of his composition, we are naturally led to believe. The
character which one forms of him, from reading his works, is of the austere,
rather than the gentle kind. He is, on every occasion, grave, serious,
passionate; takes every thing on a high tone; never lets himself down, not
attempts any thing like pleasantry. If any fault can be found to his admirable
Eloquence, it is, that he sometimes borders on the hard and dry. He may also be
thought to want smoothness and grace. But these defects are far more than
compensated, by that admirable and masterly force of masculine Eloquence,
which, as it overpowered all who heard it, cannot, at this day, be read without
emotion.

BLAIR'S Lectures, vol. ii. p. 21, 22, 23.


SECTION XVI. Of Bossuet.
AT the very name of Demosthenes, my admiration reflects on the most eloquent
man of my nation, who bears the greatest refemblance to him of all his
competitors. Such, whom we may consider as one of those Orators, whom Cicero
styles "vehement, and, in some measure, tragical." Grandis, et ut ^ta dic^m,
tragicus Orator. Brutus, 203.
Such, who, transported with an empassioned Eloquence, rises superior to rules
and models, and advances the art to all the elevation of his peculiar
genius.... An Orat^^, who ascends to the height of heaven, whence he descends
with his expanded mind to sit upon the side of a tomb, and to pull down the
pride of Princes and Kings before God, who, after distinguishing them for a
moment upon earth, confounds them forever in the common dust. A Writer, who
frames for himself a language as new as his ideas; who imparts to his
expressions such a character of energy, that the reader supposes he hears him;
and gives to his style such a majesty of elocution, that the idiom he makes use
of seems to transform and improve itself under his pen.... An Apostle, who
instructs the world, whilst celebrating the most illustrious of his
contemporaries, making them become, even from their graves, the Preachers of
all ages; who, in bewail^ng the death of one single man, clearly shows the
vanity of mankind. An Orator, in fine, whose discourses, animated by a most
glowing and original genius, are classic works in Eloquence, which ought to be
perpetually studied; just as in the arts, one goes to Rome to form his taste by
the masterpieces of Raphael and Michael Angelo.

BEHOLD the French Demosthenes! Behold ^o^^uet!

WE may apply to his rhetorical writings the panegyric which Quintilian
ascribed to the Jupiter of Phidias, when he said, that this statue had
increased the religion of the people.

^OSSUET has been, in Europe, the real ^ormer of the Eloquence of the Pulpit.
Lingendes, who might have laid claim to a share of this honor, wrote his
sermons in Latin, and consequently, was not of more use than Cicero to the
preachers of the age of Louis XIV.

BOSSUET fixed the boundaries of the art in the funeral Oration: and it is a
singularity worthy of being remarked, that, at the age of fifty-eight, he
finished his rhetorical labors by his masterpiece, the panegyric of the great
Conde.

I SHALL say nothing here of his sermons. I have borne sufficient testimony
elsewhere The Abbe refers to a separate dissertation of his, entitled,
"Reflections sur les Sermons no^vea^x de M. Bossuet;" in which work he
introduces the highest eulogiums on his favorite author. As a specimen, the
reader is presented with the following comparison: As Bossuet formerly ^^ad
Homer, that he might be inflamed with the charming descriptions of this Poet;
with the same assurance should we read the sermons of Boss^et, when, after long
application to study, we have need to have our fatigued imagination reanimated.
P 321. Bishop ATTERBURY, during his exile in France, and in the course of his
epistolary correspondence with his friends in England, expresses his opinion of
Bossuet in the following strong terms: Of what I have read since I came on this
side of the water, I have conceived a much greater opinion of the Bishop of
Meaux, than I had while in England, and give him readily the preference of all
those writers of the Church of France, with which I am acquainted. He is an
universal genius, and manages every thing he takes in hand, like a master. Good
sense and sound reflections attend all he says; which is expressed in the most
agreeable and beautiful manner, without any of the pomp (...) p^int of false
Oratory. He has particularly the secret of knowing not only what to say, but
what not to say; the hardeft task even of the most exact and excellent writer!
I really prefer his funeral Orations to those of Flechier and Bourdaloue;
though I think he would have written still better, had he imitated them less;
for by that means, he now and then heightens his expression a little too much,
and becomes unnatural. Letter xiv. In another letter, he says, The more I read
of the Bishop of Meaux, the more I value him as a great and able writer, and
particularly for that talent of taking as many advantages of an adversary, and
giving him as few, as any man, I believe, that ever entered the lists of
controversy. There is a serio^s warmth in all he says, and ^is manner of saying
it is noble and moving.

S^^ ATTE^^URY'S Epistolary Correspondence, and G^^eral Diction^^y, vol. ii. p.
444, n. Dr. BLAIR passes the following encomium on Bossuet: The most nervous
and sublime of all the French Orators, is the famous Bishop of Meaux; in whose
Oraiso^s ^unebres, there i^ a very high degree of Oratory.

Vol. ii. p. ^3^.
to the lively admiration which they have excited in me; and I take pleasure in
renewing the declaration, because I love always to revive the homage which is
due to genius.

BEFORE him, Maillard, Menot, Corenus, Valladier, and a multitude of other
French Preachers, whose names, at this day, are obscure or ridiculous, had
disgraced the Eloquence of the Pulpit by a wretched style, a barbarous
erudition, a preposterous mytholo^y, low buffoonery, and, even sometimes, by
obscene details.

BOSSUET appeared. Accustomed to find himself engaged in controversy, he was,
perhaps, indebted to the critical observations of the Protestants, who narrowly
watched him, for that elovated strain, that strength of reasoning, that union
of Logic and Eloquence, which distinguished all his discourses.

Do you w^sh to know the revolution which he affected in the pulpit? Open the
writings of Bourdaloue, of whom he was the forerunner and model. Yes; Bossuet
never appears to me greater than when I read Bourdaloue, who, twenty years
afterward, entered this new road, where he had the skill to show himself an
original by imitating him, and in which he surpassed him in labor, without
being capable of equalling him in genius.

Do you wish to select in more remote times another object of comparison? Place
Bossuet among the most illustrious Orators of the fixteenth and seventeenth
centuries. Compare the discourse which he delivered on the day of the opening
of the famous Assembly of the Clergy in 1682, BOSSUET's ^^^mon, on this
occasion, was preached from Number xxiv. 5, "How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob,
and thy tabernacles, O Israel!" His great object was to inflame the assembly
with a ^^^ry ^eal for the e^tirpation of the Reformed Religion in France. To
this succeeded "Circular L^tt^^^ of the Assembly;" and in 1685, the famous
"Re^^^tation of the E^ict of Nan^z." S^^ ROBINSON'S Li^e of Claude, p. 42, etc.
with the sermon which the Bishop of Bitonto preached the third Sunday in
Advent, 1546, at the opening of the Council of Trent. You would imagine that
between the Bishop of Bitonto, and the Bishop of Meaux, there had elapsed an
interval of many ages. There is not, however, the difference of a century and a
half. But these two periods, so near to each other, are divided by all the
distance which removes the grossest barbarism from the most refined taste.

WE have in the edition of the Council of Trent, published at Louvaine in 1567,
all the sermons which were delivered in the different sessions, before that
Assembly. There are some funeral Orations, and more than thirty other
discourses, which were preached by the Bishops, by the Doctors of the Faculty
of Paris, or by the Monks. That of the Bishop of Bitonto is the only one which
has retained some celebrity; and as it is evidently the best of all, it is by
this piece that we are enabled to judge of the Eloquence of the sixteenth
century.

THIS sermon contains some beauties of Oratory; but it is written without
method, or taste, and sometimes presents an indecent mixture of sacred
scripture and heathen mythology.

THE Bishop of Bitonto says, That nature has given us two hands, two eyes, and
two feet, in order that man may be a council in epitome whilst making use of
all his members together; for one hand washes the other, and one foot sustains
the other. Quemadmod^^ et ipsa nature, ma^^^ ^obis geminas, geminosque ^ul^s,
pedes item geminos id^^ dedisse ^idetur, ^t quasi collect Concili^ (...) sou^er
^ga^, ^am et manus ma^^^^ l^vat, pes ped^m sustentat. Oration Ep. Bitont.
The name of this famed Bishop was CORNELIO MUSSO. He, was recko^ed one of the
greatest preachers of his age. Dresincourt mentions that he is called the
Chrysostom of the Italians. Bayle's Dictionary. See some account of his curious
sermon in Father PAUL's history of the Council of Trent, B. ii. p. 124, 125.
Also in JUR^^^'s history.




We might repeat twenty examples of this sort from the same discourse. But
there is need of one quotation only, in order to appreciate the merit of an
Orator, when we make it from Bossuet.

THE ever memorable sermon of the Bishop of Meaux upon "the unity of the
church" is not thus written.

SECTION XVII. Of Interrogation.
TIME, that destroyer of ill-founded reputation, adds, every day, fresh luster
to the glory of Bossuet. I observe, with pleasure, that this great Orator,
whose merit has been for some time attacked among us, is more warmly and
universally admired since there has been a renunciation of the depraved taste
of the Eloquence of words. The vehemence which distinguishes him, as it does
Demosthenes, appears to me frequently derived from accumulated interrogations
which are equally familiar to each of them.

INDEED, of all the figures of Oratory, Interrogation is the most overwhelming
and rapid. If it be employed in unfolding the principles on which the discourse
is established, it spreads over it an inevitable obscurity, and a species of
declamation, which disgusts persons of good taste. It is after a clear
explanation of the obligations of the Christian Religion, that particular
details of its moral injunctions, enlivened by this impetuous movement,
forcibly strike the hearers, add remorse to conviction, and, if I may so speak,
arm law against conscience. It is by earnest and repeated interrogations, that
the Orator proves and attacks, accuses and answers, doubts and affirms, affects
and instructs. Is there, in Eloquence, a surer way to agitate the human heart,
than by such questions following one another in rapid succession, to which
there is no need of waiting for an answer, because that is unavoidable and
uniform? Can we better manage the pride of the guilty, than by sparing him the
disgrace of a direct reproach, at the very time we are informing him of his
foibles or his vices? Or say -- how can we impart more force to truth, more
weight to reason, than by confining ourselves to the simple privilege of
interrogating the wicked? By what means can such an one elude the Orator, who
shuts up all the avenues by which he endeavors to escape from himself? An
Orator, who makes choice of him as judge, as sole judge, as the private judge,
of the recesses of his own heart only, which he cannot mistake? What answer
will he return, if the general questions, which be himself converts into so
many personal accusations, rush upon him, and gather strength? If, to these
evidences overwhelming to the sinner, there follows a sublime and striking
representation, which terrifies his imagination, and causes his thoughts to be
greatly confused? Thus resembling a solemn sentence, which the judge proceeds
to pronounce upon the guilty, after having first confounded him.

SUCH is that sublime and famous Apostrophe, which MASSILLON addresses to the
Supreme Being, in his sermon, "on the small number of the elect:" "O God! where
are thine elect?" These words, so plain, spread consternation. Each hearer
places himself in that list of reprobates which had preceded this passage. He
dares no more reply to the Orator, who had, again and again, demanded of him,
if he were of the number of the righteous, whose names alone shall be written
in the book of life; but, entering with consternation into his own heart, which
speaks sufficiently plain by its compunctions, he then imagines that he hears
the irrevocable decree of his reprobation.

THE eloquent RACINE almost always proceeds by interrogations, in impassioned
scenes; and this figure, which gives such an ardent rapidity to his style,
animates and warms all his arguments, none of which are ever cold, slat, or
abstracted.

THE success of this oratorical figure is infallible in Eloquence, when it is
properly employed. It is the natural language of a soul deeply affected. If you
wish to see an example of it, a famous one now occurs to me.

EVERY one knows that sine introduction of CICERO, who, unable to express the
lively indignation of his patriotic zeal, rushes abruptly upon Cataline, and
instantly overwhelms him by the vehemence of his interrogations. How long, O
Cataline, will thou abuse our patience? How long shall we continue to be the
objects of thy fury? Whither will thy headstrong audacity impel thee?
Perceivest thou not the constant watch in the city, the apprehensions of the
people, the enraged countenances of the Senators, who have discovered thy
pernicious designs? Think thou that I know not what passed the last night in
the house of Lecca? Have thou not made a distribution of employments, and
parcelled out all Italy with thy accomplices? Quousque tandem abutere,
Catilina, patie^tid ^os^r^? (...) etiam, furor isle tuns ^^s eludet? quem ad
f^nem sese effrenata jactabit ^udacia? nibil-^e te nocturnum praesidium Palaiu,
nibil urbis vigiliae, nibil timor populi, nibil concursus honorum ^^^nium,
nibil bic manitissimus babendi senatus locus, nibil borum ora vultusque
moveruns? Paters tua consilia non sentis? quid proxima nocte egeris, ubi
fueri^* quos convocavaris, quem nostrum ignorare arbitraris? etc. In Catil.
Orat. 1.
The intelligent reader will perceive that the above translation is from the
French of our author, though not exactly corresponding with the Latin of
Cicero. The following is subjoined as a more full and faithful translation of
the Roman Orator: How long, O Cataline, will thou abuse our patience? How long
also shall thy madness elude us? Whither will thy ungovernable audacity impel
thee? Could neither the nightly garrison of the citadel, nor the watch of the
city, nor the general consternation, nor the congress of all good men, nor this
strongly fortified place where the senate is held, nor the enraged countenances
of those Senators, deter thee from thy impious designs? Do thou not perceive
that thy counsels are all discovered? Think thou that there are any of us
ignorant of thy transactions the past night, the place of rendezvous, thy
collected associates? etc.


HERE is Eloquence! here is nature! It it by his making use of such language,
that the Orator dives to the very bottom of the human heart. "Interrogations,"
says Dr. BLAIR, are passionate figures. They are, indeed, on so many occasions,
the native language of passion, that their use is extremely frequent; and, in
ordinary conversation, when men are heated, they prevail as much as in the most
sublime Oratory. The unfigured literal use of Interrogation is to ask a
question; but when men are prompted by passion, whatever they would affirm, or
deny, with great vehemence, they naturally put in the form of a question;
expressing thereby the strongest confidence of the truth of their own
sentiment, and appealing to their hea^ers for the impossibility of the
contrary. Thus, in Scripture; 'God is not a man that he should He, neither the
son of man that he should repent. Has he said? And shall he not do it? Or has
he spoken? And shall he not make it good?' ( Numbers xxiii. 19.) So
Demosthenes, addressing himself to the Athenians; 'Tell me, will you still go
about and ask one another, what news? What can be more astonishing news than
this, that the man of Macedon makes war upon the Athenians, and disposes of the
affairs of Greece? Is Philip dead? No, but he is sick. What signifies it to you
whether he be dead or alive? For, if any thing happens to this Philip, you will
immediately raise up another.' All this, delivered without interrogation, had
been faint and ineffectual; but the warmth and eagerness which this questioning
method expresses, awaken the hearers, and strike them with much greater force.
BLAIR'S Lectures. vol. i. p. 355, 356. Much to the same purpose we may add
those sublime interrogations in the book of Job, where the Almighty is himself
the Speaker; and that in the eleventh chapter of the same poem: Can thou by
searching find out God? Can thou find out the Almighty unto perfection? It is
high as heaven, what can then do? deeper than hell, what can thou know? All
the energy of this passage would be lost if once divested of the
interrogations; should it be said, Thou can not by searching find out God:
Thou can not find out the Almighty unto perfection: it is high as heaven, and
thou can do nothing; and it is deep as hell, and thou can know nothing.

Another very happy illustration of the force of this figure may be brought
from the speech of St. PAUL, ( Acts xxvi.) where, with astonishing effect, he
transfers his discourse from Festus to Agrippa. In verse 26 he speaks of him in
the third person? The King, says he, 'knows of those things, before whom also I
speak freely.' He then turns abruptly upon him: 'King Agrippa, believe thou
the Prophets?' And immediately answers his own question: 'I know that thou
believe.' The smoothest Eloquence, (says Mr. Smith,) the most insinuating
complaisance, could never have made such an impression upon Agrippa as this
unexpected and pathetic address. SMITH'S Longinus, p. 93.

See also upon this head GIBBONS'S R^etoric, p. 176, 191.




SECTION XVIII. Of the Eloquence of M. Bridaine.
IF there be extant among us any traces of this ancient and energetic
Eloquence, which is nothing else than the original voice of nature, it is among
the missionaries, and in the country, where we must seek for examples. There,
some apostolic men, endowed with a vigorous and bold imagination, know no other
success than conversions, no other applauses than tears. "The best applause,"
says Dr. BLAIR, which a preacher can receive, arises from the serious and deep
impressions, which his discourse leaves on those who hear it. The finest
encomium, perhaps, ever bestowed on a preacher, was given by Louis XIV. to the
eloquent Bishop of Clermont (Massillon.) BLAIR'S Lectures, vol. ii. p. 125,
126. -- See p. 32 of this book, note. Docente in ecclesia te, non clamor
populi, sed gemitus suseitetur; lachrymae auditorum lauds tuae sunt. Jerous.
as Nepon.


Often devoid of taste, they descend, I confess, to burlesque details; but they
forcibly strike the senses; their threatenings impress terror; the people
listen to them with profit: many among them have sublime strokes; and an Orator
does not hear them without advantage, when he is skilful in observing the
important effects of his art.

M. BRIDAINE, the man, who, in the present age, is the most justly celebrated
in this way, was born with a popular Eloquence, abounding with metaphorical and
striking expressions; and no one ever possessed, in a higher degree, the rare
talent of arresting the attention of an assembled multitude.

HE had so fine a voice, as to render cradible all the wonders which history
relates of the declamation of the ancients, for he was as easily heard by ten
thousand people in the open fields, as if he had spoken under the most
resounding arch. In all he said, there were observable unexpected strokes of
Oratory, the boldest metaphors, thoughts sudden, new, and striking, all the
marks of a rich imagination, some passages, sometimes even whole discourses,
composed with care, and written with an equal combination of taste and
animation.

I REMEMBER to have heard him deliver the introduction of the first discourse
which he preached in the Church of St. Sulpice, in 1751. The first company in
the capital went, out of curiosity, to hear him.

BRIDAINE perceived among the congregation many Bishops, and persons of the
first rank, as well as a vast number of ecclesiastics. This sight, far from
intimidating, suggested to him the following exordium, so far at least as my
memory remains, of a passage, with which I have been always sensibly affected,
and, which, perhaps, will not appear unworthy of Bossuet, or Demosthenes.

AT the sight of an Auditory so new to me, methinks, my brethren, I ought only
to open my mouth to solicit your favor in behalf of a poor missionary,
destitute of all those talents which you require of those who speak to you
about your salvation. Nevertheless, I experience today, a feeling very
different. And, if I am cast down, suspect me not of being depressed by the
wretchech uncasiness occasioned by vanity, as if I were accustomed to preach
myself. God forbid that a minister of Heaven should ever suppose he needed an
excuse with you! for, whoever ye may be, ye are all of you sinners like myself.
It is before your God and mine, that I feel myself impelled at this moment to
strike my breast. UNTIL now, I have proclaimed the righteousness of the Most
High in Churches covered with thatch. I have preached the rigours of penance to
the unfortunate who wanted bread. I have declared to the good inhabitants of
the country the most awful truths of my religion. Unhappy man! what have I
done? I have made sad the poor, the best friends of my God! I have conveyed
terror and grief into those simple and honest souls, whom I ought to have
pitied and consoled! It is here only where I behold the great, the rich, the
oppressors of suffering humanity, or sinners daring and hardened. Ah! it is
here only where the sacred word should be made to resound with all the force of
its thunder; and where I should place with me in this pulpit, on the one side,
Death which threatens you, and on the other, my great God, who is about to
judge you. I hold today your sentence in my hand. Tremble then in my presence,
ye proud and disdainful men who hear me! The necessity of salvation, the
certainty of death, the uncertainty of that hour, so terrifying to you, final
impenitence, the just judgment, the number of the elect, hell, and above all,
Eternity! Eternity! These are the subjects upon which I am come to discourse,
and which I ought, doubtless, to have reserved for you alone. Ah! what need
have I of your commendation, which, perhaps, might damn me, without saving you?
God is about to rouse you, while his unworthy minister speaks to you! for I
have had a long experience of his mercies. Penetrated with a detestation of
your past iniquities, and shedding tears of sorrow and repentance, you will,
then, throw yourselves into my arms; and, by this remorse, you will prove that
I am sufficiently eloquent.

WHO does not, by this time, perceive, how much this Eloquence excels the
frigid and miserable pretensions of modern wit? In apologizing, so to speak,
for having preached upon hell in the villages, Bridaine boldly assumed all the
authority over his auditory, which belonged to his office, and prepared their
hearts for the awful truths, which he intended to announce. This Exordium alone
gave him a right to say every thing. Many persons still remember his sermon on
Eternity, and the terror which he diffused throughout the congregation, whilst
blending, as was usual with him, quaint comparisons with sublime transports, he
exclaimed, What foundation, my brethren, have you for supposing your dying day
at such a distance? Is it your youth? 'Yes', you answer; 'I am, as yet, but
twenty, but thirty'. Sirs, it is not you who are twenty or thirty years old, it
is death which has already advanced twenty or thirty years toward you.
Observe: Eternity approaches. Do you know what this Eternity is? It is a
pendulum whose vibration says continually, Always -- Ever -- Ever -- Always --
Always! In the mean while, a reprobate cries out, 'What o'clock is it? And the
same voice answers, Eternity.

THE thundering voice of Bridaine, added, on those occasions, a new energy to
his Eloquence; and the Auditory, familiarized to his language and ideas,
appeared at such times in dismay before him. The profound silence which reigned
in the congregation, especially when he preached until the approach of night,
was interrupted from time to time, and in a manner very perceptible, by the
long and mournful sighs, which proceeded, all at once, from every corner of the
Church where he was speaking.

ORATORS! ye who are wholly engrossed about your own reputation, fall at the
feet of this apostolic man, and learn from a missionary, wherein true Eloquence
consists. The people! the people! they are the, principal, and, perhaps, the
best judges of your talents. Whoever, upon comparison, is deemed, by a common
Audidience, the greatest Orator, ought most certainly to be pronounced such, by
men of science and erudition. And, though an indifferent Orator may triumph for
a long time, and be esteemed altogether perfect by the vulgar, who are
satisfied with his accomplishments, and know not in what he is defective; yet,
whenever the true genius arises, he draws to him the attention of every one,
and immediately appears superior to his rival. HUME'S Essays, Ess. xii.


SECTION XIX. Of the Choice of Subjects.
THE success of this sort of popular Eloquence is infallible, when there is
united a voice sufficiently strong to maintain its vehemence, and a taste
sufficiently delicate to avoid its eccentricities.

HENCE we draw this conclusion, that it is a great error to discard, from the
gospel ministry, those awful subjects, which enkindle the imagination of the
Preacher, while they tend to arouse every conscience. Besides that religion is
founded upon those awful truths, which its ministers ought not to conceal, and
which men are afraid to hear, in proportion to their tendency to produce a
conversion. I know no subjects which give a more ample scope to the art of
Oratory.

THE Christian Orator, who is above enriching his compositions with them,
renounces his greatest advantages.

BUT, while we present these objects of terror, we cannot be too strongly
convinced that it would be better to leave sinners in supineness than to drive
them to despair; that this is not so much to reach the end as to exceed all
bounds; that the gospel is a law of love, and not a code of wrath; that men are
naturally so weak that their faults ought to excite more compassion than anger;
that a Preacher is not the minister of the vengeance of Heaven, but the
dispenser of its mercies; that instead of repelling sinners, it is proper to
affect, to win, to reclaim them through fear to love; and to attemper the
rigor of the law with the attraction of the rewards of the gospel. Yes; it
would be doubtless too severe, only to announce threatenings to men, who need
continually to be encouraged and consoled.

MAKE choice of affecting subjects, which lay hold of, and interest, the man
and the Christian. Be serupulous about choosing those confined subjects, which
circumscribe the Orator within too narrow bounds, which are connected with no
moral precept, or which make a part of all discourses on morality. Avoid
frivolous subjects, whose surface appears showy, but which when we attempt to
search into them, only present us with particulars too insignificant and
slender for Eloquence; such as treat of matters of decorum rather than of duty;
such as suggest materials for a letter rather than grounds for a sermon. Avoid
quaint subjects, which are improper for the multitude, merely serving the
Orator himself for a pompous declamation, in which the human heart can take no
interest; philosophical and abstract subjects, equally remote from religion and
Eloquence, and more adapted to the Portico or the Lyceum, than to the Gospel
pulpit; those subjects, in a word, which, though they may have the appearance
of being novel and animating, are really far-fetched and affected, and, in
which, a discovery is made, not so much of genius, as of the want of it.

MANY good subjects still remain for Christian Orators to invent or revive. But
then is no need to search for them, when they do not Happen to present
themselves naturally to the mind, as by an involuntary inspiration.

BEGIN with studying the prevailing best of your genius; and, after having
tried your strength on different subjects of argument, imagination, or
sentiment, constantly follow that sort, which is most peculiarly your own, and
which nature itself has destined for you.

BE not afraid of going in beaten tracks. A fertile Orator always discovers new
treasures in old mines. Wherefore should we hesitate to enter afresh upon those
subjects which have been already successfully handled? It is because our great
masters have laid hold of all their most striking beauties, and that in
draining those fields, formerly so fruitful, they have changed them into barren
deserts?

LET us here be candid. If we were unacquainted with those lucid plans, those
original ideas, which we so justly admire in their writings, should we have
conceived them of ourselves? The superiority of the models ought to enkindle
our emulation, instead of damping our courage.

IF Bossuet, Bourdaloue, Masiillon, were to return upon earth, think we, that
their genius would be so fettered by their former masterly performances, as to
be incapable of fresh productions? or that these immortal Orators would not,
even at this day, have been equal to themselves? Exert your talents and zeal!
The subjects, which seem to be exhausted, will immediately receive new life:
and the Orator, who can even now acquire originality, after these primitive
men, shall participate their renown through all ages.

SECTION XX. Of Panegyrics.
WHEREFORE should we suppose that we could succeed better in Eloquence by
making choice of subjects less known, when we so seldom observe distinguished
success in the species of Panegyric, although the masters of the art have not
hitherto traveled this road with that eclat which they have acquired in
delivering doctrinal and moral discourses? The new subjects in this branch of
Eloquence, which remain for Christian Orators to handle, do not infallibly
suggest to their minds the most eloquent Orations. This remark proves that not
new subjects, but new ideas, are wanting, in order to excel in the art of
Oratory.

NOTHING, however, is more adapted to inflame the imagination, than the praise
bestowed by the sacred ministry on those Christian heroes, whose examples do
credit to our religion, while they condemn our behavior.

IF it be an excellent and pleasing sight to behold persons assembled in a
Church, in order to their being instructed in all the duties of religion, it is
also, without doubt, a very noble institution to have altars erected to virtue,
and public eulogiums decreed to the most reverend saints, whom religion holds
up to the imitation of her children. But men, whose lives, although in other
respects unblemished, have been, notwithstanding, not much known, do not
furnish sufficient materials for Eloquence.

To acquire and maintain the honor of such solemn homage, it is necessary to
possess celebrity proceeding from superior genius, or brilliant actions; to
have obtained a distinguished influence over the age, or, at least, over the
country, in which one has lived; to have formed an epoch in the history of
religion; to be exalted above the common virtues; to have outlived oneself by
illustrious monuments; and to appear before posterity with a reputation
commanding respect: for, in spite of all the pomp of declaimers, a saint
unknown will only obtain eulogiums unnoticed like himself.

THE most common fault, attending this species of discourse, is, a failure in
giving a just description of the character of the man who is praised.

PANEGYRISTS more or less dwell upon the surface, instead of penetrating to the
bottom, of the subject.

MOST Panegyrics, distinguished from one another merely by the title, are
equally applicable to all saints in similar circumstances, and consequently do
not characterize any one.

IT is on this account that we have not, as yet, any collection of the kind,
which could be quoted for a model.

THE Panegyrics of Flechier, so long extolled as masterpieces in the rhetoric
of colleges, are, in the present day, extremely fallen from their ancient glory.

THOSE of Massillon are universally considered as the least valuable of his
productions. We are continually losing sight of the saint, whom the Orator is
praising to pursue long digressions of morality, generally foreign to the
subject, and of which, not one passage is remembered.

THE inattention of Preachers has occasioned the disgust of the public. This
species of composition is now pretty generally abandoned. Excepting a very
small number of privileged subjects, which should never be given up, Panegyrics
are very rarely pronounced in the pulpits of Paris.

IT is when composing these sacred eulogies that we ought especially to keep in
view this distinguished maxim of Boileau, "Nothing is beautiful but truth."

IT is allowable to embellish facts by comparisons, or by contrasts, provided
that we confine ourselves to those innocent artifices of Eloquence; but it is
ridiculous to pretend a false admiration, which every one sees through, and in
which no one participates.

INDETERMINATE commendations, common places, accumulated epithets, deceitful
adulations, disgustful exaggerations, discover ignorance or knavery, and at
once destroy the confidence of the auditory.

LET the Orator, then, always reflect that he is placed in the Pulpit of truth;
that he is surrounded with a number of intelligent hearers; that that which
ceases to be probable is revolting; that the public opinion is never imposed on
with impunity; and that extravagant compliments debase him who bestows them
without ever exalting him who receives them. Lysippus said justly, that he had
honored Alexander more by representing him with a pike in his hand, than
Apelles, who always painted him hurling the thunderbolt like Jupiter.

WHEN the subject of a panegyric is fertile in events, the moral ought to arise
out of the historical narrative, without smothering, it under a heap of
reflections which occur to every auditor. A method too didactic would be
injurious to the discourse, by impeding its rapidity.

THOROUGHLY comprehend the character and actions of the man whom you celebrate.
Surround him with his contemporaries. Describe the manners of the age in which
he lived. Collect, combine, all the particulars which ^end to the same point,
that, with them, you may frame your materials. Arrange, so to speak, the
virtues, the talents, the events, the misfortunes, which history presents to
your view, and you will then impart to your narrations all the strength of
argument, and all the glow of Eloquence.

WE cannot but reprobate the method of those inanimate Panegyrists, who
confound rhetorical distribution with chronological order.

THAT severe sentence alights on such, which the Critic Boileau passed on
poets, who are destitute of poetical rapture, and who write without enthusiasm:
He styles them sorry historians, that will follow the order of time without
daring for one moment to lose sight of a subject. Maigres Histori^ns suivront
l'ordre des temps;
I^s n'osent un moment perdre un sujet de vue.
Pour prendre Gand, il fout que Lille soit rendue,
F^ que leur verse exact (...) que Mezerai,
A^^ ^^^a fait tomber les remfarts de Courtrai.



BUT it is no less certain, that, in the plan of a Panegyric, we must attend to
the plain relation of facts, so that the discourse, composed in other respects
according to the rules of art, may appear the simple developement of the
subject.

IT is with some astonishment, that, after having read in Massillon all the
circumstances of the death of a martyr of saint, we find the Orator afterward
promising the second part of the same Panegyric.

THIS confusion of the plan destroys the effect of the subject; and the hearer,
continually bewildered, through the want of historical order, departs without
obtaining the knowledge of him, whose praises he came to hear so emphatically
delivered. What, but a Panegyric, is this, which does not describe the man to
whom it is consecrated, and whose history I am still obliged to consult, if I
wish to form clear ideas of his life? Memoirs and Panegyrics of eminent
characters, when well selected and applied, are instructive and important
branches of composition and reading.

In the list of Biography, among a great variety which might be mentioned, the
Editor may venture to say, that, perhaps, there is no work of the sort better
composed, nor of greater utility to the young student and divine, than Memoirs
of the life, character, and writings of Dr. DODDRIDGE, by the late Rev. JOB
ORTON: in which this excellent man pre-eminently shines forth a pattern for
imitation, as a scholar, a gentleman, and a divine.

Of detached E^logiums on particular characters, none, perhaps, are more
forcibly expressed, or more justly applied, than Mr. Burke's, on that
singularly benevolent character, Mr. HOWARD, the fame of whose disinterested
actions has raised him in Europe, what Horace styles monumentu^ ^re perennius.

Says Mr. BURKE, I cannot name this gentleman, without remarking, that his
labors and writings have done much to open the eyes and hearts of mankind. He
has visited all Europe -- not to survey the sumptuousness of palaces, or the
stateliness of temples; not to make accurate measurements of the remains of
ancient grandeur, nor to form a scale of the curiosity of modern art; not to
collect medals, or collate manuscripts; but to dive into the depths of
dungeons; to plunge into the infection of hospitals; to survey the mansions of
sorrow and pain, and to take the gage and dimensions of misery, depression, and
contempt; to remember the forgotten; to attend to the neglected; to visit the
^orsaken; and to compare and collate the distresses of all men, in all
countries.

His plan is original; and is as full of genius as it is of humanity. It was a
voyage of discovery; a circumnavigation of charity. Already the benefit of his
labor is felt more or less in every country; I hope he will anticipate his
final reward, by seeing all its effects realized in his own. He will receive,
not by retail, but in gross, the reward of those who visit the prisoner; and he
has so forestalled and monopolized this branch of charity, that there will be,
I trust, little room to merit by such acts of benevolence hereafter.

BURKE'S Speech to the Ei^ctors of Bristol, 1780. The well known writer of the
above elegant ancomlum has also given the public a later specimen of his talent
for Panegyric, in that highly colored painting of the "beauteous Queen of
France," in his work, entitled, Reflections on the Revolution in France, p. 112.

However divided the public are respecting the political sentiments contained
in this celebrated work, it seems to be prevailing and Just opinion, that, in
this description, Mr. Burke has suffered his imagination and gallantry to gain
the ascendancy over his sober judgment; and that, while painting the hardships
of an individual, he has discovered the very spirit of a knight errant, and
carried his readers back to the almost forgotten age of chivalry.




SECTION XXI. Of S. Vincent de Paul.
OF all the subjects of Panegyric, which the modern history of religion affords
us, the best, in my opinion, is the eulogy of S. VINCENT DE PAUL; a man of
great virtue, though possessed of but little renown; the best citizen whom
France has had; the Apostle of humanity, who, after having been a shepherd in
his childhood, has left in his country establishments of more utility to the
unfortunate, than the finest monuments of his sovereign, Louis XIV.

HE was, successively, a slave at Tunis, Preceptor of the Cardinal de Retz,
Minister of a village, Chaplain-General of the galleys, Principal of a college,
Chief of the missions, and Joint-Commissioner of Ecclesiastical Benefices.
Adjoint au ministere de la feuille des Beaneafices.
He instituted, in France, the Seminaries of the Lazarists, and of the
Daughters of Charity, who devote themselves to the consolation of the
unfortunate, and who scarcely ever change their condition, although their vows
only bind them for a year. He endowed hospitals for foundlings, for orphans,
for the insane, for galley-slaves, and for old men. His generous compassion
reached all kinds of wretchedness, with which the human species is oppressed,
and monuments of his beneficence are to be found throughout all the provinces
of the kingdom. When reading his life, we remark, that nothing does more honor
to religion, than the history of institutions formed in favor of humanity,
when humanity is beholden for them to the ministers of the altars. Whilst
kings, armed against each other, ravage the earth already laid waste by other
scourges. Vincent de Paul, the son of a husbandman of Gascony, repaired the
public calamities, and distributed more than twenty millions of livres in
Champagne, in Picardy, in Lorraine, in Artois, where the inhabitants of whole
villages were dying through want, and were afterward left in the fields
without burial, until he undertook to defray the expenses of interment. He
discharged, for some time, an office of zeal and charity toward the galleys.
He saw, one day, a wretched galley-slave, who had been condemned to three years
confinement for smuggling, and who appeared inconsolable on account of his wife
and children having been left in the greatest distress. Vincent de Paul
sensibly affected with his situation, offered to put himself in his stead, and,
what doubtless will scarcely be credited, the exchange was accepted. This
virtuous man was chained among the crew of galley-slaves, and his sent
continued to be swollen during the remainder of his life, from the weight of
those honorable irons which he had borne.

IT is evident how much an action like this is capable of suggesting to the
mind of an Orator; and that he would be unworthy or his profession, if he
related it without exciting tears.

WHEN this great man came to Paris, foundlings were sold in the street of St.
Landry for twenty sous a piece; and the charge of these innocent creatures was
committed, out of charity, as was reported, to diseased women, from whom they
sucked corrupted milk.

THESE infants whom Government abandoned to public compassion, almost all
perished; and such as happened to escape so many dangers were introduced
clandestinely into opulent families, in order to dispossess the legitimate
heirs. This, for more than a century, was a never-failing source of litigation,
the particulars of which are to be found in the compilation of our old lawyers.
Vincent de Paul at once provided funds for the maintenance of twelve of these
children. His charity was soon extended to the relief of all those who were
left exposed at the doors of the churches. But that unusual zeal, which always
gives life to a new institution, having cooled, the resources entirely failed,
and fresh outrages were renewed on humanity.

VINCENT DE PAUL was not discouraged. He convoked an extraordinary assembly. He
caused a number of those wretched infants to be placed in the church; and
forthwith mounting the pulpit, he pronounced, with his eyes bathed in ^ears,
that discourse* which does as much honor to his piety as his Eloquence, and
which I faithfully transcribe from the history of his life, drawn up by M.
Abelly, Bishop of Rhodes.

COMPASSION and charity have assuredly induced you, Ladies, to adopt these
little creatures for your children. You have been their mothers by kindness,
since their mothers by nature have forsaken them. See, now, whether ye also are
willing to abandon them. Cease, for the present, to be their mothers, that ye
may become their judges. Their life and their death are in your hands. I am
going to put it to the vote, and to take the suffrages. It is time to pronounce
their sentence, and to know if ye are unwilling to have compassion any longer
upon them. They will live, if ye continue to take a charitable care of them,
and they will all die if ye abandon them.

SIGHS were the only answer to this pathetic exhortation: and the same day, in
the same church, at that very time, the Foundling Hospital at Paris was founded
and endowed with a revenue of forty thousand livres. The success attending this
discourse of Vincent de Paul, in the erection of the Foundling Hospital at
Paris, is elsewhere ( 48) compared to that of the Bishop of Worcester's sermon,
which influenced the public benevolence to found an Hospital for Inoculation in
London; and hence our author is led to remark, that "Eloquence could not obtain
a more excellent triumph." In addition to these two instances of succesful
discourse, it may be added, that, in consequence of Bishop Ridley's sermon on
alms, King Edward the Sixth founded St. Bartholomew's Hospital for the sick and
wounded, Bridewell for the wilfully idle and mad, and Christ Church for orphan.
BURNETT'S History of the Reformation.


THIS is the man, who scarcely possesses any fame in Europe! This is the man,
who, according to the judgment of his enemies, had zeal only without talents!
His life was interwoven with good works, the benefit of which we still enjoy.

THE misfortune of S. Vincent de Paul (if it be one to be little praised, and
even little known,) was not to be celebrated, when he died in 1661, by that
eloquent Bossuet who immortalized all his heroes, and who, at the very time,
was composing funeral orations for subjects far less deserving of his genius.
But the honor of a public Panegyric is due to his virtues; and the Orator, who
shall represent him in a point of view worthy of the admiration and gratitude
of his fellow-citizens, will have deserved well of his country. This singular
character is styled the Founder and first Superior General of the Congregation
of the Mission. BAYLE'S Dictionary, vol. i. p. 36.

The account given by our author of this great and good man, brings to
recollection the benevolent and patriotic exerti^^s of the late excellent and
well known JONAS HANWAY, in behalf of chimney-sweepers' apprentices and on
other occasions. It was his maxim that (...) vigorous and well-concerted
remonstrance of a real evil must be more effectual than a thousand vague
complaints. He himself made a vigorous and well-concerted remonstrance in
behalf of infant parish-poor in London and West-minster, entered into the
melancholy detail of mismanagement and neglect, published authentic lists of
(...) mortality, which was almost universal, encountered the resentment of
parish officers of all ranks by publishing their names, informed himself of the
best methods in practice, both at home and abroad, for preserving poor infants.
After persevering for years in investigating the evil and the remedy, he, at
length, in 1766, by his own exertions, and at his sole expense, obtained an act
of parliament, which, from its beneficial influence, was called by poor people,
the act for keeping children alive.

The life of JONAS HANWAY is a series of benevolent intentions, recommended by
his writings, promoted by his bounty, and accomplished by unceasing industry.
All his efforts, except his opposition to the hill for naturalizing the Jews,
were dictated by a wise, liberal, and enlarged benevolence. We calculate, with
pleasing admiration, how much it is possible for a good man zealously affected
to accomplish. "In every good work that he began, he did it with all his might,
and prospered.

CHARTER'S Sermon on Alms, p. 40; and HANWAY'S Life, by P^^^.


SECTION XXII. Of Describing Characters.
IT is common in Panegyrics, or in funeral Orations, for Orators to sketch the
portraiture of contemporaries who have been the rivals or antagonists of the
man whose virtues are praised. Such passages are commonly ^^^^^cised with so
much the more severity, as they always indicate design; and the Auditor is
uninterested in ^earing them, unless a distinguished precision immediately
impress them on his memory; unless each stroke of the pencil form an excellent
trait; unless the man, of whose character we are forming a judgment, is already
celebrated; and, in a word, unless the Orator compress many ideas into a very
narrow compass.

WHEN Massillon preached to the Nuns of Chilot, in the presence of the Queen of
England, he drew the picture of the Prince of Orange, to please the consort of
King James; but his genius rendered him no service on this occasion. Massillon
only introduces one thought, in order to describe William III. which he
expresses with sufficient precision, and afterward dilates with his usual
elegance, but without thoroughly investigating the character of the
Stadtholder, or availing himself of the result of the history.

HIS amplification was more adapted to console the Queen of England, than to
describe the Prince of Orange. It may serve for an illustration of the fact,
that Massillon enlarged too much on the same idea, and extremely misapplied his
fluency of expression.

WOULD you wish to know how Bossuet has described the Protector CROMWELL?
Contrast with the excessive copiousness of the Bishop of Clermont, the
energetic impetuosity of the Bishop of Meaux. Nothing will more strongly mark
the difference of their genius.

A MAN, in whom was combined an incredible depth of mind, the refined
hypocrite, and the skilful politician; a man, capable of any undertaking, and
of profound dissimulation; equally active and indefatigable in peace and war;
who left nothing to Fortune, that he could take from her, either by resolution
or foresight; withal so vigilant, and prepared on every side, that he never
neglected the opportunities, with which she presented him. In a word, he (...)
one of those restless and daring (...), who seem as if they were born to effect
the revolution of the world. Funeral Oration for the Queen of England.


IT is thus that a few lines suffice to develope an extraordinary character,
with the penetration of a Moralist, the vehemence of an Orator, and the
correctness of an Historian.

MASSILLON slightly glances upon subjects, and has a profusion of words.
Bossuet acts precisely the reverse. It is not possible to deliver an opinion
more adapted to establish the decision of posterity.

SECTION XXIII. Of Compliments.
SINCE the discussion of the different rules, to which the art of Eloquence
subjects Christian Orators, has led me on to various episodical details, I
must not proceed to more it portant matters, without dwelling a little longer
on another branch of ministerial wor^^, which has much affinity to Panegyrics,
and especially to the description of characters.

I MEAN to speak of COMPLIMENTS, with which we are sometimes led to begin, or
finish, our pulpit discourses.

ESTABLISHED usage no longer permits the ministers of the gospel to preach the
sacred word before the rulers of the world, without burning at their feet some
grains of incense. Kings are, therefore, much to be pitied, who are pursued
with flattery in those very Churches, where they come to learn their duty, and
to be humbled for their faults: but it is, also, to be regretted, that
Christian Orators, who ought then to speak as the conscience of the guilty,
should degrade themselves to a level with a crowd of flatterers. What must
doubtless comfort them, is, the assurance that commendations enjoined upon the
man who offers them, cannot dazzle the great, to whom they are addressed.

LET no one, however, exceed the bounds of just praise; for religion does not
permit it any farther than is consistent with truth.

LET us ever recognize an Apostle as an enemy to falsehood, even in those
Compliments wherein one might so often suppose himself freed from the
obligation of sincerity. Let us not bring a ministry, divinely commissioned,
into contempt, by e^^ggerated eulogiums, which can never impose, either upon
the Great who despise them, upon the Orator who pronounces them, upon the
Auditor who hears them, or upon God, who forms a just judgment concerning them.

ADULATION always displeases. To praise Princes for virtues which they have
not, says the Duke de Rochefoucauld, is to insult them with impunity. Thought,
320.
It is, at least, to forget the respect which is due to them.

EUSEBIUS, in "the life of Constantine," B. iv. chap. 4.
relates, that this Emperor imposed silence upon a preacher, who was base
enough to imitate, in his sermon, the fiction of Virgil respecting the
Apotheosis of Augustus, by telling Constantine, that, after his death, he
should be associated with the Son of God in the government of the universe.

I ADMIRE in Bossuet, that noble and manly freedom, which he always possessed,
through sear of flattery. We discern, in his Compliments, a certain apostolic
severity, and a marked dislike of adulation.

HAD an indifferent person been nominated to praise Madam de la Valliere, for
entering into a religious order, in the presence of Queen Maria Theresa, he
would not have declined such an opportunity of extolling the virtues of the
consort of Louis XIV.

"IT is proper", said Bossuet to her, it is fit, Madam, that as you form by
your rank so considerable a part of worldly grandeur, you should sometimes join
in ceremonies, wherein we learn to undervalue it. The Orator then recals his
subject, and thinks no more of the Princess.

FENELON never weakened, in his preaching, the force of the sacred maxims,
which he has recorded in Telemachus against flatterers.

ONE single Compliment of this kind is alone extant. It is to be found toward
the conclusion of the discourse, which he delivered at the Consecration of the
Elector of Cologne. That passage is alike worthy of Fenelon, by its
distinguished moderation, as well as by the rhetorical expression, which he
makes use of, to justify the reservedness of his eulogium.

YOU have just heard, my brethren, all that I have said to this Prince. What
have I not dared to say to him? And what ought I not to be bold to say to him,
since his only fear is not to know the truth? The greatest praise would do him
infinitely less honor, than the episcopal liberty with which he wishes me to
address him.

IT is difficult to adopt a direct address in Compliments, without appearing
either to exaggerate, or to have an uniformity of style, and also without
embarrassing the person too much, whom we mean to praise.

IT is preferable to include them in a paraphrase of the holy scriptures, or in
prayer to God, or in an apostrophe addressed to the auditory.

BUT, whatever be the mode of expression that we select, the Compliment
delivered must be connected with the subject under discussion; common places,
which characterize no one, must be avoided; instruction must be blended with
praise, or, rather, be made to proceed out of the praise itself; we must
confine ourselves to a small number of lively and striking ideas; and endeavor
to conclude with a passage happily expressed, and easily remembered.

BOURDALOUE never excelled in this article. All his compliments are trivial. In
the sermon he preached at Versailles, two days after the marriage of the Duke
of Bourbon, son of the great Dauphin, with Adelaide of Savoy, he repeated,
toward his conclusion, a passage of scripture, the application of which
forcibly struck the auditory. Some esteemed it a very happy allusion, while
others were of opinion, that it degenerated into a play of words.

AFTER a very instructive eulogium, Bourdaloue speaks, in these terms, of the
young Princess:

THERE is that, which, in my estimation, renders her more respectable than her
rank, and which induces me to say as Eliezer, the servant of Abraham, when,
beholding for the first time the spouse of the son of his master, cried out in
a transport of admiration and praise, this truly is she whom God has chosen,
to be the wife of the son of my Lord.

SECTION XXIV. Of a direct Address; and Rhetorical Dialogue.
IF drawing of characters and compliments be excepted, in which the Orator may
sometimes descend, without degradation, to the sparkling efforts of wit, a
manly energy, of which solidity constitutes the beauty, should enliven all the
members of his discourses.

WHENEVER he addresses an assembly, he should affect them, for the language of
the passions is that alone which strike the multitude.

I HAVE often remarked, that, in the reading societies which are formed in the
country, eloquent works are chosen in preference to those of instruction. Truth
satisfies the mind of a solitary reader; but no sooner does he unite with
others than he wishes to be affected; and writings, otherwise excellent, cease
to please, when they undergo the formidable experiment of being read aloud.

ATTEMPT not, then, to write a book, when you are composing a sermon. Guard
against ever adopting the languid trammels of a writer, who speaks from his
pen, or his paper, while I should be attending to his discourse as the
inspiration of the moment.

ARE you desirous that your Eloquence may be animated? Substitute for the
languor of a continued discourse, the liveliness of an immediate address.
Converse continually with your hearers. Instead of wandering in abstract
contemplations, as if you were meditating in solitude, speak to that numerous
assembly, which gathers around to hear you.

YOU will find a very good example of this direct address, in the familiar
instruction of Massillon, upon the ceremony of Absolution: an admirable
exhortation, which, bears no resemblance to any of his other discourses, and,
in which, each expression is a dart thrown by the Orator, transfixing the
hearts of his Auditory!

To speak to the hearers is not sufficient. It is also requisite to make them
speak themselves, and to add to the variegated charms of an immediate address,
the never failing and increasing effect of Dialogue.

THE ancients discussed, in Dialogues, the most philosophic subjects. These
men, who knew so well how to imitate nature, did not compose inanimate books,
when they meant to unfold the ideas which they had collected in their
meditations. They approached to the manner of the drama. They placed, upon the
stage, some friends, w^ose conversations they reported. They thus discussed
various opposite opinions, with an equal mixture of wisdom and urbanity. They
made choice of each reader for a judge; and hence it is, that they have
diffused over the writings of antiquity, all that delight, which is experienced
while attending to the conversation of a select number of intelligent guests,
who mutually impart each other's thoughts, in the agreeable freedom of an
entertainment.

IF, by this mode of Dialogue, Plato and Cicero have succeeded in enlivening
metaphysical subjects, how much greater impulse and life would it not impart to
Eloquence?

IN Oratory, Dialogue supplies the place of alternate speakers, breaks the
monotony, gives strength to the argument, and inspires confidence, provided the
Orator does not weaken those difficulties which he ought to propose to himself;
for, if the hearer can render the objections more forcible than the Orator, he
will no longer attend to his answers.

BESIDES, nothing is better calculated for reviving the attention, than those
suspensions, properly managed, which cause the hearers to fluctuate in a kind
of uncertainty, proceeding at first from an emotion of surprise, when the
Orator starts objections to himself, which he afterward converts into
curiosity, when he refutes them.

I AM often delighted with those cogent questions in the Discourses of
MASSILLON, which engage the attention of the hearers, at the very moment when
they might be apt to withdraw it.

AN example of this sort occurs in his sermon "on the mixture of the righteous
and the wicked."

THE righteous deprive iniquity of every excuse. Do you say that you have done
no more than to follow established precedents? But have the righteous, who are
among you, conformed to them? Do you plead the unavoidable consequences of
illustrious descent? You know some, who, with a name still more distinguished
than your own, impart sanctity to splendour. Do you plead the vivacity of your
years? -- the weakness of your sex? Every day will show you some, who, in the
bloom of youth, and with all the talents suited to this world, have their minds
supremely bent on Heaven. Is it the distraction of business? You may see those
engaged in the same cares with yourself, who, notwithstanding, make salvation
their principal concern. Is pleasure your delight? Pleasure is the first desire
of all men, and of the righteous, in some of whom it is even stronger, and
whose natural dispositions are less favorable to virtue, than in you. Do you
plead your afflictions? There are some good men distressed. Or prosperity?
There are those to be met with, who, amidst their abundance, devote themselves
to God. Or the state of your health? You discover some, who, in sickly bodies,
possess souls filled with divine fortitude. Turn yourself which way you will;
as many righteous, as many the witnesses which testify against you. The
discussion of a variety of important subjects in the form of Dialogue has been
frequently adopted. The ancient Greek and Roman Writers abounded in this method
of composition. Among others, PLATO, LUCIAN, CICERO, MACROBIUS, the author of
the Dialogue concerning the Causes of the Corruption of Eloquence (ascribed by
some to Tacitus, and by others to Quintilian;) AESCHINES, SOCRATICUS, MINUTIUS,
FELIX, XENOPHON, XENOPLION may, without much impropriety, be called a
Dialogue-writer; for, though his writings are not in the direct form of
Dialogue, yet he continually makes his characters speak in their own language.
HOMER, also, abounds in this form of Dialogue. Various instances of the same
sort may be traced so early as in the writings of MOSES, and the Prophets, as
well as in those of the Evangelists. Such are these; Isa. xlix. 14, 15: But
Zion sai^, the Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me. Can a
woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son
of her womb? Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee." Romans vi. 1:
"What shall we say then? Shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? God
forbid; How shall we, that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? In like
manner, Romans ix. 19: Thou will say unto me, why does he yet find fault? for who
has resisted his will? Nay, but O man, who art thou that reply against God?
Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus?
Has not the potter power over the clay of the same iump to make one vessel
unto honor, and another unto dishonor? So 1. Cor. xv. 35 -- 39: But some man
will say. How are the dead raised up? and with what body do they come? Thou
fool, that which thou so west is not quickened except it die, etc.

Modern, as well as ancient, writers, have handled subjects in this form of
Dialogue, or immediate address.

Mr. ADDISON has left behind him his Dialogues upon the usefulness of ancient
me^^als, which he s^ems to have formed upon the pla^ of CICERO. We have also
BE^KELEY'S Alciphron; BAXTER'S Matho; HURD'S and FORDYCE'S Dialogues on
Education; FORDYCE on the art of Preaching; FENELON on Eloquence; FONTENELLE'S
and LYTTLETO^'S Dialogues of the Dead; MORE'S Di^ine Dialogues; HARRIS, of
Salisbury; and honest JOHN BUNYAN in his Pilgrim, etc.

Dr. WARD observes, that this method seems to be attended with very
considerable advantages, if well and judiciously managed. For it is capable to
make the driest subjects entertaining and pleasant, by its variety, and the
different characters of the speakers. Besides* things may be canvasse^ more
minutely, and many lesser matters, which seem to clear up a subject may be
introduced with a better grace by questions and answers, objections and
replies, than can be conveniently done in continued discourse. There is
likewise a farther advantage in this way of writing, that the author is at
liberty to choose his speakers. And, therefore, as Cicero has well observed,
when we imagine that we hear persons of an established reputation for wisdom
and knowledge talking together, it necessarily adds a weight and authority to
the discourse, De Amic, c. 1.
and more closely engages the attention. The subject matter of it is very
extensive; for whatever is a proper argument of discourse, public or private,
serious o^ jocose; whatever is fit for wise and ingenious men to talk opon,
either for improvement or dive^sion, is suitable for a Dialogue.

WARD'S System of Oratory, vol. ii. p. 219. See to the same effect in BLAIR'S
Lectures, vol. ii. p. 293.


give us specimens of entire Discourses drawn in this manner. VOLUSENUS has
left an elegant Latin Dialogue, De animi tranquillitate, which is much in the
spirit of the ancients, and possesses pure and chaste latinity.


SECTION XXV. Of an ardent Style.
IN proportion to the frequency of Dialogue in a discourse, the less will
Apostrophes be necessary; and the less lavish we are of this figure, the
greater will be its effect.

IT is in Apostrophes that the Orator should display all his vehemence, if he
would avoid the danger and confusion, attending himself, alone, being warmed
with his subject. Feeling succeeds better than reasoning in those moments of
effervescence, in which the soul ought to burst forth with sufficient
impetuosity to hurry the Auditory along one while by the strength of the
proofs, another while by the energy of rhetorical strokes.

WHEN Apostrophes are multiplied, they discover a declaimer, who cannot write,
who is confused rather than moved and who substitutes affected convulsions for
the transports of Eloquence.

IT is necessary, without doubt, that the Orator should enliven his
compositions with that ardour of soul which indicates and awakens sensibility.

IF his writings be destitute of those glowing ideas, which proceed from the
heart, his most emphatic language will only be insipid jargon.

"THE dull writer is a wretched author." This maxim of Boileau is incontestable.

BUT, if, by the term ardour, be understood, the fermentations of a roving
brain, paradox united to a depraved taste, unceasing apostrophes, useless
exclamations, obscure hyperboles; in a word, a style inflated with extravagant
metaphors; ah! guard against such digressions, O young Orator, who have
received from nature the inestimable gift of genius. Be assured that genuine
enthusiasm is no other than reason warmed by the voice of the passions, and
that Eloquence is not a delirium. "Ancient Eloquence," says Mr. HUME, i. e. the
sublime and passionate, is of a much juster taste than the modern, or the
argumentative and rational; and, if properly executed, will always have more
command and authority over mankind. The ancients, upon comparison, gave the
preference to that kind, of which they have left us such applauded models.
Lyfias, and others, were esteemed in their time; but, when compared with
Demosth^n^s and Cicero, were eclipsed like a taper when set in the rays of a
meridian sun. Those latter Orators possessed the same elegance, and subtlety,
and force of argument, with the former; but what rendered them chiefly
admirable, was that pathene and sublime, which, on proper occasions, they threw
into their discourse; and by which they commanded the resolutions of their
audience. HUME'S Essays, No. xii. p. 123. The vehement style, (says Dr. BLAIR,)
always implies strength; and is not, by any means, inconsistent with
simplicity: but in its predominant character is distinguishable from either the
strong or the simple manner. It has a peculiar ardour; it is a glowing style;
the language of a man, whose imagination and passions are heated, and strongly
affected by what he writes; who is therefore negligent of lesser graces, but
pours himself forth with the rapidity and fullness of a torrent. It belongs to
the higher kinds of oratory; and, indeed, is rather expected from a man who is
speaking, than from one who is writing in his closet. The orations of
Demosthenes furnish the full and perfect example of this species of style.

BLAIR'S Lectures, Lect. xix. p. 396. Dr. BLAIR elsewhere says, There is a
still higher degree of Eloquence, wherein a greater power is exerted over the
human mind; by which we are not only convinced, but interested, agitated, and
carried along with the speaker; our passions are made to rise together with
his; we enter into all hi^ (...) notions; we love, we detest, we resent,
according as he inspires us; and are prompted to resolve, or to act, with
vigor and warmth. Such high Eloquence is always the offspring of passion. By
passion, I mean that state of the mind in which it is agitated and fired, by
some object it has in view. A man may convince, and even persuade others to
act, by mere reason and argument. But that degree of eloquence which gains the
admiration of mankind, and properly denominates one an Orator, is never found
without warmth, or passion. Passion, when in such a degree as to rouse and
kindle the mind, without throwing it out of the possession of itself, is
universally found to exalt all the human powers. It renders the mind infinitely
more enlightened, more penetrating, more vigorous and masterly, than it is in
its calm moment^ A man actuated by a strong passion, becomes much greater than
he is at other times. He is conscious of more strength and force: he utters
greater sentiments, conceives higher designs, and executes them with a boldness
and felicity, of which, on other occasions, he could not think himself ^apable.
But chiefly, with respect to persuasion, is the power of passion felt. Almost
every man, in passion, is eloquent. Then he is at no loss for words and
arguments. He transmits to others, by a sort of contagious sympathy, the warm
sentiments which he feels; his looks and gestures are all persuasive; and
nature here shows herself infinitely more powerful than all art. This is the
foundation of that just and noted rule; Si vis me ^^ere, dolendum est primum
ipsi tibi.

BLAIR'S Lectures, vol. ii. p. 7.


Do you ask, what is frigid? It is whatever is exaggerated; whatever is
destitute of judgment; whatever pretends to wit; whatever is written without
interesting; and, especially, nothing is more frigid than a counterfeit ardour.

THE genuine talent for Eloquence is distinguished among very different styles.
The Orator possessed of it is always simple without ever appearing vulgar. He
shuns whatever is tumid or loose, or affected, or obscure; and he knows, at
times, how to touch the soul. and to charm the ear. Master of his expressions,
as he is of his thoughts, he rises, he is melted, he is inflamed, when his
subjects require excellence, sensibility, or fervor. To avoid in his
discourses the tome of declamation, he meditates a long time before he writes;
for it is the effect of meditation to retrench the superfluity of words. The
sacrifices, which he offers to taste, do not enervate his energy; they yield
fresh pleasure to the auditor, who is capable of admiring a natural and true
expression of genius in a judicious and correct phraseology. "First-follow
Nature, and your judgment frame
"By her just standard, which is still the same;
"Unerring Nature, still divinely bright.
"One clear, unchanged, and universal light,
"L^^^, force, and beauty, must to all impart,
"At once the source, and end, and test of art.
"Art from that fund each just supply provides,
"Works without show, and, without pomp, presides."
PO^E'S Essay on Criticism, l. 69.


THIS excellence, so rate, and so deserving of universal approbation, loses,
however, all its estimation in the eyes of those, whom a counterfeit energy
dazzles, and who deviate from the language of nature.

WE know that Seneca found the eloquence of Cicero too simple, and, that his
disciple Nero gilded the statues of Lysippus. Plin. 34, c. 3.


SECTION XXVI. Of Epithets.
STYLE loses its fullness and energy, when words are environed with cumbrous
epithets.

It has been remarked, that, in the philosophical analysis of languages, the
substantive is nothing, as it were, because abstract, and the adjective every
thing, because it is sensible. But it is not so in Eloquence, where,
frequently, the Epithet not being required by the accompanying word, oppresses
the period, without strengthening the thought. "Feeble writers," says Dr.
BLAIR, employ a multitude of words to make themselves understood, as they think
more distinctly; and they only confound the reader. They are sensible of not
having caught the precise expression, to convey what they would signify; they
do not, indeed, conceive their own meaning very precisely themselves; and,
therefore, help it out, as they can, by this and the other word, which may, as
they suppose, supply the defect, and bring you somewhat nearer to their idea:
they are always going about it, and about it, but never just hit the thing. The
image, as they set it before you, is always double; and no double image is
distinct. When an author tells me of his courage in the day of battle, the
expression is precise, and I understand it fully. But if, from the desire of
multiplying words, he will needs praise his courage and fortitude; at the
moment he joins these words together, my idea begins to waves. He means to
express one quality more strongly; but he is, in truth, expressing two. Courage
resists danger; fortitude supports pain. The occasion of exerting each of these
qualities is different; and being led to think of both together, when only one
of them should be in my view, my view is rendered unsteady, and my conception
of the object indistinct. BLAIR'S Lectures, vol. i. p. 190, 191.


EVERY useless Epithet ought to be proscribed. The Orator's elocution becomes
loose and dragging, when each expression does not conduce to throw light upon
the meaning, or, at least, to charm with the harmony. Beware of imagining that
we render Style strong or expressive, by a constant and multiplied use of
Epithets. This is a great error. Epithets have often great beauty and force.
But if we introduce them into every sentence, and string many of them together
to one object, in place of strengthening, we clog and enfeeble style, and
render the image confused and ind^^tinct, which we mean to illu^trate. BLAIR'S
Lectures, vol. ii. p. 117.


SUCH is the case with some discourses, which seem to be destitute of ideas,
although in other respects profoundly studied, inasmuch as one half of the
words might safely have been retrenched.

SECTION XXVII. Of the Necessity of an Orator's refining his Style.
CHRISTIAN Orators, do you, yourselves, erase such disgusting pleonasms. Pass a
critical judgment upon your productions, and, together with such insignificant
expressions, banish all those negligencies of style, which degrade the
sublimity of the ideas.

IT is not required that the whole of a sermon should be equally striking; but
it is requisite that it be all equally well written, and that Eloquence make
amends, by the beauty of the expression, for the quality of the thoughts when
they are ordinary; just as sculpture adds, by the richness of the drapery, to
the elegance of the figures.

WE must allow pauses for admiration. This is chiefly necessary for the sake of
energy. If, therefore, it be remarked that there are many very eloquent
passages in a sermon composed with care, and containing forcible arguments, the
praise will be sufficient; since there is none as yet extant, which is in all
respects perfect.

Is the merit of a pure and elegant style your ambition? Multiply the copies of
your discourses, and cease not to transcribe your performance until you are
able to afford satisfaction to yourself.

AN Orator ought to adopt the motto of Caesar, who thought that he had done
nothing, while there remained any thing for him to do. The more he writes, the
better he writes; and it is only by surmounting the tediousness of reiterated
transcriptions, that he can display in his style all the elegance of his taste.

HENCE it is, that very few men of learning employ all their powers to
advantage. The greater part, being accustomed to rest too soon contented, die
without ever having known the extent of their own talents.

FRESH ideas, the beauties of enlargement, the exquisite sentiment of a
finished passage, which Horace so well defined and relished when he called it,
qui me mihi reddat amicum; in a word, the elegant and variegated turns of
expression, which compose the beauty of style, do not occur to a writer in the
first cast of a work, and are generally the effect of a slow correction.

WHILE there remains room to alter. there is opportunity for improvement. It is
the characteristic of excellence in all the arts, so sensibly to strike the
spectator who admires it, that he can conceive of nothing transcending that
which he beholds.

HOWEVER little we may have accustomed ourselves to write, we easily
distinguish those passages, which have not been sufficiently studied, and which
proceeded from the pen of the writer, before they had been thoroughly digested
in his own mind. This hasty or negligent composition soon discovers itself,
not, as is commonly supposed, by the pleasing freedom of a diction somewhat too
unrestrained and irregular, but by the confusion of expression, all the
constituent parts of which are stiff and forced.

THE more the writer hurries himself, the more dragging, of course, is his
style. And, when it is said that a writing "smells of the lamp," it is an
evident proof that it is not sufficiently labored.

WHEN the steel has been well polished, the edge of the file is no more
perceived.

SECTION XXVIII. Of a proper Selection of Words.
LET no one accuse me here of exhorting Orators to render their compositions
insipid, with a view of improving their style.

I AM sensible, that, whatever we wish to finish with too much care, we
enervate; and, that the impetuosity of Eloquence spurns at those minute
researches, which would extinguish its fervor; but, I am aware also, that we
can write from present impulse, and correct afterward, at leisure, without
cooling the original ardour; and, that a pnoper medium is requisite to be kept
between the extreme of neglecting application, which adds to the defects of
taste, and the excess of labor, which deadens the transports of genius.

BOILEAU has said before me, and better than I have, Put your work twenty
times upon the frame; polish and re-polish it continually; sometimes add, and
often erase. Vingt fois fire le (...) tier vemettez votre ouvrage; Polissez le
sans cesse, et le repolissez.
Ajoutez quelquefois, et souvent effacez.
HORACE, who was a shrewd judge of human nature, insists upon an author's being
rigourously strict in criticizing and correcting his own works.

Vir bonus et prudens versus reprehendet inertes;
Culpabit dirros; incomtis a^linet atrum
Transverse cala^o fignum; ambi^iosa recidot
Ornamenta; parum claris lucem dare coget.
Arguet ambigue dictum mutanda notabit.
HOR. de Ar. Poet. v. 445. Dr. BLAIR enforces the same attention to the work of
revision and correction, in his directions for forming Style, when he obser^^^
that there may be an extreme in (...) great and anxious a care about words. We
must not re^ard the course of thought, nor cool the heat of imagination, by
pausing too long on every word we employ. There is, on certain occasions, a
glow of composition which should be kept up, if we hope to express ourselves
happily, though at the expense of allowing some inadver^encies to pass. A more
severe examination of these must be left to be the work of correction. For, if
the practice of composition be useful, the laborious work of correcting is no
less so; it is, indeed, absolutely necessary to our reaping any benefit from
the habit of composition. What we have written, should be laid by for some
little time, till the ardour of composition be past, till the fondness for the
expressions we have used be worn off, and the expressions themselves be
forgotten; and then reviewing our work with a cool and critical eye, as if it
were the performance of another, we shall discern many imperfections which at
first escaped us. Then is the season for pruning redundancies; for weighing the
arrangement of sentences; for attending to the juncture and connecting
particles; and bringing Style into a regular, correct, and supported form. This
Lim^ Labor, must be submitted to by all who would communicate their thoughts
with proper advantage to others; and some practice in it will soon sharpen
their ^ye to the most necessary objects of attention, and render it a much more
easy and practicable work than might at first be imagined.

BLAIR'S Lectures, vol. i. p. 404.


A PAINS-TAKING Orator, who is desirous of giving the finishing stroke to his
productions, is always repaid for his trouble. If correction do not suggest to
him the materials of a discourse, it, at least, points out expressions unworthy
of the pulpit, which sometimes escape in the ardour of composition; and this,
doubtless, is a valuable advantage in a style wherein we apprehend, justly
enough, that one bad word does oftentimes more injury, than a weak argument.

CORRECTION suggests to the Orator appropriate expressions, which render his
ideas more striking, and his sentiments more impassioned* "In the same manner,"
says Cicero, as clothes, at first invented through necessity, have afterward
become ornamental to the human body, so words, created by necessity, impart
also beauty to discourse.

THE value of well placed expressions is so striking in the art of Oratory,
that the eloquence of a passage sometimes depends upon a single word. Take an
example which is deserving of admiration. I select it from an excellent
discourse, which the Cardinal de Rohan, Grand Almoner of France, pronounced
upon presenting the body of Louis XIV. at the Abbey of St. Dennis. The Prince,
whose loss we mourn, leaves, it is true, names celebrated upon earth; and
posterity the most remote, will, like us, admire Louis the Great, the Just, the
Conqueror, the Pacific, the Friend of Learning, and the Protector of Kings.

HAD the Cardinal de Rohan said, that this Monarch left upon earth a celebrated
name, his expression would have been very common; but the same phrase put in
the plural, while speaking only of one man, and the enumeration of the several
titles of glory of Louis XIV. which at once justifies this bold ascription,
appear to me a sublime stroke.

MASSILLON knew also, this secret of the art. In his writings, a word, which
seemed to declare a paradox, often expressed a new thought, and a very weighty
and just idea. Such is that admirable Apostrophe, which we read in his sermon,
on the mixture of the righteous and the wicked. Ye great ones of the earth! the
innocent pleasure of sincerity, without which there is nothing agreeable in the
commerce of mankind, is denied you, and ye have no more friends, because it is
too beneficial to be one.

SECTION XXIX. Of Metaphors.
"I AM fond," says Montaigne, "of words corresponding with the thought." But,
to represent an idea in all its energy, the vulgar expression is frequently
insufficient, and then the Metaphor becomes the proper word in rhetorical
language.

It is essential to the two objects of which a Metaphor is composed, that their
relation to each other be obvious, and that they may be marked by no striking
dissimilitude.

ELOQUENCE could not exist without this language of imagination. "Speech," says
Cicero, ought equally to strike the mind and senses of all men. Oration Lominum
sensibus et mentibus accom^^^data. De Orat, 12.55.
Now, the senses are not moved but by the liveliness of images. Nature herself,
which is the original model of art, suggests the most expressive images to
savages, to infants, and to the meanest ranks of people, when they are governed
by a strong passion.

DUMARSAIS has judiciously observed, that more tropes were made use of in the
markets, than in the academies. It is true, those popular Metaphors are often
very inaccurate, and a writer ought to express them with exactness, when he
means to admit them into elevated language.

THAT absurd medley of Balthazar Gratian has been quoted with propriety, as a
very striking example of the abuse which may be made of figurative eloquence:
Thoughts flow from the extensive coasts of memory, embark on the sea of the
imagination, arrive at the port of genius, to be registered at the custom-house
of the understanding. Perhaps it may be no unsuitable parallel to the
fantastical Metaphor of Balthazar Gratian, mentioned by M. Ma^ry, to quoted
from the Life of GI^TIN, that absurd bombast, said to have been addressed by an
High Sheriff at Oxford to the students; "Arriving," says ^o, at the Mount of
St. Mary, in the stony stage where I now stand, I have brought you some fine
biscui^ carefully conserved for the chickens of the church, the sparrows of the
spirit, and the sweet swallows of salvation. GI^^ONS'S Rhetoric, p. 17.

The Spectator humourously describes the abuse of figurative Eloquence, when he
says, An unskilful author shall run Metaphors so absurdly into one another,
that there small be no simile, no agreeable picture, no apt resemblance, but
confusion, obscurity, and noise. Thus have I known an hero compared to a
thunderbolt, a lion, and the sea; all and each of them proper Metaphors for
impetuosity, courage, or force; but by had management it has so happened, that
the thunderbolt has overflowed its banks, the lion has darted through the
skies, and the billows have rolled out of the Lybian desert.

The same author presents us with the following letter, as a specimen of the
enormous abuse of metaphorical expression. -- Sir, After the many heavy lashes
that have fallen from your pen, you may justly expect in return, all the load,
that my ink can lay upon your shoulders. You have quartered all the foul
language upon me, that could be raked out of the air of Billingsgate, without
knowing who I am, or whether I deserve to be cupped and sacrificed at this
rate. I tell you, once for all, turn your eyes where you please, you shall
never small me out. Do you think that the panics which you sow about the parish
will ever build a monument to your glory? No, Sir, you may fight these battles
as long as you will, but, when you come to balance the account, you will find
that you have been fishing in troubled waters, and that an ig^is sat^^s has
bewildered you, and that indeed you have built upon a sandy foundation, and
brought your hogs to a fair market. S^^CTATOR, No. 595.




THERE must, doubtless, be imagination in the manner of expression; but, above
all, there must be truth and judgment.

THE image is false, when there is a contradiction of terms: as in that phrase,
I shall ascend to the foundation of the Cartesian system. It is incoherent,
when it describes, on one side, a physical substance, and on the other, a moral
subject: such is that parenthesis, I say then (and I always continue fixed upon
my principles.) It is puerile and far-fetched, whenever it forms an affected
and unusual periphrasis: as when sun-dials have been called "the registers of
the sun." But it becomes descriptive and just, when it is expressed with
simplicity and energy. It is thus that Bossuet describes the demands of luxury,
when he says, that every art is exhausted (literally sweats) to satisfy them.
To avoid such improprieties as those mentioned by our author, it is of
importance to bear in mind, what Dr. BLAIR says on this subject: A good rule
has been given for examining the propriety of Metaphors, when we doubt whether
or not they be of the mixed kind; namely, that we should try to form a picture
upon them, and consider how the parts would agree, and what sort of figure the
whole would present, when delineated with a pencil. By these means, we should
become sensible whether inconsistent circumstances were mixed, and a monstrous
image thereby produced; or whether the object was, all along, presented in one
natural and consistent point of view. BLAIR'S L^tur^s, vol. i. p. 311.


WHEN Bossuet makes use of a Metaphor which seems bold, he sometimes
apologizes; and presently he rises upon that description, which he does not
find sufficiently great nor daring.

"Shall I speak to you," says he in the funeral Oration for Maria Theresa,
shall I speak to you concerning the death of her children? Let us figure to
ourselves that young Prince, whom the graces themselves appear to have formed
with their hands. Forgive me this expression: methinks I still behold this
flower falling. At that time the sorrowful messenger of an event so fatal, I
was also the witness, when beholding the King and Queen, of the most piercing
grief on the one hand, and, on the other, of the most mournful lamentations;
and under different forms I saw an unbounded affliction.

AN idea which would be common, were it not for the boldness of the imagination
which sometimes gives sensation to inanimate beings, becomes interesting under
the pencil of an Orator or a Poet.

ELOQUENCE, I know, has less extensive privileges than Poetry. The latter is
exempted, according to the judicious observation of Boileau, from all the set
forms of excuse to which Prose is subjected: e. g. Pardon this expression; --
so to speak; -- if I may venture to say so, etc. We often find, however, in
excellent Orators, Metaphors which we should be scrupulous about hazarding in
verse. Those figures are so transfused through the style, that they are
scarcely observed in the perusal.

RACINE was, doubtless, struck with that expression in the sermon on the
mixture of the righteous and the wicked, where MASSILLON says, the righteous
man can with boldness condemn in others, that which he disallows in himself;
his instructions do not put his conduct to the blush; as he had expressed his
admiration of that other Metaphor, which is in the same discourse; the
Courtiers of Zedekiah charged the tears and dismal predictions of Jeremiah,
occasioned by the ruin of Jerusalem, with a secret desire of pleasing the king
of Babylon, who was besieging sieging that unfortunate city.

SECTION XXX. Of technical Expressions.
LET us never confound, with this elegant language of the imagination, those
technical words, which could only appertain to the vocabulary of sciences.

PITY on an Orator, when it is necessary to be learned in order to understand
him!

IT is not to excite astonishment by the display of his learning, that he
speaks to an assembled multitude; it is to move, it is to affect them; and he
mistakes his object, if he prefer those abstract and intellectual expressions,
which the vulgar do not comprehend, to those tender and ardent ones, which
produce a general impression.

A CHRISTIAN Orator is under still stronger obligation to address his hearers
with that simplicity of style, without which he will never be truly eloquent.
All men are bound to practice the duties of religion; it is, therefore,
requisite that all may be able to understand the minister who announces them.
But, let us once more repeat it, the discharge of zeal in this, as in every
other part of a sermon, is inseparable from the rules of art.

Is it your desire to be eloquent? Be simple. I go farther -- Be familiar in
your discourses. "Youth," says M. ROLLIN, cannot be made too sensible of the
character of simplicity which runs through the writings of the ancients. They
should be accustomed to study nature in all things, and be assured that the
best eloquence is that which is the most natural, and least far-fetched. The
Grecians gave it a very significant name, aphelcia which is pretty near what
Horace calls simplex munditiis, an elegant simplicity. ROLLIN'S Belles Lettres,
vol. ii. p. 59.

"A writer of simplicity," says Dr. BLAIR, expresses himself in such a manner,
that every one thinks he could have written in the same way; Horace describes
it:

-- Ut sibi quivis

Speret idem, sudet multum, frustraque laboret

Ausus idem.

There are no mari^s of art in his expression; it seems the very language of
nature; you see in the style, not the writer and his labor, but the man, in
his own natural character. He may be rich in his expression; he may be full of
figures, and of fancy; but these flow from him without effort; and he appears
to write in this manner, no^ because he has studied it, but because it is the
manner of expression most natural to him. This is the great advantage of
simplicity of style, that, like simplicity of manners, it shows us a man's
sentiments and turn of mind laid open withour disguise. More studied and
artificial manners of writing, however beautiful, have always this
disadvantage, that they exhibit an author in form, like a man at court, where
the splendor of dress, and the ceremonial of behavior, conceal those
peculiarities which distinguish one man from another. But reading an author of
simplicity, is like conversing with a person of distinction at home, and with
ease, where we find natural manners, and a marked character. BLAIR'S Lectures,
vol. i. p. 390.

The same author elsewhere remarks, that the style which the pulpit requires
must be very perspicuous. As discourses spoken there, are calculated for the
instruction of all forts of hearers, plainness and simplicity should reign in
them. All unusual, swollen, or high sounding words, should be avoided; especially
all words that are mere^y poetical, or merely philosophical. Dignity of
expression, which the pulpit requires, is perfectly co^sistent with s^mplicity.
The words employed may be all (...) words, easily understood, and in common
use; and yet the style may be abundantly dignified, and, at the same time, very
lively and animated. Ibid, vol. ii. p. 114.




You will not find one scientific word in the great masters of the age of Louis
XIV. After their example, then, reject all those unusual expressions, which
would disguise your thoughts, instead of elucidating them; and do not raise any
mists between the truth and your auditory.

QUINTILIAN illustrates this rule of taste by a very ingenious comparison, when
he says, that an Orator should consider the words of a language like pieces of
money, with which he ought not to incommode himself, when they are not current
coin. Q^INTIL. I^stit. lib. 3.


SECTION XXXI. Of Dignity of Style.
THIS popular Elocution does not, however, prohibit a Christian Orator from
ever making use of elevated expressions.

NOTHING stands more opposed to the dignity of the Ministry than mean words,
indecent allusions, or obscene representations.

CICERO descends to disgusting descriptions in his charges against Verres, and
in relating the intemperance of Marc Antony.

MASSILLON, whose language is generally very guarded, has not paid sufficient
respect to the decorum of the pulpit, in his eulogium of St. Agnes.

BOILEAU says, the Style the least elevated has still its elevation; much more
rhetorical Style, the most dignified, and, consequently, the most difficult of
all.

ELOQUENCE, in common with Poetry, has the happy privilege of embellishing its
images with the noblest expressions, which, without this contrivance, could not
belong to the Style of Oratory.

BOSSUET excels in that admirable talent of uniting the most familiar
narrations to the dignity of his discourses; and he proves by his own example,
that an able writer will always possess the art of adapting to the Style of
Eloquence, whatever could be related in the freedom of conversation.

No excuse can, therefore, be any longer admitted in favor of those Orators,
whose Style is mean, and grovelling, in relations much less common, than some
of those which Bossuet has given us in his funeral Orations. Such split upon
this rock, who dwell upon the disorders of every condition of life, instead of
attacking the vices which are common to all.

WHENEVER a preacher neglects to moralize in general terms, he ceases to speak
to his auditors a language, which interests them all; and thus, one part of the
congregation is pleased at finding itself spared, while the other is loaded
with the severest reproaches. Whatever paints the various passions, which
agitate the human heart, is excellent; but, whatever describes the history of
the excesses peculiar to the different conditions, which divide society, is low.

SECTION XXXII. Of Transitions.
THE less you multiply those extraneous particulars which have no affinity
between themselves, the greater unity * your FENELON, presents us with the
following valuable observations on this subject: Every truth is set by the
Orator in its proper place with regard to the whole; it prepares, leads on, and
supports, another truth that needed its assistance. Thus the whole discourse is
one; and may be reduced to one single proposition, set in the strongest light,
by various views and explications of it. This unity of design shows the whole
performance at one view: as in the public places of a city one may see all the
streets and gates of it, when the streets are straight, equal and duly
proportioned. The discourse is the proposition unfolded; and the proposition is
an abstract of the discourse.

Denique sit quodvis simplex duntaxat et unum.

HOR. de Art. P^e^. v. 23. An author, who does not thus methodise his
discourse, is not fully master of his subject: he has but an imperfect taste,
and a low genius. Order, indeed, is an excellence we seldom meet with in the
productions of the mind. A discourse is perfect, when it has at once method,
propriety, strength, and vehemence. But, in order to this, the Orator must have
viewed, examined, and comprehended every point, that he may range each word in
its proper place. This is what an ignorant declaimer, who is guided by his
imagination, can never discern, FENELON (...) Eloquence, p. 180, 181.

Observe how another sensible author expresses himself.

It is an infallible proof of the want of just integrity in every writing, from
the Epope^, or heroic poem, down to the familiar epistle, or slightest essay,
either in verse or prose, if every several part, or portion, fit not its proper
place so exactly, that the least transposition would be impracticable. If there
be any passage in the middle, or end, which might have stood in the beginning;
or any in the beginning, which might have stood as well in the middle, or end;
there is properly, in such a piece, neither beginning, middle, nor end, it is a
mere rhapsody, not a work; and, the more it assumes the air or appearance of a
real work, the more ridiculous it becomes. Characteristicks, vol. iii. p. 259,
260.

Bishop BURNEY gives the following direction to Preachers.

A text being explained, then the point, upon which the sermon is to run, is to
be opened; and it will be the better heard and understood, if there be but one
point in a sermon, so that one head, and only one, is well stated, and sully
set out. Discourse of the Pastoral Care, p. 249.

Dr. BLAIR expands the Bishop's idea, and at the same time, gives it its proper
bounds, when he says;

Unity is of great consequence in every composition; but in other discourses,
where the choice and direction of the subject are not left to the speaker, it
may be less in his power to preserve it. In a sermon it must be always the
Preacher's own fault, if he transgress it. What I mean by unity, is, that there
should be some one main point to which the whole strain of the sermon shall
refer. It must not be a bundle of different subjects strung together, but one
object must predominate throughout. This rule is founded on what we all
experience, that the mind can attend only to one capital object at a time. By
dividing, you always weaken the impression. Now this unity, without which no
sermon can have much beauty, or much force, does not require that there should
be no divisions or separate heads in the discourse, or that one single thought
only should be, again and again, turned up to the hearers in different lights.
It is not to be understood in so narrow a sense: it admits of some variety; it
admits of under parts and appendages, provided always that so much union and
connection be preserved, as to make the whole concur in some one impression upon
the mind. I may employ, for instance, several di^erent arguments to enforce the
love of God; I may also enquire, perhaps, into the causes of the decay of this
virtue; still one great object is presented to the mind; but if, because my
text says, "He that loves God must love his brother also," I therefore should
mingle in one discourse arguments for the love of God, and for the love of our
neighbor, I should offend unpardonably against Unity, and leave a very loose
and confused impression on the hearers' minds. BLAIR'S Lectures, vol. ii. p.
108.


discourse will have; the more will its parts be linked together, and the ideas
follow in succession.

THE art of forming Transitions is as difficult to be subjected to rules, as to
be reduced to practice.

BOSSUET'S "History of the Variations." is "justly quoted as a masterpiece of
this sort, wherein this great man unites all the branches of his subject, by
the sole band of his logic; and thus connects, without confusion, the most
abstract and dissimilar propositions.

TRANSITIONS, which are only built on the mechanism of the style, and merely
consist in a fictitious connection between the last word of the paragraph which
finishes, and the first word of the sentence which begins, cannot, with
propriety, be admitted as natural, but are rather forced combinations. True
rhetorical Transitions are such as follow the course of the reasoning, or
sentiment, with ease, almost without art, and unperceived by the hearer; such,
as unite the materials of the discourse, instead of merely suspending some
phrases upon each other; such, as bind the whole together, without obliging the
Preacher to compose a new exordium to each subdivision, which his plan exhibits
to him; such, as form an orderly and methodical arrangement, by the simple
unfolding of the ideas, in some measure, imperceptible to the Orator himself:
such, as call for, and correspond with, each other by an inevitable analogy,
and not by an unexpected association; such, in fine, as meditation produces by
suggesting valuable thoughts, not such as the pen furnishes in its search after
combined resemblances.

CLEAR and distinct ideas reciprocally accord with easy and felicitous
transitions. Stones well hewn, says Cicero, unite of themselves, and without
the aid of cement.

SECTION XXXIII. Of a copious Style.
IF a desultory style, if short expressions, in a word, if poor ideas can never
strictly unite, let us discard them, without hesitation, from a rhetorical
discourse. A broken and sententious style will never make powerful impressions
upon the multitude. Eloquence requires a kind of diction, expanded, lofty,
sublime, in order to develope the emotions of the soul, and to impart to
thought all its energy. He who renews his thoughts line by line, is always
frigid, slow, monotonous, and superficial. Sublimity is simply the effort of
genius transcending ordinary ideas. Let your thoughts dive deep. Stop not to
pick up the sparkling grains of sand upon that ground which covers a mine of
gold. Shoot beyond vulgar conceptions; and you will find the true sublime,
between that which is common, and that which is exaggerated. Unconstrained in
your steps, confine not yourself within the narrow limits of those curtailed
phrases, which drop every moment with the expiring idea; but display in their
vast extent, those copious and commanding modes of expression, which impart to
Eloquence its energy, its elevation, its vehemence, and its grandeur. "The
thundering strokes of Demosthenes," said Cicero, would have been much less
impressive, had they not been hurled with all the power and impetuosity of
copiousnes. Demosthenic non tam vibrarent fulmina illa ^isi nume^is conter^a
^eren^ur. Orator. 234.


THE same Cicero fixed the extent of the Orator's period to four verses of six
feet, which can be pronounced with one single breathing. E quatuorigitur quasi
hexametrorum instar versuum, quod sit, conft^t fere piena comprehensio. Orator.
222.


BUT, have we proper periods in our language, who can scarcely ever make use of
transposition; who are constrained to give a signification, if not perfect, at
least very distinct, to each word of the sentence, which the reader peruses;
who are subjected to uniform and feeble constructions, in which the nominative
is contiguous to the verb preceding the case governed; and who are perpetually
embarrassed by the repetition or ambiguity of pronouns? The theory of our
participles, too, is so obscure, our conjunctions are so insufficient, our
cases, admitting we have any, so insignificant, that it becomes requisite, in
writing, perpetually to recall the nominative, or the pronoun which represents
it, and to sacrifice sublimity to perspicuity. See remarks on the same subject
in FENELON'S Letter to the French Academy, 5, p. 193.


THE ancients compared the period to a sling, which throws out the stone, after
many circuits. With respect to the form or composition of sentences, Cicero
distinguishes them into two forts called tracta, strait or direct; and
contorta, bent or winding. Orat. c. 20.
By the former are meant such, whose members follow each other in a direct
order, without any inflection; and by the ^^tter, those which, strictly
speaking, are called periods. Periodos, in Greek, signifies a circuit or
circle. And so the Latins called circuitus and ambitus. By which they both mean
a sentence consisting of corresponding parts, so framed, that the voice in
pronouncing them may have a proper elevation and cadency, and distinguish them
by its inflection. And as the latter part returns back, and uni^es with the
former, the period, like a circle, surrounds and incloses the whole sense.
WA^D'S System of Oratory, vol. ii. p. 345.
Our period is none other than an inanimate diction, like the servile
translation of a precise interpreter, who expresses literally and unskilfully,
ideas conceived in a foreign idiom. The remarks of the learned Abbe, respecting
the feeble and limited construction of the French tongue, are, in a great
measure, applicable to the English, especially when compared with the greater
liberty of transposition, which the Latin language allowed, and, in which
Cicero, particularly, manifests that so much of its beauty and elegance
consists. Dr. WARD'S observations upon this point are as follow:

There are two kinds of Order, in the construction of a sentence, one of which
may be called natural, and the other artificial. We call that order natural,
when all the words in a sentence are so placed, as they are connected with, or
follow each other, in a grammatical construction. And it may properly enough
admit of this name, as it is founded in the nature of a proposition, and the
relation of the several words, of which it consists, to each other. And this
seems agreeable to the natural way of conveying our thoughts which leads us
first to express the subject, or thing, of which some other thing is said,
before the predicate, or that which is said concerning it; and with respect to
both, as every idea succeeds another in the order of our conceptions, to range
it in the same order, when we communicate them to others.

Our language in general keeps pretty much to this method. But in one thing,
particularly, it recedes from it; and that is, in placing adjectives, which
denote the properties of things, before their substantives or subjects, whose
properties they are. As when ^t is said, Evil communication corrupts good
manners. And this we always do, except something follows which depends upon the
adjective. So we say, He was a man eminent for his virtue, not, an ^^i^ent man.

Artificial order, as it respects simple sentences, has little or no regard to
the natural construction of words; but disposes them in such a manner, as will
be most agreeable to the ear, and best answer the design of the speaker. The
Latins take a much greater liberty in this respect, than we do, or the nature
of our language will permit. Quintilian says, it is best for the verb to stand
last, when there is no particular reason to the contrary; and he gives this
reason for it, 'because the force of the sentence lies in the verb.' They
likewise separate such words as have an immediate relation between them, or
dependence one upon another; and place any of them first or last, as they
please. In short, their order seems in a manner arbitrary, if it does not break
in upon perspicuity, to which they usually attend. But most of these things are
unsuitable to the genius of our language. The Latin tongue commonly admits of a
much greater var^ety in the transpo^^tion of members, as well as in that of
single words, than suits with our idiom. Our composition is, this respect, much
more limited and confined than the Latin. The natural order is certainly more
plain and easy; but yet it must be owned, that the other has its advantages,
and those very considerable. The language both of the Greeks and Romans has
more strength, as well as harmony, than any modern tongue; which is owing, in a
good measure, to this liberty in their composition. For by giving their periods
the finest tur^, and placing the most significant words, where they may strike
the mind with the greatest force, at the same time they both delight the ear,
and excite the attention.

WARD'S System of Oratory, vol. i. p. 354-364. Dr. BLAIR makes the following
apposite remarks upon this subject.

In the Latin language, the arrangement, which most commonly obtains, is, to
place first, in the sentence, that word which expresses the principal object of
the discourse, together with its circumstances; and afterward, the person, or
the thing, that acts upon it. Thus Sallust, comparing together the mind and the
body; Animi imperi^, ^^^peris servitis, magis (...); which order certainly
renders the sentence more lively and striking, than when it is arranged
according to our English construction; We make most use of the direction of the
soul, and of the service of the body.

The Latin order gratifies more the rapidity of the imagination, which
naturally runs first to that which is its chief object; and, having once named
it, carries it in view throughout the rest of the sentence. In the same manner
in poetry,

Justum et tenacem propofiti viru^,
Non civium ardor prava jubentium,
Non vultus instantis tyranoi,
Mente quatit solida. --
Every person of taste must be sensible, that here the words are arranged with
a much greater regard to the figure which the several objects make in the
fancy, than our English construction admits; which would require the Justum et
(...) propositi viru^, though undoubtedly, the capital object in the sentence,
to be thrown into the last place.

An English writer, paying a compliment to a great man, would say thus: "It is
impossible for me to pass over, in silence, such remarkable mildness, such
singular and unheard of clemency, and such unusual moderation, in the exercise
of supreme power." "Here, we have, first presented to us, the person who
speaks. 'It is impossible for me; next, what that person is to do; impossible
for him to pass over in silence;' and lastly, the object which moves him so to
do, 'the mildness, clemency, and moderation of his patron.' Cicero, from whom I
have translated these words, just reverses this order; beginning with the
object, placing that first which was the exciting idea in the speaker's mind,
and ending with the speaker and his action. Tantum mansuetudinem, tame
inusitatam in auditamque clementia^, tantumque in summa potestate ^^rum c^^nium
modum, tacit multo [nullo] modo praeterire possum. Orat. pro Marcell.

The Latin order is more animated; the English more clear and distinct. The
Romans generally arranged their words according to the order in which the ideas
rose in the speaker's imagination. We arrange them according to the order in
which the understanding directs those ideas to be exhibited, in succession, to
the view of another. Our arrangement, therefore, appears to be the consequence
of greater refinement in the art of speech; as far as clearness in
communication is understood to be the end of speech. BLAIR'S Lectures, vol. i.
p. 119, and 121.




SECTION XXXIV. Of Harmony of Style.
NEVERTHELESS, without this measurement of periods, Style is flat and
unharmonious. A Christian Orator should endeavor to please his auditors by a
melody which may make them more attentive to his instructions, and thereby
render the allurements of art subservient to the success of his ministry. Our
great masters have frequently displayed, in the pulpit, the fine talents of
painting by ^^unds, and of forming resemblances of in imitative harmony, which
poetry would find it difficult to equal.

BOSSUET meant to intimate in the funeral Oration for Tellier, that that
magistrate had breathed his last, while repeating this verse of the psalm, I
will sing of the mercies of the Lord forever; and see how the Orator recals, if
I may so say, before all his auditory, this circumstance of the death of the
Chancellor: "Enraptured that he could pour forth his grateful acknowledgements
even with his dying breath, he began the hymn of praise for divine mercies. I
will sing, says he, of the mercies of the Lord forever. He expires while
repeating these words, and continues singing with Angels the sacred song."

IT is genius alone, which can form such excellent pictures, and the art of
producing them is above rules; but, it is no less true, that rules of art are
often useful to the Orator, in laying open to him the chief secrets of harmony.

NEVER conclude your sentences with monosyllables, unless they are sufficiently
sonorous to strike the ear, and to assist the cadence of a period. As an useful
caution against the injudicious conclusion of sentimens (...) monosyllables, we
have this reflection: How ^^^greeable is the following sentence of an author,
speaking of the ^^nity! 'It is a mystery which we firmly believe the truth of,
and humbly adore the depth of.' And how easily could it have been mended by
this transposition! 'It is a mystery, the truth of which we firmly believe, and
the depth of which we humbly adore.' In general it seems to hold that a musical
close, in our language, requires either the last syllable, or the penult, that
is, the last but one, to be a long syllable. Words which consist mostly of
short syllables, as, contrary, particular, retrospect, seldom conclude a
sentence harmoniously, unless a run of long syllables, before, has rendered
them agreeable to the ear. BLAIR'S Lectures, vol. i. p. 160.


GUARD against multiplying words, whose uniform terminations introduce
consonances, or rather rhymes, which prose ought to reject. You will find in
the organization of every language a sort of mechanical harmony, in the use of
which we should not too freely indulge. Our author proceeds to illustrate his
meaning, by showing the use to which the final e^mute may be put in promoting
this harmony of sound, and he gives us an apt quotation from Massillon, in his
description of the death of a good man. But, as in this part of the author's
enlargement, his remarks are confined to the peculiarities and terminations of
the French language, the editor has omitted them in his translation, as being
useless to the mere English reader. On the subject of "the Harmony of Sounds
and Sentences," the reader is referred to BLAIR'S 12th Lect. throughout, where
he will find many ingenious and critical observations; -- also to WARD'S System
of Oratory, vol. i. p. 367. et seq.


SECTION XXXV. Of Variety of Style.
IF variety be requisite, even in the termination of words, it is still more
indispensable in the construction of the ideas. Uniformity in the manner of
expression always implies languor of thought. Variare Oration^m magn^pere
oportebit, nam (...) in (...) ^st matter. CICER^ de in^ect. lib. 1.76.


ARE you at a loss how to vary your periods? Lay down your pen. Resume
meditation; and every trait will soon have its appropriate character and
likeness.

THE repetition of the same modes of expression, at the commencement of a new
division of the subject, succeeds in pulpit style; but, if we wish to preserve
the hearers from the weariness which accompanies uniformity, it is peculiarly
proper, in the minute opening of such parts, to diversify the expressions and
metaphors, and to give a new coloring to each phrase.

THE sermons of the Abbe POULLE, which we have heard with so much pleasure,
deserve to be quoted, in the first instance, as admirable models of the art of
Oratory. What principally distinguishes the Style of this celebrated writer, is
that inexhaustible fertility of a brilliant imagination, which continually
changes his descriptions, his movements, his language; and which, though
discovering every moment the genius of an Orator under a variety of forms,
always retains the simplicity that is inseparably connected with real ability.

SECTION XXXVI. Of Perspicuity.
LET us guard, however, against sacrificing Perspicuity to Variety; and never
become obscure and unintelligible, in the pursuit of synonyma, or periphrases,
with a view to avoid the repetition of the same expression or turn of thought.
The intention of speaking is to be understood.

THE Greeks, whose language painted to the mind, and often to the eyes, the
signification, and even the functions of each word, called the voice, light.
Gr. ph^n^, (...), a pha^, in^fit. ^^ceo. HEDERIC. Lex. in exrb^^.
Dionysius of Halicarnassus compared Demosthenes to a fire, kindled in the
midst of the public places of Athens, enlightening and inflaming a people,
equally blind and insensible to their true interests.

SUCH, indeed, should be the perspicuity of Eloquence, as indiscriminately to
strike every mind. The Orator should continually ask himself, when he revises
his productions, What was it I meant to express? -- have I expressed it? The
more simple the expression, the greater its perspicuity: this simplicity always
imparts to it double energy. Perspicuity ought not to be sacrificed to any
other beauty whatever. If it should be doubted whether perspicuity be a
positive beauty, it cannot be doubted that the want of it is the greatest
defect. Nothing, therefore, in language ought to be more studied than to
prevent all obscurity in the expression; for to have no meaning is but one
degree worse than to have a meaning that is not understood. Elements of
Criticis^a, c. xviii. 2, p. 20, 54. "Perspicuity," says Dr. BLAIR, i^ the
fundamental quality of style; a quality so essential in every kind of writing,
that, for the want of it, nothing can atone. Without this, the richest
ornaments of style only glimmer through the dark; and puzzle, instead of
pleasing, the reader. This, therefore, must be our first object, to make our
meaning clearly and fully understood, and understood without the least
difficulty. "Oration," says QUINTILIAN, "debet negligenter quoque andientibus
esse aperta; ^t in animum audientis, sicut s^l in cenios, etia^si in e^m non
intendatur, occurrat. Quare non s^^um (...) intelligere possit, sed ne omnino
possit non intelligere curandum." If we are obliged to follow a writer with
much care, to pause, and to read over his sentences a second time, in order to
comprehend them fully, he will never please us long. Mankind are too indolent
to relish so much labor. They may pretend to admire the author's depth, after
they have discovered his meaning; but they will seldom be inclined to take up
his work a second time.

The great source of a loose style, in opposition to precision, is the
^njudicious use of those words termed synonymous. They are so called, because
they agree in expressing one principal idea; but, for the most part, if not
always, they express it with some diversity in the circumstances. They are
varied by some accessory idea which every word introduces, and which forms the
distinction between them. Hardly, in any language, are there two words that
convey precisely the same idea, a person thoroughly conversant in the propriety
of the language, will always be able to observe something that distinguishes
them. As they are like different shades of the same color, an accurate writer
can employ them to great advantage, by using them so as to heighten and to
finish the picture which he gives us. He supplies by one, what was wanting in
the other, to the force, or to the luster of the image which he means to
exhibit. But, in order to this end, he must be extremely attentive to the
choice which he makes of them. For the bulk of writers are very apt to confound
them with each other; and to employ them carelessly, merely for the sake of
filling up a period, or of rounding and diversifying the language, as if their
signification were exactly the same, while, in truth, it is not. Hence a
certain mist, and indistinctness, is unwarily thrown over style. BLAIR'S
Lectures, vol. i. p, 185, 195.

The whole of Dr. BLAIR'S 10th Lecture, on Perspicuity and Precision of Style,
is well worth perusal. See also, on this subject, WARD'S System of Oratory,
vol. i. p. 319, etc.




IT is judgment, which points out the propriety of the word; and it is the
propriety of expression which renders it perspicuous. But, to give perspicuity
to the ideas, it is requisite to be thoroughly informed. The writer, who is
necessitated to learn while he composes, is generally obscure. He, on the
contrary, who has, during a length of time, brought his knowledge to maturity,
becomes sufficiently master of his subject, to banish from his style,
ambiguity, double entendre, and declamation.

OBSCURITY proceeds from ignorance, when the expression is void of sense; from
design, when it is far-fetched; from negligence, when the thought is confused;
and from depravity of taste, when the word is more abstract than the idea. The
style of sacred Eloquence ought to be clear, and, in some sort, transparent.
The rapidity of utterance, which never allows time for examination, requires in
a sermon all the perspicuity of the most familiar language. "We should use,"
says FENELON, a simple, exact, easy style, that lays every thing open to the
reader, and even prevents his attention. When an author writes for the public,
he should take all the pains imaginable to prevent his reader's having any. All
the labor should be his own; and he should leave nothing but pleasure and
instruction to his readers. They should never be put to the trouble of finding
out his meaning. None but those who deal in riddles are allowed to puzzle
people. Augustus would rather have frequent repetitions used, than that there
should be the least degree of obscurity in a discourse. Indeed the first care
of one that writes only to be understood, is to ease his readers by expressing
himself clearly. FENELON'S Letter to the French Academy, ^ v. p. 194. Nobis
prima fit vi^tus perspicuitas, propria verba, rectus ordo, non in longum dilata
conclusio: nihil neque desit, neque superfluat. Ita sermo et doctis probabilis,
et planus imperitis est.

QUINT Inst. lib. viii. c. 2. M. ROLLIN enforces the observations of M. MAURY,
respecting the importance of perspicuity in public speakers, when he says, It
is a vicious taste in some Orators to imagine they have a great deal of
understanding, when much is required to comprehend them. Such do not consider,
that every discourse which wants an interpreter, is a very bad one. The supreme
perfection of a speaker's style should be to please the unlearned, as well as
the learned, by exhibiting an abundance of graces for the latter, and being
very perspicuous for the former. St. Austin wrote at first against the
Manichees, in a flowery and sublime style; whence his writings were
unintelligible to those who had but a moderate share of learning, at least not
without great difficulty. Upon this he was told, that if he desired to have his
works more generally useful, he must write in the plain and common style, so as
to be equally intelligible to the learned and the unlearned. The holy father
received this advice with his usual humility, and made prope^ use of it in the
books he afterward wrote against the heretics, and in his sermons. His example
ought to be the standard of all those who are to instruct others.

As obscurity is the fault which the preacher must chiefly avoid, and that his
auditors are not allowed to interrupt him, when they meet with any thing
obscure, St. Austin advises him to read in the eyes and countenances of his
auditors, whether they understand him or not; and to repeat the same, thing by
giving it different turns, till he perceives he is understood. ROLLIN'S Belles
Lettres, vol. ii. c 3, 4, p. 305 -- 307.

Dr. WARD ascribes Obscurity chiefly to the three following causes: First, all
ambiguity of expression, arising from the different senses in which a word is
capable of being taken. Again, Obscurity is occasioned either by too short and
concise a manner of speaking, or by sentences too long and prolix. And a third
cause of obscurity he states to be parenthesis, when it is either too long, or
too frequent. He gives examples under each head. See System of Oratory, vol. i.
p. 327 -- 335.




SECTION XXXVII. Of striking Passages.
PERSPICUITY is never prejudicial either to depth or energy. The more striking
a passage is, the clearer should be the expression. One loves to find, in a
sermon, some of those grand and new ideas, which delight, as if they were the
fruit of our own invention; for "truth", says Fontenelle, enters so naturally
into the mind, that, when it is at first apprehended, it seems as if nothing
more were necessary than to call it to remembrance. Plurality of worlds. Second
evening.
Such is the sentiment we experience, when reading this sublime passage of
(...) God, in the sacred scriptures, derides idols, which bear the title of
Gods. Where are your gods, says he to the people, those gods in whom ye have
put your trust? Let them rise up, and help you, and be your protection. Deuteronomy.
xxxii, 37, 38.
Observe, my brethren, that this great God, this true God, and He, who alone
deserves by his beneficence the majesty of this title, would have us
understand, that it is an insufferable dignity to bear the name of God, without
supporting so great a name by extensive beneficence. This noble idea of power
is far different from that which the Mighty of the earth form in their minds.
They imagine, that their grandeur shines forth more by laying waste, than by
conferring benefits; by wars, by carnage, by the proud enterprises of those
destroyers of provinces, whom we call conquerors. Fragment of a sermon, "on the
means of sanctifying grandeur," for the fourth Sunday of Lent.


SUCH, also, is the admiration excited by that beautiful passage, in the
funeral Oration for LOUIS XV. by M. de Beavais, bishop of Sennes, who, in this
kind of Christian Eloquence, possesses a reputation as brilliant as it is
merited.

THE people, doubtless, have no right to murmur; but they have also,
undoubtedly, the right to keep silence; and their silence is the lesson of
kings.

SECTION XXXVIII. Of common Places.
SUCH strokes enliven a sermon, and leave, in the mind of the auditor, an
indelible impression. The more they are multiplied in a discourse, the higher
we soar above those diffuse writers, whose productions, being destitute of
genius, are a mere collection of common places.

BY common places, I mean, here, loose details equally applicable to all
subjects: for every subject has its common places, which will become apposite
and peculiar, in the mouth of an energetic and original Orator.

ENTER a church in the middle of a sermon: if, in a minute, you do not discern
the drift of the discourse; if you be obliged to wait to the end of a division,
in order to penetrate the design of the preacher, pronounce confidently, that
he wanders in a labyrinth of common places; that he has not composed through
inspiration; and that he labors hard to make up, by the redundancy of words,
for the sterility of ideas.

WHAT, then, will you discover in his inexhaustible loquacity? disgusting
repetitions, or extravagant conceptions; plagiarisms or imitations; an
incurable facility of uttering expressions, which always leave the mind empty;
pitiful proofs of a beggarly mediocrity, from which nothing can be expected;
and discourses, of which all the contents were known before they were heard.

HENCE arise those frequent enumerations, which are only a redundancy of words,
sometimes as dazzling in the delivery, as they are insipid in the perusal. Such
puerile figures have been, for a long time, applauded by a great many hearers,
who regarded, as the noblest effort of human genius, the mechanical talent of
collecting, into one period, accumulated substantives, crowded epithets, rapid
contradictions, unexpected antitheses, trivial or unnatural metaphors,
repetitions re-echoed, abundance of synonymous words, symmetry of combinations,
and unceasing contrasts.

BUT, it has been at length understood, that this tiresome prating was not
true eloquence, and it is now become disgustful.

GUARD against tedious enumerations, which occasion you such painful efforts of
memory, and are so soon forgotten.

WHEN an Orator studies his sermon, he is the best judge of it; and experience
daily teaches him, that the passages, which he finds the greatest difficulty to
commit to memory, scarcely ever deserve to be learnt.

SECTION XXXIX. Of Oratorical Preparation.
CONNECTED arguments imprint themselves more easily on the memory, than those
collections of words, which are destitute of ideas; and, especially, when the
progress of Eloquence is advanced by a combination of proofs.

THE difficult and necessary art of oratorial preparation is sure to be
decisive of the success of a sermon.

A SUDDEN stroke is merely a hasty sally; if it be well prepared, it becomes a
sublime movement.

MAY I be permitted to render my idea more familiar by a comparison? -- You
walk by yourself, in the fields, on a summer's day. You give scope successively
to a variety of thoughts, with which the view of the country, and the silence
of nature, inspire you. When your mind is thus wholly engaged with these
pleasing reveries, all of a sudden you hear thunder which crashes at a
distance. This noise at first alarms you. In the mean time, the sky is serene,
the air is calm, all is tranquil about you; and this first impression of terror
is soon erased from your memory. But, when the horizon lowers, and is covered
with dark clouds; when the sun disappears; when the hurricane rolls whirlwinds
of dust; when the lightning flashes; when the atmosphere is inflamed; and when
the thunder afterward roars over your head; you will be alarmed; and your
mind, prepared by gradual emotions, will then have a more lively sensation of
the violence of the shock arising from such continued perturbation. It is the
same with Eloquence. Through a multitude of adventitious ideas, the mind must
be gradually prepared to participate in all the tranports of passion or terror,
of joy or grief, of love or indignation, with which you yourself are agitated.
The impression too soon wears off, if the heart be not sufficiently mollified
to enable it to penetrate without meeting with opposition.

DOES Bossuet intend to give you a high idea of the courage, with which the
queen of England struggled against all her misfortunes? His relations, were
they introduced even without art, would astonish you; but, when ushered in by
this sublime image, they transport you: Like a column, whose solid mass appears
the firmest support of a ruinous temple, when that lofty edifice which it
sustains rests upon it without overthrowing it; thus the queen discovers
herself to be the firm support of the state, when, after having for a long time
borne its weight, she is not even bowed down under its fall. Your mind, struck
with this spectacle which the Orator had the art of representing before you,
beholds the queen of England constantly raised above her adversities; and your
imagination is continually describing to itself this column, which remains
standing in the midst of the ruins with which it is surrounded.

SECTION XL. Of Oratorial Precautions.
BESIDES those preparations, which tend to set off excellent ideas to
advantage, there are also precautions, which Orators ought not to neglect.
Precautions of modesty, with a view to conciliate the good will, or confidence,
of their auditory: Precautions of complaisance, in order to apologize for
ideas, which would appear too bold if they bluntly thwarted the prejudices
intended to be opposed: Precautions of prudence: Appear as if you dared not
accuse your hearers of certain exces^es, of which they are but too culpable,
and which the remorse of their consciences affect still more than the
reproaches of your zeal. When you make known unpalatable truths, says Cicero,
it is proper that you seem to do it with reluctance: Si quid persequare acri^s
ut invitus et coactus facere vidcare. Cic. de Orat. lib. ii. 182, p. 62.
Precautions of decency: Throw a veil over particulars, to which you ought to
refer, without too minutely investigating them. Bossuet does not choose to say
in direct terms, in his funeral oration for the queen of England, that Charles
I. died upon a scaffold; but, to recall that event, he makes an ingenious
application; he contents himself with causing the queen to adopt those words of
the prophet Jeremiah, who, alone, he says, is capable of equalling his
lamentations to his calamities. O Lord, behold my affliction, for the enemy
has magnified himself. The adversary has spread out his hand upon all my
pleasant things: my children are desolate, because the enemy prevailed. The
kingdom is polluted, and the princes thereof. For these things I weep; mine
eye, mine eye runs down with water, because the comforter that should
relieve my soul is far from me: Lam. i. 9, 16, and ii. 2.
Precautions of judgment: Write agreeably to, and sometimes in a style
different from, your peculiar talent. Is it the pathetic which characterizes
you? Guard against languor and monotony. Does energy please you? Avoid
obscurity and bombast. Observe the extreme, toward which your mind inclines,
and endeavor to shun it: Precautions in the cadences of sentences; and
particularly, in beginning paragraphs. The auditor forms his opinion of you
whenever the conclusion of your periods leaves him a moment's pause; and his
attention relaxes if you neglect to terminate your compositions with luminous
ideas, or striking images: in a word, precautions of courage, occasioned by
subjects which present difficulties, where you are attended to with an equal
mixture of eagerness and severity.

THROW yourself, at once, into the midst of the danger, that you may the better
display the resources of your genius, and make your attack while put upon your
defense. This risk, to which the Orator exposes himself, imparts to Eloquence a
glow of enthusiasm, which raises him superior to his usual exertions. It then
happens to him, -- may I be forgiven this comparison? as to the soldier who
said, while passing under the citadel of Namur, the day following the assault,
Yesterday I stormed this rock in the midst of fire, and today I should not be
able to mount it. "I firmly believe it", replied one of his comrades, nor can I
-- there is no more any firing against us.

SECTION XLI. Of Hypothesis
IT is evident, that on such hazardous occasions, the great business of an
Orator consists in omitting no precautions, and in adding energy to art.

IT is an excellent method to make choice of a proper and ingenious
circumlocution to convey the meaning of what cannot be so well expressed. The
Hypothesis is a figure well adapted to yield this resource to Eloquence. Cicero
often uses it in his Orations, and especially in those against Verres, where he
is every moment forming suppositions more striking than the facts, with a view
to render the exactions of Verres odious to the people of Rome.

BOSSUET, whom I am pepetually quoting, because I know not a better model, has
made an admirable use of Hypothesis, in his funeral Oration for Tellier. Sleep
on, ye rich men of the earth, and remain in your native dust. Ah! if some ages
-- what do I say? if, some years after your death, ye may become men forgotten
in the midst of the world, ye should hasten to enter into your tombs, that ye
may not behold your names tarnished, your memories extinguished, and your
foresight deceived in your friends and dependants, and still more, in your
heirs and children. Is this, then, the fruit of the toil with which ye have
been consumed under the sun?

SECTION XLII. Of Egotism of Style.
LET us reckon also amongst oratorical precautions, a studied attention never
to speak about oneself in the pulpit.

FLECHIER, What is most distinguishable in M. Flechier, is a purity of diction,
elegance of style, rich and florid expressions, beautiful thoughts, a prudent
vivacity of imagination, and the consequence of it, that is, a wonderful art in
painting objects, and making them, as it were, sensible and obvious. But then,
I think a kind of monotony and uniformity runs through all his writings; he has
every where almost the same turns, the same figures, the same method. The
antithesis, engrosses very near all his thoughts, and often enervates, by an
endeavor to embellish them. ROLLIN'S Belles Lettres, B. iii. c. 11, vol. ii.
p. 39.
who, in the composition of his funeral Oration for Turenne, stands in the
foremost rank of Orators, although he do not delineate the excellent character
of his hero in private life, and his discourse be, in other respects, far
inferior to the chief performances of Bossuet, affords us, in a letter which is
prefixed to his funeral Orations, a singular example of egotism and vanity. He
draws his own portrait in this letter; and one would imagine that he is sending
to his friend the materials for a panegyric; or rather, it is a complete
eulogium, in which he forms sparkling antitheses from the recital and contrast
of his various merits. See how Flechier describes himself in this passage: he
tells us, that he has a sort of genius capable of executing whatever he
undertakes; his style is nature approaching to art, and art resembling nature.
Nothing can be added to what he writes, without superfluity, nor retrenched
without removing something necessary. He can scatter some grains of odoriferous
incense to refresh, and yet not overpower; but he accepts of none which are not
equally pure with those which he bestows. There is discernible in his eyes a
certain something corresponding with his genius. After all, it would be better
if he could inure himself to study, and if his memory, somewhat treacherous,
without however being unfaithful, were equally serviceable to him as his
genius. But there is no perfection in the world, and every one has his weak
side. It were to be wished, for the honor of Flechier, that posterity had
confirmed this judgment, which he passed upon himself.

IT is, without doubt, an unnecessary apprehension, that a Christian Orator
could ever suffer himself to advance, in the pulpit, an egotism so
preposterous. It is always dangerous speak about oneself before a large
assembly. We are even careful to avoid this absurdity in small companies; and
it appears to me, that it was owing to good taste, as much as to Christian
humility, that the word I was banished from the writings of Port Royal.

THE Abbe de Fleury says, that the Historian should himself be kept out of view
in his narration, so that the reader may not have leisure to reflect, whether
the facts recorded be written well or ill; whether they be written at all;
whether he have a book in his hands; whether there be an author in the world.
It is thus that Homer wrote. What the amiable FENELON says of poets, and which
he strengthens with the sanction of Plato's judgment, may, with equal
propriety, be applied to historians: The poems of Homer and Virgil are full of
a noble simplicity; their art is entirely concealed; nature itself appears in
all that they say. We do not find a single word, that seems purposely designed
to show the poet's wit. They thought it their greatest glory never to appear,
but to employ our attention on the objects they describe; as a painter
endeavors to set before your eyes wide forests, mountains, rivers, distant
views, and buildings; or the adventures, actions, and different passions, of
men, in such a lively manner, that you cannot trace the masterly strokes of his
pencil, for art look, mean and coarse when it is perceived. Plato, who has
thoroughly examined this matter, assures us, that in composing, the Poet [so
also the Historian or Preacher] should always keep out of sight, make himself
to be quite forgotten by his readers, and represent, only those things and
persons which he would set before their eyes.

FENELON'S Dialogues concerning Eloquence, p. 63. Mr. KNOX tells us, that his
opinion coincides with that of the best judges of antiquity, that the diction
of the historian should not be such, either in the construction or selection of
words, as to allure the attention of the reader from the facts to the words,
from the hero to the writer. The same author condemns some of the most popular
historians of France, who have violated the gravity and dignity of the historic
page, by perpetual attempts to be witty." And he adds, "though the works of
such may afford pleasure, it is not such as results from legitimate history.
The writer evidently labors to display himself, and his own ingenuity: but it
is one great secret in the art of writing, that the writer should keep himself
out of sight, and cause the ideas, which he means to convey, fully to engross
the reader's attention. They cannot indeed otherwise produce their proper
effect. If there are any readers, who choose to have the writer present to
their view, rather than the matter which he writes, they may be said to
resemble those spectators, who go to the theater, rather to see and hear a
favorite actor, than to attend to the persons of the drama. It is not
Shakespeare's Hamlet, or Lear, whom they admire, but some name which stands in
rubric characters on the walls, and in the play bills.

KNO^'S Essays, vol. i. No. 23. p. 110. Of historians, who write of themselves
with propriety, CAESAR, XENOPHON, and POLY^IUS, are the most remarkable; to
which number may be added St. LUKE, in the Acts of the Apostles; and Capt. COOK
among the moderns.

Whoever wishes for farther information on the subject of History and its
Style, may consult WARD'S System of Oratory, vol. ii. p. 230 -- 236; also
ROLLIN'S Belles Lettres, vol. iii. b. iv. p. 1, and BLAIR'S Lectures, vol. ii.
p. 293.




Now, if an Historian be not suffered to attempt to show himself in his
relations, doubtless a Preacher ought to be more attentive to keep himself out
of the view of his auditory. Let us hear what M. CLAUDE says on this subject:
when it was needful to exalt the grace of God, St. PAUL spoke of his raptures,
miracles, and visions; and when it was needful to show the faithfulness of his
conduct in discharging his ministry, against the bold accusations of his
enemies, he recounted his voyages, labors, and persecutions; but when he had a
law to impose upon men's consciences, or a doctrine of faith, or a rule of
conduct to establish, he introduced it only with the name of GOD. Nothing but
what is divine; no consideration at all of man is mentioned here; for faith and
conscience acknowledge no authority but that of God, nor obey any voice but
that of the common Master of all creatures. We preach not ourselves, but Christ
Jesus the Lord, and ourselves your servants, says the apostle elsewhere. Herein
he resembles the prophets, who, when they advanced any thing, always used this
preface, Thus says the Lord. CLAUDE'S Essay on the composition of a Sermon,
vol. ii. p. 316. Let young and fashionable divines take care, as they will
answer it to Him in whose name they ascend the pulpit, not to preach
themselves, but the Gospel; not to be so solicitous in the display of a white
hand, as of a pure heart, of a diamond ring, as of a shining example.

KNOX'S Essays, No c^xiii. A celebrated Preacher among the Dissenters, now
deceased, the Rev. Mr. R -- n, in a Charge, which he delivered to a young
minister at his ordination, thus addressed him: Let me remind you, Sir, that
when you come into this place, and address this people, you are never to bring
your little self with you. I repeat this again, Sir, that it may more deeply
impress your memory: I say, that you are never to bring your little self with
you: No, Sir, when you stand in this sacred place, it is your duty to hold up
your great Master to your people, in his character, in his offices, in his
precepts, in his promises, and in his glory. This picture you are to hold up to
the view of your hearers, w^ile you are to stand behind it, and not so much as
your little finger must be seen.




THERE are occasions, however, when an O^ator becomes himself the subject of an
argument, which interests the public, and when he may speak of himself, without
being personal. Where can I find a better example to illustrate this precept,
than in the following passage of Fontenelle, in his treatise of^ Happiness; (a
work written with distinguished and vast precision:) It is necessary, first of
all, to investigate the pretensions of that which boasts of contributing to our
happiness. Wherefore is this dignity I am pursuing so necessary for me? -- It
is so that I may have the pre-eminence before others. But wherefore should this
be necessary? -- That I may receive their respect and homage. But of what
service to me is this homage and respect? -- They will very much caress me. But
in what estimation can I hold those caresses, which are paid to my dignity, and
not to myself?

IN thus making application to himself of a general maxim, the Christian Orator
reasons in the name of his auditory. All other egotism is forbidden him.

BOSSUET affects me when he speaks of his white hairs. Bourdaloue penetrates me
with a sacred veneration when he apologizes for his sermon "on Impurity," in
his homily of Magdalen. But it is the privilege of these great masters to fall
into such sort of digressions; and yet they never allow themselves in them
unnecessarily, nor without attaining a vigor of genius, which renders all
excusable.

SECTION XLIII. Of Bourdaloue.
WHAT I am chiefly pleased with, and admire in Bourdaloue, is, his keeping
himself out of sight; that, with a style too often sacrificed to declamation,
he never strains Christian duties, never converts simple advices into positive
precepts, but his morality is such as can always be reduced to practice. It is
the inexhaustible fertility of his plans which are never alike, and the happy
talent of arranging his arguments with that order of which Quintilian speaks,
when he compares the merit of an Orator, who composes a discourse, to the skill
of a general, who commands an army; Est velut Imperatoria virtus. Instit. 2.
it is that accurate and forcible logic, which excludes sophisms,
contradictions, paradoxes; it is the art with which he establishes our duty
upon our interest, and that valuable secret, which I seldom see, but in his
sermons, of converting the recital of conversations into proofs of his subject;
it is that redundancy of genius, which, in his discourses leaves nothing
farther to be supposed, although he composed at least two, often three,
sometimes even four sermons on the same subject, without our even knowing,
after having read them, to which to give the preference; it is the simplicity
of a style, nervous and affecting, natural and noble; the profoundest knowledge
of religion; the admirable use which he makes of the Scriptures, and of the
Fathers; these are the talents, which never permit me to think of this great
man, without saying to myself, See then, to what an elevation genius may be
raised, when it is invigorated by study! What can be more beautiful and
inimitable in Christian Eloquence, than the first parts of the sermons of
Bourdaloue "on the Conception," "the Passion," and "the Resurrection! Among the
Roman Catholic Preachers, the two most eminent are BOURDALOUE and MASSILLON. It
is a subject of dispute among the French critics, to which of these the
preference is due, and each of them have their several partiz^ns. To
Bourdaloue, they attribute more solidity and close reasoning; to Massillon, a
more pleasing and engaging manner: Bourdaloue is indeed a great reasoner: and
inculcates his doctrines with much zeal, piety, and earnestness; but his style
is verbose, he is disagreeably full of quotations from the Fathers, and he
wants imagination. Massillon has more grace, more sentiment, and, in my
opinion, every way more genius. He discovers much knowledge both of the world
and of the human heart; he is pathetic and persuasive; and, upon the whole, is,
perhaps, the most eloquent writer of sermons, which modern times have produced.
BLAIR'S Lectures, vol. ii. p. 120. M. CREVIER, in his R^etorique Franco^se,
makes the following critical comparison of celebrated French Orators: BOSSUET
is sublime, but unequal; FLECHIER is more equal, but less sublime, and often
too flowery: BOURDALOUE is solid and judicious, but he neglects the lighter
ornaments. MASSILLON is richer in imagery, but less cogent in reasoning. I
would not, therefore, have an Orator content himself with the imitation of one
of these models, but rather that he strive to combine in himself the different
qualities of each.

Vol. ii. ad fin.


SECTION XLIV. Of Massillon.
HIS rival MASSILLON seldom has sublime strokes; but if he be inferior in his
peculiar fame as an Orator, he is, doubtless, of the first rank as a writer. No
one has carried the excellence of style to a higher degree of perfection. He
attended to this branch of Eloquence to the latest period of his life.

THERE were found in his port-folio, after his death, twelve transcripts of his
sermons, which he revised with unwearied pains after his advancement to the
episcopacy, and which of course, have never been delivered from the pulpit,
such as we now read them.

MASSILLON retained in his old age all the purity of his taste, although he had
lost the vivacity of his imagination. He then employed himself much more upon
the style than upon the main points of his discourses; but he was always
unwilling to revise his course of Lent Sermons, Fr. son peti^ Carem^
which he had written at first with much care; and I do not mean to attack the
glory of the immortal Massillon, I intend, on the contrary, to render him fresh
homage, in boldly advancing, that ^his, which has for a long time been quoted
as his chief work, appears to me one of his feeblest rhetorical productions.

MASSILLON'S plans are all alike; and, besides this sameness which is so
perceptible, when we read his sermons in succession, he generally confines
himself to combat excuses, and perhaps does not sufficiently search beforehand
into the bottom of his subjects.

HE was born with very great talents for Eloquence; but, he was not
sufficiently studious in his youth. He depended too much upon his quickness of
parts; and we may say respecting him, what the Roman Orator said of Piso, As
much as he withheld from application, so much he diminished his glory. Quantum
detraxit ex studio, tantum amisit e gloria. BRUTUS, 236.
Yes, it is my admiration of him; it is my reading him over and over, every
day, with delight, that emboldens me to apply to him the charge, which Cardinal
de Retz brought against the great Conde, when he blames him for not having
merited all that he might. Memoirs, vol. i.


How superior would Massillon really have been to himself, were all his sermons
as eloquent and perfect as his "Ecclesiastical Conferences;" his discourses "on
the Forgiveness of Enemies;" "on the death of a Sinner;" "on Confession;" "on
the Divinity of Jesus Christ;" "on the Mixture of the Righteous and the
Wicked;" his homily "of the Prodigal Son," etc! In these we have Massillon's
most masterly performances; it is here we discover all his genius; while we
regret that he has not bestowed more time upon the composition of his other
works. The late Dr. Dodd published a translation of Massillon's sermons
preached before Louis XV. during his minority. They were called "Sermons on the
Duties of the Great," and inscribed to the Prince of Wales. The Rev. Dr. Milne
has published a volume of sermons, professedly in imitation of Massillon and
other French writers.




THIS excellent writer, misled by his copiousness, frequently fails in not
sufficiently enriching his beautiful style with ideas; and he would
unquestionably lose much of his celebrity, were he to be judged according to
this maxim of Fenelon; a good discourse is that from which nothing can be
retrenched without cutting into the quick. Letter upon Eloquence.


MASSILLON'S arguments are sometimes destitute of regularity, of energy,
perhaps even of the solidity which he was so capable of giving them.

COULD it be believed, that, in his sermon "on the Certainty of a future
State," which is, in other respects, full of beauty and energy, Massillon
seriously refutes, and more than once, the frivolous objection, that another
state of existence is incredible, because no one ever returned from it? The
French Orator, so styled by way of pre-eminence, Bossuet, has also deigned to
take notice of this plea of sinners, who would call for miraculous apparitions,
not to convince them of the soul's immortality, but to determine their
conversion. One expression at the close of the funeral Oration for Queen
Henrietta (the most pathetic of all his discourses) suffices him to confute, by
a sublime stroke, this absurd demand. It were to be wished, that Massillon had
often copied this boldness of the pencil! Do we expect God to raise the dead in
order to instruct us? It is by no means necessary that the dead return, nor
that any one rise out of the grave; that which to day descends into the tomb
might be sufficient to convert us.

SECTION XLV. Of Saurin.
WE sometimes discover such passages after the manner of Bossuet, in the
sermons of the Pastor SAURIN, whom we ought to insert at the head of Preachers
of the second class. Among the French Protestant Divines, SAURIN is the most
distinguished: he is copious, eloquent, and devout, though too ostentatious in
his manner. BLAIR'S Lectures, vol. ii. p. 120. The sermons of the late Rev. C.
CHAIS, preached at the French church at the Hague, have also considerable merit
in pulpit eloquence.




THE first part of his discourses generally consists of a commentary upon his
text. In my opinion, all his critical discussions upon history, grammar, or
chronology, are extremely different from E^oquence.

BESIDES, the show of erudition, with which Saurin imposes on so many of his
readers, ought not to be held of any account, even if all this scientific dress
were not mistimed, inasmuch as it is no very difficult task to copy
commentators, or to translate ^^issertations.

ON this account, therefore, when you read Saurin, do not stop short at any of
the first parts of his discourses. This manner of writing, which, at the
beginning of this century, was called "the Refugee style," has been charged
against him on substantial grounds. He uses a translation of the Bible, which
was made immediately after the separation of the Protestant churches; and this
old language, contrasted with his modern Eloquence, imparts to his style a
savage and barbarous air. I might quote examples, if his sermons were not so
diffuse.

SAURIN, however, writes with ardour and vehemence. He does not make an
ostentations show of wit; he does not lose sight of his auditory; he forcibly
urges his arguments; he knows when to insist upon them; he is moved, and he
inflames. He has the merit of ^eing a natural Orator: and, he would have
acquired the taste in which he is deficient, i^ he had joined, to the study of
examples, the residence of Paris.

No Christian Orator, after Bossuet, (to whom there can be none compared when
speaking of Pulpit-Eloquence) has labored more carefully or successfully the
perorations of his discourses. In them, Saurin always recalled the idea of
death. This object renders them as solemn as they are affecting. They commonly
consist of repetitions; and this return of the same set of expressions is very
proper, when making the application of a sermon to the different classes of
hearers. It is by this figure, that he recapitulates his proofs; and then he
points to the open grave, as if the listening congregation, ready to descend
into it, were not thenceforward to hear any other instruction, or rather, as if
he himself were preaching for the last time.

THE sermons of Saurin, on the wisdom of Solomon, and on the discourse of St.
Paul to Felix and Drusilla, appear to me the masterpieces of this Orator.

IT is commonly supposed, that he never allowed himself to make use of
declamations against the church of Rome; but I apprehend that fanaticism cannot
break out more passionately, than in his sermons on the dedication of the
church of Woorburg; on "the afflictions of the church;" on "the (...)
incomprehensibility of God;" on the fast; observed before the campaign of 1706.

SAURIN is transformed. He rises to the level of Demosthenes, when he speaks of
the emigration of the Protestants; above all, when he thunders against Louis
XIV. He is never more eloquent, nor more sublime, than when wasting his fury
against this monarch, whose name perpetually recurs in his discourses, and,
principally, in the sermons, which I am about to quote.

THIS apostrophe is well known; and thou formidable Prince, whom I once
honored as my king, and whom I still regard as the scourge of the Lord, etc.
Saurin finishes this passage by saying, that he forgives Louis XIV; but he does
not attempt to impress this insulting moderation on the minds of the people of
Holland. It is, perhaps, in the pulpit of Saurin, where have been fabricated
the arms of Hochstet, of Malplaquet, and Ramillies; and where that implacable
resentment has been produced, which presided at the conferences of
Gertruidemberg.

NEVER did an Orator conceive any thing more daring than the dialogue of Saurin
between God and his auditory, in his sermon "on the fast of 1706." "My people,"
says the most High my people, what have I done unto thee?" "Ah, Lord! how many
things have thou done unto us! -- the ways of Zion covered with mourning," etc.
Answer, and hear witness here against the Eternal.

THE long enumeration of the afflictions of the Protestants, which precedes
these last words, gives them an energy, which causes one to tremble, at the
very moment when Saurin pauses, in order to vindicate the ways of Providence.
See a Translation of select Sermons of Saurin, by ROBINSON; in which the
animated passage re^erred to by M. Maury, is thus rendered; Say now, in the
presence of heaven and earth, what ills has God inflicted on you. O my people,
what have I done unto thee? Ah, Lord! how many things have thou done to us!
Draw near ye mourning ways of Zion, ye desolate gates of Jerusalem, ye sighing
priests, ye afflicted virgins, ye deserts peopled with captives, ye disciples
of Jesus Christ, wandering over the face of the whole earth, children torn from
your parents, prisons filled with confessors, galleys freighted with martyrs,
blood of our countrymen, shed like water, carcasses, once the venerable
habitation of witnesses for religion, now thrown out to savage beasts and birds
of prey, ruins of our churches, dust, ashes, sad remains of houses ded^cated to
our God, fires, racks, gibbets, punishments, till now, unknown; draw nigh
hither, and give evidence against the Lord. SAURIN'S Set^^^, entitled, God's
C^ntroversy with Isr^^l, vol. iv p. 121.


IN his sermon "on the contempt of life," he falls into a digression, which, at
first, appears whimsical, but which presently introduces a sublime passage. An
author has published a book with a very singular title; this title is Rome
subterranean; a title full of instruction and truth, teaching that Rome which
strikes the senses, that there is another Rome of dead people, another Rome
under ground, a natural image of that, which living Rome must one day be. My
brethren, I present unto you this day a similar object; I present unto you your
Republic, not such as you see it, composed of sovereigns, of generals, of the
heads of families; this is merely the surface of your Repblic. But I would
describe before you the interior, the Republic subterranean -- for there is
another Republic under your feet, Descend there -- survey those sepulchers
which are in the heart of the earth. Let us lift up the stone. Whom do we see
there? -- My God! what inhabitants! what citizens! what a republic!

THE same Orator who wrote this passage so full of vivacity and enthusiasm,
sometimes suffered his genius to cool, and then he adopted the forms of
expression, which are used in solving geometrical problems.

WE even find in one of his discourses a pretty long arithmetical calculation;
it is, I believe, the only example of this sort, which the Eloquence of the
pulpit affords. Dr. PRIESTLEY, in his funeral discourse on the death of Dr.
PRICE, introduces a pretty singular calculation and idea, founded upon the
supposition of the soul's sleeping betwixt death and the resurrection:
Supposing the amount of the expectation of life to be in my case, as I find,
about fourteen years, in many of you not more than half that number, and at the
most not much more than twenty, in those whose age admitted of any long
acquaintance with him; and the interval betwixt the time of our death and that
of our resurrection to be nothing at all, because not perceived by us, it is in
effect only fourteen, or about twenty, years that we expect to be separated
from him; and in this life we often pass more time without seeing those whom we
most respect. PRIESTLEY'S Sermon, p. 27.


THE following is to be found in his sermon on "the numbering of our days." I
suppose that the devotion of this day has drawn eighteen hundred persons to
this exercise. I reduce these eighteen hundred persons to six classes: The
first, of persons between ten and twenty years, consisting of five hundred and
thirty 530 The second, of those between twenty and thirty years, consisting of
four hundred and forty 440 The third of those between thirty and forty years,
consisting of three hundred and forty-five 345 The fourth, of those from forty
to fifty years, consisting of two hundred and fifty-five 255 The fifth, of
those from forty to sixty years, consisting of one hundred and sixty 160 And
the sixth, of those who are about seventy years, and upwards, consisting of
seventy 70 1800
According to the computation of those who have applied themselves to such sort
of inquiries, each of these classes will furnish at death a yearly tribute of
ten persons; and upon this principle there must die this year sixty of my
hearers; upon the same principle, in ten years there will remain no more of
these eighteen hundred persons than 1270 In twenty years no more than 830 In
thirty years 480 In forty years 230 In fifty years 70
Thus, my brethr^n, (...) perceive that society is in one continual fluctuation.

YES, I shall be able, without doubt, to comprehend this scale of mortality,
while ascertaining the combination of Saurin at leisure; in a book, wherein I
can trace them at sight: but how shall I lay hold of these arithmetical
deductions in a pulpit, where the rapidity of the delivery admits of no
abstract mental operations?

THIS singular calculation ought not, therefore, to find room in a sermon,
solely intended to be preached in a church.

BESIDES, the strength which this reasoning appears to have at first sight is
not sufficiently forcible to intimidate hardened sinners. Saurin acknowledges,
that fifty years after the day wherein he speaks, there will still remain upon
the earth seventy of his hearers: now, however little we may know of the human
heart, we apprehend, that there was not, perhaps, one individual of these
eighteen hundred persons, who did not flatter himself with being of this small
number, and, consequently, who did not regard death as still at too great a
distance to hasten his conversion.

SECTION XLVI. Of English Eloquence.
INFERIOR as Saurin is to our great masters, he is in the same proportion
superior to English preachers.

Mr. HUME expressly acknowledges, Treatise upon Eloquence, chap. vii.
that England has made less improvement in this kind of Eloquence, than in the
other branches of literature. In fact, although this nation has produced some
eloquent writers, at the head of whom we ought to reckon the immortal
RICHARDSON; The most moral of all our novel writers is RICHARDSON; a writer of
excellent intentions, and of very considerable capacity and genius, BLAIR'S
Lectures, vol. ii. p. 309. RICHARDSON, besides being a great genius, was a
truly good man in all respects. He was pious, virtuous, exemplary, benevolent,
friendly, generous, and humane to an uncommon degree; glad of every opportunity
of doing good offices to his fellow creatures in distress, and relieving many
without their knowledge, His chief delight was doing good. His three great
works were entitled "Pamela, or Virtue rewarded;" "The History of Clarissa
Harlowe;" and "The History of Sir Charles Grandison. "Dr. Johnson styles him
"an author from whom the age has received great favors, who has enlarged the
knowledge of human nature, and taught the passions to move at the command of
virtue." Mr. Sherlock, the traveller, observes that "Richardson is admirable
for every species of delicacy; for delicacy of wit, sentiment, language,
action, every thing. His genius was immense. His views were grand. His soul was
noble, and his heart was excellent. He formed a plan that embraced all human
nature. His object was to benefit mankind. His knowledge of the world showed
him that happiness was to be attained by man, only in proportion as he
practiced virtue.

Mr. Richardson's reputation is far from being confined to his own country. He
has been read in many of the languages, and known to most of the nations in
Europe, and has been greatly admired, notwithstanding every dissimilitude of
manners, or eve^ disadvantage of translation. "I consider him," says Dr. Young,
as a truly great natural genius; as great and super-eminent in his way, as was
Shakespeare and Milton in theirs.

New Biographical Dictionary. See Appendix.
she has not, as yet one single Orator who can do honor to his country in
Europe.s Mr. HUME, in his Essays (to which M. Maury probably refers) remarks,
that, if our nation be superior to the ancients in philosophy, we are still,
notwithstanding all our refinements, much inferior in Eloquence. In ancient
times, no work of genius was thought to require so great pa^^s and capacity, as
the speaking in public; and some eminent writers have pronounced the talents,
even of a great poet, or philosopher, to be of an inferior nature to those
requisite for such an undertaking. Greece and Rome produced, each of them, but
one accomplished Orator; and whatever praises the other celebrated speakers
might merit, they were still esteemed much inferior to these great models of
eloquence. Of all the polite and learned nations. Britain alone possesses a
popular government, or admits into the legislature such numerous assemblies as
can be supposed to lie under the dominion of Eloquence. But what has Britain to
boast of in this particular?

In enumerating the great men who have done honor to our country, we exult in
our poets and philosophers; but what Orators are ever mentioned? or where are
the monuments of their genius to be met with? There are found, indeed, in our
history, the names of several who directed the resolutions of our parliament:
but neither themselves nor others have taken the pains to preserve their
speeches; and the authority which they possessed, seems to have been owing to
their experience, wisdom, or power, more than to their talents for Oratory. At
present, [Mr. Hume first published his Essays about the year 1742] there are
about half a dozen speakers in the two houses, who, in the judgment of the
public, have reached very near the same pitch of Eloquence; and no one pretends
to give any one the preference to the rest. This seems to me a certain proof
that none of them have attained much beyond a mediocrity in their art, and that
the species of Eloquence, which they aspire to, gives no exercise to the
sublimer faculties of the mind, but may be reached by ordinary talents, and a
slight application. A hundred cabinet-makers in London can work a table, or a
chair, equally well; but no one poet can write verses with such spirit and
elegance as Mr. Pope.

HUME'S Essays, vol i. Ess. xii. p. 110-112. In a similar strain with the
foregoing remarks, the judicious and acute Mr. KNOX animadverts on the present
state of Parliamentary Eloquence, when, speaking first of the upper house, he
says, that it would be difficult to name a single peer who has attracted notice
or admiration for the classical elegance of his matter or his language. Of all
the speeches spoken in the house, how few have ever been collected and
preserved in libraries, as models of classical elegance? Passion and personal
animosity have, indeed, produced many invectives which gratify the spleen of
party, and are for the time extolled beyond all the productions of preceding
ingenuity. But is there extant a single volume of speeches, by the most famous
among the Orators of the upper house, which can be produced as a classical
book, or stand in competition with the Orations of Cicero? I regret that the
fury of party, and the meanness of servitude, have, for the most part, excluded
that true taste, true grace, and true spirit, which is necessary to form a
classical Orator, from the harangues of an assembly, which may be doomed the
most august in Europe.

The House of Commons has always been esteemed a very distinguished theater of
modern Eloquence. And there indeed, notwithstanding the same impediments which
prevail among the peers, it is easy to produce many splendid examples. But,
though we join in the applause of common fame, yet let us ask, where are to be
found the volumes of oratorical elegance? Have the speeches which have gained
the praise of admiring kingdoms, been no where collected and recorded? Do we
lock them up in our book-cases, and put them into the hands of our children as
models for imitations, as lessons to form their young minds, and raise a
succession of orators and patriots? No; the speeches are celebrated at first,
and while they answer a temporary purpose. They are like vegetables of the
night, or insects of a day. They have seldom that solidity of merit which can
render the ore valuable when the stamp is effaced, and the occasion of it
almost forgotten and quite disregarded; which can preserve the plate still
saleable after the fashion is antiquated.

KNOX'S Essays, No. 152. Dr. BLAIR joins in the same general observation: It
seems surprising that Great Britain should not have made a more conspicuous
figure in Eloquence than it has hitherto attained; when we consider the
enlightened, and the free and bold genius of the country. It must be confessed,
that in most parts of Eloquence, we are undoubtedly inferior, not only to the
Greeks and Romans, by many degrees, but also to the French. We have
philosophers, historians, and poets of the greatest name; but of Orators or
public Speakers, how little have we to boast? And where are the monuments of
their genius to be found?

BLAIR'S Lectures, vol. ii. p. 38, 39. From the unpromising aspect of British
Eloquence, according to the statement of such able writers, a motive may be
adduced to the young public speaker to signalize himself by successful
exertions in Oratory, since the field lies so open before him, and has hitherto
been so seldom trodden.

"In the House of Commons, it is easy," says Mr. Knox, ^o produce many splendid
examples of modern Eloquence. Supported by such an authority, the translator
feels rather disposed to demur at the unqualified condemnation of M. Maury,
when he says, that Great Britain has not as yet one single Orator who can do
honor to his country in Europe.

The Eloquence of the late Earl of CHATHAM has left an indelible impression on
the minds of many who still exist, and will, doubtless, remain for ages, a
glorious monument of the triumph of this art. Nations shook at the thunder of
his voice. Language can scarcely supply terms to express the weight of his
authority, the magnitude of his mind and his character, and the efficacy with
which he thought, decided, spoke, and acted.

It is, indeed, a subject of regret, that the speeches of this great man, and
of other eminent Orators, have not been more carefully preserved as models for
youth, as well as for the instruction of posterity at large. Some information
on this subject may, however, be obtained from a late publication, entitled,
Anecdotes of the Life of the Earl of Chatham, including his speeches, in 2
vols. 4to.

In the present day, the names of such public speakers as those of PIT, FOX,
SHERIDAN, and BURKE, stand pre-eminent. Of Mr. Burke it may be remarked, that,
perhaps there are few, if any, members of parliament, whose printed speeches
will bear a comparison with that which this Orator addressed to the people of
Bristol, on the occasion of a general election. We find in it that beautiful
panegyric of the late Mr. Howard referred to, p. 79. The conclusion of this
celebrated speech has been much admired, when he said, And now, Gentlemen, on
this serious day, when I come, as it were, to make up my account with you; let
me take to myself some degree of honest pride on the nature of the charges
brought against me. I do not here stand accused of venality, or neglect of
duty. It is not said, that, in the long period of my service, I have, in a
single instance, sacrificed the slightest of your interests to my ambition, or
to my fortune. It is not alleged, that, to gratify any anger or revenge of my
own, or of my party, I have had a share in wronging or oppressing any one man
of any description: No; the charges against me are all of one kind, that I have
pushed the general principles of general justice and benevolence too far;
farther than a cautious policy would warrant, and farther than the opinions of
many would go with me. In every accident which may happen through life, in
pain, in sorrow, in depression, and distress, I will think of this accusation,
and be comforted.

But, perhaps, though the last, yet not the least of these several Orators, of
whom our nation may be proud, may be ranked the venerable Earl MANSFIELD, now,
like the setting sun, ready to disappear from our view.

His eloquence as a pleader, his uprightness as a judge, his conduct as a man,
and as a peer, will embalm his memory to the latest posterity.

Upon this great character, Dr. Fordyce passes this just eulogium: Lord
Mansfield joins to the most engaging manner of speaking, the art of presenting
his subject in a light and language so clear and flowing, and at the same time
so striking and spirited, that if his eloquence or pleadings have not produced
effects equal to those recorded of Cicero or Demosthenes, it may be accounted
for by reflecting on the circumstances of the different ages in which they
lived. He is so filled with his subject, that he seems often to be at a loss to
determine which of his ideas ought to be preferred, and which omitted in his
pleadings. None of the masters of Eloquence that we know or read of, possessed
this peculiar talent but Demosthenes.

FORDYCE on the Action proper for the Pulpit, p. 237. Whoever wishes to see a
specimen of his Parliamentary speeches, may read, with pleasure, that excellent
one he delivered on occasion of the appeal of the city of London against Mr.
Evans for refusing to fine for the office of sheriff, in which the rights of
conscience, and of religious toleration and liberty, are a^^y vindicated. It is
to be found in Dr. FURNEAUX'S Letters to Judge Blackstone, 2d ed.




IN this celebrated Island, we sometimes discover amongst its inhabitants
rhetorical strokes; but they know not the art, properly so called, of
Eloquence; and it would even seem, that they do not consider it of much value.

A STUDIED discourse would not be listened to in parliament, where weighty
discussions only are expected, without the artifice of a premeditated style.
You will discover much more of the remains of Roman Eloquence in the Diets of
Poland, than in the debates of Westminster.

SUBLIME ideas are uttered by every man, whose mind is warmed; but it is a
progressive method, it is a well supported elocution, it is a sound judgment,
it is an excellent and varied diction; in fine, it is the perfection of
language, united to the sublimity of thought, which distinguishes Eloquence.

THE Boor of the Danube as has been already remarked by many critics, ought
not to be reckoned amongst Orators, although his conversation may be cited as a
pattern of energy and vehemence.

THERE is nothing of this sort, which may be denominated the Eloquence of a
stroke, more worthy of admiration, than the answer of the fugitive Marius, when
a Lictor came to command him, by the authority of the Roman Praetor, to depart
from Africa. This great man, ^ired with indignation to find himself
ungratefully treated in adversity, by a magistrate who abused his authority,
said to the slave who made known to him this cruel order, Go, tell thy master,
that thou have seen Caius Marius banished from his country, and sitting upon
the ruins of Carthage; "as if," says the Abbe Verto^ by the comparison of his
personal disgraces with the fall of the powerful Carthaginian empire, Marius
had intended to teach the Roman Praetor the instability of the highest
condition. VERTO^'S Revolutions of Rome, live. 10. See also Univ. (...). vol.
xiii. p. 56.


THE English can boast of some strokes of this kind, although far inferior to
the answer of Marius.

WHEN the parliament of Great Britain intended to pass a bill, which denied to
persons accused on a criminal account the privilege of defending themselves by
the help of counsel, Lord BOLINGBROKE, who was against this intended law,
attempted to oppose it; but, intimidated by the assembly before which he was
speaking, he could not articulate a syllable, and the words he attempted to
utter were at every breath dying away on his lips; when, making an
extraordinary effort, he cried out, You wish, Gentlemen, that the accused
should appear before you in order to defend themselves. If your presence has
imposed silence upon me, judge of the impression which it would produce upon
the unfortunate, who should behold in you judges ready to send them to the
scaffold. This single reflection, unquestionably more eloquent than all the
arguments which Lord Bolingbroke could have alleged, caused the rejection of
this new design.

Mr. CHARLES FOX, who is, in the present day, considered as the most eloquent
man of Great Britain, pronounced, in parliament, the eulogium of the late
General Montgomery: one of the court-party interrupted him in these words, How
dare you praise a rebel before the representatives of the nation?" I will not
refrain, Mr. Fox immediately replied, from repelling the outrage done to the
memory of a great man. You all know the meaning of the word rebel in the mouth
of my adversaries. If you have any doubts of the true sense of this expression,
I would entreat you to recollect, that it is to these pretended rebellions we
owe our present constitution, and the privilege of being assembled at
Westminster to deliberate upon the interests of our country. The late
celebrated Irish parliamentary Orator, Mr. FLOOD, is said to have rendered
himself, at times, distinguished for such sort of oratorical strokes, as those
which the Abbe Maury here ascribes to Bolingbroke and Mr. Fox; and also for
ingenious and sentimental expressions. As a specimen of the latter sort, it is
recorded, that, at the commencement of the American war, having indulged
himself in one of those prophecies, which experience has since proved to be so
erroneous, relative to the ruin of this country, by the loss of America, Mr.
Flood said, Destruction shall come upon the British empire, like the coldness
of death; it shall creep upon it from the extreme parts: and in speaking of the
conduct of Lord Chatham, upon the stamp act, and alluding to a passage in
Thucydides, he introduced the following beautiful episode: Illustrious man! to
whose tomb posterity shall come and say, as Pericles did, over the bodies of
his deceased fellow soldiers, You are like to the Divinities above us -- you
are no longer with us, you are known only by the benefits, which you have
conferred. Such an enlivening stroke deserves to be rescued from oblivion.

In BOSWELL'S Life of the celebrated Dr. JOHNSON, there is a remark inserted,
in relation to the written Life of Young, which may be quoted as one of those
strokes of energetic and prompt Eloquence which M. Maury acknowledges the
English possess.

"The Life of Dr. Young," (in Johnson's Lives of the Poets,) was written," says
Mr. Boswell, "by Mr. Croft, and displays a pretty successful imitation of
Johnson's style. A certain very eminent literary character opposed this idea
vehemently; exclaiming, "No, no, it is not a good imitation of Johnson; it has
all his pomp, without his force; it has all the nodosities of the oak without
its strength." This was an image so happy, that one might have thought he would
have been satisfied with it; but he was not: and setting his mind again to
work, he added, with great felicity, "it has all the contortions of the Sybil,
without the inspiration."

BOSWELL'S Life of Johnson, vol. ii. p. 361, 4to.


THESE are specimens, which would be no discredit to the writings of
Demosthenes. But a sublime idea does not constitute a discourse; a beautiful,
detached passage does not compose the art of Eloquence.

EVEN until the present period, the value of English Orators is restrained
within narrow bounds. Famous Islanders! It is not genius, it is the genius of
Oratory, that you want, may we say to you, as Cicero did formerly to some of
his contemporaries. Illis non ingenium, sed Oratorium ingenium deficit. Brutus
110.


THE human mind owes an unceasing debt of gratitude for your sublime
discoveries on light, on gravitation, on electricity, on the aberration of the
stars; but, let not your pride be wounded, if we contest the preeminence with
your Orators. Eloquence, the usual companion of liberty, is a stranger in your
country. Do not affect a false and barbarous contempt of gifts which nature
has denied you. Turn your attention to the models of antiquity, and to the
examples of Greece and Rome. Add to the glory of the good actions, which are so
common in your country, the merit perhaps, no less honorable, of knowing how
to celebrate them.

I MEAN to set bounds to myself in this discussion. I shall not speak of the
discourses of BOIL, Sermons preached by different able divines at the lecture
founded by the Hon. BOIL. Concerning these, Mr. KNOX observes, that They are
among the best argued in our language. They have been the labored productions
of the most ingenious men. But the whole collection never did so much as a
single practical discourse of Tillotson. KNOX'S Essays, No. 168.


which are entirely argumentative dissertations. I shall not detain myself with
the sermons of CLARKE; The sagacious CLARKE pretended not to wit. He affected
not the ambitious ornaments of rhetoric. He rarely reaches the sublime, or aims
at the pathetic; but in a clear, manly, flowing style, he delivers the most
important doctrines, confirmed on every occasion by well applied passages from
scripture. If he was not a shining Orator, according to the ideas of
rhetoricians, he was a very agreeable as well as useful preacher. He was not
perfectly orthodox in his opinions; a circumstance which has lowered his
character among many. Certain it is, that he would have done more good, had he
confined his labors to practical divinity. Ibid.

The following is the character of this divine, which was given in the
Gentleman's Magazine: SAMUEL CLARKE, D. D. Rector of St. James's, Westminster:
in each several part of useful knowledge and critical learning, perhaps without
a superior; in all united, certainly without an equal: in his works, the best
defender of religion; in his practice, the greatest ornament to it: in his
conversation communicative, and in an uncommon manner instructive; in his
preaching and writings, strong, clear, and calm: in his life, high in the
esteem of the wise, the good, and the great; in his death, lamented by every
friend to learning, truth, and virtue.

Dr. Clarke's principal sermons were those preached at Boyle's lecture on "The
Being and Attributes of God," and The Evidences of Natural and Revealed
Religion; besides which, there are published many other sermons of his preached
on particular (...). Dr. Clarke was born 1673, died 1729.

Dr. BLAIR'S character of this Divine is as follows: Dr. CLARKE every where
abounds in good sense, and the most clear and accurate reasoning; his
applications of scripture are pertinent; his style is always perspicuous, and
often elegant; he instructs, and he convinces; in what then is he deficient? In
nothing, except in the power of interesting and seizing the heart. He shows you
what you ought to do; but excites not the desire of doing it; he treats man as
if he were a being of pure intellect, without imagination or passions. BLAIR'S
Lectures, vol. ii. p. 123.


they are written with such metaphysical abstraction, that it is difficult to
comprehend in the retirement of the closet the discourses of this well known
rector of St. James's.

SECTION XLVII. Of Tillotson.
THE Eloquence of TILLOTSON, Archbishop of Canterbury, is highly esteemed. I
have read his sermons with the strictest impartiality, and these are my
sentiments of the works of this Prelate, who is universally, regarded as the
first Orator of England.

TILLOTSON is an excellent writer. His principal merit consists in the style.
He must, therefore, be much injured by a translation, in which the vernacular
expression is lost, and especially by such a translator as Barbeyrac, who was
always deficient in sublimity, in embellishment, in energy, and in elegance.
But, while we acknowledge all the faults of this French version, the
subject matter of the Archbishop of Canterbury's sermons still remains far
inferior to the discourses of Massillon and Bourdaloue. From this
acknowledgement of M. Maury, that his ideas of Tillotson's sermons are derived
from this imperfect French version of Barbeyrac, it would seem, that he himself
has but little acquaintance with the English language; if so, it must be
presumed that he is not a competent judge of English writers, and that,
therefore, the indiscriminate censures, which he passes upon our English
divines, must, in a great measure, be ascribed to his own ignorance of their
works, and the language in which they are written.


TILLOTSON is more of a theologian than a moralist. He scarcely ever discussed
any other than controversial subjects. He employs the same dull modes of
syllogism or dissertation; and merely habituates himself to an insipid
uniformity of method.

I DISCOVER in his discourses no rhetorical movements, no great ideas, no
sublime strokes: he generally divides every paragraph, and has thirty or forty
subdivisions in each of his sermons. His particulars are insipid, futile, and
often devoid of excellence. In short, Tillotson is so much a stranger to the
art of Eloquence, that he scarcely ever makes an exordium or a peroration. Is
this, then, the Orator whom they are bold enough to put in competition with our
French preachers? Maury had no good reason whatever, to bring Archbishop
Tillotson forward as the person, generally esteemed the first Orator among
English Divines. For soundness and strength of argument, few of his own country
have exceeded, and none of the French Divines have equalled, the celebrated and
worthy Archbishop. His warmest admirers have never esteemed him as a first rate
Orator, but have agreed with the general opinion in placing him in rather an
inferior situation of that class. He is, however, a great favorite among his
countrymen, who attend so much to the sapere from the pulpit, as to neglect the
fari to a faulty degree. Let it be recollected, that he has been the most
powerful, the unanswerable opponent of the Romish church, and that Maury has
indulged himself in attacking the Protestant church, on the weakest side of its
most formidable champion, whilst he has affected to overlook many others less
obnoxious, whose claim to Oratory he dared not to contravert. E. Albany.


BUT, not to confine ourselves to indefinite criticism, let us hasten to
substantiate the grounds of our opinion.

IN his sermon on Prejudices against Religion, Tillotson starts an objection,
drawn from the opposition which man finds between his duty and his
inclinations. Vol. iv. p. 35.
This objection he copies from the tragedy of Mustapha, by Fulke, lord Brook,
from which, he recites in the pulpit a series of verses. Is a quotation of this
sort worthy of the majesty of a church? Maury has thought it inexpedient to
recollect, that some of the writers of the holy Scripture, that Arnobius,
Lactantius, and the generality of the ancient fathers, and the most learned
writers in every age of the church, have embellished their composition,
supported their arguments, and elucidated their observations, by ^^^tations
from classic authors of every description, from tragedians and comedians, as
well as poets, historians, and philosophers. To (...) no more instances, has
not St. Paul, in his very sublime argument on the resurrection, 1. Cor. IV. 33.
made a quotation from the comic Menander, Evil communications corrupt good
manners? Has he not, in his Epistle to Titus 1. xii. quoted from Epimenides,
The Cretians are always liars, evil beasts, s^^w bellies.? Has not St. Luke, in
his memoirs of the Acts of the Apostles, xvii. 28, informed us, that St. Paul
made a quotation, which was from Aratus, "For we are also his offspring."? And
has not St. Peter, II. Epistle, ii. 22, quoted two proverbs, which the learned
generally suppose to have been from some comic writer whose works are lost, The
dog is turned to his own vomit again, and the sow that was washed, to her
wallowing in the mire.? Did not Maury recollect these, and many others; or had
rancor benumbed his faculties, and obliterated every impression of memory; or
did prejudice warp him, with his eyes open, from the region of truth? E. Albany.
"The passions," he adds, are a kind of glue, fastening us to things low and
terrestrial. Vol. i. p. 168.
Tillotson's expressions are, The lusts and passions of men do sully and darken
their minds, even by a natural influence. Intemperance, and sensuality, and
fleshly lusts, debase men's minds, and clog their spirits, make them gross and
foul, listless and inactive; they sink us down into sense, and glue us to these
low and inferior things; like bird-lime, they hamper and entangle our souls,
and hinder our flight upwards; they indispose and unfit our minds for the most
noble and intellectual considerations. TILLOTSON, vol. i. Sermon. 4, 7th ed. 8vo.
p. 153.
Scarcely can one pass in the streets, I speak of it from experience, without
having his ears assailed with such horrible oaths and imprecations, as would be
sufficient to ruin a nation, were it guilty of no other crime: and they are not
merely servants, who break out into such blasphemous conversation; it proceeds
also from the mouth of their masters. Vol. i. p. 173.
Tillotson's words in the English edition are, I speak it knowingly, a man can
hardly pass the streets without having his ears grated and pierced with such
horrid and blasphemous oaths and curses, as are enough, if we were guilty of no
other sin, to sink a nation; and this not only from the tribe that wear
liveries, but from those that go before them, and should give better example.
Vol. i. Sermon. 3, p. 148.


ELSEWHERE, in order to prove that the mysteries of religion ought to be
believed, although we can never comprehend them with mathematical evidence,
Tillotson expresses himself in this manner; we eat, we drink, every day,
although, in my opinion, no one can demonstrate that his baker, his brewer, or
his cook, have not put poison into the bread, the beer, or the meat. Vol. i. p.
112; or, in the English edition, thus: Nay, which is more, men every day eat
and drink, though I think no man can demonstrate out of Euclid or Apollonius,
that his baker, or brewer, or cook, have not conveyed poison into his meat or
drink. Vol. i. Sermon. 1, p. 86.


IN this manner did Tillotson perform the ministry of the word in the age of
Dryden, Addison, Waller, Milton; and before that same Charles II. who had heard
in his childhood the most illustrious French Orators. Abp. Tillotson's
character as an Orator must be acknowledged to be somewhat problematical. The
extravagant eulogiums of those, who have extolled him as a pattern of
excellence, and the first Orator of England, have, perhaps, whetted the edge of
our author's severe censures on his performances. Tillotson, as a writer, had
considerable merit; but he was not without his faults. His style is so
deficient in accuracy and elegance, that it will not, in the present day of
refinement, permit him to be held up as a model for imitation. At the same
time, M. Maury appears to be as much prejudiced against this (...). Protestant
writer, as he is unreasonably partial to those of his own nation and communion.

An acute and polite writer of our own country refuses to Tillotson the
character of an illustrious Orator, and thinks that no man had ever less
pretensions to genuine Oratory than this celebrated preacher. "One cannot but
regret," says he, that Dr. Tillotson, who abounds with such noble and generous
sentiments should want the art of setting them off with all the advantage they
deserve; that the sublime in morals should not be attended with a suitable
elevation of language. The truth, however, is, his words are frequently
ill-chosen, and almost always ill-placed; his periods are both tedious and
unharmonious; as his metaphors are generally mean, and often ridiculous; a
fault, which seems to be chiefly owing to his having had no sort of notion of
rhetorical numbers. A noble simplicity at the same time runs through his
discourses.

FITZOSBORNE'S Letters, Let. xiv. The learned Dr. DODDRIDGE, in his Character
of English Divines, (in MS) makes the following concise remarks on Tillotson:
Some pertinent expressions; method admirably clear, beyond almost any other
man. Many sermons contain nothing remarkable, particularly in his posthumous
works; yet some there are equal to any formerly published. His best pieces are
those at the beginning of his first and second volumes; such are those "on evil
speaking," and "forgiving our enemies." He made great use of Barrow and
Wilkins, with whom compare some few of his sermons. No man ever found such
lucky arguments, nor represented the adversary's sentiments more artfully for
confutation.

Dr. BLAIR'S sentiments of Tillotson are thus expressed: Tillotson has long
been admired as an eloquent writer, and a model for preaching. But his
eloquence, if we can call it such, has been often misunderstood. For, if we
include in the idea of eloquence, vehemence and strength, picturesque
description, glowing figures, or correct arrangement of sentences, in all these
parts of Oratory the Archbishop is exceedingly deficient. His style is always
pure, indeed, and perspicuous, but careless and remiss, too often feeble and
languid; little beauty in the construction of his sentences, which are
frequently suffered to drag unharmoniously; seldom any attempt toward strength
or sublimity. But, notwithstanding these defects, such a constant vein of good
sense and piety runs through his works, such an earnest and serious manner, and
so much useful instruction conveyed in a style so pure, natural, and
unaffected, as will justly recommend him to high regard, as long as the English
language remains; not, indeed, as a model of the highest eloquence, but as a
simple and amiable writer, whose manner is strongly expressive of great
goodness and worth. As appears in the Archbishop, negligence may sometimes be
carried so far, as to impair the beauty of simplicity, and make it border on a
flat and languid manner.

BLAIR'S Lectures, vol. i. p. 393, 394. Tillotson was born 1630, died 1694.
Vid. BIRCH'S Life of Tillotson, prefixed to his works.




O LOUIS XIV! What would thou have thought, if the ministers of the altar had
addressed such language to thee in the midst of thy court! What would have been
thy surprise, if thine ear, accustomed to the dignified accents of Bossuet, to
the elevated and energetic tone of Bourdaloue, to the insinuating melody of
Maisillon, had been assailed with this gross and barbarous elocution? With what
indignation would not thou have blushed for thy country? But thou had the
skill of imparting to all the arts the dignity of thy character; under thy
happy auspices, all the various kinds advanced toward perfection. Thou
broughtest forth to view Orators worthy of speaking in the name of the Eternal
and never shall the eloquence of thine age be surpassed!

TILLOTSON writes with as little moderation as dignity.

IN every page of his discourses we perceive the fanaticism of a Protestant,
who is solicitous to please the populace.

TOWARD the conclusion of his sermon "on the love of our neighbor," he makes
a sort of recapitulation, with a view to apply the moral of his subject to the
church of Rome. Who would not suppose, that a subject, so affecting, would
inspire him with tender, and even generous, sentiments? Observe, however, the
consequence he draws, after having largely proved the necessity of loving all
men: Whenever we speak of charity, and of the obligation of loving one another,
we cannot avoid thinking of the Church of Rome; but she must recur to our
minds, particularly at this time, when she has made so fresh a discovery, and
in a manner so well authenticated, of the regard she has for us, by the
merciful plot contrived against us (the pretended plot of 1678;) such a plot,
as may make the ears of all who hear it related to tingle, render Popery an
eternal disgrace, and cause it to be regarded with horror and execration even
to the end of the world. Vol. iii. p. 53.
In the English edition thus: We cannot choose but think of the Church of Rome,
whenever we speak of Charity, and loving one another; especially having had so
late a discovery of their affection to us, and so considerable a testimony of
the kindness and charity, which they designed toward us; such as may justly
make the ears of all that hear it to tingle, and render Popery execrable and
infamous, a frightful and a hateful thing to the end of the world. Vol. iii.
Sermon. 2, p. 54.
What style! what sentiments! what candor! what logic! Every candid and
considerate mind should make all due allowance for the power of prejudice, and
the force of education. Attending to this, we need not be surprised at the
warmth with which M. Maury, that zealous advocate for the Church of Rome,
exclaims against Tillotson as a fanatical Protestant. It were to be wished,
that the Abbe had possessed sufficient candor for Tillotson to recollect the
time when he lived, and the history of that time. During the greater part of
the reign of Charles II. and his successor James, the nation was kept in a
constant alarm through the machination of Popish emissaries, and the dread of a
Popish king. Is it then, to be wondered at, if the minds of the contending
parties were embittered against each other? and if plots, real or pretended,
were made the occasion of mutual recriminations?

At this distance of time, and after calm and unbiassed reflection on the
events of Charles II's reign, we shall feel much more disposed to acquit the
Catholics of some of those plots laid to their charge and particularly that of
1678, on occasion of which lord Stafford suffered, than at the time, and in the
violence of party animosity, it was almost possible to have done.




LET none, however, suppose, that, by adopting a method too familiar for
critics, I am searching after some careless passages in the Archbishop of
Canterbury's sermons, in order to pass sentence upon him, only for his faults.
I have read the whole collection of his discourses. I have extracted thence
many quotations of the same kind; and it would cost me no more than the trouble
of transcribing them, were I not afraid of fatiguing the reader, and if the
examples which I have adduced were not sufficient to determine his judgment.

SECTION XLVIII. Of Barrow, Young, Maddox, etc. State of Pulpit-Eloquence among
the English.
I SHOULD have too many advantages if I were to investigate the merit of the
sermons of BARROW, Dr. DODDRIDGE'S character of Barrow is as follows: He was
the most laconic writer among our old divines. His works contain an amazing
number of thoughts, not always well digested, or plainly expressed, yet
sometimes excellent: he attempted to introduce some new words, which, not
succeeding, appear odd. There are many useful scriptures, and fine quotations
from the classics and fathers, in the margin. Nothing can be more elaborate.
Most of his sermons were transcribed three times, some much oftener. Many of
Tillotson's finest sermons are abridgements and quotations from him,
particularly that "of evil speaking." The first volume of Barrow's sermons
contains the best. DODDRIDGE'S Characters, MS. Barrow, a mighty genius, whose
ardour was capable of accomplishing all it undertook. The tide of his eloquence
flows with smooth, yet irresistible, rapidity* He treats his subject almost
with mathematical precision, and never leaves it till he has exhausted it. It
has been said, that a late most popular Orator of the House of Lords asserted,
that he owed much of the fire of his eloquence to the study of Barrow.

KNOX'S Essays, No. 168. Dr. BLAIR says, Barrow's style has many faults. It is
unequal, incorrect, and redundant; but withal, for force and expressiveness,
uncommonly distinguished. On every subject he multiplies words with an
overflowing copiousness; but it is always a torrent of strong ideas and
significant expressions which he pours forth.

BLAIR'S, Lectures, 4to. vol. i. p. 376. Barrow was born 1630, died 1677. Vid.
HILL'S Life of Barrow.


another Orator whom the English esteem and praise, although, by their own
acknowledgment, he be far inferior to Tillotson.

I AM not acquainted with the sermons of YOUNG, in which we should, doubtless,
discover that plaintive poetry, that depth of sentiment, and even those
eccentric ideas, which the pensive Pastor of Welwyn collected together in his
nocturnal meditations. But Young does not appear to me to have had an
imagination sufficiently pliable and versatile for the Eloquence of the pulpit.

THE preachers of Charles II. who happened to hear Bourdaloue at Paris, have
but faintly imitated him; and even now, when his sermons are spread through the
whole of Europe, the revolution, which they ought to produce in Christian
Eloquence, has not, as yet, taken place amongst the English. "The English
preachers" says a very sensible writer, are, it is certain, more distinguished
by their justness of sentiment, and strength of reasoning, than by their
oratorial powers, or talents of affecting the passions. More solicitous to
convince than persuade, they choose to employ their abilities in endeavoring to
impress the mind with a sense of the truths they deliver, by the force of
argumentation, instead of rousing the affections by the energy of their
eloquence. We meet with no examples in their writings of those strokes of
passion, which penetrate and cleave the heart at once, or of that rapid,
overpowering eloquence, which carries every thing before it like a torrent.
They seem to have considered mankind in the same light in which Voltaire
regarded the celebrated Dr. Clarke, as "mere reasoning machines;" they seem to
have considered them as purely intellectual, void of passion and sensibility.
This strange mistake may, perhaps, be supposed to be partly the effect of the
philosophical spirit of the times, which, like all other prevailing modes, is
subject to its deliriums; certain, however, it is, that, while man remains a
compound being, consisting of reason and passion, his actions will always be
prompted by the latter, in whatever degree his opinions may be influenced by
the former. DUET'S Essay as Genius, B. ii. 4. p. 238, 245. The French and
English writers of Sermons proceed upon very different ideas of the Eloquence
of the Pulpit; and seem indeed to have split is betwixt them. A French sermon
is, for the most part, a warm, animated exhortation; an English one, is a piece
of cool, instructive reasoning. The French preachers address themselves chiefly
to the imagination and the passions; the English, almost solely to the
understanding. It is the union of these two kinds of composition, of the French
earnestness and warmth, with the English accuracy and reason, that would form,
according to my idea, the model of a perfect sermon.

BLAIR'S Lectures, vol. ii. p. 119. "In the pulpit," says Dr. BLAIR, the
British divines have distinguished themselves by the most accurate and rational
compositions, which, perhaps, any nation can boast of. Many printed sermons we
have full of good sense, and of sound divinity and morality; but the Eloquence
to be found in them, the power of persuasion, of interesting and engaging the
heart, which is, o^ ought to be, the great object of the pulpit, is far from
bearing a suitable proportion to the excellence of the matter. There are few
arts, in my opinion, farther from perfection, than that of preaching is among
us. In proof of the fact it is sufficient to observe, that an English sermon,
instead of being a persuasive, animated Oration, seldom rises beyond the strain
of correct and dry reasoning: whereas, in the sermons of Bossuet, Massillon,
Bourdaloue, and Flechier, among the French, we see a much higher species of
Eloquence aimed at, and in a great measure attained, than the British preachers
have in view. The French have adopted higher ideas both of pleasing and
persuading by means of Oratory, though, sometimes, in the execution, they fail.
In Great Britain, we have taken up Eloquence on a lower key; but in our
execution have been more correct. In France, the style of their Orators is
ornamented with bolder figures; and their discourse carried on with more
amplification, more warmth and elevation. The composition is often very
beautiful; but sometimes, also, too diffuse, and deficient in that strength and
cogency which render Eloquence powerful.

Modern Eloquence is much more cool and temperate than the Grecian and Roman;
and in G. Britain especially, has confined itself almost wholly to the
argumentative and rational. It is much of that species which the ancient
critics called the "Tenuis," or "Subtilis;" which aims at convincing and
instructing, rather than affecting the passions, and assumes a tone not much
higher than common argument and discourse.

BLAIR'S Lectures, vol. ii. p. 39, 40, 4^. Still, however, though much remains
to be accomplished in our island in the art of pulpit-elocution, it must be
confessed, that we are by no means deficient in theological discourses, which
would reflect honor on any country, or in compositions, which will bear to
undergo the ordeal of a correct attic taste. And it appears to be a
well-founded, as it is a pleasing reflection, that our pulpit-compositions have
been, for some length of time, in an improving style. The Divines of the last
century wanted, it is true, that accuracy and refinement of taste, which
characterize some of our modern discourses; but some of them abounded in lofty
sentiments and unquestionable energy. The works of JEREMIAH TAILOR, HOPKINS,
HOW, BATES, and others, have in them traits of genuine Eloquence. In times
somewhat later, we can boast of the sermons of SEED, ATTERBURY, HOADLY,
SHERLOCK, SECKER, BUTLER, DODDRIDGE, WATTS, and others: and in the present day
the names of PORTEUS, DAVIS, GERRARD, OGILVI^, LEECHMA^, BLAIR, FORDYCE,
HU^^ER, and many others, might perhaps be adduced as no bad specimens of the
height to which the Eloquence of the pulpit has been advanced. As to
preachers, perhaps none have acquired by their natural Eloquence greater
command over their hearers than the celebrated Messrs. WHITFIELD and WESLEY: to
the former of these the description and character given by M. Maury to
Bridaine, (p. 63) bears, in various respects, a considerable resemblance.

The reader is farther referred to some ingenious and judicious remarks on the
late and present state of the Eloquence of the pulpit and sermon-writers, in
KNOX'S Essays, vol. ii. No. 164, and 168, and in DUET'S Essay on Genius, p.
234, 244.




THE Bishop of Worcester The Bishop of Worcester, referred to by our author,
was Dr. MADDOX. He was an excellent preacher, and a great promoter of public
charities, particularly the Worcester Infirmary, and the Hospital for
inoculating the Small Pox, at London. His sermon in favor of this latter
institution, preached in 1752, was much admired, and contributed greatly to
extend the practice of Inoculation. He published some other single sermons.
Born about the year 1696, died in 1759. Encyclopedia Britannica.


in 1752, preached a sermon on Inoculation for the Small Pox, which has been
frequently printed at London, and since translated into French.

IT is asserted, that this discourse influenced the public benevolence to endow
an Hospital for Inoculation.

IF, indeed, the Bishop of Worcester has participated this kind of glory with
Vincent de Paul, it must be acknowledged, that Eloquence could not obtain a
more excellent triumph. This sermon is an interesting dissertation, and new as
to its object; but the prelate, who delivered it, will never be placed in the
rank of Orators.

DESTITUTE of imagination, and of sensibility, he wanders into abstract
calculations respecting population; into low details about the secondary fever;
and, after having exhausted all those combinations, certainly more suited to a
medicinal school than a Christian assembly, he quotes the testimonies and
authority of Messrs. Ranby, Hawkins, and Middleton, surgeons of London, of whom
he speaks with as much veneration as if they were Fathers of the church.

THE more we read foreign Orators, the more we perceive the pre-eminence of the
French preachers.

THE Spaniards and Germans are yet in the rudiments of Christian Eloquence.
Father SEIGNERY has been for some time extolled as the Bourdaloue of Italy. He
has been translated. His most zealous partisans have given him up. How,
indeed, can we admire ridiculous passages and popular fables, which we should
scarcely tolerate in instructions to country villagers?

SECTION XLIX. Of M. Thomas, and the Revolution which he effected in the Style
of rhetorical Composition.
NOTWITHSTANDING the superiority of the models, which the age of Louis XIV.
has furnished, as well as the distinguished talents of many writers, who
devoted themselves to the ministry of the gospel, Eloquence seemed to be buried
in the tomb with Massillon.

MOST of the preachers, who succeeded him, were desirous of opening to
themselves a new road, where they had, at first, brilliant success, for which
they have since severely suffered. They invented an affected and effeminate
jargon, and, by dint of labor, they rendered themselves unintelligible. Ah!
wherefore did they wish to banish simplicity? Was it because they were ignorant
that one of the secrets of rhetorical composition consists in making use of
those lively, natural, and varied modes of expression, which are adopted in
conversation, in addition to such a selection of words as may be always
excellent, without ever being far-fetched? The rhetoricians, here spoken of,
wrote with the most tedious prolixity, and were equally strangers to the
precision of thought and diction. We perceive in their discourses pompous
expressions, vulgar ideas, and that affectation of wit, which is incompatible
with Eloquence. "Words are like leaves; and where they most abound,
"Much fruit of sense beneath is rarely found.
"False Eloquence, like the prismatic glass,
"Its gaudy colors spreads on every place;
"The face of Nature we no more survey,
"All glares alike, without distinction gay:
"But true expression, like the unchanging sun,
"Clears and improves whatever it shines upon,
"It gilds all objects, but it alters none.
"Expression is the dress of thought, and still
"Appears more decent as more suitable;
"A vile conceit in pompous words expressed,
"Is like a clown in regal purple dressed:
"For different styles with different subjects sort,
"As several garbs with country, town and court.
POPE'S Essay on Criticism, v. 312


A WANT of genius, however, is not what we can charge upon these corrupters of
Christian Eloquence, unless we should be of opinion, that, owing to their
deficiency in this respect, they discovered too strong an affectation of it.
They wrote without animation or fire; they confounded the gift of persuasion
with the art of dazzling; and, after having perverted the taste of the public,
they have succeeded in exciting an admiration of their faults.

ELOQUENCE, become a stranger to the works of learned men, was still cultivated
by a small number of real Orators, whom popular opinion placed far below all
those fashionable declaimers. But, in the history of the arts there are
remarkable epochs, when a superior writer recals the public attention toward
those methods which have been abandoned, and draws along with him a number, who
follow him in the course in which he himself has excelled.

SUCH is the glory, which M. THOMAS has had among us. He contributed to the
fortunate revolution, which has renewed the taste in Oratory for panegyrics: in
these, he has displayed as much Eloquence, as Fontenelle had discovered of
penetration. FONTENELLE was a celebrated French author, and pronounced by
Voltaire the most universal genius of the age of Louis XIV. He wrote on a
variety of subjects, particularly a number of panegyrics on the deceased
members of the Academy of Sciences, to which he had been appointed perpetual
secretary. See New and General Biographical Dictionary.
He inspired the most lively enthusiasm for great men. He improved the mind by
the excellence of his sentiments. He directed his discourses to an useful
object. He, in a particular manner, promoted the utility of his writings by
collecting them together, and enriching them with his "Essay on Panegyrics."
The works of the eulogist of Marcus Aurelius ought to be ever dear to us by so
interesting and unusual a conjunction of erudition, genius and virtue.

SECTION L. Of the Use of the Holy Scriptures.
THE style, which M. Thomas cultivated, possesses much of that manner, so well
adapted for the pulpit, by the elevation of the ideas, and the moral strain,
which is generally to be found in them. Do we wish to see the example of this
writer become serviceable to preachers? Let us recollect, that, in the
corruption of Eloquence, the language of Religion was forgotten; and that, in
order to impart to our ministry its former luster, we must, at once, become
Orators, and Christian Orators.

IT is by incessantly reading the Holy Scriptures, that we learn to speak that
spiritual language, which diffuses through a sermon, representations
alternately affecting, majestic, or terrible.

LET us never consider it as a painful restraint, that we are happily bound to
incorporate the sacred writings into our compositions. The Bible is for the
style of preachers, that which mythology is for the Elocution of poets. In the
sacred volumes, there are to be found thoughts so sublime, expressions so
energetic, descriptions so eloquent, allegories so well chosen, sentences so
profound, ejaculations so pathetic, sentiments so tender, that we should adopt
them from taste, if we were so unhappy as not to search after them from a
principle of zeal and piety. Without doubt a preacher ought to affect people by
strong, and sometimes even by terrible images: but it is from the scripture
that he should learn to make powerful impressions. There he may clearly
discover the way to make sermons plain and popular, without losing the force
and dignity they ought always to have." -- "The study of the sacred writings
was, in the first ages of the church, reckoned to be sufficient. Hence came
that passage in the apostolical constitutions, which says, "If you want
history, or laws, or moral precepts, or eloquence, or poetry, you will find
them all in the scriptures." In effect, it is needless to seek elsewhere for
any thing that is necessary to form our taste and judgment of true Eloquence.
St. Austin says, we ought to exalt and improve our knowledge, by the authority
of scripture; and our language, by the dignity of its expressions. The
difference betwixt them [the best heathen and inspired writings] will, upon
comparison, be found much to the honor of scripture. It surpasses them vastly
in native simplicity, liveliness, and grandeur. Homer himself never reached the
sublimity of Moses's songs; especially the last (Deuteronomy. xxxii. 1, etc.) which
all the Israelitish children were to learn by heart. Never did any ode, either
Greek or Latin, come up to the loftiness of the Psalms: that one, in
particular, which begins thus; "The mighty God, even the Lord, has spoken,"
(Psalm. 1, etc.) surpasses the utmost stretch of human invention. Neither Homer,
nor any other poet, ever equalled Isaiah describing the majesty of God, in
whose sight the "nations of the earth are as the small dust; yea less than
nothing, and vanity;" seeing it is He that stretches out the heavens like a
curtain, and spreads them out as a tent to dwell in." (Chapter xl. 10, etc)
Sometimes this prophet has all the sweetness of an eclogue, in the smiling
images he gives us of peace: (See chapter xi. and xxxv.) and sometimes he soars so
high as to leave every thing below him. What is there in antiquity that can be
compared to the Lamentations of Jeremiah, when he tenderly deplores the
miseries of his country? (v. 2, etc. chapter ii. and chapter iii.) or to the prophecy
of Nahum, when he foresees in spirit the proud Nineveh fall under the rage of
an invincible army? (i. 3, etc.) We fancy that we see the army, and hear the
noise of arms and chariots. Every thing is painted in such a lively manner, as
strikes the imagination. The prophet far out-does Homer. Read likewise Daniel
denouncing to Belshazzar the divine vengeance ready to overwhelm him; and try
if you can find any thing in the most sublime originals of antiquity, that can
be compared to those passages of sacred writ. In all the rest of scripture
there appears a natural and beautiful variety.

FENELON'S Dialogues, p. 115, 124, 127. Dr. BLAIR recommends the language of
Sacred Scripture to Preachers, by saying, that when properly employed, it is a
great ornament to sermons. It may be employed, either in the way of quotation,
or allusion. Direct quotations brought from scripture, in order to support what
the preacher inculcates, both give authority to his doctrine, and render his
discourse more solemn and venerable. Allusions to remarkable passages, or
expressions of scripture, when introduced with propriety, have generally a
pleasing effect. They afford the preacher a fund of metaphorical expression,
which no other composition enjoys, and by means of which he can vary and
enliven his style. But he must take care that any such allusions be natural and
easy; for if they seem forced, they approach to the nature of conceits. Dr.
Blair refers us for examples to Bishop Sherlock's Discourses, vol. i. disc. i.
and to Seed's Sermons, sermon. iv.

BLAIR'S Lectures, vol. ii. p. 115, 116.


A CHRISTIAN Orator may, and even ought to, seize upon all the riches, which he
discovers in these divine books. It is there where plagiarism is permitted him,
and the more treasures he draws from thence, the better are his auditors
pleased with his thefts.

QUOTATIONS from inspired authors become authorities, which render the ministry
of a Christian Orator more venerable; and witnesses, which he derives from
heaven or hell, in order to instruct the earth.

WOE! Woe to him, if he be ashamed of the gospel, at the very time when he is
preaching it, and if, from an indecent and criminal complaisance, he dare not
name Jesus Christ in that pulpit, where he comes to occupy his place!

AN abundance of new and unknown beauties still remain in the Holy Scriptures
to excite the preacher's emulation.

WHATEVER be the thought which he wishes to express, he will always find the
primary idea, at least, in the books of Revelation, if he have sufficient zeal
to read them daily, and sufficient discernment properly to understand them.
When searching for a passage which he wants, he thereby discovers other
passages, which he reserves for the subjects to which they are adapted. But he
ought only to make use of striking quotations; because it is not necessary to
speak the language of inspiration, in order to say common things.

THE preacher may derive from the Bible historical comparisons, the only ones
which are suitable for the style of the pulpit, where they always succeed; and
those analogies present themselves involuntarily to an Orator, who has grown
familiar with the sacred books.

MASSILLON excels in this respect. You will find, in all his discourses,
sometimes very short comparisons, which throw light upon his idea, and, at
other times, comparisons of greater length, which form admirable frames, in
which he incloses the picture of morals.

SUCH is that rhetorical turn, which he employs in his sermon "on the Word of
God," when he attacks that common abuse of attending upon religious
instruction, only with a view of depreciating the talents of the Preacher.
Massillon makes a particular application to his hearers of the reproach, which
Joseph addressed, in disguise, to his brethren: It is not to seek for bread,
that ye are come into Egypt; ye are come here as spies; to observe the weak
places of this country ye are spies; to see the nakedness of the land are ye
come. Genesis xlii. 9.


THE same Orator also avails himself of this figure, in his sermon upon
"Backsliding," when he paints the situation of the sinner, who, after having
been recovered, finally relapses into his criminal habits: Massillon compares
him to the image of Dagon, which, having been thrown down before the ark, was
forthwith replaced upon the altar by the priests of the Philistines; but the
idol having fallen a second time, useless efforts were made to restore this
mutilated statue, which remained stretched out upon the earth, and forever
immovable; only the stump of Dagon was left to him. I. Sam. v. 4; Kings v. 5.
Porro Dagon solus truncus remanser^t in lo^o s^^. V^L^.
The application of the fate of Dagon to the destiny of sinners, furnishes
Massillon with admirable elucidations, which he would never have thought of
without this allusion. Some of our English sermons are enriched with such
successful scriptural allusions, and applications of scripture language, as, as
least, equal any thing quoted by M. Maury from Massillon and Boismont. In some
of Sterne's works, this talent is conspicuous. See the note and quotation from
Mr. Knox, end of lvi.


THE Abbe BOISMONT, whose success has been so brilliant in the career of
Christian Eloquence, and principally in the species of funeral Oration, has
made a very ingenious use of a passage of sacred writ, in his Eulogium of Louis
XV.

HE begins with recalling all the misfortunes of France, from the beginning of
this century, until the wise and prosperous Ministry of Cardinal de Fleury;
and, in describing the changes which took place at this period in
Administration, all the branches of which had been disgraced by abuses of long
standing, he rises to the tone of Bossuet: Louis said to Cardinal de Fleury, as
formerly the Lord God to the Prophet Ezekiel, Breathe upon these slain that
they may live. Ezekiel xxxvii. 7, 9.
The spirit of life suddenly enters into the dry and withered bones. A gentle
but powerful motion is communicated to all the members of this vast wasted
body; all the parts reunite, and adapt themselves to each other: and the bones
came together, bone to its bone.

IN this funeral Oration, there are many admirable traits, equally sublime, and
pictures of the finest Eloquence, worthy of the Orator, who had deservedly
obtained universal applause, in his celebration of the Queen and the Dauphin.

SECTION LI. Of the Fathers of the Church.
CHRISTIAN Orators! Ye are the Ministers of the word of GOD; ye ought,
therefore, to draw the substance of your discourses from the sacred books, and
to speak the language of the invisible Preacher, whom ye represent. If it be
true that your lips are the depositories of science, how will ye be
instructive, if ye be not yourselves instructed? Ye will at best preach a
morality merely human; ye will never, when discoursing on divine truths, impart
to your style the energy of apt expression, if, to the study of the sacred
volumes, ye do not join the reading of tradition.

FENELON, in his Dialogues concerning Eloquence, has characterized, with equal
precision and taste, the Fathers of the Greek and Latin Church; and the opinion
of the Archbishop of Cambray ought to be law. See in the English translation of
FENELON'S Dialogues, on this point, p. 128 -- 130, and 142. See also M.
ROLLIN'S sentiments on this head, and his recommendation to the study of the
Fathers, in his B^lles Lettres, vol. ii. c. 3, 4, p. 354.

Dr. BLAIR makes the following judicio^ remark respecting those authors
denominated "Fathers of the Church."

Among the Latin Fathers, Lactantius and Minutius Felix are the most remarkable
for purity of style; and, in a later age, the famous St. Augustine possesses a
considerable share of sprightliness and strength. But none of the Fathers
afford any just models of Eloquence. Their language, as soon as we descend
(...) the third or fourth century, becomes harsh; and they are, (...) general,
infected with the taste of that age, a love of swollen and strained thoughts, and
of the play of words.

BLAIR, vol. ii. p. 36.


WE reckon among the Fathers, many very learned writers in profane antiquity,
such as CLEMENT of Alexandria, ORIGIN, EUSEBIUS of Coesarca, JEROME, and
AUGUSTINE.

I AM aware, that, in their writings, the purity of style does not always
correspond with the extent of erudition, especially if we compare them with
Cicero and Demosthenes. But, according to the judicious observation of the Abbe
de Fleury Second Discourse.
when it is intended to appreciate the merits of the Fathers of the Church, we
must not forget the time when, nor the country where, they lived; nor to
contrast them with their most celebrated contemporaries, AMBROSE, with
SYMMACHUS; BASIL, with LIBANIUS; and then we perceive how much superior they
have been to their age.

IT is not, however, requisite that a Preacher should read all tradition. For
this, his life would scarcely suffice. But, by making a selection of two or
three Fathers of the church, the most consonant to his genius; by confining
himself, moreover, to their rhetorical writings, he will find in them ideas
sufficiently striking to embellish and give weight to his sermons.

ST. JOHN CHRYSOSTOM is principally deserving of having the choice of a
Christian Orator fixed upon him. His diction is pure and splendid; his
eloquence is tender and persuasive; and he abounds so much in sublime
descriptions, or ingenious ideas, that we find passages to quote in every page
of his writings.

POPE CLEMENT XI. who, during his Pontificate, preached yearly at Rome on
Easter and Christmas days, and the feast of St. Peter, had the art of making an
admirable use of Chrysostom's writings. His homilies are an excellent
assemblage of the most striking thoughts and pathetic sentiments of the Fathers
of the Church. As to the style of sermons, it offends against all rules, if it
be not pathetic, nervous, and sublime. The path has been pointed out by St.
Chrysostom. He who was always with God, always ^ed by the milk of the word, and
perfectly acquainted with the human heart, speaks, thunders, shakes, and leaves
to sinners no other answer but cries and remorse. Pope GANGANELLI'S Letters,
vol. iii. p. 82. Abp. FENELON thus characterises Chrysostom: His style is
copious, but he did not study false ornaments. All his discourse tends to
persuasion: he placed every thing with judgment, and was well acquainted with
the holy Scripture, and the manners of men. He entered into their hearts; and
rendered things familiarly sensible to them. He had sublime and solid notions;
and is sometimes very affecting. Upon the whole, we must own he is a great
Orator. Dialogues concerning Eloquence, dial. iii. p. 143, 144.

"Among the Greek Fathers," says Dr. BLAIR, the most distinguished, by far, for
his oratorial merit, is St. Chrysostom. His language is pure; his style highly
figured. He is copious, smooth, and sometimes pathetic. But he retains, at the
same time, much of that character, which has been always attributed to the
Asiatic Eloquence, diffuse and redundant to a great degree, and often
overwrought and tumid. He may be read, however, with advantage, for the
Eloquence of the pulpit, as being freer of false ornaments than the Latin
Fathers.

BLAIR'S Lectures, vol. ii. p. 37.


BOSSUET, who, himself, may be reckoned among the Fathers, and whom, in the
present day, we quote in our sermons as we do them, sufficiently testifies, by
his example, how advantageous it is for a Christian Orator to study the
Fathers. He draws from their writings the most profound maxims, the most
convincing arguments, sometimes even sublime comparisons, which enrich the
Eloquence of his discourses.

WHO would not be ambitious to have borrowed, as he did, this admirable
description from S. AUGUSTINE, which represents the troubles of human life?
Worldings do not think that they use exercise, unless they disquiet themselves;
nor that they move, unless they make a noise. That man, who is complaining of
too much labor, were he delivered from that trouble, could not endure his
repose. At one time, the day's work appears to him too short; at another time,
his leisure would be to him a burden: he loves his servitude, and is pleased
with his weight; and this constant impulse, which involves him in a thousand
embarrassments, prevents him from gratifying himself with the image of
unrestrained liberty. As a tree, says St. Austin, which the wind seems to
caress when sporting with its leaves and branches, although this wind only
bends it with the agitation, and tosses it, sometimes on one side, sometimes on
the other, with vast caprice; you would say, however, that the tree diverted
itself with the freedom of its motions; in like manner," says this great
Bishop, "while the men of the world have no true liberty, being almost always
obliged to submit to various occupations, which impel them like a wind, they,
nevertheless, imagine that they are playing with a certain air of liberty and
peace, whilst giving indulgence to their vague and fluctuating desires. Second
sermon for the Thursday of the second week of Lent, upon "final Impenitence."
Tanquam olivae pendentes in arbore, ducentibus ventis, quasi quadam liberate
aurae perfruuntur, vago quodam desiderio suo. AUGUST. in Ps. 136, vol. iv. p.
1528.


SECTION LII. Of Quotations from Profane Authors.
IT is sometimes allowable to quote, in the pulpit, the profane writers of
antiquity, provided that such citations be not long, nor frequent, nor
accompanied with historical relations foreign to religion.

OUR old preachers flattered themselves that they were very eloquent, when they
had collected into one barbarous compilation, which they called a Christian
discourse, some shreds of poetry, eloquence, or history.

THE author of "Pulpit-maxims," ingeniously compares those sermons blended with
the principles of religion, and the maxims of Paganism, "to the Temple at
Jerusalem built with the marble and cedars of king Hiram."

BUT it is no less certain, that Christian Eloquence does not exclude heathen
testimonies, when the Orator is pointing out the duties of morality or the
particulars of good conduct.

S. BASIL has composed a treatise, in order to prove the utility of reading
heathen authors. Bossuet, whose learning equalled his eloquence, drew, from
time to time, out of those authors, sublime thoughts, which he quoted in the
pulpit; and Bourdaloue, in his sermon on "the love of riches," has paraphrased
this maxim of Horace, Rem
Si possis recte, si non, quocumque modo, rem.


LET us not, however, make an improper use of these examples. We shall never be
blamed for not having founded our proofs upon a profane authority; and we shall
do an equal injury to piety and taste, if we relate ideas taken from heathens,
when we can find them equally well, and perhaps better, expressed in scripture,
or in tradition.

SECTION LIII. Of the Studies of a Preacher.
I WILL not, then, read the Moralists, the Poets, and the Orators, of antiquity
with a view of multiplying such heathen quotations, but rather, in order to
know the human heart, and to form my taste upon the models of Eloquence. This
study is more useful than the reading of sermons.

Is it your aim to excel in Christian Eloquence? At first consult collections
of sermons. But, when once you become conversant with them, shut those books;
they would blunt your imagination, and thereby contract your ideas, although
they may be filled with sublime passages.

AIM at original composition. Original writers are, and ought to be, great
favorites; for they are great benefactors; they extend the republic of
letters, and add a new province to its dominion. The pen of an original writer,
like Armida's wand, out of a bar^en waste, ^^lls a blooming spring. An
Original, though but indifferent, yet has something to boast; it is something
to say with him in Horace, Meo sum p^uper in aere;
and to share ambition with no less than Caesar, who declared he had rather be
the first in a village, than the second at Rome. But why are originals so few?
Not because the writer's harvest is over, the great reapers of antiquity having
left nothing to be gleaned after them; nor because the human mind's teeming
time is past, nor because it is incapable of putting forth unprecedented
births; but because illustrious examples engross, prejudice, and intimidate.
They engross our attention, and so prevent a due inspection of ourselves; they
prejudice our judgment, in favor of their abilities, and so lessen the sense
of our ow^^ and they intimidate us with the splendor of their renown, and thus
under diffidence bury our strength. Nature's impossibilities, and those of
diffidence, ^^e wide asunder. YOUNG'S Conjectures on original Composition; v.
his Works, vol. vi. p. 70, 71, 73.


Search for food to nourish your mind, without degrading yourself to a level
with plagiarists.

No spare time will remain for reading the sermons of others, when we ourselves
apply in earnest to composition.

PREFER, then, to all those discourses, which have been consecrated by public
admiration, works no less valuable to Eloquence, and much more profitable to
the preacher. Such are FENELON'S Letters, in which this profound moralist
points out every singular character, by the knowledge which he has of the
human heart; the Works of the Abbe de FLEURY, who interests by his candor,
astonishes by the universality of his knowledge, always engages when speaking
of religion, because it is evident that the loves it, and displays, without
ostentation, a boldness of reasoning, which is, in him, the necessary
consequence of sincerity; Abbe de FLEURY was the author of many excellent
works, all in French, and very well written. Among these are, "the Manners of
the Jews," (translated into English by Farneworth;) also "the Manners of the
Christians;" "an Historical Catechism;" "the Method of Study;" "the Institutes
of the Ecclesiastical or Canon Law;" "the Duty of Masters and Servants." His
principal work, which has been much esteemed, is his "Ecclesiastical History,"
20 volumes in 4to. They breathe a spirit truly philosophic. See New and General
Biographical Dictionary.
some excellent books of PORT ROYAL, Messrs. de PORT ROYAL, was the general
denomination, which comprehended all the Jansenist writers; but was however
applied in a more confined and particular sense to those Jansenists, who passed
their days in pious exercises and religious pursuits, in the retreat of Port
Royal, a mansion situated at a little distance from Paris. It is well known,
that several writers of superior genius, extensive learning, and uncommon
eloquence, resided in this sanctuary of letters. MOSHEIM'S Ecclesiastical
History, vol. iv. p. 350, n.
in which we recognize the voice of religion, and the poetry of the sacred
books; the Sinner's Guide, by GRENADE, in which he alarms the apprehensions of
the wicked, and holds them, so to speak, suspended between the terrors of
remorse, and of divine justice; the Imitation of JESUS CHRIST, BY THOMAS a
KEMPIS. His work is perhaps as much known and read by Protestants, as any other
religious performance of a Catholic writer. He died 1471, aged 91. See DUPHIN'S
History.
a masterpiece of simplicity and plainness, and the best book, says
Fontenelle, which can proceed from the hand of man, seeing the gospel does not
come from thence; Life of Co^n^ille.
in a word, the writings of FRANCIS DE SALIS, which breathe the most affecting
piety, and where we should find still more pathos, were there somewhat less of
wit. After this imperfect enumeration of French theological writers by our
author, it may, with pleasure be observed, that, perhaps no nation abounds with
an equal number of solid, judicious, and instructive discourses, as does the
English. To attempt an enumeration of them would be impossible, and indeed
needless as every reader will consult his own taste.


SECTION LIVE. Of Pathos.
IT is by this persuasive pathos; Pathos, in the French l'onction. Dr. Blair
gives us the idea connected with this term, when he says; The chief
characteristics of Pulpit-Eloquence are gravity and warmth. The serious nature
of the subjects requires gravity; their importance to mankind requires warmth.
The union of these two ^ust be studied by all Preachers, as of the utmost
consequence, both in the composition of their discourses, and in their manner
of delivery. This is what the French call onction; the affecting, penetrating,
interesting manner, flowing from a strong sensibility of heart in the Preacher
to the importance of those truths which he delivers, and an earnest desire that
they may make full impression on the hearts of his hearers. BLAIR'S Lectures,
vol. ii. p. 105.
it is by the language of the heart, that we discover a writer who makes it his
practice to read those various works of piety; for it is this happy talent of
affecting, which, doubtless, constitutes the principal object of Christian
Eloquence.

ALL men have not sufficient ability to lay hold of an ingenious idea; but all
have souls capable of being affected with a weighty sentiment; and never are
the hearers more universally attentive than when the Preacher becomes pathetic.
On this point let us regard two able judges and eloquent writers. The first is
Pope Ganganelli, who says; As to the style of sermons, it offends against all
rules, if it be not pathetic, nervous, and sublime. If a Preacher only
instruct, he does no more than prepare the mind; if he only affect the
passions, he leaves but a slight impression; but if he scatter the ointment of
grace, while he diffuses the light of truth, he has fulfilled his duty.
GANGANELLI'S Letters, vol. iii. p. 82. Dr. Blair says, The only effectual
method to become pathetic, is to be moved yourselves. There are a thousand
interesting circumstances suggested by real passion, which no art can imitate,
and no refinement can supply. There is obviously a contagion among the passions.

" U^ ^identi^us arrident, sic ^^entibus ad^^ent,
" Humani vultus.
The internal emotion of the speaker adds a pathos to his words, his looks, his
gestures, and his whole manner; which exerts a power almost irresistible over
those who hear him. Afficiamur antequam officere concutur, says Quintilian.

BLAIR'S Lectures, vol. ii. p. 193.


GUARD, however, against that affected sensibility, which betrays itself by the
accents of the voice, without penetrating to the very bottom of the soul; and
which is ready to die away in the ear of the auditor, when it derives no
internal animation from the composition.

I REQUIRE not, say Cicero, a feigned compassion, not incentives to sorrow, but
that which is real, flowing from the sighs of a wounded heart. Non si^^lacra
^eque i^^it^menta doloris, sed luctus ^^rus a^^^u^ lamen^a ^^ra et spi^^^ia.
Orat. lib. 2.


AFTER a terrifying passage which has distressed me, I wish the Orator to
approach me again with affection; to revive my almost extinguished hopes; and,
after having threatened me with an avenging God, to show me a God, who
pardons.

SECTION LV. Of the Pathos of Fenelon.
THAT is a charming and flowing Eloquence, which, far from exciting violent
agitations, gently insinuates itself into the soul, and there awakes the
tenderest affections; which is a succession of natural and moving sentiments,
copiously diffusing themselves, so that, when experienced, the Orator who
inspires them is forgotten, and we suppose that we are conversing with
ourselves. Each word increases the emotion, and produces a certain sympathy,
which affects and expands every heart.

SUCH is the Eloquence of Fenelon. The first part of his discourse On the
Consecration of the Elector of Cologne, is written with the energy and
sublimity of Bossuet; the second denotes a sensibility, which is peculiar to
Fenelon. I shall only mention one example.

O PASTORS! far from you let the contracted heart be banished. Enlarge, enlarge
your bowels of affection. Ye know nothing, if ye are only acquainted with the
voice of authority, reproof, of correction, and with pointing out the letter of
the law. Be fathers; this is not sufficient: be mothers; travail in birth again
till Jesus Christ be formed in the heart. M. Maury, elsewhere, speaks of this
amiable author by the appellation of "the immortal Fenelon," and declares that
his discourse, upon the consecration of the Elector of Cologne, is one of the
chief works of modern Eloquence. Reflections sur les Sermons de M. Bossuet, p.
328. The character and method of Fenelon have been thus described: He visited
his diocese very diligently, and preached in all the churches of it. In his
public instructions, he suited his discourses to every capacity; speaking to
the weak in an easy and familiar manner, whilst he raised his style for those
who had a more elevated genius. His sermons flowed from his heart; he did not
write them down, and hardly meditated on them beforehand. He only shut himself
up in his closet to obtain by his prayers the knowledge he wanted. His only
view was to be like a good father, to comfort, to relieve, and to instruct his
flock. He was a man of extensive learning, great genius, and of an exquisite
taste and irreproachable morals. Was born 1651, died 1715. General Dictionary,
in loc.

In the Eulogium delivered by M. MAURY on Abp. Fenelon, before the French
Academy, in 1771, he gives us the following, among many other, traits of this
great and good man. The eulogium of the Archbishop of Cambray is none other
than his history written with faithfulness. Here, there is no occasion to
exaggerate or dissemble. Instead of attempting to exceed that public
admiration, which he possesses, we should be glad if we can but keep pace with
it, whilst speaking of a man, who was the Orator of the people, and pleaded the
cause of humanity before kings; of a man, illustrious by the renown of his
name, the eminence of his virtues, the superiority of his talents, the
importance of his functions, the character even of his errors; of a man, whose
mind was entirely engrossed in consulting the happiness of the human race; all
whose peculiarities originated in his genius and his virtue, and who, if he
failed in being happy, needed but to have had an ordinary capacity. ^^^ge de
Fenelon, p. 354, 355.




SECTION LVI. Of other Pathetic Orators: Bourdaloue, Flavian, Las Casas,
Cheminais, Ken, Grosvenor, Stern, etc.
TO require of a Preacher discourses written entirely in the pathetic style
would be to adopt very mistaken ideas of Christian Eloquence. It is dangerous
to enlarge too much in affecting passages. Commiseration, says Cicero, ought to
be of short duration, for nothing dries up sooner than tears. Commiserationem
brevem esse opo^tet, nihil enim lachryma citi^s ^^^scit. Ad HERENIUM, lib. 2,
31.
The effect is weakened when the auditor is suffered to remain too long in the
same state, and when no relief to sensibility is admitted, nor any suspension
to Eloquence.

LABOR may render the style correct, forcible, harmonious; but industry never
produces a true pathos; for the more it costs the Orator to be animated and
pathetic, the more is his discourse cold and languishing. Besides, are all
subjects susceptible of tender sentiments? Our great masters, on some
occasions, durst not venture to pursue this method, even when discussing
subjects, which seem to border most upon sensibility.

BOURDALOUE has composed four different sermons upon the death of Jesus Christ,
and yet he has not made one single Good Friday sermon, of which the
distinguishing characteristic should be to affect. His genius always led him to
consider the history of the sufferings of the Son of God in another point of
view; he, therefore, intimated to his hearers, that their shedding of tears was
not the design he proposed. Others have moved you to pity a hundred times, said
he in his exordium; but, for my part, I am desirous of instructing you.
Bourdaloue was, nevertheless, affecting: but he had the skill of placing, at
proper intervals, those passages, which would no longer have had the effect of
impressing the auditory, had he heaped them together.

THE most celebrated models of pathetic Eloquence are the address of FLAVIAN
the Bishop For an account of FLAVIAN'S conduct, and his speech to the Emperor,
in favor of the inhabitants of Antioch [not Thessalonica,] whose seditious
conduct had provoked Theodosius's threatened vengeance, but which the Eloquence
and entreaties of Flavian averted, See Universal History, vol. xvi. p. 417 --
419, and CHRYSOSTOM. Orat. xx. p. 226 -- 234, and Hom. xxi. c. 3. See also, the
substance of Flavian's noted speech, as reported by Chrysostom, in ROLLIN'S
Belles Lettres, vol. ii. c. iii. 2, p. 215 -- 220; and in MAURY'S Reflections
sur les Sermons de M. Bossuet, p. 329 -- 334.
to the Emperor Theodosius, in favor of the inhabitants of Thessalonica; the
supplication of the virtuous Prelate BARTHOLOMEW (...) LAS CASAS All the
writings of LAS CASAS show a solid judgment, profound learning, true piety, and
in excellent heart. Biographical Dictionary.

"This man, so famous in the annals of the new world, had accompanied his
father, in the first voyage made by Columbus. The mildness and simplicity of
the Indians affected him so strongly, that he made himself an ecclesiastic, in
order to devote his labors to their conversion. But this soon became the least
of his attentions. As he was more a man than a priest, he felt more for the
cruelties exercised against them, than for their superstitions. He employed
every method in order to comfort the people for whom he had conceived an
attachment, or to soften their tyrants. He became the avowed patron of the
Indians; and, by his bold interpositions on their behalf, as well as by the
respect due to his abilities and character, he had often the merit of setting
some bounds to the excesses of his countrymen. He did not fail to remonstrate
warmly against the proceedings of Albuquerque, and, though he soon found that
attention to his own interest rendered that rapacious officer deaf to
admonition, he did not abandon the wretched people, whose cause he had
espoused. He instantly set out for Spain, with the most sanguine hopes of
opening the eyes, and softening the heart of Ferdinand, by that striking
picture of the oppression of his new subjects, which he would exhibit to his
view.

"He easily obtained admittance to the king, whom he found in a declining state
of health. With much freedom, and no less eloquence, he represented to him all
the fatal effects of the repartitionio^^es, or distributions, in the new world,
boldly charged him with the guilt of having authorized this impious measure,
which had brought misery and destruction upon a numerous and miserable race of
men, whom Providence had placed under his protection. Ferdinand, whose mind as
well as body were much enfeebled by his distemper, was greatly alarmed at this
charge of impiety, which, at another juncture, he would have despised. He
listened with deep compunction to the discourse of Las Casas, and promised to
take into attentive consideration the means of redressing the evil of which he
complained.

"After this, Ferdinand in a short time dying, Las Casas applied to his
successor Charles V. but none of the schemes of this most amiable Prelate were
crowned with that success, which his benevolence merited." RAYNAL'S and
ROBERTSON'S Histories, passim.


to Philip II. [Ferdinand] against the murderers of the Mexicans; and the
exhortation of CHEMINAIS in behalf of the prisoners.

THIS discourse of Cheminais is written with as much pathos as simplicity; but
the ideas and strokes of Oratory are never raised so high as to reach the
sublime. In it the style is adapted to the subject, without forming its
principal merit. The sermons of CHEMINAIS are on various subjects, and are
comprised in four, and sometimes in five volumes, 8vo. They have been much
admired. Cheminais was born 1652, died 1689. Vid. Dictionnaire des Predicateurs
Francois, in artic.


CHEMINAIS'S manner of writing, so full of sweetness and tenderness, denotes
the happiest talent. His sermons breathe a certain attractive and affectionate
languor, which must ever give us occasion to regret, that this writer,
otherwise enfeebled by habitual infirmities, had not lived long enough to
finish his oratorial career. It is to be confessed, that there are not so many
specimens of this sort of pathetic Eloquence to be found among English writers,
as could be wished. Perhaps no nation can boast of more argumentative and
sensible discourses, or of abler defenses of every branch of Christian doctrine
and duty. But to find that persuasive tenderness, or what the French call
onction, mingled with the solidity of argument, and the effusions of piety, is
mo^^ rare. Bishop KEN'S retired Christian resembles, in a good measure, the
character ascribed by our author to the writings of Cheminais* In the works of
FLAVEL are intermingled many tender and pathetic expressions. The noted RICHARD
BAXTER, also, though too fond of controversy, and his style, far from being
correct or elegant, has, notwithstanding, in some of his practical pieces, and
particularly in that one entitled the Saints everlasting Rest, some fine and
affecting passages. He only wanted his genius to be curbed by salutary checks,
to have obtained, in his practical works, the character of a pathetic writer.
There is in HOWE'S "living temple," a grand and beautiful metaphorical
description of human depravity under the idea of a ruinous temple (p. 155;) and
in Bishop SHERLOCK'S discourses, a fine and much admired piece of Eloquence,
where the character of our Blessed Lord is contrasted with that of the impostor
Mahomet, (v. i. p. 271;) though, perhaps, neither of these can be properly
classed as pathetic pieces. Where shall we find any passages more excellent and
pathetic in their kind, than in Dr. GROSVENOR'S sermon, entitled the Temper of
Jesus toward his Enemies?

The ingenious Dr. Knox has the following sensible observations on the pathetic
style, particularly as it is to be found in scripture, and in the works of
Stern:

There must be a charm added by the creative power of genius, which no didactic
rules can teach, which cannot be adequately described, but which is powerfully
felt by the vibrations of the heart strings, and which causes an irresistible
overflowing of the sacri fontes lachrymarum.

Florid diction and pompous declamation are, indeed, found to be the least
adapted of all modes of address to affect the finer sensibilities of nature.
Plain words, without epithets, without metaphors, without similies, have
oftener excited emotions of the tenderest sympathy, than the most labored
compositions of Corneille. A few words of simple pathos will penetrate the soul
to the quick, when a hundred lines of declamation shall assail it as feebly and
ineffectually, as a gentle gale the mountain of Plinlimmon.

A writer of taste and genius may avail himself greatly in pathetic
compositions, by adopting the many words and phrases, remarkable for their
beautiful simplicity, which are interspersed in that pleasing, as well as
venerable book, the Holy Bible* Besides its astonishing simplicity, it has many
a passage exquisitely tender and pathetic.

Throughout all the works of STERN, there are interspersed exquisite touches
of the pathetic. His pathetic stories are greatly admired. The pathetic was the
chief excellence of his writings; his admirers will be displeased if we were to
add, that it is the only one which admits of unalloyed applause.

KNOX'S Essays, No. 145. Stern, who, though he is justly condemned for his
libertinis^^, possessed an uncommon talent for the pathetic, has availed
himself greatly of the scriptural language. In all his most affecting passages,
he has imitated the turn, style, manner, and simplicity of the sacred writers,
and in many of them has transcribed whole sentences. He found no language of
his own could equal the finely expressive diction of our common translation. I
will quote only one or two instances of his imitations of scripture, taken from
the most admired pieces in the tender style: "Maria, though not tall, was,
nevertheless, of the first order of fine forms. Affliction had touched her
looks with something that was scarce earthly, and so much was there about her
of all that the heart wishes, or the eye looks for in woman, that could the
traces be ever worn out of her brain, or those of Eliza out of mine, she should
not only ^at of my bread, and drink of my cup, but Maria should lie in my
bosom, and be unto me as a daughter." "Adieu, poor, luckless maiden! imbibe the
oil and wine, which the compassion of a stranger, as he sojourneth on his way,
now pours into thy wounds. The Being, who has twice bruised thee, can only bind
them up for ever." Again, in his description of the captive: "As I darkened the
little light he had, he lifted up a hopeless eye toward the door, then cast it
down, shook his head, and went on with his work of affliction. I heard his
chains upon his legs, as he turned his body to lay his little stick upon the
bundle. He gave a deep sigh. I saw the iron enter into his soul." It would be
easy to adduce many other instances, in which a writer, who eminently excelled
in the power of moving the affections, felt himself unequal to the task of
advancing the style of pathos to its highest perfection, and sought assistance
of the Bible.

KNOX'S Essays, No. 154. For more instances of the pathetic sort, the reader is
referred to Sterne's well known story of "Le Fevre," in which is that beautiful
passage, "The accusing spirit, which flew up to heaven's chancery with the
oath, blushed as he gave it in; and the recording angel, as he took it down,
dropped a tear upon the word, and blotted it out for ever." Tristram Shandy,
vol. III. c. 49. To this may be added the story of "Maria," in do. vol. IV. c.
83; and the affecting and beautiful story of "La Roche," in the Mirror, vol.
II. p. 39 -- 62; also, the story of "Mercator," in the Adventurer.

To these may not be improperly added a specimen of affecting Eloquence in an
American Indian. "I may challenge," says Mr. Jefferson, the whole Orations of
Demosthenes and Cicero, and of any more eminent Orator, if Europe has furnished
more eminent, to produce a single passage superior to the speech of Logan, a
Mingo chief, to lord Dunmore, when governor of Virginia. The following
incidents that occurred in the spring of the year 1774, were the occasion of
it. A robbery and murder had been committed on the inhabitants of the frontiers
of Virginia, by two Indians. The neighboring whites, according to their
custom, undertook to punish this outrage in a summary way. A party was
collected, and proceeded in quest of vengeance. Unfortunately, a canoe of women
and children, with one man only, was seen coming from the opposite shore,
unarmed, and unsuspecting an hostile attack from the whites. The moment the
canoe reached the shore, the white party, who had been concealed, singled out
their objects, and, at one fire, killed every person in it. This happened to be
the family of Logan, who had been long distinguished as a friend of the whites.
This unworthy return provoked his vengeance. He accordingly signalized himself
in the war which ensued A decisive battle was soon afterward sought, in which
the Indians were defeated and sued for peace. Logan, however, disdained to be
seen among the suppliants. But, lest the sincerity of a treaty should be
distrusted, from which so distinguished a chief absented himself, he sent by a
messenger the following speech to be delivered to lord Dunmore:

I appeal to any white man to say if ever he entered Logan's cabin hungry, and
he gave him not meat; if ever he came cold and naked, and he clothed him not.

During the course of the (...) long and bloody war, Logan remained idle in his
cabin, an advocate for peace. Such was my love for the whites, that my
countrymen pointed, as they passed, and said, "Logan is the friend of white
men." I had even thought to have lived with you, but for the injuries of one
man. Colonel Cr^sap, the last spring, in cold blood, murdered all the relations
of Logan, not sparing even my women and children. There runs not a drop of my
blood in the veins of any living creature. This called on me for revenge. I
have sought it: I have killed many: I have glu^^ed my vengeance. For my
country, I rejoice at the beams of peace. But do not harbor a thought that
mine is the joy of fear. Logan never felt fear. He will not turn on his head to
save his life. Who is there to mourn for Logan? -- Not one.

JEFFERSON'S History of Virginia.


SECTION LVII. Of the Peroration.
IF pathos be requisite in a Christian discourse, it is undoubtedly in the
Peroration. There, the Orator ought to set in motion all the springs of
sensibility, and to strike the greatest strokes of Eloquence.

ALL moral subjects tend to pathetic conclusions. The attention of the
auditory, which always revives toward the close of the sermon, invites the
Christian minister to finish instruction by moving and energetic
representations, which may powerfully affect the conscience, and leave an
indelible impression upon every mind.

SOME rhetoricians have laid it down as an established maxim in the art of
Oratory, to recapitulate, in this part of the discourse, the principal
arguments, and to offer an analy^i^ of them.

I MAKE bold to object to this method, which neither Demosthenes nor Cicero
ever followed.

IF this recapitulation of the proofs ought to terminate a discourse, ought it
not especially to be adopted at the Bar?

IT would be to no purpose to object to me here the example of Cicero, in his
beautiful Oration against Verres. The Orator successively invokes, in his
Peroration, all the gods and goddesses, whose temples this robber had pillaged,
and, by this means, ^e draws a more striking picture of his profanations. But
what then i^ are those sub^i^e apostrophes an analysis of his pleading?

CICERO had proved, at the beginning, that Ver^es had no military genius, and
that he was equally incapable of commanding a fle^t, or an army; he had
afterward gone over the excesses of his debaucheries his ava^ice, and his
cruelties toward the Roman citizens, whom he caused to be crucified upon the
coasts of Sicily their faces being turned from the Roman shore.

NOW Cicero omits all these outrages at the conclusion of his discourse, and
only reproaches the accused with his sacrileges.

IT is not, therefore, true, that the Roman Orator presents to his judges a
summary (...) his speech in this Peroration.

OUR most illustrious Orators, when ^^^cluding a sermon, never recapitulate the
and arguments of the subject.

MASSILLON, I confess, hastily runs over some of his ideas in the Peroration of
his discourse, "on the certainty of a future state;" but he does not grow
languid, when he touches upon the contradictions with which he charges the
wicked; and he quickly extricates himself by some moving passages.

BESIDES, one single example should not suffice for establishing a general
rule. What! ought we then to follow Massillon and Bourdaloue, when even they
would be shackled by a proceeding so didactic and uniform? Who does not
perceive, that such sort of corollaries would leave both the preacher and the
congregation unaffected?

THE Orator's conclusion must not be confined to simple speculative
consequences. He has done nothing as yet when he has proved the truth of his
principles. This is the point from which he should proceed, in order to subdue
the passions, that the sinner may retain no excuse, and that conviction may
bring him to repentance.

Now, that you may produce such effects, ^ke leave of your proofs and your
divisions, (...) be assured, that whatever is repeated, ^ebles.

^^^IMENT upon some verses of a psalm (...) to your subject, and in the
compunction, or in the weaknesses of David point out the remorse and secret
troubles of all. Exhort, instruct, confute, by varied repetitions, and such as
may interest the feelings of the different classes, of which society is
composed. Display all the strength of your genius to prove that happiness does
not consist in pica^ure, but in virtue.

WHAT, in short, shall I say to you? Forget method: forget art itself. Lift up
your heart to God by an affectionate prayer. Become the intercessor on behalf
of your auditory; and that the multitude, who resisted your threatenings, may
be monstrained to yield to the effusions of your Christian charity.

SECTION LVIII. Of Memory.
YOU may, in vain, have received from nature, this happy gift of persuading and
moving; in vain may you have brought your talent to perfection by the study of
rules; you may attain to Eloquence in writing; still you would never speak like
an eloquent man, if you were impeded in the delivery of your discourse by the
treachery of your memory.

CICERO calls this faculty the treasure of the soul; (...) of (...)
and he always reckons it among the qualities essential to an Orator.

WHAT is not clearly understood is badly repeated; for, to a stiff
pronunciation, which is already become too perceptible in Christian pulpits,
there is added a want of freedom, which wearies the congregation. Quel
deplai^ir de voir l'Orateur entrepris Relire dans la voute un sermon mal appris!


WHEN once hearers experience this disgust, they are afraid of meeting with a
similar embarrassment, and never listen afterward without uneasiness. Hence it
follows, that a defect of memory, which is by no means injurious to the merit
of the Orator, does infinite injury to the success of the discourse.

NEVER, therefore, consider the time lost, which you may devote to this
mechanical study. It is not this time which you lose, but it is the labor of
composition, which becomes fruitless, if you do not carefully make yourself
master of a sermon on which you have bestowed much pains. "Those," says Dr.
Watts, who are called to speak in public, are much better ^eard and accepted,
when they can deliver their discourse by the help of a genius and ready memory,
than when they are forced to read all that they would communicate to their
hearers. Reading is certainly a heavier way of conveying our sentiments; and
there are very few mere readers, who have the felicity of penetrating the soul,
and awakening the passions of those who hear, by such a grace and power of
Oratory, as the man, who seems to talk every word from his very heart, and
pours out the riches of his own knowledge upon the people around him, by the
help of a free and copious memory. This gives life and spirit to every thing
that is spoken, and has a natural tendency to make a deeper impression on the
minds of men; it awakens the dullest spirits, causes them to receive a
discourse with more affection and pleasure, and adds a singular grace and
excellency both to the person and his oration. WA^^S on the Improvement of the
Mind, vol. 1. ^^0. p. 247.




BOURDALOUE and Massillon, both of them born with treacherous memories, were
obliged to have recourse to their manuscripts during almost the whole period of
their exercising the sacred ministry; but they perceived at that time, with a
degree of mortification, how much they diminished the pleasure, which people
received in hearing them. The Bishop of Clermont, from thence, conceived such a
dislike for the pulpit, that he was unwilling to mount it during the
twenty-five last years of his life; and it is a fact, that, when urged one day
to declare to which of his sermons he gave the preference, he very shrewdly
replied, "to that which I know the best." To corroborate our author's remark
respecting Bourdaloue and Massillon having treacherous memories, let it be
remarked, that it is often found, that a fine genius has but a feeble memory;
for, where the genius is bright, and the imagination vivid, the power of memory
may be too much neglected, and lose its improvement. An active fancy readily
wanders over a multitude of objects, and is continually entertaining itself
with new-flying images; i^ runs through a number of new scenes, or new pages,
with pleasure, but without due attention, and seldom suffers itself to dwell
long enough upon any of them to make a deep impression thereof upon the mind,
and commit itself to everlasting remembrance. This is one plain and obvious
reason, why there are some persons of very bright parts and active spirits, who
have but very short and narrow powers of remembrance; for, having riches of
their own, they are not solicitous to borrow Ibid* p. 250. Useful directions
for the improvement of the memory, will be found in WATTS on the Improvement of
the Mind, vol. i. c. xvii. p. 245, 8vo; in MASON on Self-knowleage, c. xv. p.
131, 8vo; and in ROLLIN'S Balls Lettres, B. ^. c. 3. ^ iv. p. 244, 8vo.




THE custom of repeating from memory has brought forward in the road of sacred
Eloquence, that multitude of preachers, who, through indolence, or defect of
talents, deliver the sermons of others.

As for such, their ministerial labors are wholly confined to the painful and
unpleasant task of imprinting in their memory discourses, which they have not
had the trouble or the pleasure of composing. Memory equalizes all Christian
Orators before the eyes of the people, and serves as a supplement to genius.

BUT this slight inconvenience may promote religious instruction, without
preventing the improvement of the art of preaching; and it may be inferred,
that he, who preaches the sermons of others, does so from an inability to
produce better himself.

SHOULD it ever be the case, that the ministers of the gospel would wish to
rest satisfied with reading religious instructions from the pulpit, their
h^arers would become fewer, and their discourses less successful; for memory
refembles a sudden inspiration, whereas reading is only a cold communication.
If the practice of preaching sermons memoriter be objectionable, the practice
of reading them verbatim is still more so. Against the former method, which M.
Maury seems to approve of, it may be objected, that it renders preaching a
great labor; that if the preacher forget one word, he perplexes himself, and
confuses the (...); and that it puts a restraint upon pronunciation, action,
and the movement of the passions, while the mind is wholly taken up with
recollection and repetitions. See PE^KINS'S Art of Preaching, vol. ii. ^. 9. A
slavish attachment to written notes, which has become so prevalent in the
present day, both among the established and dissenting clergy, unquestionably
tends to enervate the energy, which should accompany the delivery of sermon^,
and, in some measure, to weaken and prevent the desired effects.

The judicious reflection of our author concerning the consequences of
ministers resting satisfied with reading religious instructions from the
pulpit, has great weight in it, and should be seriously considered by
ministers, whose concern it is to be useful. Facts strongly corroborate the
justness of his reasoning. The most accurate and sensible discourses of mere
readers are disregarded, and their hearers are comparatively few, while the
discourses of others, which appear to flow "ex imo pectore," though, perhaps,
less accurate and elegant are listened to with pleasure and avidity. In this
respect, human nature is the same in every country, and will continue to be so
till the end of time.

That the above hints, which the translator throws out, with all deference, may
not appear to lose the weight and support of authority, the reader is presented
with the following sentiments of wise and capable judges.

We shall begin with HORACE, who tells us, in general, that the speaker, who
has thoroughly digested his subject, will be at no great loss for suitable
expressions;

"Verbaque provisam rem non invita sequentur."

HOR. Ar^ Poet. ^. 311. Let us next attend to the united suffrages of two
respectabl^ signitaries of the Church of England: Bishop WIL^INS says, As for
composing, it will not be convenient for a (...) preacher to pen all his
discourse, or to tie himself ^o phrases; when the matter is well digested,
expressions will easily follow, whereas to be confined to words, besides the
oppression of the memory, will much prejudice the operations of the
under^tanding and affections. The judgment will be much weakened, and the
affections dulled, when the memory is overburdened. A man cannot ordinarily be
so much affected himself, and consequently he cannot affect others, with things
he speaks by rote: the should take some liberty to prosecute a matter according
to his more immediate apprehensions of it; by which many particulars may be
suggested, not before thought of, according to the working of his own
affections, and the various alterations that may appear in the auditory; and
besides, they will breed a parr^^^a, such a fitting confidence as should be in
that Orator, who is to have a power over the affections of others, of which
such a one is sca^^^ capable. WILKIN'S Ecclesiast. 2. To the same effect, see
FENELON'S Dialognes concerning Eloquence, dial. ii. p. 78, etc.

Bishop BURNET gives us his sentiments on this subject, as follow: This leads
me to consider the difference that is between reading and speaking of sermons.
Reading is peculiar to this nation, and is endured in no other. It has indeed
made our sermons more exact, and has thus produced many volumes of the best
that are extant. But, after all, though some few read so happily, pronounce so
truly, and enter so entirely into those affections, which they recommend, that,
in them, we see both the correctness of reading, and the seriousness of
speaking sermons; yet every one is not so happy; some by hanging their heads
perpetually over their notes, by blundering as they read, and by a cursory
running over them, do so lessen the matter of their sermons, that, as they are
generally read with very little life or affection, so they are heard with as
little regard, or esteem. Those who read, ought certainly to be at a little
more pains, than, for the most part, they are, to read true; to pronounce with
an emphasis; to raise their head, and to direct their eyes to their hearers:
and if they practiced more, alone, the just way of reading, they might deliver
their sermons with much more advantage. Man is a ^ow sort of creature: he does
not (nay, the greater part cannot,) consides things in themselves, without
those little seasonings that must recommend them to their affections. Besides,
the people, who are too apt to censure the clergy, are easily carried into an
obvious reflection on reading, that it is a^ effect of laziness. BURNET'S
Pastoral Car^, ix.

The learned Dr. WATTS, in his Thoughts, entitled Words without Spirit,
describes the following character: Lectorius is a pious man; and worthy
minister in a country parish; his discourses are well formed, his sentiments on
almost every subject are just and proper, his style is modern, and not
unpolite, nor does he utterly neglect the passions in the turn of his
composures; yet I cannot call him a good preacher, for he does not only use his
written notes to secure his method, and to relieve his memory, but he scarce
ever takes his eye from of^ his book to address himself with life and spirit to
the people: for this reason, many of his hearers fall asleep: the rest of them
fit from January to December, regardless and unconcerned; an air of indolence
reigns through the faces of his auditory, as if it were (...) matter of no
importance, or not addressed to them, and his ministrations have little power
or success. In his last sermon, he had a use of reproof for some vices which
were practiced in a public and shameless manner in his parish, and he thought
that these sins ought not to escape a public rebuke. The paragraph was well
drawn up, and indeed it was animated with some just and awful severities of
language; yet he had not courage enough to chide the guilty, nor to animate his
voice with any just degree of zeal. However, the good man did his best, he went
into the pulpit, and read them a chiding.

His conduct is just the same when he designs his address in his paper to any
of the softer passions; for by the coldness of his pronunciation, and keeping
his eye ever fixed on his notes, he makes very little impression on his
hearers. When he should awaken senseless and obstinate sinners, and pluck them
as brands out of the burning, he only reals to them out of his book some words
of pity, or perhaps a use of terror; and if he would lament over their
impenitence and approaching ruin, he can do no more than read them a chapter of
lamentation.

Since there are so many of the kindred of Lectorius in our nation, it is no
wonder that some of them arise to vindicate the family and their practice. Do
not the English sermons, say they, excee^ those of other nations, because they
are composed with so much justness and accuracy, and by careful reading they
are delivered with great exactness to the people, without trusting o^^^^n^ence
to the frailty of the memory, or the warmth of sudden imagination? I am sure it
may be replied, that if the English sermons exceed those of our neighbors, the
English preachers would exceed themselves, if they would learn the ar^ of
reading by the glance of an eye, so ^s never to interrupt the force of their
argument, nor the vivacity and patho^ of their pronunciation; or if they made
themselves so much masters of that they had written, and delivered it with such
life and spirit, such freedom and fervency, as though it came all fresh from
the head and the heart. It is by this art of pronouncing, as well as by a warm
composure, that some of the French praechers reign over their assemblies, like
Cicero or Demosthenes of old, and that, with superior dignity and power, as is
seldom seen nowadays in an Englisn audience, whatsoever esteem may be paid to
our writings.

A paper with the most pathetic lines written upon it, has no fear or hope, no
^eal or compassion; it is conscious of no design, nor has any solicitude for
the success; and a mere reader, who coldly tells the people what his paper
says, seems to be as void of all these necessary qualifications, as his paper
is.

WATTS'S Miscellaneous Thoughts, No. xxvi. p. 104 -- 106, 8vo. Dr. BLAIR shall
conclude the authorities quoted upon this point: With regard to the pulpit, it
has certainly been a great disadvantage, that the practice of reading sermons
has prevailed so universally in England. This may, indeed, have introduced
accuracy; but it has done great prejudice to Eloquence; for a discourse re^d,
is far inferior to an Oration spoken. It leads to a different sort of
composition, as well as of delivery; and can never have an equal effect upon
any audience. The odium of the different sects, about the time of the
Restoration, drove the established Church from that warmth which the sectaries
were judged to have carried too far, into the opposite extreme of a studied
coolness, and composure of manner. Hence, from the art of persuasion, which
preaching ought always to be, it has passed, in England, into mere reasoning
and instruction; which not only has brought down the Eloquence of the Pulpit to
a lower tone than it might justly assume; but has produced this farther effect,
that, by accustoming the public ^ar to such cool and dispassionate discourses,
it has tended to fashion other kinds of public speaking upon the same model.
BLAIR'S Lectures, vol. ii. p. 43, 44.

The same author says elsewhere, that the practice of reading sermons is one of
the greatest obstacles to the Eloquence of the Pulpit in Great Britain, where
alone this practice prevails. No discourse, which is designed to be persuasive,
can have the same force when read, as when spoken. The common people all feel
this, and their prejudice against this practice is not without foundation in
nature: what is gained hereby in point of correctness, is not equal to what is
lost in point of persuasion and force?

Ibid, p. 118.


SECTION LIX. Of the Action of an Orator.
AFTER a sermon has been composed, and even committed to memory, much still
remains for the Orator to execute; for the success of the composition depends
upon the manner of delivery.

THIS concluding particular ought to be the subject of a separate work.

THE ancients regarded delivery as a very considerable branch of the art of
Oratory, and have carried this talent to a degree of perfection, of which we
have no idea.

FOR such as are merely desirous to avoid the most common faults in
declamation, the following are the principal precautions which ought to be
adopted.

THEY should indulge a favorable hope of the success of their performance at
the very moment of delivery, that they may speak without reluctance or
uneasiness. They should be deeply penetrated with their subject, and recall what
passed in their mind while engaged in composition. They should diffuse
throughout every part of the discourse the ardour with which they are animated.
They should speak authoritatively, in order to arrest the attention of the
hearers. They should avoid the declamation of an actor, and be cautious of
introducing theatrical pantomime in the pulpit, which will never succeed. They
should begin with pitching their voice at a proper medium, so that the tone may
be capable of rising without producing discord, and of being lowered without
becoming inaudible. They may be well assured, that the effect is lo^t, when
they attempt to strain their voice to the highest pitch; that hawling repels
attention instead of assisting it, and that the lower they sink their voice in
pathetic passages, the better they are he^^^. They should not allow themselves
to make use of a multiplicity of gestures; and they should especially guard
against laying an undue stress on a particular word in the general movement of
a period. They should avoid all corporeal agitation, and never strike the
p^lpit either with the feet or hands. They should vary the inflections of their
voice with each rhetorical figure, and their intonations with every paragraph.
Let them ^mitate the ^^^pl^ and impressive accents of nature, in deliver^ as
well as in composition. In a word, with the rapidity of utterance, they should
blend pauses, which are always striking when but seldom used and properly timed.

SUCH are the innocent artifices, which a Christian Orator may render
subservient to the success of his ministry. Advices respecting an Orator's
action are to be found in FENHLON'S Dialogues, ii. p. 65 -- 76; in BURC^'S
Essay upon Pronunciation and Gesture; also in Dr. JAMES FORDYC^'S Sermon on the
Eloquence, and Essay on the Action of the Pulpit. See also many useful hints
concerning the ministerial character and conduct in the same author's Charge at
the Ordination of his Successor, the Rev. Mr. LINDSAY. Likewise the Rev. Mr.
RYLAND'S Sermon to the Bristol Education Suciety, 1780.


BOURDALOUE'S action was very impressive, although he continually had his eyes
shut when he was preaching.

MASSILLON spoke also with much authority, but scarcely made use of any action.

THE Abbe POULLE and the Abbe RENAUD, and Orator of older standing, have
united, to their other talents, action of a higher quality; and there is no
preacher of this century who has been able to equal them in this respect.

IT is an excellent method to revise a sermon as soon as it has been preached.
The pulpit discovers its beauties and its faults; and, provided the Orator is
skilful to remark the impression that the discourse makes upon the auditory, it
is easy for him to observe the weak or prolix passages, which require to be
improved.

LET him, then, pass judgment upon himself when quitting the pulpit, less by
the report of others, than by his own observations.

SECTION LX. Of Motives to excite the Emulation of Christian Orators.
I AM aware that these multiplied corrections occasion very painful labor to
Christian preachers. Nevertheless, that which is really disheartening and
seriously alarming to us in our ministry, is neither the study, which
composition requires, nor the restriction, which memory imposes on us; but the
discouragements increasing as we grow old in our profession* the lassitude,
which perpetually attends the repetition of sermons, no longer delivered but
with reluctance; the certainty of discovering faults continually in our
discourses, and of finding ourselves, thus, not only very much on this side
perfection, but even below the level of our own abilities; and, above all, the
indifference of our age for religion. Hence it is, that persons attend to
religious instruction, as they would to a profane spectacle; that they are
desirous of reducing our zeal to the sacrifice of the most important truths,
and the most forcible Eloquence, to I know not what frivolous subject, or
rhetorical flowers; and that, in fine, it seems as if it were expected of us to
degrade ourselves, both as Apostles and Orators, in order to please the
multitude.

THESE draughts are, no doubt, bitter. It is, however, necessary to swallow
them, should we only succeed in reclaiming one wicked man to virtue, of
preserving one wretched man from despair; in a word, of preventing one single
crime from the earth.

AH! what more can be necessary in order to quicken our ardour? Is there a
virtuous and feeling mind, that can despise such a delightful reward?

WE shall have fulfilled the end of our vocation, when we render ourselves
useful to men; in their felicity we shall receive an indemnification for all
our sacrifices: the pleasing remembrance of our youthful labors will serve to
delight the solitude, and to console the inactivity, of our advanced years;
and, when Death sahll lay his heavy hand upon our eyelids, we shall each be
able to say to that great GOD, whose laws we have published O my Father! thou
have given me thy children to instruct. I restore them to thee better. Remember
all the blessings, which thou have poured upon thy people, through the
instrumentality of thy ministering servant. Let the tears, which I have dried
up, the tears, which I have excited when pleading in thy name, plead with thee
on my behalf. I have been the instrument of thy clemency: make me hereafter the
object of thy tender mercies.

EVERY other inducement, doubtless, dwindles to a point before these great
objects.

IF it were allowable, when entering upon this course of life, to hold human
encouragements in any degree of estimation, I should say, without dread of
contradiction, that, with a view of reviving the relish for Evangelical
^^oquence, the same means are made use of among us, which excited so successful
an emulation in the excellent days of the age of Louis XIV.

NEVER, in the record of ecclesiastical preferments, have Christian Orators
found a more distinguished attention paid to their labors, nor a more marked
good will to reward their talents.

AFTER having, in this manner, unfolded the ideas, which have arisen in my own
mind, on the subject of Eloquence, I am not afraid of being charged with having
sacrisiced the rules of taste to the purposes of my own vanity.

THE theories of individuals are, for the most part, only indirect apologies
for the compositions of their authors; and, despair of equalling the ancient
models, often gives rise to extravagant systems.

BUT if my rhetorical writings be inferior to my theory, I can, at least,
willingly bear this testimony, from the bottom of my heart, that, in deriving
the Principles of Eloquence from nature, or from the chief performances of our
greatest masters, I have been actuated by no other motive than a warm
attachment to truth, and the most earnest solicitude to contribute to the
advancement of science.

THE END.

