A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED APRIL 12, 1797, AT THE REQUEST OF AND BEFORE THE
NEW YORK SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING THE MANUMISSION OF SLAVES, AND PROTECTING SUCH
OF THEM AS HAVE BEEN OR MAY BE LIBERATED.

By SAMUEL MILLER, A. M. ONE OF THE MINISTERS OF THE UNITED PRESBYTERIAN
CHURCHES IN THE CITY OF NEW YORK, AND MEMBER OF SAID SOCIETY.

NEW YORK: Printed by T. and J. SWORDS, No. 99 Pearl-street. 1797.

At a Stated Meeting of The New York Society for promoting the Manumission of
Slaves, etc. held at the Society's School-Room, in Cliff-street, the 16th of
May, 1797:
THE Society having received Information that the Annual Discourse on Slavery
was delivered, by SAMUEL MILLER, on the 12th ult. agreeably to Appointment, --

Resolved,

That WILLIAM DUNLAP and ELIHU H. SMITH be a Committee to wait on Mr. MILLER,
to present him with the Society's Acknowledgements for his excellent Discourse,
and to request a Copy for publication.

Extracted from the Minutes. E. H. SMITH, Secretary.

TO THE NEW YORK SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING THE MANUMISSION OF SLAVES, AND
PROTECTING SUCH OF THEM AS HAVE BEEN OR MAY BE LIBERATED, The following
Discourse, DELIVERED AND PUBLISHED AT THEIR REQUEST, IS RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED,
BY The AUTHOR.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IT will, perhaps, be asked, why the detail of common place observations and
arguments which the following Discourse presents, was thought necessary at the
present day, on a subject so well understood, and concerning which there is so
little variety of opinion among enlightened men? -- To this question it may be
answered, that this Discourse being the first that was delivered, in
consequence of a late determination of the Society to institute an Annual
Oration, it was thought pardonable, and even proper, to begin with an
elementary view of the subject -- that the subject of slavery, however
familiarly understood by a few benevolent individuals among us, has been but
little attended to by the generality of our citizens; and that, strange as it
may seem, the objections and principles which the Author combats are daily
advanced, with confidence, by many with whom he converses.

A DISCOURSE, etc.
Friends, and Fellow Citizens,
IN meeting you on this occasion, I am deeply impressed with circumstances
which demand the warmest congratulations. We cannot survey the present
condition of the civilized world, without forming a contrast, at once pleasing
and melancholy, between our peaceful and happy situation, and the convulsed and
distracted state of those countries with which we are most nearly connected. No
invidious feelings -- no insensibility to the calamities of others, will be
supposed to suggest this comparison. It is forced upon us by a conjuncture in
human affairs so extraordinary and interesting, that no one can be inattentive
to it -- so gloomy and dark, that none can calculate the danger, or see the end.

At this era, momentous at present, but still more pregnant with the future,
the voice of Humanity, alas! is but too seldom heard. Persecuted and chased
from almost every corner of the globe, she knows not where to find an asylum.
The struggles of Ambition, grasping and devouring every thing within his reach;
and the desolations of War, widely spread, and murderous beyond former example,
exhibit the prominent features of Europe, and engross, almost exclusively, the
attention of the passing hour. Europe, more highly favored and cultivated than
the rest of the world, and regarding the other quarters of the globe with a
fastidious superiority, is become as pre-eminent in crimes, as in opulence,
refinement, and power. She offers few examples, but those of rapine and
violence -- little intercourse, but such as is calculated to corrupt and
destroy.

From scenes equally affecting to our view, and destructive to human happiness,
let us turn away our eyes, and fix them on the means of promoting the welfare
and improvement of our own country. Among these, there is one object which
pathetically invites our attention. The institution of the SOCIETY which I have
now the honor to address, and the occasion of the present meeting, designate
this object. The importance of it can escape the observation of none. For,
however justly we may prize the comparative felicity of our country; however
justly we may exult in the excellence of our Constitution, and the humanity of
our laws; we are forbidden to be idle, while a single source of human misery,
admitting of relief, remains to tarnish our character.

That, in the close of the eighteenth century, it should be esteemed proper and
necessary, in any civilized country, to institute discourses to oppose the
slavery and commerce of the human species, is a wonderful fact in the annals of
society! But that this country should be America, is a solecism only to be
accounted for by the general inconsistency of the human character. But, after
all the surprise that Patriotism can feel, and all the Indignation that
Morality can suggest on this subject, the humiliating tale must be told -- that
in this free country -- in this country, the plains of which are still stained
with blood shed in the cause of liberty, -- in this country, from which has
been proclaimed to distant lands, as the basis of our political existence, the
noble principle, that "ALL MEN ARE BORN FREE AND EQUAL," -- in this country
there are slaves! -- men are bought and sold! Strange, indeed! that the bosom
which glows at the name of liberty in general, and the arm which has been so
vigorously exerted in vindication of human rights, should yet be found leagued
on the side of oppression, and opposing their avowed principles!

Much, indeed, has been done by many benevolent individuals and societies, to
abolish this disgraceful practice, and to improve the condition of those
unhappy people, whom the ignorance or the avarice of our ancestors has
bequeathed to us as slaves. Still, however, notwithstanding all the labors and
eloquence which have been directed against it, the evil continues; still laws
and practices exist, which loudly call for reform; still MORE THAN HALF A
MILLION of our fellow creatures in the United States are deprived of that
which, next to life, is the dearest birthright of man.

To deliver the plain dictates of humanity, justice, religion, and good policy,
on this subject, is the design of the present discourse. In doing this, it will
not be expected that any thing new should be offered. It is not a new subject;
and every point of view in which it can be considered has been long since
rendered familiar by the ingenious and the humane. All that is left for me is,
to bring to your remembrance principles which, however well known, cannot be
too often repeated; and to exhibit some of the most obvious arguments against
an evil which, though generally acknowledged, is still practically persisted in.

And here I shall pass over in silence the unnumbered cruelties, and the
violations of every natural and social tie, which mark the African trade, and
which attend the injured captives in dragging them from their native shores,
and from all the attachments of life. I shall not call you to contemplate the
miseries and hardships which follow them into servitude, and render their life
a cup of unmingled bitterness. Unwilling to wound your feelings, or my own, by
the melancholy recital, over these scenes I would willingly draw a veil; and
confine myself to principles and views of the subject more immediately
applicable to ourselves.

That enslaving, or continuing to hold in slavery, those who have forfeited
their liberty by no crime, is contrary to the dictates both of justice and
humanity, I trust few who hear me will be disposed to deny. However the
judgment of some may be biassed by the supposed peculiarity of certain cases, I
presume that, with regard to the abstract principle, there can be but one
opinion among enlightened and candid minds. What is the end of all social
connection but the advancement of human happiness? And what can be a more plain
and indisputable principle of republican government, than that all the right
which society possess over individuals, or one man over another, must be
founded either upon contract, express or implied, or upon forfeiture by crime?
But, are the Africans and their descendants enslaved upon either of these
principles? Have they voluntarily surrendered their liberty to their whiter
brethren? Or have they forfeited their natural right to it by the violation of
any law? Neither of these is pretended by the most zealous advocates for
slavery. By what ties, then, are they held in servitude? By the ties of force
and injustice only; by ties which are equally opposed to the reason of things,
and to the fundamental principles of all legitimate association.

In the present age and country, none, I presume* will rest a defense of
slavery on the ground of superior force; the right of captivity; or any similar
principle, which the ignorance and the ferocity of ancient times admitted as a
justifiable tenure of property. It is to be hoped the time is passed, never
more to return, when men would recognize maxims as subversive of morality as
they are of social happiness. Can the laws and rights of war be properly drawn
into precedent for the imitation of sober and regular government? Can we
sanction the detestable idea, that liberty is only an advantage gained by
strength, and not a right derived from nature's God? Such sentiments become the
abodes of demons, rather than societies of civilized men.

Pride, indeed, may contend, that these unhappy subjects of our oppression are
an inferior race of beings; and are therefore assigned by the strictest justice
to a depressed and servile station in society. But in what does this
inferiority consist? In a difference of complexion and figure? Let the narrow
and illiberal mind, who can advance such an argument, recollect whither it will
carry him. In traversing the various regions of the earth, from the Equator to
the Pole, we find an infinite diversity of shades in the complexion of men,
from the darkest to the fairest hues. If, then, the proper station of the
African is that of servitude and depression, we must also contend, that every
Portuguese and Spaniard is, though in a less degree, inferior to us, and should
be subject to a measure of the same degradation. Nay, if the tints of color be
considered the test of human dignity, we may justly assume a haughty
superiority over our southern brethren of this continent, and devise their
subjugation. In short, upon this principle, where shall liberty end? or where
shall slavery begin? At what grade is it that the ties of blood are to cease?
And how many shades must we descend still lower in the scale, before mercy is
to vanish with them?

But, perhaps, it will be suggested, that the Africans and their descendants
are inferior to their whiter brethren in intellectual capacity, if not in
complexion and figure. This is strongly asserted, but upon what ground? Because
we do not see men who labor under every disadvantage, and who have every
opening faculty blasted and destroyed by their depressed condition, signalize
themselves as philosophers? Because we do not find men who are almost entirely
cut off from every source of mental improvement, rising to literary honors? To
suppose the Africans of an inferior radical character, because they have not
thus distinguished themselves, is just as rational as to suppose every private
citizen of an inferior species, who has not raised himself to the condition of
royalty. But, the truth is, many of the negroes discover great ingenuity,
notwithstanding their circumstances are so depressed, and so unfavourable to
all cultivation. They become excellent mechanics and practical musicians, and,
indeed, learn every thing their masters take the pains to teach them. Having
been, for two years, a monthly visitor of the African School in this city, I
directed particular attention to the capacity and behavior of the scholars,
with a view to satisfy myself on the point in question. And, to me, the negro
children of that institution appeared, in general, quite as orderly, and quite
as ready to learn, as white children.
And how far they might improve in this respect, were the same advantages
conferred on them that freemen enjoy, is impossible for us to decide until the
experiment be made.

ARISTOTLE long ago said -- Men of little genius, and great bodily strength,
are by nature destined to serve, and those of a better capacity to command. The
natives of Greece, and of some other countries, being naturally superior in
genius, have a natural right to empire; and the rest of mankind, being
naturally stupid, are destined to labor and slavery. De Republ. lib. i. cap.
5, 6.
What would this great philosopher have thought of his own reasoning, had he
lived till the present day? On the one hand, he would have seen his countrymen,
of whose genius he boasts so much, lose with their liberty all mental
character; while, on the other, he would have seen many nations, whom he
consigned to everlasting stupidity, show themselves equal in intellectual power
to the most exalted of human kind.

Again -- Avarice may clamorously contend, that the laws of property justify
slavery; and that every one has an undoubted right to whatever has been
obtained by fair purchase or regular descent. To this demand the answer is
plain. The right which every man has to his personal liberty is paramount to
all the laws of property. The right which every one has to himself infinitely
transcends all other human tenures. Of consequence, the latter can never be set
in opposition to the former. I do not mean, at present, to decide the question,
whether the possessors of slaves, when called upon by public authority to
manumit them, should be indemnified for the loss they sustain. This is a
separate question, and must be decided by a different tribunal from that before
which I bring the general subject. All I contend for at present is, that no
claims of property can ever justly interfere with, or be suffered to impede the
operation of that noble and eternal principle, that all men are endowed by
their Creator with certain unalienable rights -- and that among these are life,
liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.

These principles and remarks would doubtless appear self-evident to all, were
the case of the unhappy Africans for a moment made our own. Were it made a
question, whether justice permitted the sable race of Guinea to carry us away
captive from our own country, and from all its tender attachments, to their own
land, and there enslave us and our posterity for ever; -- were it made a
question, I say, whether all this would be consistent with justice and
humanity, one universal and clamorous negative would show how abhorrent the
principle is from our minds, when not blinded by prejudice. Tell us, ye who
were lately pining in ALGERINE BONDAGE! tell us whether all the wretched
sophistry of pride, or of avarice, could ever reconcile you to the chains of
barbarians, or convince you that man had a right to oppress and injure man?
Tell us what were your feelings, when you heard the pityless tyrant, who had
taken or bought you, plead either of these rights for your detention; and
justify himself by the specious pretenses of capture or of purchase, in
riveting your chains?

Let none say, that, notwithstanding all these reasonings, the slaves are
happier in a state of servitude, than they would be if set at liberty,
especially when they are treated with lenity, and provided for in a comfortable
manner. That there are different degrees of wretchedness among them, in
different circumstances, no one can doubt: and when they fall into the hands of
the humane and kind, their depression is less -- far less miserable, than when
the torture of whips, the pains of hunger and nakedness, and the unreasonable
impositions of hard taskmasters, are added to servitude. On this account, I am
happy in being able to say, that the lot of slaves among us is, in general,
much more tolerable than that of those in some other parts even of our own
country. But still they are both in bondage. However favored the situation of
either, they are both deprived of that blessing, in possession of which the
barren rock has its joys, and without which Eden itself would be a gloomy
scene. After all the sordid pleas of those who would measure out enjoyment for
them, they are forced to submit to an evil which, however disguised, is a
bitter draught, and ever will be so till Nature herself shall change.

But higher laws than those of common justice and humanity may be urged against
slavery. I mean THE LAWS OF GOD, revealed in the scriptures of truth. This
divine system, in which we profess to believe and to glory, teaches us, that
God has made of one blood all nations of men tha^ dwell on the face of the
whole earth. It teaches us, that, of whatever kindred or people, we are all
children of the same common Father; dependent on the same mighty power; and
candidates for the same glorious immortality. It teaches us, that we should do
to all men whatever we, in like circumstances, would that they should do unto
us. It teaches us, in a word, that love to man, and a constant pursuit of human
happiness, is the sum of all social duty. -- Principles these, which wage
eternal war both with political and domestic slavery -- Principles which forbid
every species of domination, excepting that which is founded on consent, or
which the welfare of society requires.

There have not been wanting, indeed, men as ignorant as they were impious, who
have appealed to the sacred scriptures for a defense of slavery. They have
dared to seek for a justification of injuries and oppression in a volume, which
teaches nothing but peace on earth, and good will toward men. As a specimen of
their reasoning -- Some have contended, that the Africans are the posterity of
HAM, one of the sons of NOAH; that, as it was declared by divine inspiration,
that his descendants should be servants to their brethren, so reducing them to
a state of slavery is only accomplishing the will of heaven. -- But this plea
can never be maintained, either upon the ground of fact, or of sober principle.
The curse pronounced upon HAM was evidently a limited one, and extended only to
a part of his posterity. It was only said, that the descendants of CANAAN, one
of the four sons of HAM, should serve the posterity of SHEM and JAPHET. This
curse, then, had nothing to do with the African nations, who have been so much
abused by the civilized world; but was partly fulfilled, when the descendants
of CANAAN in PALESTINE became hewers of wood and drawers of water to the
ISRAELITES, who were the descendants of SHEM: and afterward was completely
accomplished, when the CARTHAGINIANS and TYRIANS were subdued by SCIPIO and
ALEXANDER. See STACKHOUSE'S History of the Bible, vol. i. p. 268, 269.


But, admitting the curse pronounced upon HAM to have all the meaning and
extension which the advocates for slavery contend; yet we are to remember it
was prophetical in its nature; and though infinite Wisdom designed to fulfill
it, still it is plain, the agents in bringing about the fulfillment cannot be
considered the less criminal on this account. It was prophesied, that the
SAVIOR OF THE WORLD should be crucified, long before that important event took
place; and yet, I presume, none ever supposed that this consideration
exculpated his murderers. The truth is, if our being made instruments of
accomplishing the designs of heaven takes away guilt, there is no such thing as
crime in the world; the most execrable cruelty that ever disgraced mankind must
be pronounced right; and the work of carnage and death, in every age, must
receive the benediction of the wise and the good!

The practice of the JEWS, the chosen people of God, has also been supposed, by
some, to furnish a precedent which we might lawfully follow. That the children
of Israel had the permission of God to purchase bondmen and bondwomen of the
heathen nations which were round about them, and even to retain some of their
own people in servitude, for a limited time, is readily granted. But this
permission appears to have been particularly designed for that people, and was
not extended to the rest of mankind. It stands on the same ground with many
other things, which they were permitted to do, on account of their separation
from the rest of the world, and on account of the comparatively servile nature
of their dispensation; but in which it would be extremely criminal for us to
imitate them. As well might the midnight murderer plead, as an apology for his
crime, that God's chosen people were once ordered to destroy the guilty heathen
who inhabited the promised land. Besides, if this permission, given to the
children of Israel, on a special occasion, and for wise purposes, be considered
as extending to all succeeding times and people, where shall its operation
begin? and where shall it end? If this principle be admitted, then every nation
on earth is at liberty to purchase and enslave the citizens of every other. If
this be the case, we have a right to make merchandise of our white brethren in
Europe, if any can be found so base as to seize and sell them to us; and they,
on the other hand, have a like privilege to institute a trade in the flesh of
AMERICAN FREEMEN! -- Will any say, that this is a forced conclusion? No --
though justice, humanity, and religion all rise up against it, it naturally
flows from the principle above stated, and is quite as tenable in every point
of view.

But farther -- the writings of the Apostles, it seems, have been thought by
some to furnish a warrant for slavery. In one of the Epistles we find these
words -- Let as many servants as are under the yoke, count their masters worthy
of all honor, that the name of God and his doctrine be not blasphemed. And let
them who have believing masters not despise them, because they are brethren,
but rather do them service. 1 Timothy vi. 2.
Now, even taking for granted what, perhaps, may reasonably be called in
question, that the persons referred to in this passage were slaves for life,
and under involuntary servitude -- still it furnishes no such argument as many
imagine. It must be remembered, that the great Author of our religion did not
think proper directly to interfere with the political arrangements, and the
civil laws, which were established when his Gospel was first preached among
men. He always rather inculcated submission, and patience under the most
oppressive injuries. This doctrine the Apostle applies, in the present
instance, to a particular class of persons, to whom he thought the admonition
necessary; and all that he intends to inculcate on such is, that, during the
continuance of their servitude, (the origin, nature, or duration of which does
not appear) they should faithfully perform their duty to their masters, and
patiently submit to their lot. But, does this precept justify those who hold
their fellow creatures in illegal and forcible subjection? By no means -- No
more than the precepts, Resist not evil; and, If any man smite thee on thy
right cheek, turn to him the other also, justify the evil and the abuse which
they forbid us to resist -- No more than the precept, Let every man be subject
to the powers that be, can be construed into a justification of the cruelty and
despotism which, in those days, and ever since, rulers have exercised over
their subjects.

But, though it be granted that Christ and his Apostles, for the reason which
has been just assigned, did not in so many words prohibit the practice of
slavery; it is evident they taught principles and doctrines utterly abhorrent
from such a practice. And they who imbibe the true spirit of their religion,
will not hesitate a moment to pronounce, that invading the liberty and
diminishing the happiness of a fellow creature, are directly opposite to the
benign genius of Christianity. Hence it is a remarkable and well known fact,
that, after the introduction of this religion into the ROMAN EMPIRE, every
successive law that was made relating to slaves, was more and more in their
favor, abating the rigours of servitude, until, at last, all the subjects of
the empire were declared equally free. Nay, a celebrated historian has not
scrupled to account for the degree of liberty which is at present enjoyed,
throughout most parts of Europe, by the mild and benevolent influence of a
system, the uniform tendency of which is, to let the oppressed go free, and to
break every yoke. ROBERTSON'S History of Charles V. Proofs and Illustrations,
vol. i. note 20.


But in vain is a large proportion of mankind addressed on the principles of
morality and religion. These they will seldom regard, as long as they suppose
interest and policy to deliver different precepts. For the sake of such,
therefore, I add, with the utmost confidence, that slavery is not more opposed
to justice, humanity, and religion, than it is to the INTEREST of individuals,
and to the TRUE POLICY and HAPPINESS of that society in which it is suffered to
exist.

Slavery will always be found, in proportion to the extent and severity with
which it prevails, to INJURE THE MORALS of a people. That it tends to produce,
on the one hand, haughtiness, a spirit of domination, cruelty, and lewdness,
among the whites, appears probable, upon the slightest consideration of the
subject, and is abundantly proved by experience. And, on the other hand, that
it has an equal tendency, to produce and cherish almost every species of vice,
among the slaves themselves, none, I presume, will hesitate to admit. Should
any have a remaining doubt whether this be the case, let them compare the state
of morals in those parts of our own country, in which slavery is either
unknown, or exists in the most lenient form, with that which is exhibited in
those states in which slaves are more numerous and more degraded. That there is
a sensible difference between the moral aspect of the one and the other, no one
will controvert. That the comparison furnishes a result unfavourable to the
latter, the most decided partiality for them can neither conceal nor deny. And
that this difference of national and moral character depends, to say the least,
in some degree, on the state of slavery in each respectively, I believe the
most accurate and candid observers have readily granted. It is scarcely
necessary to say, that no reflection on the Southern States is here intended.
Many enlightened and benevolent men among themselves acknowledge and lament the
same things. It is their misfortune to be loaded with an evil, of which they
are by no means insensible; but to the best means of removing which, it must be
believed they have been, and continue to be most culpably inattentive. The
ill-natured remarks and comparisons which have been often made by party
politicians, on this subject, are too odious and contemptible to be reproved:
but a sober and candid statement of the truth ought neither to be concealed,
nor to offend any.


In this State, as well as in most others in the union, the testimony of a
slave cannot be admitted in judicial process, excepting in a few cases. What is
the ground of this law? The answer is obvious, -- "SLAVERY DEBASES THE MIND,
AND CORRUPTS THE MORAL CHARACTER." The unhappy victims of oppression, feeling
themselves precluded by violence, from enjoying the benefits of society,
neglect the social virtues. Finding their own rights habitually invaded, they
soon learn to disregard the rights of others. Living perpetually under the
frowns of power, they are insensibly taught the arts of deception, treachery,
and fraud, until every moral feeling is blunted or destroyed. Hence slaves, in
all ages and countries, have generally exhibited the most odious moral
depravity. And nations which, for refinement, virtue, and happiness, were once
the glory of the world, under the iron rod of despotism, we now behold sunk
into the lowest state of debasement. For farther information on this part of
the subject, the reader is referred to an Essay on the Effects of Slavery on
Morals and Industry, by NOAH WEBSTER, jun. Esquire -- a valuable work, and well
worthy the attention of all who would see a judicious and comprehensive
exhibition, both of fact and argument, on so interesting a point.


Nor has slavery a more mischievous effect on the morals of society, than it
has on NATIONAL INDUSTRY, POPULATION, AND GENERAL IMPROVEMENT. Men not only
become lazy and idle when they can make others the servile instruments of their
will; but labor will soon be esteemed disreputable and degrading, when it is
chiefly performed by slaves. And whatever diminishes industry, discourages
population, and sows the feeds of social weakness and disorder. Besides,
slaves, in general, do less work, and waste and destroy much more than free
laborers. It is said, by gentlemen well informed on this subject, that three
blacks, in the Southern States, will not, in general, perform more labor than
one free white in the Northern. -- Webster's Essay, p. 7.
Feeling no interest in the property of their owners, they will seldom perform
more labor, or exercise more care, than will be merely sufficient to save them
from punishment. Of course, agriculture, carried on by such uninterested
machines, must necessarily languish; lands must become comparatively
unproductive; and every species of national prosperity must be impeded, or
decline. Those who are acquainted with history, or who take notice of what is
daily exhibited in our own country, will be at no loss for facts to exemplify
and confirm what is here advanced.

In this part of the United States, indeed, the pernicious effects of slavery
are displayed in a comparatively moderate degree. But even in our own State
they are distinctly perceptible. Even here we should be a happier and a
wealthier people, were every labourer a freeman, and, of consequence, the
product of every man's labor his own property. -- Would to God, however, there
were not some of our SISTER REPUBLICS, whose situation is more perilous, and
whose prospects are more gloomy! Our southern Brethren, deaf to the dictates of
policy, to say nothing of higher considerations, have unhappily suffered the
evil in question to take such deep root among them, and to spread its baneful
influence so far and wide, that, if it do not prove the ruin, it will probably
prove, at least, the long and awful scourge of their land. -- "I tremble," says
one who cannot be suspected of undue partiality for the depressed Africans, I
tremble for my country when I remember that God is just -- that his justice
cannot sleep for ever -- and that an exchange of circumstances is among
probable events. The Almighty has ^o attribute which can take side with us in
such a conflict. JEFFERSON.


I have hitherto confined myself to the consideration of slavery as it exists
among ourselves, and of that unjust domination which is exercised over the
Africans and their descendants, who are already in our country. -- It is with a
regret and indignation which I am unable to express, that I call your
attention, before concluding, to the conduct of some among us, who, instead of
diminishing, strive to increase the evil in question. While the friends of
humanity, in Europe and America, are weeping over their injured fellow
creatures, and directing their ingenuity and their labors to the removal of so
disgraceful a monument of cruelty and avarice, there are not wanting men, who
claim the title, and enjoy the privileges of American citizens, who still
employ themselves in the odious traffic of human flesh. Yes, in direct
opposition to public sentiment, and a law of the land, there are ships fitted
out, every year, in the ports of the United States, to transport the
inhabitants of Africa, from their native shores, and consign them to all the
torments of West India oppression. -- Fellow citizens! Is Justice asleep? Is
Humanity discouraged and silent, on account of the many injuries she has
sustained? Were not this the case, methinks the pursuit of the beasts of the
forest would be forgotten, and such monsters of wickedness would, in their
stead, be hunted from the abodes of men.

Oh AFRICA! unhappy, ill-fated region! how long shall thy savage inhabitants
have reason to utter complaints, and to imprecate the vengeance of heaven
against civilization and christianity? Is it not enough that nature's God has
consigned thee to arid plains, to noxious vapors, to devouring beasts of prey,
and to all the scorching influences of the torrid zone? Must rapine and
violence, captivity and slavery, be superadded to thy torments; and be
inflicted too by men, who wear the garb of justice and humanity; who boast the
principles of a sublime morality; and who hypocritically adopt the accents of
the benevolent religion of Jesus? Oh AFRICA! thou loud proclaimer of the
rapacity, the treachery, and cruelty of civilized man! Thou everlasting
monument of European and American disgrace! Remember not against us our
offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers; be tender in the great day of
enquiry; and show a christian world thou can suffer and forgive!

Such, then, is the nature and magnitude of an evil existing among us, and for
the diminution and final extinction of which, the SOCIETY which I now address
was instituted: -- an evil which reason, justice, the religion of Christ, and
sound policy, with one voice condemn: -- an evil, therefore, against which,
whether we consider ourselves as men, as christians, or as patriots, we are
bound to unite all our force, and to discourage by all just and equitable
means. Commanded by such high authority, and solicited by so many interesting
considerations, I persuade myself, that my fellow citizens will neither
consider it an object unworthy of their attention, nor be deterred by all the
clamours of prejudice and of avarice, from contributing their influence and
their exertions to its speedy and everlasting abolition.

Many have been the proposals of benevolent men to remedy this grand evil, and
to ameliorate the condition of the injured negroes. But, while I revere the
very mistakes of those who have* shown themselves friends to human happiness,
yet the most of these proposals appear to me incumbered with insuperable
difficulties, and, in some points of view, to involve greater mischief than the
original disorder designed to be cured. Immediately to emancipate seven hundred
thousand slaves, and send them forth into society, with all the ignorance,
habits, and vices of their degraded education about them, would probably
produce effects more unhappy than any one is able to calculate or conceive. Nor
does the plan appear much more plausible, which some have proposed, to collect,
and send them back to the country from whence they or their fathers have been
violently dragged; or, to form them into a colony, in some retired part of our
own territory. I shall not pronounce either of these impracticable; because one
of them has been attempted by an European nation, and not altogether without
success. I shall not say, that such a removal would be less happy for the
subjects of it, than their present condition; because, in particular instances,
it might prove otherwise. But, in my view, the difficulties and objections
attending such a plan, especially on a large scale, are far greater and more
numerous than many sanguine speculators have seemed to suppose.

Perhaps no method can be devised, to deliver our country from the evil in
question, more safe, more promising, and more easy of execution, than one which
has been partially adopted in some of the states, and hitherto with all the
success that could have been expected. This plan is, to frame laws, which will
bring about emancipation in a GRADUAL MANNER; which will, at the same time,
PROVIDE FOR THE INTELLECTUAL AND MORAL CULTIVATION of slaves, that they may be
prepared to exercise the rights, and discharge the duties of citizens, when
liberty shall be given them; and which, having thus ^itted them for the
station, will confer upon them, in due time, the privileges and dignity of
other freemen. By the operation of such a plan, it is easy to see that slavery,
at no great distance of time, would be banished from the United States; the
mischiefs attending an universal and immediate emancipation would be, in a
great measure, if not entirely, prevented; and beings, who are now gnawing the
vitals, and wasting the strength of the body politic, might be converted into
wholesome and useful members of it. Say not that they are unfit for the rank of
citizens, and can never be made honest and industrious members of the
community. Say not that their ignorance and brutality must operate as
everlasting bars against their being elevated to this station. All just
reasoning abjures the flimsy pretext. Make them freemen; and they will soon be
found to have the manners, the character, and the virtues of freemen. It is
easy to foresee that many strong prejudices, and many feelings not altogether
unnatural, will oppose the execution of this plan. The idea of admitting
negroes to a state of political and social equality with the whites, even after
the best education they can receive, is not a very pleasant one to a great
majority even of those who are warmly engaged for their emancipation. I shall
not discuss the reasonableness of such feelings at present. It is sufficient to
say, that our political body is laboring under a most hurtful and dangerous
disease; and that the most skilful physician cannot restore it to health
without the exhibition of some remedies which are more or less unpalatable.


In two of our sister States, the important work of which I am speaking is
already, in a great measure, achieved. In MASSACHUSETTS and NEW HAMPSHIRE
there is not a single slave! In both they were all emancipated in a single day;
and no inconvenience resulted from an event so honorable to humanity. Noble
example! Happy triumph of truth and justice over a mistaken and sordid policy!
When shall a similar wisdom pervade the union, and rescue our national
character from disgrace? When shall this TOPSTONE be laid upon our REPUBLICAN
FABRIC, which, until then, must exhibit a most defective and inconsistent
appearance?

In the pursuit of this laudable and important object, you, my fellow citizens
of the SOCIETY whom I now address, need no exhortations of mine to inspire you
with zeal -- no hints from me to direct your exertions. Your labors have been
so indefatigable and successful, that I have only to repeat the injunction of
holy writ, -- Be not weary in well doing. To tell this audience, that you have
no wish to oppose the laws of your country, nor to invade the rights of private
property -- To say, that you have no desire to excite a spirit of discontent
and insolence among those whom the public will, however mistaken, has devoted
to slavery -- To say, that your only objects, as a Society, are, to rescue
those who are unlawfully held in bondage; to promote, by all just means, such a
gradual manumission, as shall be consistent with the public good; and to
cultivate a spirit of sobriety, honesty, and good behavior among the negroes
of every description -- To say that these are your only objects, would be
condescending to obviate prejudices, and to repel calumnies, which, as I am
persuaded they have no just ground, are entitled to but little attention; --
prejudices and calumnies, to which the tenor of your proceedings, if examined,
will furnish an abundant and honorable answer.

But, amidst all the opposition which you are called to encounter, in pursuing
the objects of your association, you have grounds of encouragement and support
of the most substantial kind. The good effects of your benevolent exertions are
already great and extensive. You cannot look back, without the highest
pleasure, on the hundreds, unlawfully held in servitude, whose chains you have
broken, and whom you have elevated, in some measure, to the rank of men. You
cannot contemplate, without satisfaction, the perceptible and happy influence
which your proceedings have had, in impressing the rude minds of the Africans,
in general, among us; in giving them some ideas of the importance of their
moral conduct; and in leading many of them to sober and industrious pursuits.
-- And above all, it must reward your past labors, and animate your future
exertions, to behold a SEMINARY FOR THE EDUCATION OF THE DESCENDANTS OF
AFRICANS, grown up under your fostering care, to a respectability which
promises extensive usefulness, and which demands the gratitude and support of
every good citizen. The African School above referred to, was founded in the
month of November, 1787. It began with twelve scholars. Since that time, it has
been gradually improving in every respect. It is under the immediate care and
inspection of a board of Trustees. It is provided with a Master, Usher, and
Mistress, by whom the pupils are taught Reading, Penmanship, Arithmetic,
English Grammar, and Geography; and, in addition to these, the female scholars
are instructed in Needlework. The number of scholars, on the first of January,
1797, was one hundred and twenty-two; of whom sixty-three were males, and
fifty-nine females. The good behavior, and teachable character of these
scholars, have been before noticed. This institution is supported at the annual
expense of one thousand dollars; and, of course, employs nearly the whole of
the funds of the Society. The benevolent, of every description, will readily
perceive, and deeply feel the strong claim which it presents for their support
and encouragement.


Go on, then, my Friends and Colleagues, with unabating zeal. You are engaged
in the cause of human happiness, and, therefore, in the cause of God. Be not
discouraged by the magnitude of the evil which you have associated to
encounter; nor by the difficulties which occur in your way. The sentiments of
the wise and the good, and the fundamental principles of our government, must
have a powerful operation, and they are both on your side. Though you cannot
control Legislatures; and though, when you plead the cause of humanity, they
will not at all times listen to you; yet there are other means in your power,
perhaps, even more effectual. You can do much by directing your efforts to the
conviction of individuals; by diffusing proper publications among them; and by
presenting the evils of slavery, in various forms, to their minds. Address of
the Convention of 1796, to the New York Society.


The time, I trust, is not far distant, when there shall be no slavery to
lament -- no oppression to oppose in the United States: -- when the
EMANCIPATING SPIRIT of our Constitution shall go forth in "the greatness of her
strength," breaking in pieces every chain, and trampling down every unjust
effort of power: -- when she shall proclaim, even to the stranger and the
sojourner, the moment he sets his foot upon American earth, that the ground on
which he treads is sacred to LIBERTY; and that the air which he breathes,
nourishes FREEMEN ONLY: -- when every being, who bears the name of MAN,
whatever complexion an equatorial Sun may have burnt upon him, and with
whatever solemn injustice his rights may have been infringed, shall enjoy the
privileges, and be raised to the dignity which belong to the human character.

THE END

