Mr. MELLEN's ELECTION SERMON. MAY 31, 1797.

COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS. IN SENATE, MAY 31st, 1797.
ORDERED, That PELEG COFFIN, THOMAS DAWES and ISAAC THOMPSON, Esq'rs. be a
Committee to wait upon the Rev. Mr. MELLEN, and, in the name of the Senate, to
thank him for the SERMON delivered by him, this day, before His Excellency the
Governor, His Honor the Lieutenant Governor, the Honorable Council, and the two
Branches of the General Court, and request a copy for the press.

True copy of Record, EDWARD MCLANE, Clerk of the Senate.

A SERMON, DELIVERED BEFORE His Excellency the GOVERNOR, AND The Honorable
LEGISLATURE, OF THE COMMONWEALTH of MASSACHUSETTS, ON THE Annual Election. May
31, 1797.

BY JOHN MELLEN, JUN. ONE OF THE MINISTERS OF Barnstable.

PRINTED AT BOSTON, By YOUNG and MINNS, PRINTERS TO THE STATE. 1797.

AN ELECTION SERMON.
Is It PETER, 2d. -- xv. "FOR SO IS THE WILL OF GOD, THAT WITH WELL DOING YE MAY
PUT TO SILENCE THE IGNORANCE OF FOOLISH MEN."
THIS declaration of the apostle, directed to christians, and designed, to
instruct and caution them, while under the government of heathen rulers, may,
it is presumed, without impropriety, be recommended to the consideration both
of rulers and ruled, now that christianity is their common religion. As the
circumstance no longer exists, which directed the observations and counsels of
the apostles, relative to civil government, principally to subjects and their
duties; and as being misrepresented by ignorance, and slandered by folly are
evils to which subjects are by no means exposed alone, may I not well be
justified in giving to the text such a latitude of application, as has been
suggested?

A VIEW of the words in their connection, may lead to some previous observations
on the ORIGIN and DESIGN of CIVIL GOVERNMENT, and the aspect of CHRISTIANITY
upon it.

"SUBMIT yourselves, says the apostle, to every ordinance of man, for the
LORD'S sake: whether it be to the king as supreme; or unto governors, as unto
them that are sent by him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise
of them that do well. For so is the will of GOD, that with well doing ye may
put to silence the ignorance of foolish men."

IT is of little importance whether we allow, to the first quoted words, the
construction which our translation gives them, or, with some learned divines,
instead of every ordinance of man, read every human creature; that is, every
person in authority; civil rulers of every rank and description. If civil
government be considered by this apostle, as an ordinance of man, he does not
in thus representing it, contradict another apostle, who says, "the powers that
be are ordained of GOD." HE has ordained them, because they are agreeable to
the constitution of the world, which he has established. It is evidently his
will that civil government should exist, because he is a GOD of order and not
of confusion; because the nature of mankind, their social disposition, their
wants, their passions, their irregularities and their vices clearly indicate
its expediency and importance. We are by no means obliged to conclude, from a
command, to be in subjection to the existing powers, because they are ordained
of GOD: or to submit to every person in civil authority, of whatever name, rank
or degree of power, for the LORD'S sake, that all rulers derive their authority
immediately from GOD. We may not infer that he has so pointed out the
particular manner in which we should be governed, or the degree of power which
every ruler ought to possess, that civil government, may not be properly styled
an ordinance of man.

GOVERNMENT has its remote origin in the nature of mankind: Or, the ruler's
power is indirectly derived from HIM who is the author of that nature. Its
immediate origin, as relative to particular nations and communities of men, has
been far from uniform. The only proper source of the ruler's power, at least,
when extended farther than that of a parent over his family, is, under GOD, the
people or community, who are the subjects of his government. We believe that
the people only have the right to determine the nature and form of their
political constitution. But we readily allow that facts are, in many instances,
at variance with right; and that the theory which supposes the obligation to
civil obedience derived from an original social compact, is not universally, or
in general, supported by the history of nations. Many, if not most of the
governments now existing in the world, probably originated in conquest. Or,
however their foundations were at first laid, they have, through various
changes, been matured to what they now are. And it is far from true, that their
present forms are the result of a general compact among the people, or are a
just expression of their will, unless their submission to them be considered as
implicit consent. The instance of a numerous people, unawed by any foreign
power, uncontroled by any internal oppressor, calmly collecting the wisdom and
the will of the whole community; coolly examining first principles; freely
discussing and declaring their natural rights, and on such a firm and rational
basis, deliberately erecting a constitution of government for themselves, is a
spectacle not less singular than august, even in modern, more enlightened
times. Nor will it, I trust, be considered as savouring of national pride,
rather than as expressive of just gratitude to heaven, if I add, that to no
instance among the few which modern times have exhibited, claiming any title to
the above description, is it so fully applicable, as to that of our own highly
favored country.

AS to the design or final cause of government, we feel no more doubt than with
regard to its legitimate origin, or the proper source of the ruler's power.
That is the general good of the people, as this is their general will. I should
blush for my country, or for myself, did I hesitate to say, that we are agreed
in exploding the absurd idea of the many being made for the few; and of rulers,
as such, not living for the people, rather than the people for them: or did I
suppose that it could be felt as any disparagement by the latter, to be styled
the servants of the public. Their usefulness is their honor; and they are
great in proportion as they minister to the general good. This, however, does
by no means suggest that a consciousness o^ their being benefactors, ought to
be their only reward. -- While acting in character, they merit not only the
esteem and respect of the people, but have a right to find their own interests
promoted by their exertions for the benefit of others. If they are servants,
they are by no means slaves. They are not bound to give their labor to the
public, without an honorable compensation though in common with others, they
ought to be under the influence of those sublime principles of patriotism and
religion, which may induce them, when peculia^ occasion calls, to make such
sacrifices for their country's welfare, as nothing but the gratitude and
affection of their country can repay.

THIS representation of the design of government and the ruler's power is not
less agreeable to scripture, than it is to enlightened reason; and is indeed,
suggested by the apostle in the words preceding the text. He speaks of
governors as sent "for the punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of them
that do well." The office of the ruler or magistrate is not less honorable or
necessary because a part, and no small part, of the good which it produces is
of the negative kind, or consists in preventing evil. And if the punishing or
preventing of evil seem, according to the apostle's representation, to be the
object of government and its laws, rather than recompencing such as do well: or
we be ready to ask why praise is the only recompense allotted to well-doing,
while punishment is the portion of those who do evil; we shall nevertheless
find his manner of expression sufficiently accurate, if we consider that
well-doing, in the sense here made use of, is its own reward. He who carefully
observes the laws of society; who is just, faithful, sober and temperate,
wisely pursues the path of honest industry, finds his advantage in so doing,
without any direct reward from the government under which he lives. Virtue
tends to happiness. Such is the constitution of heaven. This tendency, indeed,
is often counteracted by the follies and vices of men. A virtuous individual
might be happy in the state of nature; at least he might be free from those
evils and injuries against which government is calculated to protect him, if
all around were as innocent and virtuous as he. The primary design of
government, therefore is, not so much to render the subjects of it positively
happy, as to prevent their being rendered miserable by the violence, injustice,
fraud or negligence of their fellow men. This appears to be in perfect
conformity to the apostle PAUL's ideas, when he exhorts that "supplications,
prayers, intercessions and giving of thanks be made for all men; for kings, and
for all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in
all godliness and honesty."

IT is to be observed, however, that all laws are not of the penal kind, or
designed to deter from the commission of crimes. Some propose rewards. Their
immediate object is to encourage exertions, in a particular line, calculated to
promote the general good. And many others, though neither directly penal, nor
of the kind last mentioned, are professedly designed to increase the public
emolument, strength and prosperity, while they secure the peace and liberty of
virtuous individuals. In a word, civil government, when wisely and faithfully
administered, is as really calculated as it is designed to improve the
condition of mankind, and to widen the sphere of their enjoyments, as well as
to regulate and protect them. A very extensive sense may, therefore, be justly
given to the Apostle's expression, when speaking of the civil ruler: "He is the
minister of GOD to thee for good."

No man who impartially reads the exhortations of ST. PETER in the context,
with those of ST. PAUL in his epistle to the Romans, and in his charge to
TITUS, relative to civil obedience and subjection; and recollects the language
of our SAVIOR, on which his conduct was so just a comment, with reference to
the same subject, can refuse to acknowledge that the Christian religion
sufficiently inculcates submission to government, and looks with a very
friendly aspect on civil order and subordination.

INDEED, so strongly and with so little limitation has christianity enjoined
submission to the ruling powers, as to give some degree of plausibility to the
charge of its being unfriendly to the liberty of the subject, and the
unalienable rights of men. The doctrine of passive obedience and
non-resistance, so favorable to the selfish views and ambition of tyrants, and
so degrading to the human character in general, has presumed to derive its
origin from this religion, or at least, with confidence appealed to it for
support. It is presumed, however, that the expressions in the New Testament,
which seem most to favor the beloved doctrine of tyrants, may be fairly
explained and accounted for, in such a manner that they will appear to give no
real countenance to such a doctrine; and further, that upon an impartial view
of the Christian religion, we shall find abundant reason to acknowledge that it
is most friendly to rational liberty, and that the spirit of it is most
congenial to that of free governments.

THERE is good reason for supposing that the exhortations of the Apostles,
recommending quiet submission to the ruling powers, were occasioned, especially
by, and had a particular reference to a prejudice which then existed in the
minds of the Gentiles, and was taken advantage of by the Jews, against the
Christians, as though they were enemies to all government, and thought
themselves on account of their relation to CHRIST, freed from all subjection to
any earthly power. This prejudice probably arose from confounding Christians
with Jews; and knowing that principles of a very seditious nature, criminal to
the Roman, and indeed to all civil government, were really held by a sect among
the latter, originated by JUDAS of Galilee, and on that account, called,
Galileans, a name which, by the Heathens, was indiscriminately given to the
Christians, in the early days of our religion.

As the principle attributed, though unjustly, to the Christians, or at least
to Christianity, was so subversive of all order and government, it was of great
importance that they should carefully guard against every thing in their
language and conduct, which might tend, in the least to justify their enemies
in fixing it upon them. This may well account for the Apostle's urging
obedience to the ruling powers, in terms so strong and absolute; and explains
their giving the following or a similar reason for their thus pressing it upon
their Christian brethren, -- "That the word of God be not blasphemed." It shows
also, that their object was not to define the limits of submission, but to
evince the obligation to submission in general. Can it then be fairly inferred
from any thing which they have written, that our religion may be justly charged
with being unfriendly to liberty, or giving any countenance to oppressive and
tyrannical government? Would the charge be just, though we should allow that it
was the design of the Apostles to recommend to their Christian brethren, in
existing circumstances, an unreserved obedience to the ruling powers; not
merely to such as were good and just, but to all without exception, to the
rulers of that day, who, it is well known, were sufficiently despotic and
oppressive? Certain it is, that had they undertaken to qualify the obedience of
the subject, the end of their exhortations would have been frustrated; for they
would by no means have vindicated themselves, in the eyes of the government,
from the scandal to which they were exposed.

I AM sensible that our religion has been thought sufciently defensible against
the imputation of teaching the slavish doctrine of unlimited obedience and
passive submission, upon the idea that the sacred writers, when they inculcate
subjection, in the strongest and most unqualified terms, still discover, by the
arguments which they make use of to enforce it, that they consider govvernment
and ruling powers as what they ought to be, not regarding what they really
were: That they urge obedience upon the principle that the civil magistrate is
the minister of GOD for good, unto the people, and therefore that their
obligation to obedience cannot be inferred, when he ceases to maintain this
character, and becomes their scourge and oppressor. But if this construction of
the apostolic writings, and particularly of ST. PAUL's reasoning in the 13th
chapter of Romans, be just, which, however, is not undisputed, there appears to
be no occasion for having recourse to it.

NEVERTHELESS, though it is allowed that christianty does not profess to define
the respective powers and rights of rulers and subjects, it is still contended
that the spirit of it is most congenial to that of free governments, and
evidently favorable to rational liberty.

WE readily assent to our Savior's declaration, when he said, "my kingdom is
not of this world." His immediate object was to improve the hearts, and mend
the morals of mankind: To reconcile them to the Deity, and thus train them up
as subjects of a spiritual and eternal kingdom. This object however, is in
perfect consistency with that of rendering them wiser, better and happier, in
every earthly relation, and of promoting the present welfare, both of
individuals and societies. It is manifestly, the tendency, and we need not
hesitate to consider it as the design, of his religion, to render men better
citizens of the world as well as to make them meet for an heavenly inheritance;
to give them more just ideas of, and dispose them more faithfully to discharge,
their respective duties, whatever their rank, station or condition in life. It
is, doubtless, agreeable to his will, and in perfect conformity to the design
of his spiritual kingdom, that mankind should avail themselves of every
instruction which may be deduced from his religion, for securing liberty, peace
and posperity, and enhancing those advantages which are derived from civil
government, and the laws of society.

THE spirit of Christianity ought to be carried into the administration of
every kind of government, and to regulate the conduct of all classes of men,
from the highest to the lowest, but it does not thence follow that genius and
principles of some kinds of government are not more nearly allied to the spirit
of this religion than others; or that it does not point to the election of one
form, rather than another. And if there be any one form on which it looks with
peculiar approbation, can we hesitate to say, it is the REPUBLICAN.

WHEN our Savior said to his disciples, "All ye are brethren," did he not
recognize or clearly countenance that fundamental principle of republicanism,
the natural equality of men. I mean an equality with regard to certain natural
and inherent rights; the only one which reason can successfully undertake to
defend, and which is in perfect consistency with that difference and almost
endless variety which is found among them, with respect to original capacity,
aptitude to govern, education, riches, and influence derived from any of these
sources, or from all combined.

IT was not necessary that the author of our religion should more fully avow
that important maxim of all free government, that rulers are invested with
power not principally, for their own sakes, but for the good of the community;
or that he should more clearly discountenance the idea of hereditary power, and
greatness derived from titles and distinctions, not founded on merit, than he
did, when he said to his followers, "Ye know that the princes of the Gentiles
exercise dominion over them, and they that are great exercise authority upon
them; but so it shall not be among you: But whosoever would be great among you,
let him be your minister, and whosoever will be chief among you, let him be
your servant."

HE did not say, reject those kinds of government which cherish sentiments
tending to depress, and hold in vassalage the great mass of the people; in
which numbers of the community live in idleness and luxury, upon the labors of
the rest, and enjoy privileges and exemptions, greatly oppressive to the
degraded multitude: But he said by his Apostles, "Be ye, all of you subject one
to another -- Bear ye one another's burdens -- And, serve one another in love."
And he discovered in a striking manner, an impartial concern for all his
brethren, when represented as saying, "Inasmuch as ye did it to the least of
these, ye did it unto me."

HE has not said that governments, in order to their being free, must be
elective; that all the members of the community are entitled to a voice,
mediately or immediately, in choosing their rulers, and making the laws by
which they are governed; or to a degree of weight in the general scale. But he
has, by his Apostle, commanded us to honor all men; and has compared the
Christian society to the human body; representing all the members of it as
connected with, and mutually dependent on each other; so that "the eye cannot
say to the hand, I have no need of thee; nor, again, the head to the feet, I
have no need of you." We are taught that "GOD has tempered the body together,
so that there should be no schism therein, but that the members should have the
same care one of another; and whether one member suffer, all the members suffer
with it; or one member be honored, all the members rejoice with it."

THE Apostle enjoins obedience and fidelity to their own masters, on all in a
state of servitude; but adds, "if thou may be free, choose it rather," that
we might not be left in doubt, which of those two states had the preference in
his mind.

IF it be thought of peculiar importance, in order to determine what kind of
government is most agreeable to the spirit and principles of Christianity, to
enquire what form the Author of it instituted in his church; may I be
permitted, without seeming to wander too far from the present occasion, or to
enter too deeply into a disputed question, to observe, concisely -- that if we
except what may be called Theocratic in this government, particularly the
appointment of its first officers, by CHRIST himself, and the extraordinary
powers with which these officers were invested, for the purpose of successfully
propagating a religion, so strongly opposed by the lusts, passions and
prejudices of the world: If we attend to the direct evidence which we have from
the New Testament, that one species of officers was elected by the brethren: If
we consider that the Apostles do not appear to have had any proper successors,
the end of their office being answered in the witness which they gave to the
resurrection of CHRIST, and the foundation which they laid for transmitting his
religion to future generations: If we recollect that, by Apostolic direction,
censure was to be inflicted on an offending brother, in an assembly of the
whole church; that no brother was forbidden to speak and exhort in their
religious assemblies; and, to mention no more, that there was, for a time, a
community of goods, among the early Christians -- the conclusion appears to be
just and obvious, that, so far as CHRIST has instituted any particular kind of
lasting government for his church; and so far as this is pointed out to us, by
the authority or example of the New Testament writers, it partakes largely and
most strongly of the REPUBLICAN and ELECTIVE form.

I ONLY add, that the friendly aspect of our religion on the cause of liberty
in general, and of consequence, on the most free governments, is clearly
visible in the whole tenor and tendency of its precepts, which is to promote,
not only the divine, but all the benevolent and social virtues; to cherish that
charity which works no ill to his neighbor, and to deter men from every act
of injustice, treachery or unkindness, whereby the rights and liberties of any
of their brethren might be violated; in the exhortations which are given to
christians, to stand fast in the liberty wherewith they are made free; not to
be the servants of men; not to call any man master on earth; not to affect
being called Rabbi, and not to exercise lordly dominion over each other.

PERHAPS I ought to apologize for dwelling so long upon a point, on which this
respectable audience may be supposed to have felt themselves previously agreed.
It is hoped, however, that an attempt to illustrate the indirect testimony
which the best of religious furnishes, in favor of our own constitutions of
government, will not be deemed an improper one, by the friends, either of
republicanism or christianity.

WHAT has been already said, is I trust, more than sufficient to explain the
occasion of the apostles words, in the text, and their meaning as they relate
to that occasion. This appears to be, that it was the will of GOD, with respect
to the christians to whom he wrote, that they should with due subjection to the
civil powers, silence the ignorance of foolish men; or the objections and
complaints of all, who, through prejudice, or want of acquaintance with them,
and their religion, accused them of principles or practices unfriendly to
government. Such subjection, we have reason to conclude, was the well doing
especially intended. But taking the words in a more general sense, though still
as relating to government, and the duties connected with it, may they not, with
propriety, be recommended to the attention both of rulers and subjects,
especially at a time when party spirit is so prevalent, that not a few of both
find themselves exposed to censures which they ought not to deserve, and which
they must naturally wish to silence?

BUT it may be asked, will not ignorance and folly be forever clamorous? Must
not he who attempts to silence them, undertake an helpless task? Can it be the
will of GOD that we should perform impossibilities? Is it not enough that we
should be required to prevent or silence the complaints of the candid and
judicious? To the following construction, which is presumed to be the true one,
there can be no difficulty in assenting: That it is the duty of all to
endeavor, by well doing, in their respective stations and relations, to
prevent every just ground of complaint against them; and to conduct in such a
manner as will have the most probable tendency to put to silence even the
ignorant and foolish.

PERMIT me now to suggest, that if rulers would conform to the will of GOD, and
the spirit of what is recommended in the text, they will feel themselves
obliged, practically to remember the origin of government, and the source of
their authority and power. If they duly consider that civil government is the
ordinance of GOD, they will view themselves as his ministers, and charged with
an important commission from him who "stands in the congregation of the
mighty, and judges among the GODS." They will feel an elevation calculated,
not to foster pride, but to inspire noble sentiments, and the most generous and
laudable kind of ambition; and cherish that self respect which will render them
cautious and circumspect in their deportment, and fearful of sinking the
dignity of the ruler in the vices or follies of the man. They will remember the
character of him whose ministers and representatives they are; they will take
heed that they do not, by unfaithfulness, negligence, selfishness, or any
baseness of behavior, misrepresent and dishonor HIM who has put such honor
upon them; and carefully endeavor to manifest unto all who witness their
administration, that they know him who exercises loving kindness, and judgment
and righteousness, in the earth. They will not forget that being raised above
their brethren, in authority, does not render them less accountable to HIM who
is the judge of all the earth; but rather, will be seriously impressed with the
interesting importance of that divine maxim, unto whom much is given, of him
will much be required.

REMEMBERING also that their power is not derived immediately from GOD, but
through the intervention of those, over whom their power is extended, they will
feel the propriety and importance of respecting the people, as well as
themselves. This caution is usually applicable to rulers, in all kinds of
government, even the most despotic: For, in all "the physical strength resides
in the governed; and this strength wants only to be felt and roused, to lay
prostrate the most ancient and confirmed dominion." But especially may it be
recommended to republican rulers, whose authority, while in common with that of
others it derives its support from public opinion, is more sensibly and
immediately dependent on the suffrages and general will of the governed. We
reprobate the inconsistent idea of power, delegated to the rulers, remaining,
at the same time, in the hands of the people: Yet, in governments like ours,
where all delegated power may be said, by means of frequent elections, to
return, after short intervals, to those who gave it; and their right to change
even the constitution, when the public good may require, is clearly
acknowledged, there appears to be a peculiar propriety in rulers treating the
general opinion, and feelings of the people, with delicacy and respect. And
this, not merely for their own advantage, and with a view to the more certain
enjoyment of the public confidence and affection, but also from a patriotic
regard to the general welfare and tranquillity; that the people may not be
furnished with a plea for attempting, or wishing, frequently, to shake
foundations, and make injudicious or dangerous changes in the constitution.

IT is a dictate of sound policy, as well as of christian morality, that we
should, not only endeavor to do that which is right and good, but, if possible,
to do it in such a manner that our good may not be evil spoken of. It is, by no
means, inconsistent with that firmness, and resolute adherence to what appears
to be right, which characterizes a good ruler, to aim, habitually, at providing
things honest in the sight of men; and to strive by manifestation of the truth,
to commend himself to every man's conscience, in the sight of GOD.

AGAIN, if rulers do what is in their power to put to silence the ignorance of
foolish men, they will practically remember the DESIGN OF GOVERNMENT, or the
end for which they are invested with authority. In the whole of their
administration, they will direct their aim, and point their endeavors to the
general good. Whatever sphere they move in the system of government, this will
be the center toward which their views and actions will tend. They will divest
themselves, as much as possible of selfish, of local, and of party prejudices.
If they are legislators, they will, in making laws, ever consult the good of
the whole community. And though it may be often proper to make such, as are
designed to benefit, more immediately, a part, yet they will consent to none,
which, in their view, will operate injuriously with respect to the whole. And
if their office be to execute the laws, they will be guided by the same
principle. They will view all classes and conditions of men with an equal eye.
They will not employ their power and influence to oppress the poor, in
judgment; or screen the guilty from deserved punishment, on account of their
riches or honors. They will not bear the sword in vain, by neglecting the
duties required of them; or from sinister motives, overlooking crimes which
they ought to punish; but in such a manner as to be a terror to evil doers,
while they are a praise to them who do well.

FURTHER, if rulers would, as much as possible, secure themselves from censure,
by conforming to the will of GOD, it highly concerns them to consider the
influence of religion upon the present happiness of mankind. Upon the
acknowledged principle, that religion, if not absolutely necessary to the
existence, is greatly conducive to the order, peace and welfare of civil
society, they will feel themselves bound to make all that provision for
disseminating the knowledge, and enforcing the practice of it, among the
people, which is consistent with the rights of conscience; rights which they
will ever hold sacred, and never presume to violate, even with a view to
promoting what they may esteem the greatest good of the community; sensible
that they, equally with others, are bound by the prohibition, not to do evil
that good may come. They will, upon the same principle, and under the
conviction, that it does not appertain to them to decree articles of faith or
modes of worship, protect all denominations in the peaceable exercise of their
religion, and in worshipping GOD according to the dictates of their
consciences. Consistently, however, with the above mentioned conviction; and
that such protection may be effectually granted, they will, not only feel
themselves at liberty, but under obligation to restrain the licentiousness of
those, who, regardless of all religious institutions, would throw down the
barriers, designed to separate from others, that day which is peculiarly
devoted to the public worship of GOD.

THE ruler's respect for religion may, and ought to be discovered also by
distinguishing those who appear to reverence its laws, in the distribution of
public offices; so far, at least, as a due regard to other qualifications will
permit. If they would silence the ignorance of the foolish, or give no occasion
to the judicious and well disposed to censure their conduct, they will follow
the direction given to the Israelites, respecting the choice of their rulers
and judges -- provide such as fear GOD, as well as able men, and haters of
covetousness. Their eyes will be upon the faithful of the land, to honor and
promote them; nor will they suffer considerations of friendship, affinity, or
self interest to outweigh those of personal character.

BUT there is yet another way in which their regard for religion may be most
effectually expressed, and this is, exhibiting in their own characters, that
which it is their duty to honor in others. It is possible that men may respect
religion in others, who do not habitually feel its influence themselves; at
least, they may occasionally distinguish and honor it, when their own
authority, interest, or favorite schemes may be promoted by so doing. It would,
however, be with faint hopes of success, should we recommend to men destitute
of religious principle, the making of such principle an object in the
appointment of others to places of power and trust. And indeed, with respect to
their own fidelity, and uniform attention to the duties of their office, we
cannot feel that confidence in men, who profess not to be governed by higher
motives than those of honor, civil virtue or regard to reputation, which we
cheerfully repose in such as give us the additional security, which is derived
from those sublime principles by which religion, and especially the christian
religon, awes, controuls, directs and animates its votaries.

IN connection with what has been now said, it is natural to observe, that if
rulers would hope to avoid, not merely the clamours of ignorance and folly, but
the frowns of knowledge and virtue, they must be exemplary in their own respect
for, and obedience to those laws by which they are instrumental in binding
their brethren. If they treat their own institutions with practical contempt,
they will be justly chargeable with the absurdity of pulling down with one
hand, what they build with the other. It is of as real importance that they
should govern, as that the ministers of religion should instruct and pursuade,
by example.

THE inquiry, how the subjects of government ought to conduct, that they may
comply with the spirit of the instruction given in the text, now demands our
attention. The sum of the answer we may find in the words immediately
following. "As free, and not using your liberty as a cloak of maliciousness,
but as the servants of GOD."

AS HIS servants, it becomes them to remember that submission to government is
a duty, than which scarcely any one appears to be more clearly enjoined by HIM.
Reason teaches us that whatever tends to promote the happiness of mankind, is
agreeable to the benevolent author of our beings. For the necessity, importance
and salutary tendency of government, of laws and magistrates, to be a terror to
evil doers, and a protection, as well as praise to them that do well, we need
not appeal merely to the feelings of those who have suffered in their persons,
their property or their connexions, by the audacious wickedness of the highway
robber, or the insidious, and even more alarming villainy of the midnight thief,
incendiary and assassin. On this point general experience abundantly confirms
the decision of reason. The conclusion is obvious. The voice of revelation,
also, is clear and decisive upon our obligation to civil obedience: So clear,
that we may safely pronounce real enemies to government, to civil order and
subordination, practical enemies, at least, to our holy religion. Whatever they
may be in name, they are not christians in spirit and in truth. To declare any
one, an enemy to government in general, is therefore a high and grievous
charge. It may be, and, no doubt, often is misapplied. This may be the language
of ignorance, of folly, of prejudice or malice, as well as the complaints which
are too often uttered against those by whom government is administered. Nothing
which sober reason dictates, or which CHRIST, or his apostles have taught, on
this subject, furnishes any just ground for the pretense, that resistance to
the ruling powers is, in all cases, contrary to the will of GOD, and the spirit
of our religion: Much less, that all disapprobation of, or speaking against the
measures of those in authority, is criminal. We have not so learned CHRIST, nor
the principles of civil subjection. In this respect we may, and ought to
conduct as free. But if we would do what we ought to prevent or silence
complaints, with regard to the use which we make of our liberty, we must
consider the ill consequences of a groundless diminution of the public
confidence, in our civil rulers. We must remember that although they may not
introduce more of mystery into their administration, than particular
circumstances, or the general nature of government may require, yet we are not
capable of knowing, in all cases, at least, immediately, the motives which
influence their conduct. Their means of information are more perfect, and their
field of vision more extensive than those of private individuals. These
considerations will dictate candor and tenderness, in the judgments which we
form of their public conduct, in those instances which appear most doubtful, or
liable to suspicion; and are calculated to produce a habit of manly and
generous, though not of blind and implicit confidence, in the uprightness of
their views, and the wisdom of their measures. The same considerations should
also inspire us with the truly patriotic resolution, of standing forth in the
defense of our rulers, when we conceive them to have done well, and their
measures to be unjustly attacked; and induce us, by enlightening, according to
our ability, the ignorant, to silence, if possible, their groundless
complaints. Permit me to observe, that such a kind of confidence, as has been
recommended, may, with peculiar justice, be expected of the subjects of such a
government as our own, in which all the rulers are, either directly or
indirectly, appointed by the people: Since, in censuring them we do, in some
measure, cast a reflection on our own, or at least, the public wisdom or
integrity.

WHILE we hold fast the liberty of private judgment, and assert our right to
investigate and discuss the measures of government, if we would give no just
occasion of offense, we shall exercise this right with prudence and decency. We
shall appeal to dispassionate reason and argument; and not have recourse to
reviling, scurrility and abuse. Those do but injure a good cause, while they
render a doubtful one, still more suspicious. Need I add, that falsehood and
deception, however they may be viewed by the optics of corrupt policy, or
violent party zeal, are a kind of weapons which will be rejected with
abhorrence, by every true friend of liberty, of government, and his country.

THE man to whom this character belongs, whatever his sentiments may be on
disputed political questions, will, we may expect, quietly yield up private
opinion to that of the pubic, as expressed by the constituted organs of the
general voice; so far at least, as to submit, without difficulty or opposition,
to its established effects. He will rejoice in the prosperity of his country,
whether it were produced by the means which he preferred, or not. And with
respect to measures which involve only the question of expediency, not that of
justice and right, will feel willing that events should determine their wisdom
or impropriety.

I ONLY observe further, that a due regard to the will of GOD, and the peace,
order and welfare of society, will deter him from imputing to those who differ
from him, in some of their sentiments, on public measures, worse motives and
intentions than their conduct clearly indicates; and from exasperating the
spirit of party, when already too violent for the health of the political body.

FROM what has been said of the friendly aspect of the christian religion on
civil liberty, and the congeniality of its spirit to that of the most free
governments, we may infer, that as conformity to its principles and obedience
to its precepts prevail, the rights of men will be more thoroughly understood,
and more sacredly regarded.

AND may we not view it, at least, as probable, that the extension of
republican principles and forms of government will accompany that spreading of
the gospel, in its power and purity, which the scripture prophecies represent
as constituting the glory of the latter days? The surprising changes and
revolutions which have taken, and are taking place in Europe, loudly pronounce
the present an eventful period. Whether they be not the wheels, in the grand
machinery of providence, which are to have a distinguished efficiency in
hastening the fulfillment of ancient predictions, relative to the downfall of
antichristian and tyrannical power, and thus introducing the reign of truth,
of peace, and equal liberty, is an inquiry which may well arrest the attention
of every serious and enlightened believer in revelation.

NOR am I deterred from offering the above suggestion, by reflecting that the
great and formidable Republic, which makes so conspicuous a figure on the
bloody theater, has, in the midst of revolutionary violence, and their zeal for
destroying the corrupt appendages of the christian religion, made war upon
christianity itself: Nor by a review of those attendant enormities, from which
humanity ever must, and, as we have reason to hope, the nation among whom they
were perpetrated now generally does, turn away with abhorrence: Nor by any
thing which may be justly thought equivocal, or alarming in their present
designs or conduct, relative to us, or to surrounding nations.

To the prevalence of infidelity, and an unparalleled prostration of christian
principles and institutions, may be justly attributed, in no small degree,
those shocking evils which tarnished the glory of their wonderful revolution.
Nor let us hastily conclude that the strange and impious attempts to banish
christianity, in the days of anarchy and confusion, will prove effectual to
hold it in lasting exile; -- or prevent its return, in an improved and more
rational form, to bless the reign of order, peace and settled government.
Besides, we acknowledge that the power and wisdom of the Deity are often
exercised in bringing good out of evil. HE disappointeth the devices of the
crafty, carries headlong the counsel of the froward, and brings about the
most important events, by the means which they make use of to defeat them. We
remember how the enemies of CHRIST flattered themselves that they had
effectually crushed his power and cause, when they accomplished his death,
though that very event was the corner stone on which his kingdom was erected.
We recollect that the Assyrian monarch is called the rod of GOD's anger; and
that the righteous designs of the Almighty Ruler were carried into effect
through his instrumentality, though he meant not so, neither did his heart
think so; but it was in his heart to destroy and cut off nations, not a few.
And we assent to the scripture declaration: "Surely the wrath of man shall
praise thee; the remainder of wrath shall thou restrain."

REFLECTING on the legitimate origin, and design of civil government, what
abundant reason have we to felicitate ourselves on being the inhabitants of a
country, in which the former is so clearly, and practically recognized, and the
latter so rationally and happily pursued! It is our happy lot to live under
civil constitutions "which unite, and by their union establish, liberty with
order;" the latter of which is not less essential to our permanent welfare,
than liberty itself. We are citizens not merely of a single COMMONWEALTH, but
also, of a FEDERAL REPUBLIC, which unites, for general defense, and many
important purposes, under one common head, a number of distinct States,
possessed of qualified sovereignty, spread over an extensive country; and thus,
without endangering freedom, or giving up any thing essential to the republican
form of government, in a great measure, if not entirely, obviates the often
repeated objection against this form, as being compatible only to a small
extent of territory.

NOR are our religious rights less firmly secured to us than our civil. Not by
legal establishments. Not by any other alliance between the church and state,
than what consists in that rational respect which each entertains for the
other, founded on a conviction of the importance, both of religion and
government, to the happiness of society. While religion, and the christian
religion is countenanced, if not directly patronized by the ruling powers,
every man is at liberty to worship GOD in the manner which his conscience
dictates to be right. The citizens of the UNITED STATES are highly favored, in
as much as they are not shackled in their inquiries, by the baneful influence
of a powerful and bigoted hierarchy, on the one hand; nor, with pleasing
confidence, I add, taught by general infidelity and irreligion, in their civil
rulers, to slight the institutions of Christianity, or to neglect the support,
or despise the instructions of their spiritual teachers, on the other.

THAT the great body of the people are possessed of an uncommon degree of
valuable knowledge, compared with most, if not all other nations, with whom we
are acquainted; that the arts and sciences are flourishing; that the means of
education are improving, as well as increasing, and that religion is generally
respected, amongst us, are considerations which tend to confirm the pleasing
hope, that the TEMPLE OF LIBERTY which has been erected in this Western world,
will be as renowned for its duration, as it is for the harmony of its
proportions, and the simple elegance of its structure.

WERE we to take a review, (which however, the time will not permit,) of the
various scenes through which we have passed, in our progress from a state of
dependence on a distant power, whose impolitic measures for securing, more
firmly, our subjection, were the means of losing it entirely, to our present
state of independence, prosperity, wealth and respectability, the recollection
might well excite a throng of emotions in our breasts, among which, gratitude
to heaven would justly claim the preeminence. For it was not our own arm that
saved us; but the right hand of the LORD, and his arm, and the light of his
countenance. This pious affection, however by no means forbids, and, I trust,
will not exclude the gratitude so justly due to those patriotic warriors and
statesmen, whom heaven has honored, in making them important instruments of
our political salvation and national prosperity. Among this band of worthies,
it would be unnatural and unjust, not to distinguish the late illustrious
President of the United States. Viewing him both in his military and civil
character, and tracing him through the whole course of his patriotic and
benevolent labors, who will deny that he has well done, and deserved most
highly of his country? May that retirement, to which he has been followed by an
unparalleled share of the public applause, esteem and gratitude, be as happy as
it is dignified; and the evening of his life as peaceful and serene, as its day
has been active and useful!

WHILE we cheerfully pay this tribute of respect to the distinguished merits of
the retired President, we disclaim the idea, of our political salvation or
prosperity depending on the name or the virtues of a single citizen, however
illustrious. Let the well known abilities, the extensive political knowledge,
the integrity and patriotism of that highly respectable character, who now
fills the first seat in our national government, be our justification in so
doing. And let the general satisfaction with which the result of a late
interesting election was received; and the confidence, and spirit of
conciliation with which both the first and second in command, appear to be
viewed by the people at large, suffice to falsify the gloomy predictions, and
disappoint the fears and hopes of such as have, either kindly trembled for our
safety, or viewed with a jealous eye, our rising greatness and respectability.

AMONG the public causes of joy and gratitude, it is far from the least, that
we have been enabled to realize the invaluable blessing of peace, while other
nations, with whom we are connected, have so severely experienced the
calamities of war. Our joy has, however, lately felt a check, and a cloud has,
in a degree, obscured the face of our national prosperity, in consequence of
the misunderstanding which has taken place, between our government and the
Republic of France. Nevertheless, we trust that those ties which bind the two
nations to each other, will not be lightly broken by either; and that both
understand their honor and interest too well, to widen, rather than attempt
healing the unhappy breach. With respect to our own government, we feel full
confidence that, from a conviction of the undiminished value of peace, and a
due regard to the dictates of general benevolence, they will be induced, before
an appeal is made to the sword, to pursue the expedient of negotiation, as far
as national dignity will permit: Farther than this, it is presumed, no citizen
of independent America will wish them to go; or patiently bear the humiliating
idea of being controuled, or dictated to, by any foreign nation whatever.

THE aged and venerable chief Magistrate of this Commonwealth, His Excellency
SAMUEL ADAMS, Esquire.
now that he is retiring from the chair of government, to which he has been
repeatedly raised by his fellow-citizens, who have thus clearly expressed their
grateful sense of his past exertions, in the cause of freedom and his country,
will be pleased to accept our warmest wishes for his health and happiness; That
peace may crown his latter days; that he may live to see, and rejoice in the
increasing prosperity of his country, and finally realize the blessedness
promissed to the faithful disciples of CHRIST.

WHEN we extend our views forward, to a successor, in this high and honorable
office, it is with much satisfaction that we observe the prevailing suffrages
of the people pointing us to a CHARACTER, His Excellency INCREASE SUMNER, Esquire.
in whom we can feel so strong confidence, that he will faithfully and
uniformly endeavor to promote the true interest of this Commonwealth, in
connection, and consistency with that of the United States.

HIS Honor, the Lieutenant Governor, His Honor MOSES GILL, Esquire.
will accept our congratulations, on the renewed testimony which he has
received of the esteem and confidence of his fellow citizens. By still exerting
himself to serve them, in that honorable station, to which their so general
suffrages have called him, may he enhance their esteem and approbation, as well
as the final rewards of fidelity.

MAY the Honorable Senate, and House of Representatives, in the elections of
this day, and all their future deliberations and decisions, be actuated by the
purest of motives; a regard to the honor of GOD, and the happiness of those
who have placed confidence in their wisdom and integrity. We trust they will
not forget the salutary influence of religion, on the welfare of civil society,
nor the peculiar importance of the general diffusion of knowledge, in a
Republic. We therefore anticipate their solicitous, and unremitted concern, not
only for our University, and Academies, but for those smaller and more common
seminaries of learning, on which our dependence, for the general dissemination
of the most useful knowledge, and a great part of the benefit of public
religious instruction, must ultimately rest. Happy will it be for the people,
and happier still, in the end, for themselves, if they conscientiously pursue
the way of well-doing: If, by their laws, their influence and example, they
endeavor to discourage vice, and honor and promote that righteousness which
exalts a nation, while it lays the only sure foundation of happiness to
individuals, both temporal and eternal. For, if to the character of good
rulers, they join that of good men, though they should not be able, at all
times, to silence the ignorant and foolish, they will secure the approbation of
the wise and candid; and above all, they will be glorious in the eyes of the
LORD.

THIS whole assembly is reminded of the obligation which lies upon them to do
well, not merely by subjection to government, and giving honor, to all among
their fellow-men, to whom honor is due, but by uniform submission to the will,
and impartial respect to all the commandments of the SUPREME RULER of the
world. Let us rejoice that we are called unto liberty, and that our submission
to government is so rational a service. But let us take heed that we do not use
our liberty either civil or religious, as a cloak of maliciousness. Let us not
show ourselves unworthy of the former, either by unreasonable and groundless
complaints of our rulers on the one hand, or blind and servile confidence in
them on the other: By neglecting or abusing the important privilege of
election, which we so freely enjoy; nor by losing sight of the principles and
spirit of those excellent constitutions of government, under which we live. And
let us not abuse the latter, by injustice, fraud and falsehood; by luxury,
intemperance and corrupting dissipation; nor by infidelity, profaneness, and
contemptuous disregard of religious institutions. But duly appreciating the
merits, both of the government and the religion with which we are blessed, let
it be our great concern, to crown the virtues of the citizen with those of the
christian: Thus firmly laying the foundation of a joyful hope, that when the
solemn period shall arrive, which will level all distinctions, but those of the
moral kind, we may find a place among the just made perfect; and with all
those, who, by patient continuance in welldoing, have sought glory, honor,
immortality, enter on the enjoyment of eternal life.


