TRAVELS OF A PHILOSOPHER; OR, OBSERVATIONS ON THE MANNERS AND ARTS OF VARIOUS
NATIONS IN AFRICA AND ASIA.

BY M. LE POIVRE, Late Envoy to the King of CONCHIN-CHINA.

AUGUSTA (Kennebeck) REPRINTED BY PETER EDES.

1797.

PREFACE.
THE following interesting work was originally read before the Royal Society of
Agriculture at Lions, of which the author was then President; and soon after
that before the Royal Society of Paris. -- It was so well received by those
learned bodies, that it soon found its way to the press, and has since been
translated and reprinted in London. M. LE POIVRE's manner is easy and elegant
-- his observations striking and judicious -- his sentiments philanthropic and
benevolent. -- His principal aim appears to be to prove that the genuine
happiness of every nation depends upon the improvements of Agriculture; and
that for this end the property of the industrious ought to be permanently
secured by laws and modes of government that should be subject to no violation.

For the benefit of the American Farmers and Legislators it is now reprinted,
in hopes that it may be an incitement to a proper mode of thinking on the
subject of Agriculture, as well as to greater exertions and industry among the
different ranks of people amongst us.

TRAVELS OF A PHILOSOPHER.
EVERY people, however barbarous, have arts peculiar to themselves. The
diversity of climates, whilst it varies the wants of mankind, offers to their
industry different productions on which to exercise it. Every country, at a
certain degree of distance, has fabrics so singularly peculiar to itself, that
they could not have been the fabrics of other regions: but agriculture, in
every climate, is the universal art of mankind: from one extreme of the globe
to the other, nations still barbarous, as well as those whose ideas are
civilized, procure to themselves, at least, a part of their subsistence by the
culture of their fields; yet this art, however universal, is not every where
equally flourishing.

It never fails to prosper among wise nations, who know how to honor and
encourage it; -- it supports itself but feebly amongst a people half polished,
who either prefer to it frivolous arts, or who, being sufficiently enlightened
perhaps to perceive its utility, are still too much slaves to the prejudices of
their ancient barbarity, to affranchize and confer honors on those who exercise
it; -- it languishes, and its influence is scarcely to be observed amongst
barbarians, who despise it. The state of agriculture has ever been the
principal object of my researches among the various people I have seen in the
course of my voyages. It is almost impossible for a traveller, who perhaps only
passes through a country, to make such remarks as are necessary to convey a
just idea of the government, police, and manners of the inhabitants. In such a
case, the criterion which best mar^s the internal state of a nation, is to
observe the public markets, and the face of the country. If the markets abound
in provisions, if the fields are well cultivated, and covered with rich crops,
then in general you may conclude that the country is well peopled, that the
inhabitants are civilized and happy, that their manners are polished, and their
government agreeable to the principles of reason. -- You may then say to
yourself, I am amongst Men.

When, on the contrary, I have arrived amongst a people, whom it was necessary
to search for amidst forests, whose neglected lands were overgrown with
brambles; when I have traversed large tracts of uncultivated deserts, and then
at last stumbled on a grubb'd-up wretchedly cultivated field; when arrived at
length at some canton, I have observed nothing in the public market but a few
sorry roots, I no longer hesitated to determine the inhabitants to be wretched
savages, or groaning under the most oppressive slavery.

I never remember a single instance of being obliged to retract this first
idea, conceived simply by inspecting the state of agriculture amongst the
various nations I have seen: the knowledge of various particulars, which a long
residence amongst many of them has enabled me to acquire, has ever confirmed me
in opinion, that a country poorly cultivated is always inhabited by men
barbarous or oppressed, and that population there can never be considerable.

You will observe by the detail I now offer you of my enquiries, that in every
country agriculture depends absolutely on the laws, the manners, and even on
the established prejudices of the respective inhabitants. I shall begin with
observations on some parts of Africa.

The Western Coasts of Africa.
The islands and western districts of this part of the world which I have seen,
are for the greater part uncultivated lands, inhabited by unhappy negroes.
These wretched men, who have so poor an estimation of themselves as to sell one
another, never employ a thought on the cultivation of their lands. Satisfied to
exist from day to day, under a climate where their wants are few, they
cultivate just as much as prevents their dying of hunger; they carelessly sow
every year some maize, a very little rice, and plant, in small quantities,
different kinds of potatoes, not of the nature of ours, though the culture is
much the same; we know them by the name of yams. In general their harvests are
so poor, that the Europeans, who resort to them for the purchase of slaves, are
obliged to bring from Europe or America the provisions necessary for the
maintenance of those unfortunate creatures doomed to compose their cargoes.

The negroes, who inhabit the environs of the European colonies, give somewhat
more attention to agriculture than the others; -- they rear slocks; they
cultivate rice in greater quantities; and in their gardens are found pulse, of
which the seed has been brought from Europe; yet all they know of agriculture,
they have learnt from the Europeans settled amongst them; their own experience
is extremely bounded; and I have never been able to discover in their industry
any process which could in the least improve our own.

From the river of Angola to Cape Negroe, and from thence till you approach the
Cape of Good Hope, nothing is to be seen but sterile uncultivated lands; the
coasts are naked, and covered with barren sands; and you are under the
necessity of traveling many leagues before yon can discover a palm tree, or
the slightest verdure. The country and its few inhabitants seem to be struck
with one common curse. From the informations I have received touching these
countries from the Italian missionaries, who, with an admirable zeal, have
penetrated into the heart of these accursed regions, I learn likewise that
agriculture is just as languid in the interior parts as upon the coasts,
although, in many places, the soil appeared much more fruitful from its natural
productions.

The Cape of Good Hop^
The countries around the Cape were condemned to the same sterility before the
Dutch took possession of them; but since their establishment on this point of
Africa, the lands produce in abundance wheat and grain of every kind, wines of
different qualities, and a considerable quantity of exellent fruits, collected
from every quarter of the world: There you see extensive pastures covered with
horses, black cattle, and sheep -- these herds and flocks thrive exceedingly
well. The abundance which this colony enjoys, compared to the barrenness of the
surrounding countries, evidently demonstrates that the earth denies her favors
only to the tyrant and the slave; but becomes prodigal of her treasures, beyond
the most sanguine hope, so soon as she is free, and cultivated by men of
discernment, whom wise and invariable laws protect.

A number of Frenchmen, forced from their country by the revocation of the
edict of Nantz, have on this coast found a new establishment, and with it,
security, property, and liberty, the only true encouragers of agriculture, the
only principles of abundance. They have enriched this adopted mother by their
industry; they have there founded considerable colonies, some of which bear the
name of that unhappy country which denied them the use of water and of fire,
the remembrance of which however they still fondly cherish.

The colony of Little Rochelle surpasses all the rest, by the industry of the
colonists, and the fertility of the lands which belong to it. The pastures are
there composed of a variety of grasses, natives of the country, together with
several different species of herbage, which compose our artificial meadows in
Europe, such as trefoil, lucern, and faintfoin. The exotic plants, the seeds of
which have been imported by the Dutch, flourish there as the natural
productions of the country. Those seeds are sown by an operation of the plough;
they cut the grass only the first year; the second they open the meadows to
cattle, which live there at discretion, without any other attention than that
of collecting them together every evening into a park enclosed with strong and
high pallisades, to secure them against the lions and tigers, with which this
country abounds.

Some of these enclosures are watered only by the rains, although they
generally endeavor to choose them in the neighborhood of some brook, where they
dig commodious watering places. In all these pasturages, they have an eye to
groves of trees, where the herds and flocks may find shelter against the
intense heat of the sun; particularly in January, February and March, which in
this part of the world are the most sultry months in the year.

The arable land is here labored as in Europe, sometimes by horses, but oftener
by oxen: the Dutch of this colony have by their industry corrected the natural
sluggishness of these latter animals, by exercising them while young in a brisk
pace; in consequence of which I have seen, at the Cape, carriages, drawn by
teams of ten or a dozen yoke of oxen, go as expeditiously as if drawn by horses.

The grains commonly sown at the Cape, are wheat, turkey corn, and rice; these
generally produce an increase of fifty-fold. They cultivate a variety off
different kinds of pulse, such as pease, common beans, and French beans. This
pulse makes a refreshing provision to the ships touching at the Cape going or
returning to India.

A particular species of this pulse is much in request in India, to which they
export a considerable quantity; it is there known by the name of Cape-Pease: it
is a kind of French bean which requires no prop; its grain is of the form of
that bean, but larger and flatter; it tastes like our green peace, and preserves
its freshness for a long time. I have this year attempted the culture of this
plant, which promises success. The climate at the Cape seems to demand from the
cultivator an attention which appears not so necessary in this country, and
which would even perhaps be prejudicial to the productions of our lands.

The Cape however is exposed the greatest part of the year to violent
hurricanes, which blow generally from the north-east. These winds are so
impetuous that they would beat down the fruits from the trees, and sweep to
destruction the labors of the farmer, had they not provided a barrier for the
security of the harvest. The Dutch colonists have divided their lands into
small fields, which they have surrounded with high pallisades of oaks and other
trees, planted very close to one another, some what resembling a charmille,
designed for the ornament of a garden. These pallisades they cut every year, as
they grow; their height being commonly from twenty-five to thirty feet; every
separate field, in consequence, is enclosed like a chamber.

It is by this industry alone that the Dutch have rendered this colony not only
the granary of all their settlements in the East Indies, but the most
commodious place for vessels to touch at for refreshments and provisions of all
kinds.

When the Dutch began to form their vineyards, they endeavored to procure
plants from those cantons which enjoyed the greatest reputation for their
wines; but after many fruitless attempts to produce, at the extremity of
Africa, the vines of Burgundy and Champagne, they applied to rearing the plants
transported from Spain, the Canaries, and the Levant, where the climate is more
analagous to the Cape. At present the plants which are cultivated most
successfully, are those of the Muscadel kind: the red Muscadel particularly,
which they rear in a small district called Constance, produces most delicious
wine; the Dutch East India Company always secure this vintage, which they send
in presents to the sovereigns of Europe.

The vines at the Cape are cultivated without vine-props; the method of labor
is much the same with that in France. The vineyards are surrounded by a number
of trees, upon which they entwine the slips of the great Spanish Muscadine, in
form of espaliers, very high, by which the vines are sheltered from the
violence of the winds.

The same attention, at the Cape, is paid to gardening, as to the other
branches of agriculture. You there find all the variety of European pulse,
greens, herbs, and roots, with the best of those peculiar to other parts of the
world. Independent of the gardens of the colonists, which are kept in as fine
order as any in Europe, the India Company have caused to lay out two or three
gardens, extensive and magnificent, which they support with an expense worthy
of a sovereign company.

Fifteen or twenty European gardeners, whose abilities are approved before they
are embarked, are employed in the cultivation of each of those vast gardens,
under the direction of a principal gardener, whose place is lucrative and
honorable. It is in those gardens, at the expense of the company, that all the
experiments are made in every new species of culture; and it is there that
every private individual is provided gratis, with such plants and seeds as he
may have occasion for, together with the necessary instructions for their
cultivation. These gardens furnish, in the greatest abundance, herbage and
fruits of various kinds to the company's ships.

Travelers cannot but with pleasure and admiration observe large enclosures
consecrated to the study and improvement of Botany, in which the most rare and
useful plants, from every quarter of the world, are arranged in the most
excellent order: the curious have the additional satisfaction also of finding
skilful gardeners, who take pleasure in describing and pointing out their
virtues.

Those beautiful gardens are terminated by large orchards, where are to be
found all the fruits of Europe, together with several natives of Africa and
Asia. Nothing is more agreeable than to see in different expositions, even in
the same enclosure, the chestnut, the apple, and other trees, from the most
northern climates, together with the muscadine of the Indies, the camphres of
Borneo, the palms, and a variety of other trees, which are natives of the
torrid zone.

MADAGASCAR.
After doubling the Cape of Good Hope, you enter the Indian sea, where you find
the great Island to Madagascar: we are still unacquainted with many places of
this island, though the Portuguese, Dutch, French, and other Europeans have had
settlements, and frequented it, above two centuries. Those parts which we know,
are very fertile, and the inhabitants would in all probability, cultivate them
extremely well, were there a vent for their productions. They rear numerous
herds of cattle and sheep; their pasturages, such as nature has formed them,
are rich: in many cantons are large tracts of tilled ground, covered with grass
of an extraordinary size, which grows to the height of five or six feet; the
natives call it Fatak; it is excellent for nourishing and fattening their
horned cattle, which are of the largest species, and differ in shape from ours,
particularly by a large fleshy protuberance on their neck. -- Another grass, of
a finer blade, shoots spontaneously through the sands on the sea coast, which
furnishes food for the sheep: these are of the same species with those of
Barbary, and differ from ours most remarkably, by the monstrous size of their
tails, which weigh in general from six to eight pounds.

The Madecasses or Malegaches (which is the name of the inhabitants of this
island) cultivate scarce any other grain but rice: they sow at the commencement
of the rainy season; in consequence of which they are not under the necessity
of watering their fields. In laboring their ground, they use no other
instrument but the pickaxe; they begin by grubbing up all the weeds; then five
or six men, ranging themselves in a line on the field, dig little holes as they
pass along, into which the women or children, who follow, throw the grains of
the rice, and then with their feet cover them with earth: a field sown in this
manner produces an increase of above eighty or a hundred fold, which proves
rather the extreme fertility of the soil, than the goodness of the cultivation:
badly understood as it may be, however, the inhabitants of Madagascar live in
abundance. In no country in the world, that I have seen, are rice and other
essential provisions cheaper than in this island. For a remnant of coarse blue
cloth, which may be worth perhaps twenty pence, the Madecasse gives two or
three measures of rice. These measures are furnished by the Europeans, who
never fail to enlarge them every year; yet the islanders do not complain. The
measure is first of all heaped; the buyer then, in virtue of an established
right for securing good measure, thrusts his arm to the elbow in the rice, and
with one sweep empties it almost entirely, which the Madecasse has the patience
a second time to replenish, without a murmur. This measure is called a Gamelle,
which, thus filled, will hold about 160 pounds of pure rice.

There cannot be a doubt, but if our [the French] India Company, who alone are
in possession of the trade with the natives of this island, would give proper
encouragement to agriculture, it would in a short time make a rapid progress.
-- Our islands of Bourbon and France would here always find a certain resource
against those dearths which too frequently distress the latter of these
islands. Our squadrons bound for India, who put into the Isle of France for
refreshments, would there always find abundance of provisions brought from
Madagascar, and of consequence would not be subjected to the necessity of
losing their time at the Cape, or at Batavia, begging refreshments from the
Dutch, whilst the enemies of France, as happened in the late war, are
conquering their settlements, and destroying their trade.

Wheat would grow in Madagascar in the same abundance as rice: it was formerly
cultivated successfully in the settlement which we then possessed at the
southern point of the island, called Fort Dauphin. Even at this day fine stalks
of wheat are still to be found there, produced from the scattering grains of
the ancient crops, which being blown about by the winds have annually, since
our being drove from that settlement, sown of themselves, and sprung up at
random, amongst the native herbs of the country. The lands there are of
inconceiveable fertility; the islanders intelligent and ingenious. In those
districts where the Arabs have not penetrated, the simple laws of nature are
their guides; their manners the manners of the primitive ages. These laws, and
these manners, are more favorable for agriculture, than all our sublime
speculations, than all our most applauded theories on the most approved
practice; than all those ineffectual means now employed to re-animate an art,
which our manners teach us to regard with contempt, or treat with levity; and
which is perpetually harrassed, perpetually oppressed by innumerable abuses,
which derive their source from the very laws themselves.

The Isle of Bourbon.
Almost 200 leagues east of Madagascar lie the two islands of Bourbon and
France; the soil of which is naturally as fertile as that of Madagascar, whilst
they enjoy a happier climate. Bourbon has no port; it is of consequence little
frequented by the shipping. The inhabitants have preserved their simplicity of
manners, and aggriculture is there in a flourishing state. The island produces
wheat, rice, and maize, not only for its own consumption, but even furnishes a
small supply to the Isle of France: the culture there is the same as at
Madagascar. The horned cattle and sheep, which they have imported from that
island, thrive here extremely well, especially as they have also introduced the
grass called Fatak, which, as I have before observed, makes excellent pasturage.

The lands of this island are principally employed in the culture of the
coffee-tree. The first plants of this shrubby tree were brought from Mocha. It
multiplies by its grains sowing spontaneously; little attention is required;
nothing more is necessary than to grub up, three or four times during the first
year, the neighboring weeds, which would otherwise rob it of its proper
nourishment: the second year it grows without care; its branches, which extend
horizontally along the surface of the ground, by their shade stifle the growth
of all such weeds, as might shoot up within their circumference: at the end of
eighteen months the coffee-tree begins to bear fruit, and in three years yields
a plentiful crop. They plant these trees chequer-wise, at about the distance of
seven feet from one another, and when they grow too tall, prune them to the
height of perhaps two feet from the ground.

The coffee-tree demands a light soil: it thrives better in sand almost pure,
than in rich ground: they observe in the isle of Bourbon, that these trees
yield annually, one with another, about a pound of coffee: this fruit comes to
perfection, and is gathered in during dry weather, which gives it a great
advantage over the West India coffee, which never ripens nor is got-in but in
the rainy seasons. The coffee, after it is gathered in, must be dried; for
several days, therefore, it is exposed to the sun, till the bean becomes
extremely dry; they then clear it of the pulp, which is done by pestles in
large wooden troughs.

The Isle of France.
This island possesses two excellent harbors, where all the shipping of the
French Company, employed in the commerce of China and the Indies, touch for
refreshments; here also rendezvous their armaments in times of war: this island
is, of consequence, not so solitary as Bourbon. The politics and manners of
Europe have here more influence. The lands are as fertile as those of Bourbon;
rivulets, which are never dry, water it like a garden: notwithstanding which,
the harvests often fail, and scarcity is here almost perpetually felt.

Since the days of the celebrated M. de la Bourdonnois (who governed this
island for ten or twelve years, and ought to be regarded, as the founder of the
colony, for his introduction and patronage of agriculture) they have wandered
incessantly from project to project, attempting the culture of almost every
species of plants, without properly prosecuting any one of them. The coffee,
the cotton, the indigo, the sugar-cane, the pear, the cinnamon, the mulberry,
the tea, and the cocoa trees, have all been cultivated by experiments, but in
such a superficial manner as could never secure success. Had they followed the
simple plan of the founder, which was to secure bread, the island would at this
day have been flourishing; abundance would then have reigned amongst the
colonists, and the shipping never been disappointed of the necessary
refreshments and provisions.

The cultivation of grain, nevertheless, though neglected and badly understood,
is that which succeeds the best. Those lands, which are so employed, yield
annually a crop of wheat, and another of rice or Turkey-corn, without the
intervention of one fallow year, and without the least improvement, or any
other mode of labor, than that which is practiced at Madagascar.

The Maniac was first introduced into this island by M. de la Bourdonnois: the
culture of this plant was at first attended with very great difficulty, but is
now the principal resource of the colonists for the nourishment of their
slaves. As the culture of this root is here the same as in America, I shall not
repeat what has been related by a number of travelers.

They formerly brought from Madagascar black cattle and sheep; but since they
have discovered that more advantage attends the transportation of slaves they
have neglected the increase of their cattle, which the continual demands of the
shipping and the wants of the inhabitants at the same time daily diminish:
Besides, they have never hitherto formed any pastures; such as they have
attempted having been laid out with so little skill, that they have not
succeeded. The island produces naturally, in different cantons, an excellent
kind of grass, which grows to the height of five or six feet. This grass begins
to appear above ground about the beginning of the rainy season; it performs all
its vegetation during the three months, which this season lasts: the
inhabitants take advantage of this to pasture their herds, who fatien upon it
amazingly; but the vegetation over, there remains nothing on the ground but a
straw too hard to afford nourishment to the cattle; and soon after the fire,
which is kindled here by a thousand accidents, consumes this straw, and with it
frequently part of the neighboring forests. During the remainder of the year,
the herds wander about and languish amongst the woods.

The greatest fault which has been committed in this island, and which has
proved most prejudicial to cultivation, is the method of clearing the woods
from off the grounds by fire, without leaving groves and thickets at proper
distances. The rains, in this island, conduce most to the amelioration of the
grounds; but the clouds being stopped by the forests, there the rains fall;
whilst the cleared lands are scarce watered by a single drop: the fields, at
the same time, being thus deprived of defense, are exposed to the violence of
the winds, which often entirely destroy the harvests. The Dutch, as we have
before observed, found no trees at the Cape; but they have planted them there,
as shelter for their habitations. The Isle of France, on the contrary, was
covered with woods, and the colonists have entirely destroyed them.

Coast of Coromandel.
Agriculture has ever flourished in the East Indies; it has, however,
degenerated since the conquest of this country by the Moguls; who, like all
barbarous nations, have despised that industry which nourishes mankind, to
attach themselves to that destructive art which desolates the earth.

The conquerors, when they took possession of the country, appropriated to
themselves at the same time all the lands. The Mogul emperors divided them into
great moveable fiefs, which they distributed amongst their grandees; these
farmed them out to their vassals; and those again to others; so that the lands
are now no longer cultivated but by the servants and day-labourers of the
sub-farmers.

As no country in the world is more exposed to revolution than the Indies,
subjected to masters whose government is an absolute anarchy, the possessor of
the fief, as well as the farmer, for ever uncertain of their fate, endeavor to
make the most of the lands and their cultivators, without ever bestowing a
thought on improvement. Fortunately for these barbarian conquerors, the
conquered natives, inviolably attached to their ancient manners, apply
themselves incessantly to agriculture, from inclination, and from religion.
Notwithstanding the frantic despotism of the Mogul government, the Malabar, The
French give the name of Malabar not only to the ancient inhabitants of the
Malabar coast, but in general to the Aborigines of the great peninsula of
Indostan.
despising and pitying the master whom he obeys, cultivates, with the same
ardor as if he was proprietor, the fields of his ancestors, the care of which
is confided to him by the usurper.

The laborers are a tribe much honored among the Indians. Religion has
consecrated agriculture, even to the animals destined for the labor of the
ground. As the Indians in general are deficient in pastures, as horses are
scarce, as buffaloes and other cattle for the draught multiply but slowly, the
ancient Indian policy made it a crime against their religion to kill these
useful animals. The Malabars make them more serviceable than any other people:
they employed them, as we do, in laboring the ground; as also in drawing their
carriages, and in carrying every kind of load: there are no other beasts of
burden in the neighborhood of Pondicherry. I am convinced that in every country
they might be rendered equally useful.

The soil on the Coromandel coast is light, dry, and sandy; the industry and
labor, however, of the natives make it produce two crops every year, without
the necessity of one fallow season. After the rice harvest is over, there is
always a crop of some smaller grains, such as millet and a species of French
beans, of which India produces a variety of different kinds.

The most remarkable process of Indian husbandry, is the watering their grounds
for the culture of rice.

Machine for watering Rice Grounds.
If the grounds they propose watering, have neither rivulet nor fountain
sufficiently abundant, they dig a pit-well, on the brink of which they raise a
pillar of near the same height as the depth of the well. At the summit of this
pillar, which is forked, is an iron bar, which crossing both divisions
horizontally, supports a kind of see-saw, to one end of which a ladder is
suspended; the other end of this see-saw, projects from the top of the pillar
about three feet, having a long pole fastened to it in a position parallel with
the pillar, at which hangs a large bucket of wood or copper: by the side of
this machine is a large reservoir, built with bricks and closely cemented,
elevated above the level of the grounds they propose to water; the opening
whence the waters are discharged being on that side which fronts the field.
Every thing being thus disposed, a man ascends to the top of the column, by the
ladder fixed to the see-saw: as soon as he has reached the top, another man,
stationed by the side of the reservoir, plunges the bucket, which is suspended
by the pole, into the well; upon which he at the top descends the ladder, and
bringing thereby the bucket full of water to a level with the reservoir, the
other there empties it. As soon as the reservoir is full, they open a kind of
sluice; the inundation begins, and is kept constantly flowing by the operations
of these two men, who sometimes are thus employed whole days, the one ascending
and descending, the other throwing the bucket into the well, and emptying it
when full.

Mode of Labor.
The Malabars labor their grounds with instruments resembling the Air and the
Souchee, in use in the south of France. They employ oxen, but more commonly
buffaloes; these last being stronger, and more capable of enduring the heat,
than the oxen, which, on the coast of Coromandel, are generally weakly, and of
a small size.

Flocks of Sheep, etc.
These animals are generally fed with the straw of rice, some herbs and boiled
beans. Here and there in the fields you see some small flocks of goats, and
others of sheep, which differ from ours by their being covered with hair
instead of wool. They are known in the French colonies by the name of Chiens
marous. These flocks, however, are lean, and multiply but slowly.

Were the inhabitants of India to eat the flesh of animals, like the Europeans,
their cattle would very soon be destroyed. It appears, therefore, that the
religious law rendering it criminal for an Indian to eat the flesh of animals,
has been dictated by the wisdom of sound policy, which has employed the
authority of religion to secure obedience to a regulation which the nature of
the climate required.

The principal food of the Malabars is grain, butter, pulse, and fruits. They
eat nothing which has ever enjoyed life. The countries to the south and west of
Indostan, are the granaries of this vast continent, and maintain the
inhabitants in abundance. These countries still remain in the possession of the
Aborigines of the country, whose laws are extremely favorable for agriculture.
The Moguls have endeavored often to make themselves masters of these countries,
but hitherto in vain.

Gardens.
In the Malabar gardens there is no kind of pulse equal to ours. Exclusive of
the various kinds of French bean, some of which are of the arborescent kind;
the best they cultivate is the Bazella, known in France by the name of the
Spinach of China; this is a lively, clambering plant, which, while growing,
they support upon sticks, like our peace, or prop up against the walls, which it
very soon covers with a most agreeable verdure; its taste is almost the same
with our spinach.

Gardening is but little known on the Coromandel coast. The orchards are better
supplied than the gardens; yet they have no fruits that can be compared to
those of Europe. They do not understand the art of engrafting. Their most
common fruits are the pineapple, the mango, the bonana, and the gouyave. The
two first of these fruits are but indifferent on the Coromandel coast, though
excellent on the Malabar coast, and several other parts of India.

The Cocoa-Tree.
The most useful of all the trees in their orchards is undoubtedly the
cocoa-tree. This tree bears clusters of nuts of an immense size. When these
nuts are ripe, they yield a species of oil in great abundance, which the
Indians use for various purposes, particularly in seasoning their garden stuff:
the taste of this oil, however, is extremely disagreeable to those who are not
accustomed to eat it. But the method of rendering the culture of this tree most
advantageous, is the extracting wine from its fruit. The Indian watches the
time when the nuts of the cocoa-tree have attained to the size of our ordinary
nuts which happens soon after the fall of the flower* he then makes an incision
in the stalk of the cluster about seven or eight inches from the trunk o^ the
tree; here he fastens an earthen vessel to receive the juice, which issues in
great abundance: the mouth of the vessel he carefully wraps round with a cloth,
to prevent the admission of the air, which would soon turn it to the fret. The
vessel fills in twenty-four hours: the Indian takes care to change it every
day. This natural wine, which is called Soury, is sold and drunk in this state.
It has much of the taste and strength of the Must, or new wine of the grape: it
keeps, however, but a few days; it is necessary then to distill it, otherwise it
would sour, and become entirely useless. This species of wine, when distilled,
is the well-known liquor called Arrak.

A cocoa-tree, thus managed, is worth a pagoda (about eight shillings) per
annum. These trees are planted about twenty-five or thirty feet distant from
each other. They produce nothing for ten or twelve years, but then annually
bear fruit for above fifty years. They flourish best in a mixed sandy soil; and
succeed extremely well even in pure sand.

The Malabars cultivate, in the open fields, a variety of plants, whose
productions are of an oily substance; such as the Sesame or Gergelin, which is
a kind of fox-grass, and the Ricin or Palma Christi. The fresh oil extracted
from this plant, which is known in Europe for a violent and dangerous caustic,
cannot have the same hurtful quality in the Indies, as the Malabars consider it
as a gentle purgative, and the best remedy for almost all the diseases incident
to infants at the breast; giving them usually, every month, a spoon-full of it,
mixed in an equal quantity of their mother's milk.

I shall conclude this article by observing, that the reader must not form an
idea of agriculture over the Indies in general, from the sketch I have given of
that on the Coromandel coast: this coast and the countries adjacent, form but a
small part of the East Indies, properly so called: they are, at the same time,
the most barren, and have suffered most from the devastations of the Moguls,
from the destructive government of these conquerors, and from the continual
wars which harrass and depopulate the country. The coasts of Orixa, Malabar,
the territory of Surat, the banks of the Ganges, and the interior parts of
Indostan, are much more fertile, and in many of these countries agriculture
flourishes surprisingly. -- I relate nothing but facts, which I had
opportunities of observing myself.

The Kingdom of Siam.
The kingdom of Siam, situate on the peninsula of the Indies beyond the Ganges,
is in general extremely fertile. Divided, like Indostan, by a chain of
mountains from north to south, it enjoys all the year round, and at the same
time, two very opposite seasons. The western division, all along the bay of
Bengal, is deluged by continual rains, during the six months that the monsoons
continue to blow from the west. This season is considered as their winter on
this coast; whilst in the other division of the kingdom, toward the east, they
enjoy the finest climate, and never experience that difference of season, which
reigns on the western side, except by the overflowing of the Menam. This noble
river runs along a great way among mountains, where the rains concenter: it
washes the walls of the capital, and annually overflows, without the least
ravage, a delightful country, covered all over with rice plantations. The
slime, which the Menam leaves behind, enriches the soil prodigiously; the rice
seems to grow up in proportion as the inundation rises, and the river at length
gently retires by degrees into its bed, as the rice approaches to maturity, and
has no further occasion for its waters. How bountiful has nature been to those
who inhabit this charming country! -- she has, however, done more: the fields
produce, in profusion, an infinite variety of most delicate fruits, which
require almost no cultivation; such as the pineapple, the mangoustas (the most
delicate fruit perhaps in the world) mangoes of different kinds, and all
excellent, several species of oranges, the banana, the ducion, the gacca, with
other fruits of an inferior quality. Nature, still more bountiful, has also
scattered over this country, almost on the surface of the ground, mines of
gold, copper, and a species of fine tin, which there, as in other parts of
India, they name Calin.

In this terrestial paradise, surrounded with so much riches, who would imagine
that the Siamese are, perhaps, the most wretched people in the world?

The government of Siam is despotic: the sovereign alone enjoys that liberty
which is natural to all mankind: his subjects are all his slaves; every one of
them is annually taxed at six months personal service without wages, and even
without food: he allows them the other six months to procure themselves
wherewithal to exist the year. Under such a government, there is no law that
can afford protection to individuals against violence, or in the smallest
degree secure them in their property. Every thing is subjected to the caprice
of a prince, rendered brutal by every species of excess, particularly that of
power; who passes his days locked up in his seraglio, without an idea of any
thing beyond the walls of his palace; and particularly ignorant of the wretched
condition of his subjects. These are exposed to the avarice of the grandees,
who themselves are only the chief slaves, and tremblingly approach, on
appointed days, the presence of their tyrant, whom they adore like a divinity,
though subject to the most dangerous caprices.

Religion alone has preserved the power of protecting against tyranny those
who, ranging themselves under its standard, are admitted into the order of the
priests of Somonacondom, the deity of the Siamese. Those who embrace this
order, and their number is considerable, are by law obliged to observe the
strictest celibacy, which in a warm climate, such as that of Siam, whilst it
occasions great disorders, almost depopulates the country.

It may easily be conceived, that under such a government agriculture cannot
flourish; it may be said, even, that no regard is paid to it at all, when the
small portion of ground which is labored, is compared to the immense extent of
lands which are totally neglected.

With regard even to those grounds which they have laid out, nature may be said
to do every thing. Men oppressed, debased, without spirit, nay, in a manner
without hands, give themselves scarce any other trouble than just to reap what
the earth produces; and, as the country is extensive, and thinly peopled, they
enjoy abundance of necessaries, almost without labor.

From the port of Mergin, situated on the western coast of this kingdom, to the
capital, during a journey of ten or twelve days, you cross immense plains,
charmingly watered, and the soil excellent; some of which appear to have been
formerly tilled, but now lie quite uncultivated. This journey travelers are
under the necessity of making in caravans, in order to defend themselves from
the tigers and the elephants, to which this fine country is in a manner
entirely abandoned, during a journey of eight days there scarce being the
vestige of a habitation.

The environs of the capital are cultivated; the lands belonging to the king,
those of the princess, the ministers, and principal officers, display the
amazing fertility of the country, producing, as I have been assured, an
increase of two hundred fold.

The Siamese method of cultivating their rice, is first to sow it very thick in
a small square plot of ground, well watered, a little below the surface of the
earth. As soon as the plants have grown about five or six inches high, they
pull them up by the roots, and transplant them, in small parcels of three or
four stalks, distant from each other about four inches every way. These plants
are placed deep in a clay soil, which has been previously well labored with a
plough, drawn by two buffaloes. The rice transplanted in this manner, has
beyond comparison a much greater increase, than if allowed to grow up in the
same ground where it was originally planted.

It is the Chinese, and the Cochin-chinese, settled in the capital and its
neighborhood, who contribute most to the improvement of the grounds. These
strangers are useful to the sovereign, by the commerce they carry on with him,
and it is the interest of the government to protect them from oppression.

In the neighborhood of the uncultivated lands I have mentioned, you find
others, belonging to different individuals, who, discouraged by continual
oppressions, have quite abandoned them. It is astonishing, however, to observe
these lands, frequently neither labored nor sown for years together, produce
extraordinary crops of rice. The grain, reaped negligently, sows of itself, and
re-produces annually another harvest, by the help of the inundations of the
river Menam; which proves, at the same time, the extreme fertility of the
ground, and the extreme misery of the inhabitants.

The orchards of the prince, and the great Talapoins A religious order.
are admirable for the variety of their fruits, all of the most exquisite kind;
but these delicacies no private individual is allowed to enjoy. When a man is
so unhappy as to have in his grounds a tree of excellent fruit, such as the
mangoustas, a party of soldiers never fail to come every year, to secure, for
the king, or some great minister, the produce of this tree. They take an
account of every mangousta, good or bad, making the proprietor guardian and
security for the whole; and when the fruits ripen, should there happen the
smallest deficiency the poor proprietor is subjected to all the insolence of
unrestrained power; it becomes of consequence, a real misfortune for a private
man to be possessed of such a tree.

The Siamese rear herds of buffaloes, and horned cattle; but all the care they
take of them, is to conduct them in the day time, to the fallow grounds, which
abound in pastures, and re-conduct them, in the evening, to the enclosures, in
order to secure them from the tigers, of which there are great numbers in this
country. The milk, and a very little labor, is all the advantage they draw from
them. Their religion, which is the same that prevails in Indostan, and which
the Talap^^s alone know any thing about, forbids them killing these animals.
They elude, however, this law, by selling them to the Mahometans, settled among
them, who kill them, and sell their flesh privately. They have also great
numbers of poultry, particularly ducks of the best kinds in the Indies.

The king maintains a number of tame elephants. Each of these monstrous animals
has twelve or fifteen men daily employed in cutting herbs, bananiers (a kind of
large rose) and sugarcanes. They are after all of no real use; they serve only
for show. They display, say the Siamese, the grandeur of their prince; and he
conceives an idea of his greatness, more from the number of his elephants, than
from the number of his subjects.

These animals, wherever they come, make most destructive havoc; of this their
keepers take advantage, making every individual, who is possessed of cultivated
lands, or gardens, pay annually a certain tribute: should they refuse, the
elephants would immediately be let loose, and ravage and ruin desolate their
fields: for what subject would be hardy enough to dare to fail in respect to
the elephants of the king of Siam, many of which, to the disgrace of humanity,
are loaded with a profusion of titles, and preferred to the first dignities in
the kingdom.

THE MALAIS.
Beyond the kingdom of Siam is the peninsula of Malacca; a country formerly
well peopled, and, consequently, well cultivated. This nation was once one of
the greatest powers, and made a very considerable figure on the theater of
Asia. The sea was covered with their ships, and they carried on a most
extensive commerce. Their laws, however, were apparently very different from
those which subsist among them at present. From time to time they sent out
numbers of colonies, which, one after another, peopled the islands of Sumatra,
Ja^a, Borneo, the Celebes or Macassor, the Moluccas, the Philippines, and those
innumerable islands of the Archipelago, which bound Asia on the east, and which
occupy an extent of seven hundred leagues, in longitude, from east to west, by
about six hundred of latitude, from north to south. The inhabitants of all
these islands, those at least upon the coasts, are the same people; they speak
almost the same language, have the same laws, the same manners. -- Is it not
somewhat singular, that this nation, whose possessions are so extensive, should
scarce be known in Europe? -- I shall endeavor to give you an idea of those
laws, and those manners; you will, from thence, easily judge of their
agriculture.

Travelers, who make observations on the Malais, are astonished to find, in
the center of Asia, under the scorching climate of the line, the laws, the
manners, the customs, and the prejudices of the ancient inhabitants of the
north of Europe. The Malais are governed by feudal laws, that capricious
system, conceived for the defense of the liberty of a few against the tyranny
of one, whilst the multitude is subjected to slavery and oppression.

A chief who has the title of king, or sultan, issues his commands to his great
vassals, who obey when they think proper. These have inferior vassals, who
often act in the same manner with regard to them. A small part of the nation
live independent, under the title of Oramoai, or noble, and sell their services
to those who pay them best; whilst the body of the nation is composed of
slaves, and live in perpetual servitude.

With these laws the Malais are restless, fond of navigation, war, plunder,
emigrations, colonies, desperate enterprises, adventures, and gallantry. They
talk incessantly of their honor, and their bravery, whilst they are universally
considered, by those with whom they have intercourse, as the most treacherous,
ferocious people on the face of the globe; and yet, which appeared to me
extremely singular, they speak the softest language of Asia. That which the
Count de Forbin has said, in his memoirs, of the ferocity of the Macassars, is
exactly true, and is the reigning characteristic of the whole Malay nations.
More attached to the absurd laws of their pretended honor, than to those of
justice or humanity, you always observe, that amongst them, the strong oppress
and destroy the weak: their treaties of peace and friendship never subsisting
beyond that self-interest which induced them to make them, they are almost
always armed, and either at war amongst themselves, or employed in pillaging
their neighbors.

This ferocity, which the Malais qualify under the name of courage, is so well
known to the European companies, who have settlements in the Indies, that they
have universally agreed in prohibiting the captains of their ships, who may put
into the Maley Islands, from taking on board any seamen, of that nation, except
in the greatest distress, and then, on no account, to exceed two or three.

It is nothing uncommon for a handful of these horrid savages suddenly to
embark, attack a vessel by surprise, poignard, in hand, massacre the people,
and make themselves masters of her. Malay batteaus, with twenty-five or thirty
men, have been known to board European ships of thirty or forty guns, in order
to take possession of them, and murder with their poignards great part of the
crew. The Malay history is full of such enterprises, which mark the desperate
ferocity of these barbarians.

The Malais, who are not slaves, go always armed: they would think themselves
disgraced, if they went abroad without their poignards, which they call Crit.
The industry of this nation even surpasses itself, in the fabric of this
destructive weapon.

As their lives are a perpetual round of agitation and tumult, they could never
endure the long flowing habits, which prevail amongst the other Asiatics. The
habits of the Malais are exactly adapted to their shapes, and loaded with a
multitude of buttons, which fasten them close to their bodies in every part. --
I relate these seemingly trifling observations, in order to prove, that, in
climates the most opposite, the same laws produce similar manners, customs, and
prejudices. Their effect is the same too with respect to agriculture.

The lands possessed by the Malais are, in general, of a superior quality.
Nature seems to have taken pleasure in there assembling her most favorite
productions. They have not only those to be found in the territories of Siam,
but a variety of others peculiar to these islands. The country is covered with
odoriferous woods, such as the eagle or aloes wood, the sandal, and the cassia
odorata, a species of cinnamon. You there breathe an air impregnated with the
odours of innumerable flowers of the greatest fragrance, of which there is a
perpetual succession the year round, the sweet flavor of which captivates the
soul, and inspires the most voluptuous sensations. No traveller, wandering over
the plains of Malacca, but feels himself strongly impelled to wish his
residence fixed in a place so luxuriant in allurements, where nature triumphs
without the assistance of art.

The Malay islands produce various kinds of dying woods, particularly the
Sapan, which is the same with the Brasil wood. There are also a number of gold
mines, which the inhabitants of Sumatra and Mallaca call Ophirs: some of which,
those especially on the eastern coast, are richer than those of Brasil or Peru.
There are likewise mines of fine copper, mixed with gold, which the inhabitants
name Tombage. In the islands of Sumatra and Banea are mines of calin, or fine
tin; and at Succadana, in the island of Borneo, is a mine of diamonds. Those
islands enjoy also exclusively, the rotin, the sagou, (or bread-palm-tree) the
camphre, and other precious aromatics, which we know under the names of various
spiceries.

The sea too teems with abundance of excellent fish, together with ambergris,
pearls, and those delicate birds nests (so much in request in China) formed in
the rocks with the spawn of fishes, and the foam of the sea, by a species of
small sized swallow, peculiar to those seas: this is of such an exquisite
substance and flavor, that the Chinese long purchased them for their weight in
gold, and still buy them at an excessive price.

In the midst of all this luxuriance of nature, the Malay is miserable. The
culture of the lands, abandoned to slaves, is fallen into contempt. These
wretched laborers, dragged incessantly from their rustic employments by their
^^stless masters, who delight in war and maritime enterprises, have rarely
time, and never resolution, to give the necessary attention to the laboring of
their grounds. Their lands, in general, remain uncultivated; and produce no
kind of grain for the subsistence of the inhabitants.

Sagou.
The sagou-tree, in part, supplies the defect of grain. This admirable tree is
a present which bountiful nature has made to men incapable of labor. It
requires no culture; it is a species of the palm tree, which grows naturally,
in the woods, to the height of about twenty or thirty feet; its circumference
being sometimes from five to six. Its ligneous bark is about an inch in
thickness, and covers a multitude of long fibers, which, being interwoven one
with another, envelope a mass of gummy kind of meal. As soon as this tree is
ripe, a whitish dust, which transpires through the pores of the leaves, and
adheres to their extremities, proclaims its maturity. The Malais then cut them
down near the root, divide them into several sections, which they split into
quarters: they then scoop out the mass of mealy substance, which is enveloped
by and adheres to the fibers; they dilute it in pure water, and then pass it
through a straining bag of fine cloth, in order to separate it from the fibers.
When this paste has lost part of its moisture by evaporation, the Malais throw
it into a kind of earthen vessels, of different shapes, where they allow it to
dry and harden. This paste is wholesome, nourishing food, and preserves for
many years.

The Indians, in general, when they eat the sagou, use no other preparation
than diluting it in water; but sometimes they dress it after different manners:
they have the art of separating the finest of the flour, and reducing it to
little grains, somewhat resembling grains of rice. The sagou, thus prepared, is
preferred to the other, for the aged and infirm; and is an excellent remedy for
many complaints in the stomach. When diluted either in cold or boiling water it
forms a whitish jelly, very agreeable to the taste.

Though this sagou-bearing-palm grows naturally in the forests, the Malay
chiefs have formed considerable plantations of it, which constitute one of
their principal resources for subsistence.

They might have the finest orchards in the world, would they give themselves
the trouble to collect the various plants of those excellent fruits which
nature has so liberally bestowed upon them: we find, however, none but a few
straggling trees planted at random around their houses, or dispersed over their
lands without symmetry or order.

The inhabitants of the great island of Java have somewhat better ideas of
agriculture, than the other Malais, since their subjection to the government of
the Dutch. These sovereign merchants have taken advantage of the feudal system
of the Malais, to reduce them under their yoke; artfully weakening the regal
power, by fomenting, at times, the rebellions of the great vassals; and
humbling the vassals, in their turn, by succoring their princes, when drove to
the brink of ruin.

The Javanese begin to recover from that state of anarchy, the consequence of
their ancient laws now almost no longer remembered. They cultivate with
success, rice, coffee, indigo, and sugar-cane. They rear, on the eastern coast
of the island, and in the districts of Madur and Solor, in the neighborhood,
numerous herds of buffaloes, of a monstrous size: their flesh is excellent, and
they are of infinite use in laboring the ground. They have likewise numbers of
horned cattle, the largest and finest, perhaps, in the world. The common
pasturage in this, and the rest of the Malay islands, is the same grass I have
mentioned under the article of the Isle of France, which the colonists there
almost entirely neglect.

Here it would be proper to describe the manner of cultivating the spiceries,
the indigo, the sugar-cane and the camphre; but these must be the subject of
another discourse. I could have wished also to have comprehended, in this
memoir, the observations I have made on the husbandry of China. You could then
have compared nation against nation; and, after having observed agriculture
despised and debased amongst barbarians, oppressed and loaded with fetters by
their frantic laws, the genuine productions of delirium incompatible with
reason, you would have beheld this art (divine it may be called, as taught to
man by the great Author of his being) supported and protected by the most
simple of laws, those of nature, dictated to her by the first inhabitants of
the earth, and preserved, since the beginning of time, from generation to
generation, by one of the wisest and greatest nations in the world. This
comparative representation, whilst on the one hand, it displayed the misery and
misfortunes of every kind, which attend the neglect of agriculture, would, on
the other, have demonstrated how much this art, honored, protected and
encouraged as it ought, will ever advance the happiness of the human race.

END OF PART FIRST.
PART SECOND.
I LAST year began to give you a sketch of my inquiries into the state of
agriculture among different nations of Africa and Asia. I observed that scarce
a vestige of it could be traced amongst the stupid, the indolent negroes, who
inhabit the western coasts of Africa; whilst it flourished, under the shade of
liberty, amongst the Hollanders at the Cape of Good-Hope. I pointed out the
happy abundance which reigned in the fertile island of Madagascar, inhabited by
a people governed by the greatest simplicity of manners, and unacquainted with
other laws than those of nature. Whilst I did justice also to the system of
cultivation that prevailed at the Isle of Bourbon, which having no po^t, and of
consequence little or no intercourse with Europe, the colonists have preserved
an uncorrupted system of manners, ever favorable for agriculture, I was, at the
same time, under the necessity of acknowledging, that this art which requires
perseverance and simplicity, was greatly neglected at the Isle of France,
which, having two excellent ports, and being much frequented by European ships,
was more influenced by the inconstant and volatile manners of our quarter of
the world; and that, in consequence, though the soil, in point of fertility,
was equal to Madagascar and Bourbon, their harvests generally failed, and an
almost perpetual scarcity prevailed over the island. -- I passed from thence to
the great peninsula of the Indies, where agriculture, however oppressed by the
barbarous laws of the Mogul conquerors, is still honored and supported by the
religion, the manners, and the perseverance of the conquered Malabars. -- At
Siam, under the happiest climate, and blessed with a soil inferior in fertility
to no country in the world, agriculture we have observed debased by the
indignities of tyranny, and abandoned by a race of slaves, whom nothing can
interest, after the loss of liberty. -- I have represented it almost in the
same condition amongst the Malais, who inhabit immense dominions, and
innumerable islands, where nature has distributed her choicest treasures, and
lavished her bounties with a profusion unknown to other regions. The
destructive genius of the feudal laws, which keep this people in a perpetual
ferment, permits not their application to the culture of the finest soil in the
world. Nature alone does all. I am convinced that if the other nations of the
earth, who have the misfortune to be governed by the feudal system, inhabited a
climate equally happy, and lands equally fertile with those of the Malais,
their agriculture would be equally neglected: necessity alone could force the
plough into their hands.

In my last discourse I endeavored to give you an idea of the most interesting
modes of local agriculture which came under my observation: my principal
object, however, was to enable you to remark that in every country, in every
quarter of the world, the state of agriculture depends entirely on the
established laws, and, consequently, on the manners, customs, and prejudices
from which these laws derived their origin. I now proceed.

THE POWER OF AGRICULTURE.
Origin of the Kingdom of Ponthiamas.
Departing from the peninsula of Malacca, and the islands of the Malais,
toward the north, I fell in with a small territory called Cancar, but known on
the marine charts, under the name of Ponthiamas. Surrounded by the kingdom of
Siam, where despotism and depopulation go hand in hand; the dominions of
Camboya, where no idea of established government subsists; and the territories
of the Malais, whose genius, perpetually agitated by their feudal laws, can
endure peace neither at home nor abroad: this charming country, about fifty
years ago, was uncultivated, and almost destitute of inhabitants.

A Chinese merchant, commander of a vessel which he employed in commerce,
frequented these coasts. Being a man of that intelligent reflective genius,
which so characteristically marks his nation, he could not, without pain,
behold immense tracts of ground condemned to sterility, though naturally more
fertile than those which formed the riches of his own country; he formed,
therefore, a plan for their improvement. With this view, having first of all
hired a number of laborers, some Chinese, others from the neighboring nations,
he, with great address, insinuated himself into the favor of the most powerful
princes, who, for a certain subsidy, assigned him a guard for his protection.

In the course of his voyage to Batavia, and the Phillippine Islands, he
borrowed from the Europeans their most useful discoveries and improvements,
particularly the art of fortification and defense: with regard to internal
police, he gave the preference to the Chinese. The profits of his commerce soon
enabled him to raise ramparts, sink ditches, and provide artillery. These
preliminary precautions secured him from a coup de main, and protected him from
the enterprises of the surrounding nations of barbarians.

He distributed the lands to his laborers, without the least reservation of any
of those duties or taxes known by the names of service or fines of alienation;
duties which, by allowing no real property, become the most fatal scourge to
agriculture, and is an idea which revolts against the common sense of every
wise nation. He provided his colonists, at the same time, with all sorts of
instruments proper for the labor and improvement of their grounds.

In forming a laboring and commercial people, he thought, that no laws ought to
be framed, but those which nature has established for the human race in every
climate: he made these laws respected by obeying them first himself, and
exhibiting an example of simplicity, industry, frugality, humanity, and good
faith: -- he formed, then, no system of laws -- he did more -- he established
morals.

His territories soon became the country of every industrious man, who wished
to settle there. His port was open to all nations. The woods were cleared; the
grounds judiciously labored, and sown with rice; canals, cut from the rivers,
watered their fields; and plentiful harvests, after supplying them with
subsistence, furnished an object of extensive commerce.

The barbarians of the neighborhood, amazed to see abundance so suddenly
succeed to sterility, flocked for subsistence to the magazines of Ponthiamas;
whose dominions, at this day, are considered as the most plentiful granary of
that eastern part of Asia; the Malais, the Cochin-chinese, the Siamese, whose
countries are naturally so fertile, considering this little territory as the
most certain resource against famine.

Had the Chinese founder of this colony of mercantile laborers, in imitation of
the sovereigns of Asia, established arbitrary imposts; if by the introduction
of a feudal system, of which he had examples amongst the neighboring nations,
he had vested in himself the sole property of the lands, under the specious
pretense of giving them away to his colonists; if he had made luxury reign in
his palace, in place of that simplicity which distinguished his humble
dwelling; had he placed his ambition in a brilliant court, and crowds of
fawning slaves; had he preferred the agreeable to the useful arts, despising
the industrious who labor the ground with the sweat of their brow, and provide
sustenance for themselves and their fellow creatures; had he treated his
associates as slaves; had he received into his port strangers in any other
shape than as friends; his fields had still been barren, his dominions
unpeopled; and the wretched inhabitants must have died of hunger,
notwithstanding all their knowledge of agriculture, and all the assistance they
could derive from the most useful instruments either for tilling or sowing
their grounds. But the sage Kiang-tse, (the name of this judicious Chinese)
persuaded that he should always be rich, if his laborers were so, established
only a very moderate duty on all the merchandise entered at his port; the
produce of his lands appearing to him sufficient to render him powerful and
great. His integrity, his moderation, and his humanity, made him respected. He
never wished to reign; but only to establish the empire of reason. His son, who
now fills his place, inherits his virtues as well as his possessions: by
agriculture, and the commerce he carries on with the produce of his lands, he
has become so powerful, that the barbarians his neighbors, style him king, a
title which he despises. He pretends to no right of sovereignty, but the
noblest of all, that of doing good; happy in being the first laborer, and the
first merchant of his country, he merits, as well as his father, a title more
glorious than that of king -- the friend of mankind.

How different such men from those ^^^querers so celebrated, who amaze and
desolate the earth; who, abusing the right of conquest, have established laws,
which, even after the world has been delivered from these tyrants, has
perpetuated for ages, the miseries of the human race.

Camboya and Tsiampa.
To the northward of Ponthiamas we find the countries of Camboya and Tsiampa.
They are naturally fertile, (Camboya in particular) and appear in former times,
to have been well cultivated; but the government of these two little states,
having no settled form, the inhabitants being perpetually employed in
destroying tyrants, only to receive others in their place, have abandoned the
culture of their grounds. Their fields, which might be covered with rice, with
herds, and with flocks, are deserts; and the natives are reduced to feed on a
few wretched roots, which they gather from amidst the brambles, which
overspread their lands.

Travelers are surprised to find, at a little distance from the wretched
canton of Camboya, the ruins of an old city, built with stone, the architecture
of which has some resemblance to that of Europe. The neighboring fields too
still preserve the traces of ridges: every thing shows that agriculture and the
other arts have once flourished there; but they have now disappeared, with the
nation who cultivated them. Those who at present inhabit this country have no
history, no tradition even, which can throw the faintest light upon the subject.

COCHIN-CHINA.
The Cochin-chinese, who border on Camboya to the north, observing the lands of
this kingdom desolate and abandoned, some years ago took possession of such
tracks as were most conveneient, and have there introduced an excellent
culture. The province of Donnay, usurped in this manner from Camboya, is at
present the granary of Cochin-china. This kingdom, one of the greatest in
Eastern Asia, about one hundred and fifty years ago, was inhabited by an
inconsiderable nation, barbarous and savage, known by the name of Loi, who,
living partly by fishing, partly on roots, and the wild fruits of the country,
paid little regard to agriculture.

A Tonquinese prince, unsuccessful in a war he carried on against the king of
Tonquin (under whom he enjoyed an office somewhat resembling the maires de
palais, under the Merovingian race of the kings of France) retired with his
soldiers and adherents across the river which divides that kingdom from*
Cochin-china. The savages who then possessed this country, fled before these
strangers, and took refuge among the mountains of Tsiampa. After a long war
with their old enemies, who pursued them, the Tonquinese fugitives remained at
length peaceable possessors of the country known under the name of
Cochin-china: it extends about two hundred leagues from north to south, but
narrow and unequal from east to west. They then applied themselves entirely to
the cultivation of rice, which, being the ordinary food of the inhabitants of
Asia, is to them an object of the greatest importance. They separated into
little cantonments, and established themselves on the plains, which extend
along the banks of the river.

The fertility of the soil, which had lain long uncultivated, soon recompensed
their labors by abundance; population increased in proportion to the culture;
and their cantons extended in such a manner, that all the plains of this vast
country being put into a state of improvement, they were tempted to make
encroachments on those of Camboya, which were in a manner totally abandoned. I
never saw any country where the progress of population was so remarkable as in
Cochin-china, which must be attributed not only to the climate, and the
fertility of the soil, but to the simplicity of their manners, to the prudence
and industry of the women as well as the men, and to the variety of excellent
fish, which, with rice, is their ordinary food.

Culture of different Kinds of Rice in Cochin-China.
The Cochin-chinese cultivate six different kinds of rice: the Little Rice, the
grain of which is small, oblong and transparent; this is by far the most
delicate; it is generally administered to the sick: the Great Long Rice is that
whose form is round: the Red Rice, so called because the grain is enveloped in
a husk of a reddish color, which adheres so closely, that it requires a very
uncommon operation to separate it. These three kinds are produced in the
greatest abundance, and form the principal subsistence of the natives. They
require water, it being necessary to overflow the grounds where they are
cultivated.

They raise also two other sorts of dry rice, which grow in dry soils, and like
our wheat, require no other watering but what they receive from the clouds. One
of these species of rice has a grain as white as snow; when dressed it is of a
slimy viscous substance; they make of it different kinds of paste, such as
vermicelli. Both these kinds form a considerable article in their commerce to
China. They cultivate them only on the mountains and rising grounds, which they
labor with the spade. They sow these grains as we do wheat, about the end of
December or beginning of January, when the rainy season ends: they are not
above three months in the ground and yield a plentiful crop.

I am induced to believe, that the culture of this valuable grain would succeed
extremely well in France. In the years 1749 and 1750, I often traveled over
the mountains of Cochin-china, where this rice is cultivated; they are very
high and the temperature of the air cold; in the month of January, 1750, I
observed that the rice was very green, and above three inches high, although the
liquor in Reaumur's thermometer was only about four degrees above the freezing
point.

I carried some quintals of this grain to the Isle of France, where it was sown
with success, and produced a greater crop than any other species. The colonists
received my present with the greatest eagerness, as, exclusive of its superior
increase, it has a finer taste, is attended with less trouble, there being no
necessity for overflowing the fields; and, as it ripens fifteen or twenty days
sooner than the other kinds, it can be reaped and secured before the hurricane
season, which frequently makes dreadful havoc with their latter harvests. The
other kinds of rice, being of a slower growth, require their grounds to be laid
under water, after the manner of the natives of the Coromandel coast; but our
colonists pay so little attention to agriculture, that they have never hitherto
introduced it.

One might have imagined, that the advantages flowing from the cultivation of
dry rice, would have engaged the colonists to attend to it with the greatest
care; and that, from the Isle of France, it might have been with ease
introduced into Europe: but I have in vain endeavored to procure it from this
island; those to whom I have applied, have sent me only common rice, which
demands water and warmth. The culture of dry rice has, like every other species
of agriculture, been abandoned to the unexperienced ignorance of slaves, who
have mixed all the different kinds together, in such a manner, that the rice of
Cochin-china being ripe long before the others, the grains have dropped from the
ears before they were reaped, and the species, in this manner, has been by
degrees, entirely lost in that island. Would any traveller, whom business or
curiosity might lead to Cochin-china, send over but a few pounds of this
excellent grain, he would deserve our warmest acknowledgments.

The Cochin-chinese cultivate the common rice nearly in the same manner with
the Malabars on the Coromandel coast. -- After having twice ploughed their
ground, they sow the rice in a little field which has been well labored with
the spade; the surface of this little field they just cover with water, to the
height only of a few lines; and as soon as the rice is about five or six inches
high, they harrow over their large fields, and overflow them with water; then
pulling up the rice-plants in the seed-plots, transplant them into these
grounds, thus prepared, in small parcels of four or five stalks, about the
distance of six inches the one from the other. Women and children are generally
employed in this work.

The Cochin-chinese have no machine for overflowing their grounds, nor have
they any occasion: their plains, from one end of the kingdom to the other, are
commanded by a chain of high mountains, plentifully supplied with springs and
rivulets, which naturally overflow the grounds, according as their course is
directed.

They cultivate likewise different kinds of grain, such as the mahis millets of
different sorts, several species of the French bean, potatoes, yams, and a
variety of roots proper for the subsistence of men and animals. But the culture
of most important advantage to them, next to the rice, is the sugar-cane; and
no country in Asia produces it in greater abundance than Cochin-china.

Sugarcanes.
The sugarcanes of this country are of two kinds; the first grows thick and
tall, the joints at a considerable distance from one another, the color always
green, the juice abundant, with very little of the salt in it. This species of
cane is in general use for feeding and fattening of cattle; and experience
teaches them, that no kind of food fattens sooner or better the human species,
as well as animals, than this sugar-cane, eat while green, and the sugar which
is extracted from it.

The second species is smaller in every respect, with its joints approaching
nearer together: when ripe it assumes a yellow color; and contains less water
and more salt than the other.

The Cochin-chinese, when preparing the ground for the sugar-cane, turn it up
to the depth of two feet; this operation is performed with a plank. They then
plant joints or eyes of the cane, three and three together, in a horizontal
position, in the same manner almost as they plant vines in several provinces of
France. These slips are planted chequer-wise about eighteen inches deep in the
ground, distant six feet from one another; this operation they perform near the
end of the rainy season, in order that the slips may be sufficiently watered,
till such time as they have taken root. During the first six months, they give
them two dressings with a kind of pick-axe, in order to destroy the weeds, and
preserve a moisture about the roots of the canes, by heaping the earth around
them.

Twelve, and sometimes fourteen, months after the plantation, they gather the
first crop. By this time the canes, though planted at the distance of six feet,
become so bushy that it is impossible to enter the field, without the
assistance of a hatchet to clear your way.

The canes being cut, and tied up into bundles, are carried to the mills, in
order to extract their juice. I shall not here describe the form of these
machines, which resemble in a great measure those of the West Indies; instead
of water, they employ horned cattle or mules to set in motion the two
cylinders, between which the sugarcanes are pressed. These engines have been
described by numbers of travelers.

The juice being extracted, they boil it some hours in large kettles, in order
to evaporate part of its water: it is then transported to the neighboring
market, and sold in that condition. Here ends the industry and the profits of
the Cochin-chinese planter. The merchants purchase the juice, which resembles
pure water; they boil it again, throwing into the kettles some alkaline
substance, such as the ashes of the leaves of the musia or bananier, and
shell-lime; they are acquainted with no other; these ingredients throw up a
thick scum, which the refiner carefully skims off, the action of the alkali
hastens the separation of the salt from the water, and by the force of
ebullition, reduces the juice of the cane to the consistence of syrup. As soon
as this syrup begins to granulate, they decant it into a great earthen vessel,
where they cool it about an hour; when a kind of crust, still soft, and of a
yellowish color, appears on the surface of the syrup; they lose not a moment
then to empty it into a vessel of a conic shape, which they call a form.
Without this intermediate operation of cooling the syrup, it would harden into
a mass, and not being granulated, would consequently want one essential quality
of sugar.

These sugar-cones, or forms, in Cochin-china, are, like those of our
West India colonies, of baked earth, about three feet high, pierced at their
narrow extremities, and contain in general about forty or fifty pounds of
sugar. These forms, when full, are placed on another earthen vessel, the mouth
of which is proportioned to receive the narrow end of the cone, and must be
large enough to contain the coarse syrup, which distills from the sugar, through
some straw which imperfectly stops up the little opening in the bottom of the
form.

When they suppose the syrup has acquired the consistence of salt in every part
of the cone, they then proceed to whiten and purify it. They dilute in a trough
a fine sort of whitish clay, with such a quantity of water as, when thus
prepared, prevents it from having too much consistence; with a trowel they then
lay it upon the surface of the sugar to the thickness of about two inches in
the void space left at the top of the form by the condensing of the sugar,
after purging itself of the coarser syrup or molasses. The water contained in
the clay penetrating by degrees into the mass, washes it, and carries off
insensibly the remaining syrup, and every foreign particle that adheres most
closely to the sugar. When the clay hardens, they replace it with a fresh
quantity, diluted as the first: this operation, which lasts about twelve or
fifteen days, is the same here as in our West India colonies. Some refiners of
Cochin-china, however, have another method. In place of clay, tempered thus
with water, they cut into small pieces the trunk of the musa or bananier, which
they place upon the sugar: the trunk of this tree is very watery; the water of
a detergent quality; and distills from the fibers which envelope it, in very
small drops. Those who follow this method pretend, that the operation is
thereby rendered less tedious, and that the sugar acquires a finer color.

The process of the Cochin-chinese, in refining their sugar, goes no further:
they are unacquainted with the stoves in use in the West Indies. After having
clayed their sugars sufficiently, they sell them in the public markets,
particularly to the Chinese, and other strangers, who are invited to their
ports by the moderate price of this commodity, which is cheaper at Cochin-china
than any where in India.

The white sugar of the best quality is generally sold at the port of Faiso, in
exchange for other merchandise, at the rate of three piasters (about fourteen
shillings) the Cochin-china quintal, which weighs from one hundred and fifty,
to two hundred pounds French Ninety-one pounds eight ounces French, make one
hundred pounds English.
. The trade in this commodity is immense. The Chinese alone, whose lands do not
produce enough for their own consumpt, purchase annually from Cochin-china
above forty thousand barrels, weighing about two thousand pounds per barrel.

This country, it should be observed, which produces this commodity in such
abundance, and at so low a price, being a new kingdom, ought to be considered,
in some measure, as a colony: it is worthy observation too, that the sugar-cane
is there cultivated by free men, and all the process of preparation and
refining, the work of free hands. Compare then the price of the Cochin-chinese
production with the same commodity which is cultivated and prepared by the
wretched slaves of our European colonies, and judge if, to procure sugar from
our colonies, it was necessary to authorize by law the slavery of the unhappy
Africans transported to America. From what I have observed at Cochin-china, I
cannot entertain a doubt, but that our West India colonies, had they been
distributed without reservation amongst a free people, would have produced
double the quantity that is now procured from the labor of the unfortunate
negroes.

What advantage then has accrued to Europe, civilized as it is, and thoroughly
versed in the laws of nature, and the rights of mankind, by legally authorizing
in our colonies the daily outrages against human nature, permitting them to
debase man almost below the level of the beasts of the field? These slavish
laws have proved as opposite to its interest as they are to its honor, and to
the laws of humanity. This remark I have often made. Liberty and property form
the basis of abundance, and good agriculture: I never observed it to flourish
where those rights of mankind were not firmly established. The earth, which
multiplies her productions with a kind of profusion, under the hands of the
freeborn laborer, seems to shrink into barrenness under the sweat of the
slave. Such is the will of the great Author of our nature, who has created man
free, and assigned to him the earth, that he might cultivate his possession
with the sweat of his brow; but still should enjoy his liberty.

The Cochin-chinese, exclusive of the sugar-cane, employ themselves in the
culture of a variety of other productions, of great importance both to their
interior fabrics, and external commercce.

They cultivate the cotton-tree, the mulberry, the pepper, the varnish-tree,
the date, the tea, the indigo, and the saffron, together with a plant peculiar
to the country, called Tsai, which being fermented like indigo, furnishes in
great plenty a flower of a green color, which, in dying, gives a durable
tincture of a fine emerald color. This plant would undoubtedly be a most
valuable present to our West India colonies.

I must at present decline entering into a description of the various processes
attending these different cultures. They will afford subject for some future
memoirs.

The soil, in general, of Cochin-china, is excellent, and they cultivate it
well. Their mountains in general are fallow, as population is not even
sufficiently considerable for the cultivation of all the plain grounds they
have taken possession of in Camboya: these mountains produce, however, the
eagle or aloes-wood, which is the most precious perfume in the world; the
sapan-wood, the same with that of Brasil; and the cinnamon, in small quantities
indeed, but much superior in quality to that of Ceylon. The Chinese pay three
or four times more for it than for that which the Dutch import from that
island. They have several sorts likewise of admirable wood for joiner and
cabinet-work, particularly the rose-wood; the tea-wood is excellent for
building, and is preferred to all others in the construction of the royal
galleys, having every property that can be wished for, either for beauty or
solidity. From their mountains also, and from the forests with which they are
covered, they procure ivory, musk, wax, iron and gold in great abundance. These
mountains too are full of game, such as deer, antelopes, wild goats, peacocks;
pheasants, etc. The chase is free to all, but dangerous from the number of
tigers, elephants, rhinoceros, and other carnivorous and destructive animals,
with which the forests abound.

The sea, which washes their coasts, as well as the rivers, are well supplied
with excellent fish. Every one has the liberty of fishing; and in this the
Cochin-chinese take great delight. I have already observed, that they live
chiefly on fish and rice.

Their domestic animals are, the horse for the road, the buffalo for labor, and
the cow, the hog, the goat, the goose, the duck, and hens of various kinds, for
the table. These animals thrive extremely well, and are in great abundance. The
king alone reserves to himself the exclusive right of breeding elephants for
the war; and this is a reservation which no man envies him. He maintains
generally four hundred of them; he could maintain four thousand men at a much
less expense. The Cochin-chinese have few good fruits; the pineapple, and
oranges of different kinds, are the best their country produces. They do not
cultivate the vine, though it is one of the native productions of their lands.
They are but indifferently provided with pulse. In a word, their orchards and
their gardens are very inconsiderable. They attach themselves to the more
essential branches of agriculture.

Although this art is not yet arrived at that degree of perfection in
Cochin-china, to which it might be carried, with the advantage of such an
excellent soil, yet the manners of the people being very favorable, it
flourishes greatly.

The Cochin-chinese are gentle, hospital, frugal, and industrious. There is not
a beggar in the country; and robbery and murder absolutely unknown. A stranger
may wander over the kingdom, from one end to another (the capital excepted)
without meeting the slightest insult: he will be every where received with a
most eager curiosity, but, at the same time, with great benevolence. I have
here remarked a custom singular indeed, but expressive of their goodness of
heart. A Cochin-chinese traveller, who has not money sufficient to defray his
expenses at an inn, enters the first house of the town or village he arrives
at: no body inquires his business; he speaks to none, but waits in silence the
hour of dinner; so soon as the rice is served up, he modestly approaches,
places himself at table along with the family, eats, drinks, and departs,
without pronouncing a single word, or any person's putting to him a single
question: it was enough they saw he was a man, a brother in distress; they
asked no further information.

The six first kings, founders of this monarchy, governed the nation as a
father governs his family; they established the laws of nature alone; they
themselves paid the first obedience to them. Chiefs of an immense family of
laborers, they gave the first example of labor; they honored and encouraged
agriculture, as the most useful and honorable employment of mankind. They
required from their subjects only a small annual free-gift, to defray the
expense of their defensive war against their Tonquinese enemies.

This imposition was regulated, by way of polltax, with the greatest equity.
Every man, able to labor the ground, paid into the magistrate, on account of
the prince, a small sum proportioned to the strength of his constitution, and
the vigor of his arm; and nothing more. It was under their reign, that this
nation multiplied so surprisingly, in consequence of the plenty furnished by
the culture of their fields. Whilst they reigned, the treaties entered into on
the banks of the river, which separates Tonquin from Cochin-china, between the
chiefs of their family and those who followed them in their retreat, were most
religiously observed. It is to this reciprocal fidelity that Cochin-china owes
its present flourishing state with regard to power, population and agriculture.
Their successor, who now reigns, inherits their goodness of heart, but has the
weakness to suffer himself to be governed by his slaves. These have acquired
the art of separating the interest of the prince from that of his people. They
have inspired him with the thirst after personal riches. The vast quantity of
gold which they have dug from the mines, during this reign, has already proved
detrimental to industry and agriculture. In the palace it has been productive
of luxury and corruption, its never-failing attendants.

This prince has been insensibly led to despise the simple habitations of his
ancestors. He has built a superb palace, a league in circumference, surrounded
by a wall of brick, on the model of that of Pekin. Sixteen hundred pieces of
cannon, mounted around the palace, announce to the people the approaching loss
of their liberties and rights.

He found a necessity too for a winter palace, a summer palace, and an autumn
palace. The old taxes were by no means sufficient to defray these expenses;
they were augmented; and new impositions devised, which, being no longer
voluntary contributions, could not be levied but by force, and tyrannical
oppression. His courtiers, who found their interest in the corruption of their
prince, have given him the title of King of Heaven: Vous Tsoi, hearing himself
often so styled, at length thought he might assume it -- "Why," addressing
himself one day to me, "don't you come oftener to pay your court to the King of
Heaven?"

These designing sycophants, who guard every avenue to the royal ear, have had
the address to overawe the ordinary administration of justice; and, taking
advantage of exemption from punishment, have pillaged the laborers, and filled
the provinces with oppression and distress.

All along the high roads I have seen whole villages newly abandoned by their
inhabitants, ^^^rassed by fruitless toil, and never-ending exactions, and their
fields, in consequence, falling back to their first uncultivated state.

In the midst of all this growing disorder, the prince, whole mind has been
surprised by fawning flatterers, and who alone is ignorant of the villainy of
those around him, still preserves a repect for the manners of his ancestors; he
does not indeed, like his forefathers, give an example of personal labor, but
still his desire is to protect agriculture.

I have seen him, at the commencement of the new year, preside, with all the
simplicity of his predecessors, at the general assembly of the nation, which is
annually held on that day, in the open field, in order to renew the reciprocal
oath for observation of the primordial contract, which established him father
of his people, at the same time that they invested him alone with the power,
the noblest indeed of all, of making his people happy.

When he speaks of his subjects, he calls them still by no other name than that
of his children. I have seen him too assist, like a simple individual, in the
annual assembly of his family, according to the ancient usage of the nation; an
assembly where the most aged always preside, without regard to the dignities of
those of younger years. This, however, seemed to me only a formality ^^^erable
from custom; for what is man where the King of Heaven appears?

Corruption, it is true, has not yet infected the general body of the people;
they still preserve their primitive manners: it is hitherto confined to the
palace, and the capital: its source, however, is too elevated to prevent its
poisoned streams from flowing to the plains. It is from the great that the
corruption of a people ever derives its origin.

When it shall have infected every rank; when the foundations of agriculture,
liberty and property, already attacked by the great, shall be overthrown; when
the profession of the farmer shall become the most contemptible, and the least
lucrative, what must be the fate of agriculture? without a flourishing
agriculture what must be the fate of those multitudes, fostered under its wing?
-- what must be the fate of prince and people? -- it will resemble that of the
nation who possessed the country before them; perhaps that of the savages, who
yielded it to that nation: of them there are no remains, but the ruins of an
immense wall, near the capital, which appears to have been part of a great
city: it is of brick, and of a form very different from what is to be seen in
the other countries of Asia: no history, however, no tradition has preserved
the memory of the builders.

Upon the whole I conclude, from the general corruption which threatens the
manners of the Cochin-chinese, that agriculture is on the decline, and that
whatever efforts they may make to support it, it has now passed its meridian,
and must infallibly degenerate.

CHINA.
I now approach the period of my travels. Departing from the coasts of
Cochin-china, and directing my course toward the north-east, I proceeded for
China, which the Cochin-chinese call, with great respect, Nuse d'ai Ming -- the
kingdom of the great Luminary. After some days navigation, before there was any
appearance of land, I perceived along the horizon a forest of masts, and soon
after an innumerable multitude of boats, which covered the surface of the
water. These were thousands of fishermen, whose industry drew from the deeps
subsistence for numbers. The land now began to rise to my view; I advanced to
the mouth of the river, still amidst crowds of fishers, throwing out their
lines on every side. I entered the river of Canton; it is peopled like the
land; its banks lined with ships at anchor; a prodigious number of small craft
are continually gliding along in every direction, some with sails, others with
oars, vanishing often suddenly from the sight, as they enter the numberless
canals dug with amazing labor, across extensive plains, which they water and
fertilize. Immense fields, covered with all the glory of the harvest, with
stately villages rising to the eye on every side, adorn the remoter view,
whilst mountains, covered with verdure, cut into terrasses, and shaped into
amphitheatres, form the back ground of this noble landscape.

I arrive at Canton, where new subjects for admiration arise; the noise, the
motion, the crowd augments; the water, as well as land, being every where
covered with multitudes. Astonished at the amazing appearance, I inquire into
the numbers of inhabitants of this city, and suburbs; and after comparing
different accounts, find that they must amount at least to eight hundred
thousand souls. My surprise, however, is greatly increased, when I learn, that
to the northward of Canton, about five leagues up the river, is a village named
Fachan, which contains a million of inhabitants, and that every part of this
great empire, extending about six hundred leagues from north to south, and as
much from east to west, was peopled in the same proportion.

By what art can the earth produce subsistence for such numbers? do the Chinese
possess any secret art of multiplying the grain and provisions necessary for
the nourishment of mankind? To solve my doubts I traversed the fields, I
introduced myself among the laborers, who are in general, easy, polite and
affable, with some share of learning, and knowledge of the world. I examine,
and pursue them through all their operations, and observe that their secret
consists simply in manuring their fields judiciously, ploughing them to a
considerable depth, sowing them in the proper season, turning to advantage
every inch of ground which can produce the most inconsiderable crop, and
preferring to every other species of culture that of grain, as by far the most
important.

This system of culture, the last article excepted, appears to be the same that
is recommended in all our best authors, ancient and modern, who have wrote on
this subject; our common laborers are acquainted with it; but how much must our
European farmers be surprised, when they are informed, that the Chinese have no
meadows, natural nor artificial, and have not the least conception of
fallowing, never allowing their lands the slightest repose.

The Chinese laborer would consider meadows, of every denomination, as lands in
a state of nature; they sow their lands all with grain, and give the preference
to such grounds as we generally lay out in meadows, which, lying low, and being
properly situated with respect to water, are consequently by far the most
fertile. They affirm, that a field sown with grain, will yield as much straw
for the nourishment of cattle, as it would have produced of hay, besides the
additional advantage of the grain for the sustenance of man, of which they can
spare too, in plentiful seasons, a small portion for the animal creation.

Such is the system adhered to from one extremity of their empire to the other,
and confirmed by the experience of four thousand years, amongst a people, of
all the nations in the world, the most attentive to their interest.

That which must render this plan of agriculture the more inconceivable to
Europeans, is the idea of their never allowing their lands to lie one season
unlabored. Those who for some years have endeavored, with such public-spirited
zeal, to reanimate amongst us this neglected art, have considered as the first
and most important object, the multiplication of artificial meadows, to supply
the defect of natural ones, for the fattening (...) cattle; without once
venturing to think of suppressing the mode of fallowing the grounds, however
far they carried their system of increasing the number of artificial pastures.

This system, which appears the most plausible of any they have projected, and
is received with the greatest partiality by our farmers, is, nevertheless,
contradicted by the constant experience of the greatest and the most ancient
land laboring nation in the world, who regard the practice of meadows, and
fallowing grounds, as an abuse, destructive of plenty and population, which are
the only important objects of agriculture.

A Chinese laborer could not but smile, if you informed him, that the earth has
occasion for repose at a certain fixed period of time: he certainly would say,
that we deviated greatly from the point in view, could he read our treatises
ancient and modern, our mavelous speculations on agriculture: what would he
say, if he saw our lands, part of them fallow, part of them employod in useless
cultures, and the remainder wretchedly labored? What would he say, what must be
his feelings, if, in traveling over our fields, he observed the extreme misery
and barbarism of their wretched cultivators?

The Chinese lands, in general, are not superior to ours: you see there, (...)
with us, some excelle^^ ^ounds, others midd^^ng, the rest bad; some soils
strong, others light; lands where clay, and lands where sand, gravel, and
flints every were predominate.

All these grounds, even in the northern provinces, yield annually two crops,
and in those toward the south often five in two years, without one single
fallow season, during the many thousands of years that they have been converted
to the purposes of agriculture.

The Chinese use the same manures as we do, in order to restore to their
grounds those salts and juices, which an unintermitting production is
perpetually consuming. They are acquainted with marl; they employ also common
salt, lime, ashes, and all sorts of animal dung, but above all that which we
throw into our rivers: they make great use of urine, which is carefully
preserved in every house, and sold to advantage: in a word, every thing
produced by the earth is reconveyed to it with the greatest care, into whatever
shape the operations of nature or art may have transformed it.

When their manures are at any time scarce, they supply the deficiency, by
turning up the ground, with the spade, to a great depth, which brings up to the
surface of the field a new soil, enriched with the juices of that which
descends in its room.

Without meadows the Chinese maintain a number of horses, buffaloes, and other
animals of every species necessary for labor, for sustenance, and for manure.
These animals are fed, some with straw, others with roots, beans, and grain of
every kind. It is true, they have fewer horses, and horned cattle, in
proportion, than we have, yet it is not necessary they should have more.

The whole country is cut into canals, dug by the industry of the inhabitants,
extending from river to river, which divide and water this vast empire, like a
garden. Traveling, transporting of goods, almost every species of carriage is
performed on these canals, with great ease, and small expense: they don't even
use horses to drag their boats; every thing is done by the sail or the oar,
which they manage with singular dexterity, even in going up the rivers. Where
any kind of labor can be performed, at a moderate price by men, it is a maxim
with them never to employ animals. In consequence of this, the banks of their
canals, are cultivated almost to the water's edge; they lose not an inch of
ground: their public roads resemble our foot paths; their canals, however, are
infinitely more useful than high ways: they convey fertility every where, and
furnish the people great part of their subsistence in fish. -- There is no
comparison between the weight which can be transported in a boat, and that
which can be conveyed by any kind of land-carriage; no proportion between the
expense.

The Chinese are still less acquainted with the use, or rather the luxury of
chariots, and equipages of every kind, which crowd the principal cities of
Europe. The horses necessary for these, assembled in thousands in our capitals,
consume the produce of numberless acres of our best grounds, which, if
cultivated with grain, would afford subsistence for multitudes, who are dying
of hunger. The Chinese wish rather to maintain men than horses.

The emperor and chief magistrates are carried through the cities by men, with
safety, and with dignity; their march is sedate and majestic, it threatens not
with danger those who walk on foot: they travel in a kind of galleys, safer,
more commodious, equally magnificient, and less expensive than our land
equipages.

I have before observed, that the Chinese lose not an inch of ground. They are
very far, therefore, from alloting immense parks, of the finest ground, for the
maintenance alone of deer, in contempt of the human race. The emperors, even
those of the Tartar line, have never hitherto dreamed of forming these parks;
still less the grandees, that is, the magistrates and the learned: such an idea
could never find place in the mind of a Chinese. Even their country houses, and
boxes of pleasure, present nothing to the eye all around, but useful cultures,
agreeably diversified. That which constitutes their principal beauty, is their
delightful situation, judiciously improved, where, in the disposition of the
various parts which form the whole, there every where reigns a happy imitation
of that beautiful order of nature, from whence art has borrowed all her charms.

The most rocky hills, which, in France, and other places of Europe, they turn
into vineyards, or totally neglect, are there compelled, by dint of industry,
to produce grain. The Chinese are acquainted, indeed, with the vine, which here
and there they plant in arbors; but they consider it as a luxury, and the wine
it produces as an unnecessary superfluity: they would imagine it a sin against
humanity, to endeavor to procure, by cultivation, an agreeable liquor, whilst,
from the want of that grain which this vineyard might have produced, some
individual perhaps might be in danger of perishing of hunger.

The steepest mountains, even, are rendered accessible: at Canton, and from one
extremity of the empire to another, you observe mountains cut into terrasses,
representing, at a distance, immense pyramids divided into different stages,
which seem to rear their heads to heaven. Every one of these terrasses yields
annually a crop of some kind of grain, even of rice; and you cannot withold
your admiration, when you behold the water of the river, the canal, or the
fountain, which glides by the foot of the mountain, raised from terrass to
terrass, even to the summit, by means of a simple portable machine, which two
men with ease transport and put in motion.

The sea itself, which seems to threaten the solid globe it surrounds, has been
compelled, by industry and labor, to yield part of its dominions to the Chinese
cultivator.

The two finest provinces of the empire, Nan-king and Tche-kiang, formerly
covered with water, have been united to the continent some thousands of years
ago, with an art infinitely superior to that which is so much admired in the
modern works of Holland.

The Chinese had to struggle with a sea, whose natural flux from east to west
urges it continually toward the coasts of these two provinces; whilst the
Dutch have had nothing to oppose but a sea, which by the same natural motion,
always avoids their western shores.

The Chinese nation is capable of the most stupendous works; in point of labor
I never observed their equals in the world. Every day in the year is a working
day, except the first, destined for paying reciprocal visits, and the last
which is consecrated to the ceremonial duties they pay to their ancestors.

An idle man would be treated with the most sovereign contempt and regarded as
a paralytic member, a load to the body of which he made a part; the government
would in no manner permit it. How opposite from the ideas of other Asiatics,
where none are admitted to any degree of estimation, but those who, from their
situation in life, have nothing to do! -- An ancient emperor of China, in a
public instruction, exhorting the people to labor, observed, that if in one
corner of the empire there was one man who did nothing, there must, in some
other quarter, be another who suffers on that account, deprived of the
necessaries of life. This wise maxim is fixed in the breast of every Chinese;
and, with this people so open to reason, he who pronounces a wise maxim
pronounces a law.

Behold, gentlemen, a slight sketch of the general picture of Chinese
agriculture, with the peculiar genius of that people for this art. The limits
of my discourse will not permit me at present to enter into a detail of the
different cultures I have seen in this country: I shall only observe, that they
are such as abundantly supply all the wants, and conveniences of the most
populous nation in the world, and furnish, with their superfluity, an important
article for foreign commerce.

From these observations it is obvious, that agriculture flourishes in China
more than in any other country in the world: yet it is not to any process
peculiar to their labor, it is not to the form of their plough, or their method
of sowing, that this happy state, and the plenty consequent on it, is to be
attributed; it must chiefly be derived from their mode of government, the
immovable foundations of which have been laid deep, by the hand of reason
alone, coeval almost with the beginning of time; and from their laws, dictated
by nature to the first of the human race, and sacredly preserved from
generation to generation, engraved in the united hearts of a great people, not
in obscure codes, devised by chicanery and deceit. -- In a word, China owes the
prosperity of her agriculture to the simplicity of her manners, and to her
laws, which are the laws of nature and reason.

This empire was founded by laborers, in those happy times when the laws of the
great Creator were still held in remembrance, and the culture of the earth
considered as the noblest of all employments, the most worthy of mankind, and
the general occupation of all. From Fou-hi (who was the first chief of this
nation, some hundreds of years after the deluge, if we follow the version of
the Septuagint, and in this quality presided over agriculture) all the
emperors, without exception, even to this day, glory in being the first
laborers of their empire.

The Chinese history has carefully preserved an anecdote of generosity in two
of the ancient emperors, who, not perceiving among their children any one
worthy to mount a throne, which virtue alone ought to inherit, named, as their
successors, two simple laborers. These laborers, according to the Chinese
annals, advanced the happiness of mankind, during very long reigns; their
memory is still held in the highest veneration. It is unnecessary to observe
how much examples, such as these, honor and animate agriculture.

The Chinese nation has ever been governed like a family, of which the emperor
is father: his subjects are his children, without any other inequality but that
which established by talents, and by merit. Those puerile distinctions of
noblesse, and plebeians, men of family, and men of mean birth, are no where to
be found but in the jargon of new people, still barbarous, who, having forgot
the common origin of all men, insult without reflection, and debase the whole
human race; whilst that nation whose government is ancient, dating its
commencement with the first ages of the world, are sensible that all men are
born equal, all brothers, all noble. Their language has not even hitherto
invented a term for expressing this pretended distinction of birth. The
Chinese, who have preserved their annals from the remotest times, and who are
all equally the children of the emperor, have never so much as suspected an
inequality of origin amongst them.

From this principle, that the emperor is father, and the people his children,
spring all the duties of society, all the duties of morality, every virtue of
humanity, the union of every wish for the common good of the family,
consequently an attachment to labor, and above all to agriculture.

This art is honored, protected, and practiced by the emperor, and the great
magistrates, who generally are the sons of plain laboring men, whom merit has
raised to the first dignities of the empire; and, in a word, by the whole
nation, who have the good sense to honor an art the most useful to mankind, in
preference to others more frivolous, and less important.

Ceremony of opening the Grounds.
On the fifteenth day of the first moon, in every year, which generally
corresponds to the beginning of March, the emperor in person performs the
ceremony of opening the grounds. This prince, in great pomp, proceeds to the
field appointed for the ceremony: the princes of the imperial family, the
presidents of the five great tribunals, and an infinite number of madarius
accompany him. Two sides of the field are occupied by the emperor's officers,
and guards; the third is allotted for all the laborers of the province, who
repair thither to behold their art honored and practiced by the head of their
empire, the fourth is reserved for the mandarins.

The emperor enters the field alone, prostrates himself, and nine times strikes
his head against the ground, in adoration of Tien, the GOD of heaven; he
pronounces, with a loud voice, a prayer appointed by the tribunal of rites,
invoking the blessing of the Almighty Sovereign on his labor and on the labor
of his people, who form his family; he then, in quality of sovereign pontiff of
the empire, sacrifices a bullock, which he offers up to heaven, as the source
of every blessing: whilst they cut the victim in pieces, and place them on the
altar, they bring to the emperor a plough, in which are yoked a pair of
bullocks, magnificently adorned. The emperor then, laying aside his royal
robes, takes hold of the handle of the plough, and turns up several furrows the
whole length of the field; then, with a complaisant air, having delivered the
plough to the mandarins, they successively follow his example, emulating one
another in performing this honorable labor with the greatest dexterity. The
ceremony concludes with the distribution of money, and pieces of stuff, among
the laborers there present; the most active of whom finish the remaining labor,
in presence of the emperor, with great agility and address.

Some time after, when they have sufficiently labored and manured their
grounds, the emperor repairs again, in procession, and begins the sowing of the
fields; always accompanied with ceremony, and attended by the laborers of the
province.

The same ceremonies are performed, on the same days, in all the provinces of
the empire, by the viceroys, assisted by all the magistrates of their
departments, in presence of a great number of the laborers of their respective
provinces. I have seen this opening of the grounds at Canton, and never
remember to have beheld any of the ceremonies invented by men, with half the
pleasure and satisfaction with which I observed this.

The Encouragement of Agriculture.
The Chinese agriculture has, at the same time, other encouragements. Every
year the viceroys of the provinces send to court the names of such laborers as
have chiefly distinguished themselves in their employments, either by
cultivating grounds till then considered as barren, or, by a superior culture,
improving the production of such lands as formerly had bore grain. These names
are presented to the emperor, who confers on them honorary titles, to
distinguish them above their fellow laborers. If any man has made an important
discovery, which may influence the improvement of agriculture, or should he, in
any manner, deserve more distinguished marks of regard than the rest, the
emperor invites him to Pekin, defraying his journey with dignity, at the
expense of the empire; he receives him into his palace, interrogates him with
regard to his abilities, his age, the number of his children, the extent and
quality of his lands; then dismisses him to his plough, distinguished by
honorable titles, and loaded with benefits and favors.

Who is happiest, gentlemen, the prince who conducts himself in this manner, or
the nation who is thus governed? Amongst a people where all are equal, where
every one aspires after distinctions, such encouragements cannot fail to
inspire a love for labor, and an emulation for the cultivation of the ground.

Attention of the Chinese Government.
The whole attention, in general, of the Chinese government, is directed
toward agriculture. The principal object of the father of a family, ought to
be the subsistence of his children. The state of the fields, in consequence,
forms the great object of the toils, the cares and the solicitudes of the
magistrates. It may easily be conceived, that with such dispositions, the
government has not neglected to secure to the laborers that liberty, property,
and indulgence which are the great springs for the improvement of agriculture.

The Chinese enjoy, undisturbed, their private possessions, as well as those
which, being by their nature indivisible, belong to all, such as the sea, the
rivers, the canals, the fish which they contain, and the beasts of the forest:
navigation, fishing, and the chase are free to every one; and he who buys a
field, or receives it by inheritance from his ancestors, is of course the sole
lord and master.

The lands are free as the people; no feudal services, and no fines of
alienation; none of those men interested in the misfortunes of the public; none
of those farmers who never amass more exhorbitant fortunes, that when an
unfavorable season has ruined the country, and reduced the unhappy laborer to
perish for want, after having toilthe year round for the sustenance of his
fellow subjects; none of that destructive profession, hatched in the delirium
of the feudal system, under whole auspices arise millions of processes, which
drag the laborer from his plough into the obscure and dangerous mazes of
chicane, and thereby rob him, while defending his rights, of that time which
would have been importantly employed in the general service of mankind.

The Imposts established in China invariable.
In China there is no other lord, no other superior, who has power to levy
taxes, but the common father of the family, the emperor. The bonzes [priests of
the sect of Fo-hi] accustomed to receive alms from a charitable people, would
be very indifferently received, should they pretend that this alms is a right
which heaven has bestowed upon them.

The Impost called the Tenth.
This impost, which is not exactly the tenth part of the produce, is regulated
according to the nature of the grounds: in bad soils it is perhaps only the
thirtieth part, and so in proportion. This impost, however, of the tenth part
of the produce of the earth, which belongs to the emperor, is the only tax on
the lands, the only tribute known in China since the origin of the monarchy:
and such is the happy respect which the Chinese have for their ancient customs,
that an emperor of China would never entertain the most distant thought of
augmenting it, nor his subjects the least apprehension of such augmentation.
The people pay it, in kind, not to avaricious farmers-generals, but to upright
magistrates, their proper and natural governors. The amount of this tribute,
though apparently trifling, must be immense, when we consider that it is levied
on every foot of ground of the most extensive and best cultivated empire in the
world. This tax is paid with the greatest fidelity, as they know the purposes
to which it is applied. They know, that part of it is laid up in immense
magazines, distributed over every province of the empire, and allotted for the
maintenance of the magistrates and soldiery: they know, that, in the event of
scarcity, these magazines are open to all, and the wants of the people supplied
with part of that which was received from them in times of abundance: they know
too, that the remainder of this impost is sold in the public markets, and the
produce of it faithfully carried to the treasury of the empire, the custody of
which is entrusted to the respectable tribunal of Ho-pou, from whence it ^^ver
is issued but to supply the general wants of the family.

Comparison of the Agriculture of Africa and Asia with that of China.
Recollect, gentlemen, what I have said of the laws, the manners, and the
customs of the different nations of Africa and Asia, the state of whose
agriculture I have examined: compare nation with nation, and then judge, if the
unfortunate Malabar, without property, subjected to the tyrannical government
of the Moguls; judge if a race of slaves, under the iron scepter of the despot
of Siam; judge if the Malais, ever turbulent, and fettered by their feudal
laws; judge, I say, if these nations, though possessing the finest grounds in
the world, can possibly ever make agriculture to flourish like the Chinese,
governed as a family, and subjected to the laws of reason alone. -- I shall
again repeat, therefore, with confidence, that, in every country in the world,
the fate of agriculture depends solely on the laws there established, on the
manners of the people, and even on the prejudices which derive their origin
from those laws.

What industry have the inhabitants of the earth displayed, from one extremity
of the globe to the other, in rendering themselves unhappy! created to live in
society, to cultivate the earth, and enjoy from their labor the infinite
blessings of the great Creator, they had only to listen to the voice of nature,
who would have taught them happiness below: in place of which, they have
strained their faculties in the invention of barbarous institutions, and
perplexing legislations, which being ill adapted to the feelings of mankind,
and discordant with that law which is engraved in every man's breast, their
establishment could only be effected by force, deluging the world with blood;
and which, once established, have continued to desolate the earth, checking
population, by the oppression of agriculture.

The State of Agriculture in Europe.
What an object for an attentive traveller, to observe the state of agriculture
amongst the various people who divide the globle! In Europe behold it at
present flourishing, in a country which, during many preceding ages, was
reduced to the necessity of begging subsistence amongst the neighboring
nations, who possessed a happier climate, and a greater extent of territory.
During those ages of barbarism, their loss of liberty and right of property
brought along with them the ruin of cultivation; nor has she recovered those
natural rights of mankind, and reestablished the foundations of drooping
agriculture, but through seas of blood, and outrages shocking to humanity.

In Africa.
Africa, in general, whose regions, known to the ancients, were considered as
the granaries of the world, now present nothing to the view but grounds either
entirely neglected, or wretchedly cultivated by the labor of slaves.

In America.
South-America, covered with marshes, brambles, and woods, beholds her
extensive tracks hardened even by the sweat of her laborers in chains. The
northern regions of that quarter of the world are inhabited by inconsiderable
tribes of savages, miserable, and without culture; yet free, and, in
consequence, less wretched perhaps than those nations who pretend to be
civilized; but who, being farther removed from the laws of nature, by the
privation of those rights which she bestows, make ineffectual efforts to
procure that happiness, which a good agriculture alone can produce.

In Asia.
The vast continent of Asia offers to your consideration, in one quarter, an
immense uncultivated region, peopled by a race of banditti, more intent on
plunder than the cultivation of their grounds; in another, a great empire,
formerly flourishing, and excellently labored, now inhabited by the poor
remains of a wretched people, perishing with hunger from the neglect of
agriculture, and shedding their blood, not for liberty, but for a change of
tyrants. This charming fertile quarter of the world (the cradle of the human
race) now beholds her lands in slavery, her laborers in chains, subjected
either to the blind despotism of unfeeling tyrants, or the destructive yoke of
the feudal system.

But turn your eyes to the eastern extremity of the Asiatic continent,
inhabited by the Chinese, and there you will conceive a ravishing idea of the
happiness the world might enjoy, were the laws of this empire the model of
those of other countries. This great nation unites under the shade of
agriculture, founded on liberty and reason, all the advantages possessed by
whatever nation, civilized or savage. The blessing pronounced on man, at the
moment of his creation, seems not to have had its full effect, but in favor of
this people, who have multiplied as the sands on the shore.

Princes, who rule over nations! arbiters of their fate! view well this
perspective; it is worthy your attention. Would you wish abundance to flourish
in your dominions, would you favor population, and make your people happy;
behold those innumerable multitudes which overspread the territories of China,
who leave not a shred of ground uncultivated; it is liberty, it is their
undisturbed right of property that has established a cultivation so
flourishing, under the auspices of which this people have increased as the
grains which cover their fields.

Does the glory of being the most powerful, the richest, and the happiest of
sovereigns, touch your ambition, turn your eyes toward Pekin, and behold the
most powerful of mortal beings seated on the throne of reason: -- he does not
command, he instructs; -- his words are not decrees, they are the maxims of
justice and wisdom; -- his people obey him, because his orders are dictated by
equity alone.

He is the most powerful of men, reigning over the hearts of the most numerous
society in the world, who constitute his family. -- He is the richest of
sovereigns, drawing from an extent of territory six hundred leagues square,
cultivated even to the summits of the mountains, the tenth of those abundant
harvests it incessantly produces: this he considers as the wealth of his
children, and he husbands it with care. -- To sum up all, he is the happiest of
monarchs, tasting every day the inexpressible pleasure of giving happiness to
millions, and alone enjoying, undivided, that satisfaction which his subjects
share -- his children! all to him equally dear; all living like brothers, in
freedom and abundance, under his protection.

He is called the son of Tien, as the true and most perfect image of heaven,
whose benevolence he imitates; and his grateful people adore him as a God,
because his conduct is worthy of a man.

FINIS.

