THE AMERICAN BE; A COLLECTION OF Entertaining Histories. SELECTED FROM
DIFFERENT AUTHORS, AND CALCULATED FOR AMUSEMENT AND INSTRUCTION.

THE FIRST EDITION.

LEOMINSTER, [MASS.] PRINTED BY AND FOR CHARLES PRENTISS. 1797.

THE AMERICAN BE.
THE ADVENTURES OF SOCIVIZCA -- A NOTORIOUS ROBBER AND ASSASSIN, OF THE RACE OF
THE MORLACHIANS.
MORLACHIA is a province belonging to the Vene^^an state, lying between the
Gulf of Venice, Croatia and Bosnia, having Dalmatia to the South. Some reckon
it a part of Croatia: the Capital town is Seng, or S^gna. The inhabitants are
inveterate enemies to the Turks, and never spare them when they get them into
their power. This will appear in the history of Socivizca, and is the only
thing that can be urged in extenuation of his crimes, or as an excuse for the
conduct of the present Emperor of Germany, who, since the year 1776, has
retained him in his service, as Arambassa, an officer in his regiment of
Pandours. The Morlachians are amazingly strong; travelers affirm that four of
them will carry a man on horseback twenty or thirty paces over the most
dangerous passes of the mountains. Their habits are of diverse colors, quite
different from those of the Venetians, and they commonly go armed with an ax.

This singular man will not excite in us that horror and aversion which we
generally feel in reading the lives of common thieves and murderers, nor does
he deserve to be considered wholly in that light, since he did not lie in wait
for travelers indiscriminately* to strip and murder them, but confined his
depredations and barbarity to the Turks, against whom he had a native
animosity, roused and augmented by personal injuries.

Before we proceed to the incidents of his life, it may be proper to show, that
the Morlachians of our time differ very little in their manners and customs
from the ancient inhabitants of their country, described thus by Ovid, in his "
Epistolae ex Pento. The men that I see here (says this author) are scarce
worthy to be called men, for they have the natural ferocity of wolves. They
neither fear nor ob^y the laws: justice with them, yields to strength, and the
laws are annulled by the force of arms. They live on pillage, but they
fight-bravely and openly for their prey; all other means of procuring the
necessaries of life appear to them to be base and ignominious,. Without any
fear or apprehension of them, the sight of them is alone sufficient to create
aversion. Their voice is savage; their wan and furious physiognomy is a just
representation of death."

STANISLAO SOCIVIZCA was born in the year 1715, at Simiovo, in a farm house,
about sixteen miles from Trebigne, a city dependant on the Ottoman empire. His
father, who was in extreme indigence, labored, with three other sons, in
cultivating the lands of a very rich Turkish family, called the Umitalcichi,
and these poor people were cruelly oppressed by their masters, insomuch that
they not only loaded them with insults, but beat them severely. Neither
Socivizca, whose temperament was naturally savage and cruel, nor his brothers,
could any longer endure their repeated acts of tyranny, but their father
constantly exhorted them to forbearance, and bound them by the ties of filial
obedience to submit, for several years, with resignation to their hard fate.

At length however chance threw in their way the three Turkish brothers who
were the chief persecutor^ of these unfortunate laborers. Having amassed the
sum of ^8000 sequins arising from exactions called the Arai, that is to say,
the forced contributions of the inhabitants of several villages, their vassals,
they came to pass a few days on the farm where Socivizca and his family
cultivated the lands. This favorable opportunity awakened their resentment,
and deaf to all the remonstrances of their mild and peaceable father, they
resolved to avenge themselves of the whole house of the Umitalcichi in the
persons of these three young men: accordingly they massacred them, and buried
the bodies in a deep ditch which they dug round the farm. The young men being
missed, the Turkish Bashaw of Trebigne, and the captain of the guards arrested
upwards of fifty christians of the district; some of whom were put to death,
and others made slaves for not confessing tho innocent, that they were
criminals; but not the smallest suspicion fell upon the family of Socivizca.

It is a custom among the Turks, that when a sum of money has been stolen from
any person, and cannot be recovered, all the inhabitants of the village or town
wherein the robbery is committed are assembled together, and a tax is levied
upon each family in proportion to their property to make up the amount; this
was put in practice in the present case, and the neatness of Socivizca's dress,
the pride he had assumed, and which he had not shown before, together with his
temerity and audacity of which he had given frequent proofs since this event,
left no doubt in the minds of the Turks that he was the murderer: but a full
year had elapsed before they were confirmed in this opinion.

Upon the first rumor of his family being suspected, Socivizca had advised his
brothers to retire to a distant province with the remains of the money.
Accordingly they all sled together with their father, who being very old and
infirm died upon the road; and they reached Imoschi a small town upon the
Venetian territories. This happened in the year 1745; there they purchased
lands, built a house, and stocked a warehouse with the most valuable
merchandise.

As for Socivizca as he did not think the slow returns of trade, or annual
rents worth his notice he resolved to return to Monte Vero, where with a small
band of chosen relations and friends, he commenced public robber and murderer
of the Turks; in one summer they attacked, assassinated and robbed forty. One
of his comrades having lost his carabine, Socivizca resolved to take one by
force from the first person he met armed, but in this attempt, when he least
suspected it, he found himself in the midst of a Turkish caravan. The guard who
first perceived him, took him for what ^e really was, an Aiduco, a name
formerly given to a party of Morlachians, who devoted their whole lives to the
destruction of the Turks, at present they call every highway robber an Aiduco;
he denied it with terrible oaths, but in vain, six other Turks surrounded him,
and without any further trial were preparing to bind him. Socivizca seeing
himself in this situation, fired a pistol as an alarm to his companions and
told the Turks they consisted of a large band at a little distance; at the same
time he shouted as loud as possible. The Turks took the alarm, and imagining
they already saw a hardy troop of veteran assassins advancing, fell back a few
paces to observe from what quarter they would come, this gave him an
opportunity to escape by flight; but the Turks perceiving the stratagem,
pursued him with their carabines loaded. Socivizca, who knew that it was the
custom of the Turks to fire all together, and not to reserve a single carabine
for an emergency, just as they were on the point of discharging their pieces,
laid himself down flat on the ground, and the enemy having fired, instantly
approached him thinking they had mortally wounded him, either in the middle of
his body or in the head, when rising suddenly he shot one Turk, and knocked
down another, with the butt end of his pistol, then recollecting that he had
another pistol loaded he dispatched him.

In the interval his comrades joined him, and the five remaining Turks took to
their heels. The caravan now came up, and tho Socivizca and his companions had
no inclination to let so rich a body escape them, they found it so numerous
that they durst not venture to attack it.

After this expedition he returned to Imoschi where he lived retired for nine
years, and followed the traffic his family had established, but when he wanted
recreation he made a sport of hunting the Turks, and assassinating one or two
from time to time.

One of the brothers of Socivizca following his example, became the terror of
the country; he associated himself with a banditti, at the head of whom was one
Pezeireb who took pleasure in empaling alive all the Turks who had the
misfortune to fall into his hands. This monster of cruelty at last was taken by
the Turks, who ran a stake through his body, and then fastened him with cords to
another, leaving him in this condition to expire at the side of a high road.
Passengers, and the peasants inhabiting the neighborhood, affirmed, that he
lived in this horrid situation three days, preserving his ferocity to the last,
and smoking repeated pipes given him by them as long as he had breath,
notwihstanding the agonies he endured.

Soivcizca's brother, after the death of his chief, entered into a close
friendship with a Mo^lachian, of the Greek church, but a subject of the Turks.
This man was a Probatim, a name assumed by a fraternity in Morlachia, who by
solemn rites and ceremonies, at the foot of the alter, swear an unalterable
friendship to each other, and a mutual alliance offensive and defensive. The
usual vows had been exchanged between this Greek and Socivizca's brother, and
in confirmation of their friendship, he invited him to pass a few days at his
house on the confines of Imoschi: the^e having shown him every mark of
hospitality and attention, when he had made him quite drunk, he advised him to
retire to rest, and while he slept, sent for a party of the Turks to whom, for
a bribe, he delivered up his unsuspecting guest. The Turks carried him to the
Bashaw of Trawnick, who knowing him to be the brother of a man who had sworn
destruction to the Ottoman race held a council which lasted eight hours, to
devise the most cruel mode of torturing him to death. The news of this dreadful
catastrophe soon reached the ears of Socivizca, but as he remained ignorant of
the circumstances of his falling into their hands, he went directly to the
house of the Probatim for intelligence. The father of the prefidious friend,
received him with the greatest composure, and being a venerable old man,
Socivizca readily believed the artful tale he told him, of their being
unexpectedly surrounded by the Turks, who had received some secret
intelligence, no doubt, from an unknown hand. The Probatim likewise received
him with such an appearance of real kindness, that he did not entertain the
smallest suspicions of treachery: for he invited him to stay the night, and
told him he would fetch a fine lamb from the fold to make him an excellent
supper. With this pretense he left him, in affect, to run as fast as he could
to give notice to a party of the Turkish cavalry stationed about twelve miles
from his house, that he had got their great enemy under his roof.

The hour of midnight was passed, when Socivizca finding the Probatim was not
returned with the lamb, went to bed, as well as the rest of the family, who
soon fell into a profound sleep, but as for Socivizca, his suspicions were
awake, and he could not close his eyes. "And such were my forebodings, said he,
(his own words to the Emperor) as if I was at the brink of some eminent danger,
that I jumped from my bed and endeavored to light a lamp by the ashes of a
fire that had been in the room, but the old man was in the plot with his son,
and knowing what they expected to happen in the course of the night, had taken
care to extinguish every spark." He was then convinced that some horrid
conspiracy was formed against his life, and rage took possession of his soul;
he sought in vain for his arms, they were concealed: he then called aloud to
know if any of the family could tell him where to find them, but no one
replied, except an old woman, who bid the brute lie still and not make a noise
to disturb the children. Fortunately he had a flint and a knife in his pocket,
with which he struck a light, and applied it to the lamp. He then repaired to
the old man's bed, and asked in a severe tone of voice where they had put his
arms, but the traitor to gain time, feigned to be asleep, but being compelled
to answer, he pretended not to understand him, which cost him his life, for
Socivizca took up a hatchet that lay by the chimney, and dispatched him. This
so terrified the woman, that she instantly produced his arms, and he had no
sooner got them, then he made his escape from the house, and concealed himself
in some thick bushes at a small distance to wait the event. He had not been
long in this situation before he heard the trampling of a great number of
horses, and by the light of their torches he discovered them to be a detachment
of Turkish cavalry, who dismounted, went into the house, and in a few minutes
returned, seemingly much disappointed. Socivizca observed their motions when
they remounted and returned by the same road; at length, having narrowly
watched that not one of them remained to lay wait for him, he ventured from his
hiding place and made the best of his way to Imoschi.

This double persidy of the Probatim made such an impression upon his mind that
it was never out of his thoughts, nor was he easy till he had taken a most
ample and cruel revenge. As soon as he could get together seven companions on
whom he could rely for their resolution, insensibility, and attachment, he
proposed to them his horrid expedition, which was to set fire to the house in
the dead of night. This they effected so secretly and suddenly, that the
cottage which was built with wood and thatch was in flames before any of the
family perceived it, except one woman, who endeavoring to make her escape by
the door, was shot through the head. Seventeen persons fell a victim to his savage
vengeance; and the Turks represented this barbarous transaction in such strong
terms, in a memorial against him, addressed to the Governor General of
Dalmatia, that he issued a decree ordering the house of Socivizca to be razed
level with the ground, and setting a price upon his head, by offering twenty
sequins to any person who should kill him, and forty to those who should take
him alive. Before this decree appeared, he had withdrawn himself from Imoschi,
and secreted himself under different disguises, in various places, without
enjoying one hour of tranquillity, from the constant exertion of his mind, to
find means of avoiding a surprise.

Being at the fair of Sign, in August 1754, the year in which he had burnt the
family of the Probatim, he narrowly escaped the pursuit of a party of Croats,
who were out in search of him, and therefore finding he was no longer safe in
any part of the Venetian territories* he wrote privately to one of his
confidential friends to send his wife and family, with his effects, after him
to Carlowitz, near the river Zermanga, as soon as they could securely quit the
retreat in which they lay concealed. Thither he traveled on foot, with all
possible expedition, and not long after his family arrived with all his
effects, which were considerable. His household consisted of himself, his two
remaining brothers, his wife, a son and two daughters. This place being so
situated that he had no opportunity to pursue his savage vengeance against the
Mahometans; his manners were insensibly softened, he lived a peaceable life for
three years, and might have been totally reformed if a certain person in
authority in that country had not been tempted from motives of avarice to
deliver him and his brothers into the hands of the Turks. It is said, he
afterward paid dear for his perfidy; but be this as it may, poor Socivizca and
his two brothers were sent to a fort beyond the Udbina, on the frontiers of the
territories of Austria, Venice, and Turkey, from whence they were escorted by a
detachment of one hundred Turkish hors^ to the Bashaw of Traunick, the same who
had put the fourth brother to death a few years before. After they had lain in
prison some time, sinking under the weight of double irons, and strictly
guarded night and day: the alternative was proposed to them, either to turn
Mahometans, or to be impaled. It may well be imagined they prefered the milder
operation of circumcision; and at the same time it shows the force of Turkish
superstition, which beats down the fence of justice: for Socivizca was
publicly known to be the mortal foe of their race; and had massacred many of
their brethren. Socivizca upon this occasion took the name of Ibrahim, but he
did not thereby regain his liberty: his two brothers indeed were released, and
one of them had the post of Aga bestowed upon him; but this did not prevent
them from taking the first fair opportunity to fly from the Turkish dominions.
The Bashaw enraged at this step ordered the new Ibrahim to be more closely
confined; that the indulgence lately granted to him should be withdrawn, and
notwithstanding his pretended zeal for the Mohammedan faith, that the guards
should never lose sight of him.

Perceiving at length, that all his religious adorations, his affected
docility, and exemplary patience did not advance his deliverance; his fruitful
imagination furnished him another stratagem. His only relief from the horror of
his fate was to converse with his guards, whom he one day addressed in the
following terms. "My condemnation to perpetual captivity I could bear with
fortitude; I have been guilty of crimes which deserve this punishment; but I
regret the quantity of money I have been obliged to bury under ground, while
the hand of justice pursued me from place to place: considerable sums are
likewise owing to me from my former neighbors and friends. The Bashaw cannot
demand the one, nor find the other, but if he would permit me to demand my dues
in person, or to find the money I have concealed, it should be his; and I
should be happy to regain his favor by these presents, and to be restored to
the privileges' I enjoyed before my brothers incurred his displeasure by their
escape."

The substance of this speech was carried to the Bashaw; avarice, the ruling
passion of the Turks, prevailed over every other consideration, and an order
soon came to the jailer, to perm^t Ibrahim to leave the prison, escorted by ten
of the guard^, and to give them directions to conduct him to every spot where
he should indicate that he had concealed any treasure.

Restored by this artful device to the liberty of breathing the free air, his
subtlety furnished him with various pretenses to amuse the guards for upwards
of a month; sometimes he directed them to pursue one route to arrive at a
cavern in which he had concealed a considerable sum, at others, he declared he
had mistaken the place, and finally, at SIGN, being confronted by several
persons whom he called his debtors to a large amount, but who solemnly and
juridically protested they did not owe him a single sequin, the guards to
punish him loaded him with heavy irons and confined him in an obscure
apartment, placing two sentinels at the door night and day, till they had
reposed themselves sufficiently after the fatigue of traveling, and had
procured depositions in form of the falsity of his pretensions to give to the
Bashaw. By way of revenge, they found means to send for his wife and his two
children, a boy and a girl, from the county of Zara, pretending that he was at
full liberty, and had ordered them to repair to him, but as soon as they
arrived, they took them into custody.

This was an unexpected aggravation of his misfortunes, but it did not conquer
his fortitude, nor check the fertility of his genius, ever meditating the means
of escape. On the 26th of November, 1758, Socivizca and his family were carried
before the Effendi by his guards, in order to receive instructions for
reconducting him to Traunick; his wife was ordered to kiss the hand of the
officer as a token of obedience; he suffered her and his daughter to submit to
this ceremony, but when they ordered his son to do the same* he called to him
in a furious tone -- "Stand off! and do not offer to kiss the hand of that
dog." The Turks were struck dumb with surprise, and the Effendi admiring his
greatness of soul made an apology to him, expressing regret that his people had
urged the compliance with this ceremony, only as a matter of custom. One of the
spectators showing a forwardness to seize him, in order to tie him on the horse
he was to ride, he shook his chains in a terrible manner, and bid him keep his
distance, adding these words, in the same furious tone: "Soul of a dog,
think thou, that I am a woman to be held by the hand!" and then
notwithstanding the weight of his chains, he mounted his horse without
assistance, and would not suffer any ^ubaltern to tie him on, obliging the
Effendi himself to perform this office, to whom he submitted quietly. His wife
and children were obliged to follow upon other horses.

The inhabitants of Sign, affected at this melancholy cavalcade, in compassion
for his wife and children, made a collection for him, and these charitable
contributions he turned to more advantage than a rich booty so dexterous was he
in resources. The liberality of Socivizca soon became the theme of praise with
his guards, for most of the money given to him for his support he spent in
regaling them with brandy, till they got drunk by drinking bumpers to his
health. As soon as they had passed the frontiers of the Venetian territories,
Socivizca complained of the extreme cold, upon which they covered him with a
long Turkish cloak called a habanizca, and his wife having secretly conveyed to
him a knife sometime before; he took an opportunity under this concealment, to
cut the rope with which he was tied upon the horse, first in two, and
afterward by degrees into small bits which he dropped from time to time
unperceived upon the road. About sun set they arrived at the tower of Prologh,
not far from Bilibrigh, where is a station of Turkish cavalry. Here a dispute
arose, if they should proceed farther, or stop; and it was decided by the
majority to go on. At the distance of about two hundred yards beyond the tower
of Prologh the road on one side, passes along the edge of a very steep descent;
at this part of it Socivizca slid from the horse, and took the chance of
rolling down the declivity, till he caught hold of the branch of a tree, which
stopped him, and behind this tree he sheltered himself. The snow lay upon the
ground, which at other times is a fine valley lined with fruit trees. As soon
as the guard nearest the horse missed his prisoner, he imparted it to his
companions, who were stupefied with astonishment, and not suspecting that he
had stopped, they separated and galloped on in pursuit of him. Night now came
on, and a heavy fall of snow, and when Socivizca thought it was so dark that
objects could not be any longer distinguished, he traversed the mountains and
woods, continuing his journey all night to regain the Venetian frontiers. He
was frequently obliged to climb up into trees to avoid the fury of wild beasts,
but the weight of his chains generally brought him to the ground, and probably
nothing but the rattling of them preserved him from being devoured. At length
however he reached Morlachia in safety; his countrymen released him from his
chains, made great rejoicings upon the occasion, and composed songs in their
language to be sung in honor of their hero.

He told the emperor, that at this period of his life he had resolved to
support himself and family by the labor of his hands in a private retreat, and
not to commit any more depredations on the Turks; if he could have prevailed on
the Bashaw of Traunick to restore to him his wife and son; as for his daughter
she had been compelled to embrace the Mohammedan religion, and was well married
to a rich Turk, who said it was a pity such fine blood should be contaminated
by a Morlachian contract. But the Bashaw deaf to all his entreaties, and
enraged by disappointment, would not answer the letters he wrote him, in which
he ^emonstrated, that he had only followed the common law of nature in using
every stratagem to recover that first of blessings, liberty. Instead of
restoring his wife and son, he sent an embassy to the Margrave Contarini,
Governor General of Venetian Dalmatia, requiring him by the law of nations to
find him out, to seize him, and to send him to him. The Margrave who understood
politics better than the Bashaw, replied, that having once got him into their
hands, within their own dominions, they should have taken care to prevent his
escape; and that an attempt to make him compensate for their negligence was a
manifest affront: in short, he dismissed the envoys with contempt.

As for Socivizca, finding all his endeavors to recover his wife and son by
fair means were fruitless, he resolved to resume his former occupation and to
avenge himself on the Bashaw's subjects. For this purpose he put himself at the
head of twenty five select companions, all of them intrepid, and in the vigor
of youth: with this chosen band he took the road for Serraglio, the first
Turkish town beyond the Venetian frontiers; for he had the prudence not to
commit any act of violence within the jurisdiction of the Venetian state, that
he might not make that government responsible for his depredations.

In a few days he met with a Turkish caravan, consisting of one hundred horses
laden with merchandise, and escorted by seventy men. The Turks seeing him
accompanied by so strong a band, though they were so much superior, dreaded him
to such a degree, that they fled with the utmost precipitation, and only one
Jew merchant lost his life, in defense of his valuable effects. This audacious
robbery alarmed the whole Ottoman empire. Parties were sent out against him
from all quarters, he was sought for in the mountains and in the valleys, every
field and almost every bush was beat, as if they had been in chase of a wild
boar; but this was all mockery to disguise their cowardice, for while all these
parties were making such strict researches, he and his companions appeared at
noon day in their villages, and supplied themselves with provisions in the
markets of their towns. He generally lodged his booty at a convent of Caloyers,
an order of friars of the Greek church, who make a vow of rigid abstinence, but
whose religion does not prevent them from harboring the Aiduzee (highwaymen) of
the country, and sharing their plunder. The guardian of one of these convents
situated at Dragovich, seven miles beyond the springs of Cettina, was his
particular friend, and here he often retired, seperating himself from his
companions for many months, so that the Turks often thought he was dead; while
he was only waiting for an opportunity to fall upon them, and to exterminate as
many of their race as possible. At length, his robberies and massacres became
insupportable to the Ottomans, and occasioned great inconveniences to the
Venetian state; for they were the constant source of quarrels between the
inhabitants of the frontiers of the two powers, so that it became the interest
of the latter to seize him; therefore upon every new complaint of the Turks,
the government of Dalmatia increased the reward offered to take him, dead or
alive.

Socivizca was not insensible of the great danger he was in of being seized by
open force, or betrayed by some false friend for the sake of the price set on
his head, yet such is the force of habit, that nothing could deter him from
continuing his depredations on the Turks, In the course of the year 1760, a
certain Turk whose name was Acia Smaich, a very formidable man in the opinion
of his countrymen, and in his own ideas a great hero, boasted in all companies
that Socivizca durst not encounter him in single combat. It happened however
that this man and one of his brothers escorted, in company with eight others, a
rich caravan which passed through a village near Glamoz in the Ottoman
territories, where Socivizca and six of his comrades lay concealed waiting for
an opportunity to exerc^se their valor and to gain some considerable booty. By
their spies they easily got intelligence who was at the head of the escort, and
Socivizca who was not of a temper to put up with the insolence of Smaich, went
out to meet the caravan; and as soon as he approached it, publicly called upon
the Turk to defend himself. Smaich advancing, instantly fired from his carabine
at Socivizca, and aimed so well that the ball struck the upper part of his
forehead, fortunately for him he had turned his head, to see that the enemy did
not surround him while he was engaged with his adversary, and in this position,
the ball passed obliquely and only gave him a slight wound; but it rendered him
desperate, and with amazing rapidity he fired one ball which entered the barrel
of Smaich's carabine, and a second which shot him through the head, and killed him
on the spot. His companions instantly fled, but five of them were overtaken in
the pursuit and put to death by Socivizca's comrades.

After they had plundered the caravan and divided the spoils, they disguised
themselves and took different roads, the better to avoid the researches of the
Turks, who generally go in search of troops of robbers, and pay little or no
attention to single persons on the road. For some time after this event,
Socivizca lived so retired and quiet, that it was generally believed he was
dead; but when it was least expected, he suddenly appeared at the head of a
formidable banditti, consisting of twenty five stout young men, with whom he
marched to attack a very considerable caravan that was going from Ragusa into
Turkey with a prodigious quanti^y of visclini, a silver coin of base alloy,
worth about four pence of our money. At the first onset, they killed seventeen
of the Turks and took three prisoners; which so terrified the rest of the
guards, that they fled with the utmost precipitation and left him in quiet
possession of the treasure. Socivizca was no sooner arrived at a neighboring
wood, than he ordered two of his prisoners to be impaled alive, and assigned to
the third, the dreadful office of turning the stake which was passed through their
bodies before a slow fire; his companions advised him to put the third to
death, but instead of this when the two victims were half roasted, he ordered
their heads to be cut off, which he delivered to the surviving prisoner with
this commission: "Carry these to the Bashaw of Traunick, and tell him from me,
that if he does not release my wife and children without delay, I will serve
every Turk who falls into my hands in the same manner; and, that God only knows
what excessive pleasure it would give me to roast the Bashaw himself."

The melancholy ambassador no sooner arrived at Traunick and made known the
unhappy fate of his countrymen, than all the ^nhabitants vowed revenge, and
rivalled each other in their eagerness to arm and go in pursuit of Socivizca.
Several strong parties of foot and horse took different routes to traverse the
mountains, woods, and valleys in search of this desperate enemy. Upon this
occasion they were so exasperated, that they resolved to quit every other
employment, and to think of nothing else but the extirmination of Socivizca and
his band; and they were very near succeeding, for not expecting so much
celerity on the part of the Turks, they were surprised in a wood, and obliged
to maintain a flying skirmish, in which five of his comrades were wounded and
and one killed, whose brother cut off his head, that the Turks might not have
it to expose upon a gibbet: The Turks pursued them almost to Mitco^ick in the
Primorie, and in this place, belonging to the Venetians, they took refuge.
Escaped from this eminent danger, Socivizca once more separated himself from
his companions, and to avoid the consequences of such a general pursuit, he
retired for several months and concealed himself in the most dismal caverns in
the sides of mountains, or in woods that were seldom penetrated by any human
foot-step; here he endured hunger, fatigue, and all the horrors of solitude,
venturing forth but seldom for food, from the apprehension of being traced to
his retreats.

In the mean time the Bashaw of Traunick was recalled to Constantinople, to
answer to accusations of tyranny in his government, and a design to pillage the
province af Mostar: Socivizca had always foretold this event, and that whenever
it happened, the festivity and disorder which is occasioned by the arrival of a
new Bashaw, would afford a favorable opportunity for his wife and children to
escape. After a great many fruitless attempts to accomplish this grand point,
he fell upon a stratagem which succeeded. A comrade who had found him out, and
informed him of the revolution at Traunick, agreed to be dressed in the habit
of the Calac^e, persons who have an exclusive privilege from the Grand Signor
to sell silks and other merchandise, in the nature of traveling pedlars,
throughout all Turkey. Having collected four more of his troop, he sent this
man to Traunick, and with the others he arrived by another road within four
miles of that city, and there waited the issue of the enterprise. We know not
how it happened, but his four companions had one day left him alone, when three
of the Turkish cavalry accosted him, who strongly suspected he was an Aiduco,
but little imagined he was Socivizca. Finding no excuse to evade this, he
thought the only way of removing their suspicion was to offer to go with them
to the city of Prusack, which was at no great distance; many people in that
place knew him personally, and he would not have made this offer, if he had not
imagined that their doubts concerning him would have ceased, and that they
would have left him, for it was hardly possible to conceive that any notorious
robber would make such an offer.

Contrary to his expectations the Turks replied, Well then, we will, go with
you: accordingly they set out* when they arrived on the banks of a river, the
soldie^^ dismounted to water their horses, Socivizca drew hi^ sabre
unperceived, and in a moment severed the hea^ of one of them from his
shoulders, the second turning round-upon his companion's falling at his feet,
met with the same fate, and the third, like a poor bird, who sees the hawk
ready to pounce upon him, was struck motionles^* he had not the power to mount
his horse, or to attemp^ his escape on foot: this man he, took aside into a
wood, and after he had drawn from him all the information he could procure
concerning the number and disposition of the troops that were in search of him,
he sacrificed him also to the savage resentment he harbored against all the
Ottoman race. His four comrades found him employed in this dreadful manner, and
with them he returned to the village wh^^e he was to wait for his emissary to
Traunick. The pretended pedlar, went about that city ^ending his silks for some
days, till at last he met the wife of Socivizca, and imparted to her his secret
design. Overjoyed to find her husband was so near, she determined to join him
if possible, and she would have brought off her daughter, but she enjoyed so
much pleasure in the arms of her husband, that she would only consent to
facilitate the escape of her mother and brother. In the dusk of the evening
they followed the pedlar, as if they were bargaining for some of his goods, and
walking gently out of the gates, as if intending to return, they stole out
without notice, and got clear off. The joy of Socivizca at their meeting, could
only be restrained by the sense of their immediate danger, and therefore as
soon as the first embraces were over, he and his companions escorted his wife
and his son to Dracovick, the usual place of refuge for them, and he desired
the Cal^yer, his confidential friend to teach the boy to read and write.

When it was known in Traunick that the wife and son of Socivizca were not to
be found, after the strictest search, the inhabitants were in as much
consternation as if their city had been besieged: fear was on every
countenance, for the name of Socivizca was become so formidable to the Turks,
that instead of terrifying their children with the appearance of ghosts; they
had only to name Socivizca to make them shudder, and as the sum of all
punishment; not doubting that he himself had conducted this bold enterprise;
they entreated the new Bashaw to make the strongest remonstrances to the
governor of Dalmatia, declaring that they could not sleep in tranquillity,
unless his excellency would cause him to be seized and put to death. The
Turkish envoys positively maintained that he resided in Dalmatia, and the
Venetian governor as obstinately insisted that he durst not remain a single day
within any part of his juridiction, which was the fact, and therefore the
disputes about him occasioned jealousies between the two powers without
producing any effect.

About the latter end of the year 1764, Socivizca found himself deprived of
most of his comrades, some being carried off by the plague which raged with
great violence in the territory of Sign, and others, amongst whom were the most
desperate, being taken and executed for robberies in the Venetian dominions.
Thus circumstanced, he could not undertake any cosiderable enterprise, for
which reason he retired to the Austrian frontiers near the river Zermagna, and
his name was not heard of again for some years, insomuch that the Turks had
entirely forgot him, imagining he was either dead, or had taken refuge in some
very remote part of the world. However, he was not quite idle all this time,
for under the name and disguise of a chief of another banditti who died, he
assisted in some attacks on small caravans, and collected a little booty, just
sufficient for the support of his own family. But in the year 1769, he appeared
publicly again; having picked up eight associates of determined valor, they
attacked and pillaged larger caravans with success, and once more spread an
alarm throughout the Turkish territories. Innumerable and almost incredible
stories are related of his intrepidity and dexterity about this time, in his
encounters with large bodies of the Turkish horse sent out to scower the
country in search of him. At one time, perceiving a party of twenty five,
approaching, he ordered his comrades to conceal themselves behind some trees,
and to place their caps in such a manner in others near, that they should
appear to be upon the heads of men; by this stratagem he doubled the number of
his little corpse, and confounded the enemy, for having fired at the caps which
all fell down, and yet still receiving a warm discharge of shot from another
quarter, they thought there was some magic in it, and were struck with such a
panic that they fled with the utmost precipitation. Another party consisting of
forty, coming upon him by surprise in a wood near the banks of a river, his
companions had just time to escape by flight, and while the Turks were pointing
their musquetry at them, he darted into the river and lay concealed under the
water, in the hollow of a bank. The astonished Turks thought it impossible he
could escape them, and at last fatigued with fruitless search, they gave him to
the devil with whom they were certain he was in league, otherwise he could not
have rendered himself almost instantaneously invisible.

At length he began to grow tired of the wretched kind of life he led, and
resolved to employ the money he had saved in purchasing ^ome little post for
the remainder of his days; but his design was frustrated by a cruel misfortune.
The Caloyer, his confessor, with whom he had deposited five hundred sequins and
some valuable jewels, the principal fruit of his robberies, ran away with them
and was never heard of more; and to complete his misery, while he was gone as
far as the Danube in pursuit of him on false intelligence, one of his cousins
from Imoschi came to pay him a visit, and availing himself of his absence,
stripped the house of his clothes and linen. These events happened in the
beginning of the year 1775, and the bitter complaints he made of the perfidy of
these two thieves, showed that he was abandoning himself to despair, when by
one of those unaccountable vicissitudes for which the lives of some men are
remarkable, chance brought the present emperor of Germany to the village where
he resided; it lay in the route of his memorable travels under* the title of
Count Falkerstein; and the fame, such as it was, of this bold man having
reached Vienna many years before, his majesty sent for him, that he might be
entertained with his adventures from his own mouth. The emperor perceived that
the man was born with tallents for military enterprises, and the command of
armies; that in all probability if he had been civilized by education he would
have made a great figure in the world; and after a strict scrutiny, finding
that he had limited his assassinations and robberies to the Turks alone, from
whom he had experienced every injury almost from his birth, he generously
provided him a secure protection from the fury of his enemies, and comfortable
subsistence for life, by appointing him to be Arambassa, or chief of a company
of Pandours. Hi^ residence is at the borough of Grazact in Austria, about forty
miles from K^in. He is now in the sixty-third year of his age, and has all the
appearance of living to a great age. He is of the middle stature, long visaged,
with a lively blue eyes, but his countenance is fierce, and his demeanor
savage.

THE REFINED LOVERS. A SPANISH TALE.
WHEN a lady happens to feel tender prepossessions, in favor of a man very much
inferior to her in point of rank and fortune, she may be allowed to make the
first overtures to him, especially if she had reason to believe, from his
behavior, that he feels prepossessions of the same kind with her own, and that
he is only prevented by a delicate consciousness of his inferiority, from
making an avowal of his passion for her. In this situation, however, tho
appearances may be very promising, a woman cannot be sure of disinterestedness
on the side of him who has made an impression on her heart; she cannot be
certain that his affection is pure and unmixed with any mercenary
considerations, without making some trial of it; without bringing it to the
test. An artful woman is not, in general, an amiable character; but, in these
supposed circumstances, no woman can be fairly blamed for the exertion of her
address.

Olivetta, a rich heiress in one of the most fertile parts of Spain, lived upon
the lands she inherited in a style which at once proved the grandeur of her
sentiments, and the delicacy of her taste; the strength of her understanding,
and the goodness of her heart. In the various arrangements of her household,
she discovered a considerable deal of judgment, happily steering between the
two extremes of parsimony and extravagance: and, while she exhibited a splendid
appearance to the world, had not recourse to any domestic meannesses for the
support of it. Her liberality was extensive; but it was ever under the guidance
of discretion: the objects of her beneficence were numerous; but they were
objects deserving of her compassion, before they tasted of her generosity.

It may be easily imagined that such a woman, unmarried, had a train of
admirers. Olivetta's admirers were innumerable, and many of them were in a
situation to justify their pretentions to an alliance with her; but, as she had
discernment enough to see that the majority of them only wanted to increase
their consequence by the addition of her fortune, she very prudently declined
coming to any serious conversation with them.

Among those who wished to be united to Olivetta, there was one, however, whom
she particularly distinguished from the rest, and whom she felt emotions, of
which she had not, before he came in her way, been sensible. With nothing to
recommend himself to her first notice but an agreeable person, and a genteel
deportment, he drew her attention: by his modest and respectful behavior
afterward he became of so much importance in her eyes, that she could not help
secretly wishing he was in a situation to throw himself into the line of her
opulent lovers; a line which he avoided with a decency which heightened the
favorable opinion she had entertained of him.

Julio, the timid, silent, sincere lover of Olivetta, was by birth a gentleman,
but the sport of fortune. His parents, having met with a series of bitter
disappointments sunk at last under the oppressive load of them, and left him to
struggle with an income just sufficient for a decent subsistence: an income by
no means equal to what he had reason to expect in his early days, to the
education which his father bestowed upon him when he was in a flourishing
state, and had no presentiment of the change he was destined to feel in his
circumstances. With that income, however, he made himself, by dint of economy,
fit to mix with the best company. His figure, his conversation, and his
manners, were extremely engaging, and he was as much praised as pitied by all
who new him. Every body said, that he deserved to be placed in a very different
sphere, but nobody offered to promote his advancement to it. A man cramped in
his affairs by the mere caprice of fortune, without having done any thing to
merit his adversity, may derive some pleasure, indeed, from the good wishes of
his friends; but if those who declare themselves to be his friends are not
active in his service, if they take no steps to remove the distress^^ which
excite their compassion, he is under very slight obligations to them. Julio
could not but be pained by the inactivity of his friends, yet he was cheerful;
and moved in his small circle uncomplaining, unrepining with a dignity which
threw a luster upon his character, and shamed many illustrious personages who
looked down upon him with the cold eye of commiseration.

This was the man whom Olivetta beheld in the most favorable light, and whom
she thought worthy of that affluence which she herself enjoyed. At first she
viewed him with a kind of reverence, so much was she struck with the
philosophic part of his character: Veneration was soon followed by esteem, and
esteem in a short time ripened into love. Such was the succession of feelings
in Olivetta's bosom, and the last gave no small disturbance to her gentle
breast. Many were the tender lines which she remembered from the soft pages of
the most elegant Spanish poets, lines of which she had not till then felt the
full -- the more than poetic force. She blushed whenever she thought of her
loving a man in a station so much beneath her. Not because she deemed Julio
undeserving of her sincerest affection, but because she clearly perceived that
he would not venture to offer himself to her for a husband, and that she could
not of course hope to be united to him in the manner she wished, without
deviating from the decorum which she could not bring herself to violate.

While she was sitting one day in this painful, perplexing situation, in a
pensive attitude, over one of her favorite poets, a young lady, for whom she
had a great regard, who lived with her as a companion, endeavored to divert her
melancholy, by some sprightly reflections on the havoc made between the two
sexes by the belle passion: but poor Olivetta was too much under the influence
of that passion to be amused with her companion's vivacity. She only, sighing,
replied, that those were, in her opinion, the unhappiest of human beings, who
were denied the satisfaction of a marriage agreeable to their inclinations.

^Francisca, who knew as well what passed in Olivetta's heart at that moment as
she did herself, told her, that, "if she was in her place, she would marry the
man she liked, however inferior he might be to her, if he was not unworthy of
her, if she could be assured of his loving her, without any lucrative views in
return."

"Would you have me condescend to make the first advances to a man?"

"The first advances from a woman to a man, replied Francisca, are not, I
confess, in general, to be defended; but, circumstanced as you are, a few
female delicacies may, I think, be dispensed with. You love Julio -- nay, you
need not be ashamed of loving him -- I am sure he is necessary to your
happiness. He is very much your inferior, I grant, with respect to rank and
fortune, but he is a gentleman by birth and education, and intrinsically
superior to all his richer competitors. From the modesty of his behavior, in
consequence, no doubt, of his elevated sentiments, I will presume to say, that
he will never speak first upon the subject."

"Then I am doomed to be miserable," exclaimed Olivetta, hastily interrupting
her, rising, and walking across her chamber inexpressibly agitated.

"Perhaps not, answered Francisca, your amiable lover, through his extreme
diffidence, a diffidence which enhances his merit, prevents him from disclosing
the sensations which wound his peace on your account, may be drawn into the
very declaration you wish to extract from him, I do not pretend to put myself
upon a footing with you in any shape; yet I fancy, I can point out a way to
you, by which you may arrive at the summit of your desires, without being
reduced to any indelicate measures."

Olivetta, after having listened very attentively to her concluding words,
earnestly entreated her to proceed with the greatest freedom and unreservedness.

Francisca obeyed, proceeded, and gave Olivetta so much pleasure by her
communications, that she resolved to avail herself of her advise without delay.

While Olivetta and Francisca were engaged in this manner, Julio, unable to
remain in a place where he was perpetually beholding the woman whom he loved to
distraction, but with whom he dared not to expect an alliance, determined to
remove himself to a distant part of the country, and endeavor, by absence, to
cure the wounds which love had inflicted on his heart. It was not, however,
till after the severest conflict which he had ever endured, that he resolved to
take a step so little likely to produce the intended effect.

When he had packed up the few movables in his possession, he repaired to
Olivetta's magnificent mansion, in order to pay his grateful acknowledgements
for all the civilities he had received from her, and to bid his eyes "take
their last farewell."

The reception which he met with from the "goddess of his idolatay," would have
probably encouraged any other man to tell his "fond tale;" but he, from the
extreme refinement of his ideas, was silent upon the subject in which he was
most interested, and only announced his departure, after having poured out his
most grateful effusions. During the delivery of those effusions, O^vetta's
cheeks were alternately pale and red, and the concluding words affected her in
such a manner, that she was almost on the point of fainting away. Recovering
herself, however, in a few moments, she took a diamond ring, of considerable
value, from her finger, and presented it to him, with the following speech.

"Having longer entertained a high opinion of your merit, sir, I have long
wished to reward it; and if I should happily have it in my power to be of
service to you, I shall certainly prove myself your friend. In the mean time, I
beg you to accept this trifle (presenting the ring to him) as a small token of
my regard; and let me be acquainted with your route, if you are absolutely
determined to leave this place, that I may know whither to dispatch a
messenger, should I hear of any thing to your advantage."

If Julio had observed Olivetta's looks, while she delivered the above speech,
with the penetrating eyes of a truly touched inamorato, he would have derived
the highest satisfaction from them, as they forcibly assured him, as forcible
as a thousand words could have done* that she earnestly wished to reward him
personally for the merit which had won her heart, and that she wished, with the
utmost impatience, for his making the first overtures, to save her from the
indelicacy of having recourse to a still plainer mode of utterance for the
consumation of her desires: her chaste desires: for she loved Julio with an
affection of the purest kind; loved him more for his internal worth than for
his external accomplishments.

Julio, overwhelmed at once with gratitude, love, and delicacy, was unable to
return an answer to the most friendly expressions with which the brilliant
donation was accompanied.

It is an old saying, and a pretty true one, that a man sincerely in love is
very apt to look like a fool in the presence of his mistress. It is not quite
clear that Julio's appearance would have been silly before a woman to whom he
might have had, as he thought, pretentions, without being guilty of
impertinence or presumption; but Olivetta's superiority operated upon him in
such a manner, that all the encouragement she gave him to disclose his tender
sensations, was insuffificient to remove the obstructions which delicacy threw
in his way. After much hesitation, and many strong marks of irresolution in his
whole behavior, he murmured out something very grateful, but very aukwardly
pronounced, and retired.

It is not easy to describe what Olivetta suffered, when her timid lover had
taken his leave. Ordering her attendant to withdraw, she thus unbosomed herself
to her faithful companion,

"The behavior of this amiable man, my dear Francisca, is not to be endured. I
have gone as far as I can with propriety, to make him see that his addresses to
me would be favorably received; but to no purpose. You are continually assuring
me, that he loves me as much as I love him. Would he not then, encouraged as he
has been, make a declaration? Besides, how can you reconcile his intended
departure from this place for ever -- these were his words, Francisca, with the
violence of his attachment to me?"

"The violence of his attachment, replied Francisca smiling, is the cause of
his departure. If he was quite indifferent about you, he would not, I imagine,
have thought of it. His diffidence, his delicacy -- call it what you will,
prevents him from revealing the secret he longs to discover, (you cannot
yourself long more to have the disclosure of it;) -- and he is therefore
resolved to fly from a spot which is become so distressing to him."

"You are right, I believe, my dear; but what can I do? how can I act? I cannot
say directly to him, "I love!" and he will not, you perceive, give me a decent
opportunity to tell him so."

"You are two of the most refined lovers in Spain; but, were I in your
situation, I would --

Here Francisca was interrupted by the arrival of a letter to Olivetta, who,
upon breaking it open and seeing the name of Julio at the bottom of the page,
read it with her spirits more fluttered than she had before ever felt them.

"The unfortunate Julio, unable to express his grattitude in the terms he
wished, when he received the generous Olivetta's valuable present accompanied
with assurances of a very flattering kind, cannot help embracing this
opportunity, before his departure, to inform her, that her noble behavior has
strengthened his resolution never to return. The recollection of her promised
friendship will afford him, wherever he goes, as much consolation as he can
possibly enjoy, while he feels himself in a situation which forbids him to
expect an alliance with the only woman in the world whom he can ever love. From
the presence of her, he flies into a voluntary exile, because he cannot bear
the sight of that beauty for which he ardently long^, but dares not hope to
call his own. May she never endure the pangs of love, sharpened by despair."

The perusal of this letter occasioned a variety of mixed emotions in the
fluttered bosom of Olivetta, but the pleasing ones were predominant. Supposing
that she might now venture to reward the merit which had long engrossed her
attention, she dispatched a note to her despairing l^ver, sufficiently
animating, she imagined, not only to make him give up all thoughts of
banishment, but to bring him in haste to her presence.

Having sent it away by a trusty and active messenger, she waited for his
coming back with a restlessness much more easily to be conceived than
communicated.

The messenger, hearing that Julio had set out from his appartment some hours
before his arrival, made all the enquiries in his power concerning the road he
had taken; but, not being able to gain the least intelligence about it,
returned with his dispatches.

Olivetta, on the return of her domestic, was inexpressibly disappointed,
discontented, and distressed; and while she regretted the loss of the only man
who had kindled the flame of love, in her breast, reproached herself severely
for that refinement which, by driving him into exile, had deprived her of the
exquisite pleasure she had promised herself from the contents of her answer to
his desponding epistle.

Day succeeded day, week followed week, moons performed their revolutions, and
no Julio appeared. At last, her pain on his account increasing, and her
patience being quite exhausted, Olivetta, dead to all enjoyments of the world,
resolved to seclude herself from it; to spend the remainder of her melancholy
days in a convent. Having made over the greatest part of her fortune to
Francisca, she proceeded to carry her monasti^ designs into execution.

When she arrived within sight of her retreat, the very man for whose sake she
was going to bury herself alive, Julio, surprised her with his appearance. The
moment he saw her, he advanced with an uncommon agility toward her; perceiving
on a nearer approach, that she looked like the picture of death, he started,
and could hardly believe his eyes.

Olivetta, while her lover was advancing to her, had fainted away in the arms
of her attendants. As soon as she recovered, he inquired with the greatest
anxiety into the cause of the melancholy alteration in her looks. On her
acquainting him with her sufferings on his account, and with her conventual
intentions, in consequence of them, he rapturously told her that it was in his
power, by the decease of an opulent relation, to reinstate her in her former
style of life; and that, if she would consent to share his unexpected
acquisition with him, he should deem himself the happiest being in the universe.

Olivetta was charmed with a behavior which left her no room to question the
sincerity of her Julio's attachment to her; but threw out a few difficulties,
origina^ing from a new species of delicacy. These difficulties were, however,
soon surmounted, and the union of their hearts was cemented by the union of
their hands.

STORY OF ARISTOCLEA FROM PLUTARCH.
ARISTOCLEA, the daughter of Theophanes was celebrated all over Greece for her
virtues, her beauty, and her accomplishments. Merit, so conspicuous as hers,
could not but attract the regard of the Grecian youth, ever susceptible of the
finest emotions of love. Among the rest of her admirers, Strato and
Callisthenes were so happy as to obtain peculiar marks of distinction.

Strato had all the recommendations which wealth and power can bestow, and to
do him justi^e, was not entirely destitute of personal merit. The only
objection, which could with the appearance of reason be made to him, was, that
he was considerably advanced beyond that period which is called the flower of
youth; an objection which commonly has great weight in a female heart.

Callisthenes yielded to Strato in fortune, interest, and family: but his
person was more engaging, his manners more polite, and his acquirements more
agreeable. There was a peculiar modesty in his address, which probably might be
increased by a consciousness of the smallness of his fortune: but this
circumstance tended to promote his interest; for however it depressed his
spirit, it taught him that submissive softness, which makes him appear amiable
in the eyes of Aristoclea.

Strato, it must be confessed, was the more ardent lover, and his passion had
been enflamed by an accidental sight of his fair charmer while she was bathing,
one summer morning, in a little rivulet that glided through her father's garden.

Callisthenes, perhaps in reality, felt as strong a passion as his rival, yet
was he less assiduous in his addresses, from despair of succeeding against a
competitor so much his superior in rank and fortune.

Theophanes, the father of Aristoclea, was much embarrassed by the
importunities of the two lovers, but would gladly have given his consent to him
whose possessions were the largest, had he not been cautious of interfering in
the choice of his daughter. After many delays, it was at last agreed, on all
sides, to refer the affair to a neighbor of great wisdom and experience, by
whose decision it was resolved to abide.

In the mean time, Strato was informed by a confident of Aristoclea, whom he
had bribed with liberal presents, that he possessed the first place in the
affections of his mistress. Animated with this intelligence, he determined to
break off the agreement of referring the affair to a stranger, and to leave it
to be decided by the most proper judge, Aristoclea herself. Callisthenes
readily acceded to the proposal, from a conviction, that if he stood any
chance; it could be only from the decision of the fair object of his love. The
father, who had previously been assured by Strato, that his daughter had shown
him a preference, entered without hesitation into the agreement, and appointed
an early day for the final determination.

During this uneasy interval, various were the emotions of the two lovers.
Strato already anticipated his happiness, and wantoned in imagination on all
the charms of his mistress. Callisthenes, on the contrary felt all the pain and
anguish of suspended hope.

At length, the important hour arrived. Strato approached to hear his doom with
a smile of confidence; Callisthenes in all the dejection of despair. How
suddenly were their several emotions exchanged, when the lovely fair one
declared in favor of the desponding Callisthenes! Strato, however, after many
efforts, got the better of his amazement and chagrin, assumed an air of
cheerfulness, and besought the happy pair to grant him one request, which was
to permit him to be present at the nuptial ceremony. A request so reasonable,
none could deny; and amidst the congratulations of the whole company, the next
day was fixed for completing the union.

The next day arrived, and the lovely pair appeared adorned with all the charms
of beauty, and the smiles of innocence and joy* S^rato seemed not the least
happy on the occasion: but the scene was soon changed to melancholy and
despair. On a sudden, at a signal given by Strato, a company of armed men
rushed from an ambuscade, and seized the unhappy Callisthenes. Strato
endeavored to run away with the lovely maid, but while she was struggling in
his arms, she fainted away, and, in the violence of her agitation* fell
lifeless to the ground. Callisthenes was never heard of more, and Strato
concluded the catastrophe by plunging a dagger into his own breast, and falling
on the body of the unfortunate Aristoclea.

OMAR, OR THE FOLLY OF ENVY. AN EASTERN TALE.
AS Omar of Basra was one day wandering along the streets of Bagdat, musing on
the varieties of merchandise which the shops offered to his view, and observing
the different occupations which busied the multitudes on every side, he was
awakened from the tranquillity of meditation, by a crowd that obstructed the
passage. He raised his eyes and saw the chief Vizier, who had returned from the
Divan, and was entering his palace.

Omar mingled with the attendants, and being supposed to have some petition for
the Vizier, was permitted to enter. He surveyed the spaciousness of the
apartments, admired the walls hung with golden tapestry, and the floors covered
with silken carpets, and despised the simple neatness of his own little
habitation. Surely, said he to himself, this palace is the seat of happiness,
where pleasure succeeds to pleasure, and discontent and sorrow can have no
admission. Whatever nature has provided for the delight of sense, is here
spread forth to be enjoyed. What can mortal wish or imagine which the master of
this palace has not obtained? The dishes of luxury cover his table, the voice
of harmony lulls him in his bowers; he breathes the fragrance of the groves of
Java, and sleeps upon the downs of the cygnets of the Gange^. He speaks and his
mandate is obeyed; he wishes, and his wish is gratified; all whom he sees obey
him, and all whom he hears flatter him.

How different, Omar, is thy condition, who art doomed to the perpetual
torments of unsatisfied desire, and who has no amusement in thy power that can
withold thee from thy own conviction. They tell thee that thou art wise, but
what does wisdom avail with poverty? None will flatter the poor, and the wise
have very little power of flattering themselves. That man, is surely the most
wretched of the sons of wretchedness, who lives with his own faults and follies
always before him, and who has none to reconcile him to himself by praise and
veneration. I have long sought content, and have not found it; I will from this
moment endeavor to be rich.

Full of his new resolution, he shuts himself in his chamber for six months, to
deliberate how he should grow rich; he sometimes proposes to offer himself as a
counselor to one of the kings of India, and sometimes resolves to dig for
diamonds in the mines of Colconda. One day, after some hours passed in violent
fluctuation of opinion, sleep insensibly seized him in his chair. He dreamed
that he was ranging a desert country in search of some one that might teach him
to grow rich; and as he stood on the top of a hill shaded with cypres^* in
doubt whither to direct his steps, his father appeared on a sudden, standing
before him; Omar, said the old man, I know thy perplexity, listen to thy
father. Cast thine eyes on the opposite mountain, Omar looked, and saw a
torrent tumbling down the rocks, roaring with the noise of thunder, and
scattering its foam on the impending woods. Now, said his father, look upon the
valley that lies between the hills. Omar looked, and espied a little well out
of which issued a small rivulet. Tell me now, said his father, do thou wish
for sudden affluence, that may pour upon thee like the mountain torrent, or for
a slow and gradual increase, resembling the rill gliding from the well? Let me
be quickly rich, said Omar, let the golden s^ream be quick and violent. Look
round thee, said his father; once again Omar looked, and saw the channnel of
the torrent dry and dusty. But, following the rivulet from the well, he traced
it to a wide lake, which the supply, slow and constant, kept always full. He
waked, and determined to grow rich by silent profits and persevering industry.

Having sold his patrimony, he engaged in merchandise, and in twenty years
purchased lands on which he raised a house, equal in sumptuousness to that of
the Visier's, to which he invited all the ministers of pleasure, expecting to
enjoy all the felicity he had imagined riches able to afford. Leisure soon made
him weary of himself, and he longed to be persuaded that he was great and
happy. He was courteous and liberal, he gave all that approached him hopes of
pleasing him, and all who should please him hopes of being rewarded. Every act
of praise was tried, and every source of adulatory fiction was exhausted. Omar
heard his flatteries without delight, because he found himself unable to
believe them. His own heart told him his frailties. His own understanding
reproached him with his faults. How long, said he, with a deep sigh, have I
been laboring in vain to amass wealth, which at last is useless, let no man
hereafter wish to be rich, who is already too wise to be flattered.

EDWIN AND ADELA. A TRAGIC STORY.
ADELA was the only daughter of a powerful baron of Aquitaine. Her father
sprung from an illustrious family, and added to hereditary honors, the glory of
heroic achievements. In his youth, he accompanied the flower of the European
chivalry, who fought under the banner of Godfrey, and recovered the holy
sepulcher from the hands of the infidel. He returned to his country, crowned
with victory, and fair renown; and inherited the rich domains of his ancestors.
Adela was in the prime of beauty, and possessed a susceptible heart. In her air
and aspect, dignity was mingled with sweetness: for in the disposition of her
mind, conscious elevation of sentiment was softened by amiable and mild
affections.

Edwin, a gallant youth, animated with the generous love of arms, smit with the
renown of Albert's prowess, and ambitious of profiting by the narrative of his
exploits, repaired with other warriors to his hospitable castle. His eye; keen
and piercing, indicated a fiery, vigorous, and active spirit. His form was well
fitted to kindle desire in the bosom of tender maids: and the heart of Adela
was not insensible to his merit. Their passion was mutual. He gazed on her
unaffected charms with astonishment; for, till then, he had never felt the
tender anxiety, the restless longing and languishment of love. Ambition had
been the governing passion of his soul: but the fierceness of ambition now
yielded to a softer, tho no less ardent desire. He no longer discoursed in keen
rapture of marshalled hosts, of listed fields, and feats of venturous men; but
languished on the ineffable attractions of a roseate complexion, and tender
melting eye. The vehement impatience of the warrior was lost in the complacency
and pensiven^ss of the lover.

Albert, perceiving this change in his deportment, demanded the cause, Edwin
replied in candid and respectful guise; he told him, without reserve, of the
impression made on his soul by the peerless beauty of Adela; and, with the
temerity of youthful passion, besought him to ratify his sincere attachment by
wedlock. "And who art thou, said the haughty baron, who pretendest to the love
of Adela? What feats of heroic prowess have thou achieved? Or is thy ancestry
distinguished among the chieftains of the south? Thy shield is inscribed with
no valorous atchievment: no^ are thy deeds, nor the deeds of thy fathers,
rehearsed by recording minstrels. Gain thee a name in arms, and then aspire to
the envied alliance of the House of Albert" These words, like an arrow,
penetrated the heart of Edwin. Love and ambition, hitherto at variance, were
now united, they concurred in the same pursuit, and their vehemence was
irresistible. Accordingly the youthful warrior prepared for his departure, and
took tender farewell of Adela. "Farewell, she replied (the tears gushing from
her radiant eyes) heaven knows, no gallant youth but thee ever shared my
affections. May the holy angels, who regard true and virtuous love with esteem,
grant thee protection! speedy be thy return! and O! remember me. Gay and
courtly dames, skilled in seducement and cunning device, may strive to allure
thee; but their love will not equal mine." They plighted vows of mutual (...),
and exchanged tokens of unshaken attachment* (...) Edwin, clad in complete
armor, a gay undaunted warrior, mounted a steed proudly caparisoned, and bent
(...) course to the plains of Catalonia, where the Saracen waded in the blood
of Spain.

Soon after his departure, Edgar, a proud and wealthy chieftain, with a
numerous retinue of knights and retainers, came to the castle of Albert. He was
received with pomp and hospitable welcome. He cast amorous glances on the
reserved, unrivaled charms of Adela. He prefered his courtship with studied
smiles, and speeches devised with cunning. She heard him at first with
indifference; he persisted, and she requited him with contempt. He then
addressed his suit to the baron: he boasted of the high renown of his
ancestors, and the wide extent of his domain; he expatiated on the number of
his vassals; and insisted, in magnificent terms, on the mutual honor and
security that would accrue from so seemly an alliance. Albert listened to him
with partial and pleased attention; he repented of the hopes he had encouraged
in the soul of Edwin; and endeavored to persuade his daughter to forget her
attachment to that valiant youth. In vain the astonished Adela lamented, wept,
entreated; in vain she threw herself at her father's feet, and tore her
dishev^lled tresses, and in anguish smote her breast. Her opposition, instead
of mitigating his rigor, irritated his resentment, and confirmed him in his
ungenerous purpose. He mingled menaces and unkindly reproach with his
persuasions: "By the holy rod, said he, with a fastidious and wrathful aspect,
the honor of my house shall not be stained by the pretensions of a low born
boy. Degenerated as thou art, the meanness of thy sentiments shall not fully
the splendour of thine ancestry, nor load my respectful age with dishonor.
Receive the addresses of Edgar with suitable regard, and the deference due to
my commands. Mean time preparations shall be made for the bridal solemnity in a
manner becoming the dignity of this alliance."

Adela, after remonstrating in vain against the severity of his commands,
entreated, with an humble and dejected air, that the marriage ceremony might be
delayed. "Can Edgar, said she, prize the cold and eonstrained embraces of a
heart that throbs for another? Will the sighing and anguish of a broken spirit
accord with the fond caresses of a bridegroom? To Edwin my faith was plighted,
and on him my imagination has dwelt. Give me time, therefore, to divert the
current of an affection too violent to be suddenly opposed; to discourage the
reveries of fancy, animated by a legal and habituated passion; and to reconcile
myself to the addresses of Edgar." As her reasoning was plausible, the nuptial
solemnity was deferred. But, as soon as she had retired from her father's
presence, she summoned a page in whom she confided, and spoke to him in the
following manner: "Prepare thee for a long journey: saddle the sl^etest of my
father's steeds, and during the obscurity of the night depart. Hie thee to the
b^nks of the Ebro; find Edwin; tell him of the perils that beset me; tell him
that a wealthy and powerful rival, with costly parade, and glittering show of
blazonry, has imposed on my father, and insinuated himself into his esteem."
The menial bowed with humble obeisance, and, with professions of diligence and
fidelity, departed.

Mean time Edgar pressed his suit with courteous phrase and dalliance. Daily
tournaments were exhibited at the castle of Albert. The knights and barons of
the neighboring domains attended: but Edgar surpassed them in the splendour of
his armor, and the pomp of his retinue. The hall resounded with revelry and
rejoicing; and minstrels, clad in gaudy apparel, celebrated the praises of
warlike chiefs, or s^ng the power and the pleasures of love. Adela arrayed her
countenance with smiles and courtesy; but her bosom was distracted with
anguish. "O when, she cried, shall I be delivered from the importunity of a
detested suitor, and the bondage of feigned complacency? When will Edwin
return, adorned with conquest, and confident with success? His merit shall
shine unrivaled; and Edgar shall be covered with shame." At length the page
returned; and, repairing to the apartment of his mournful mistress, "Now heaven
forbid, said he, most gracious lady, that the tidings I bring should injure thy
tender frame more than thou art able to endure. May the saints and minist^ring
angels ^^hold thee!" -- "Has he perished? cried Adela, with a look of terror
and amazement, in what bloody field has he fallen? Where li^^ the lifeless
body? What barbarous adversary has mangled and insulted his graceful form?"
"He has not perished replied the attendant. But, O gentle lady! foul arts have
been practiced; shameful perfidy has been committed. Edwin lives, but not for
thee; he has given his hand to another!" "Peace! peace! interrupted Adela,
with a faultering utterance and looks of astonishment mixed with anger,
restrain thy blasphemous speech, nor with base calumny asperse the fame of a
true and gallant warrior." "When, answered the menial, have I been guilty of
deceit or infidelity toward my gentle mistress? full sore it grieveth me to be
the messenger of evil tidings." "Rehearse them unreservedly, cried Adela, with
a tone of anxious impatience."

"I pursued my journey, said he, many days, without any adventure, till I came
within sight of a stately castle. It stood on a brow of a woody hill; was
garnished with towers and battlements; and commanded a wide prospect of
cultivated fields and forests. As I advanced mine ear was suddenly surprised
with the din of hounds and horns, mingled with the cries of the huntsmen. I
soon descried a gallant show of knights and gorgeous dames, mounted on
milk-white cou^^ers, and pursuing the rapid deer. When the chase was ended,
they stopped by the side of a crystal brook; and a comely youth, arrayed in
shining apparel, lighting from his foamy st^^d, with courtly obeisance
presented the prey to a fair smiling lady. I mingled in their company, and in
the lineaments of the courteous youth recognized the inconstant Edwin. O gentle
lady, may Heaven so help me in my utmost need, as I now speak the words of
truth; and may the saints and holy angels so succor thee as thy mishap
requires! The faithless youth has committed treason against thy love; seduced
by the blandishment of an artful dame, he has become forgetful of thy peerless
beauty."

The heart of Adela throbbed with anguish during the recital. "Valorous, heroic
warrior! she exclaimed, are these thy deeds of hardy prowess, to betray the
innocent credulity of an easy maid? Stain to manhood, and the honored
profession of arms, be henceforth banished from my remembrance?"

Edgar now advanced his suit with redoubled ardor. Albert, unable to brook any
longer delay insisted on having the bridal ceremony solemnized; and Adela,
incited by secret pride and resentment, submitted to the will of her father.
The report of this noble alliance was published through the land; and the kindred
of Albert and Edgar, with the neighboring barons, were assembled to grace the
solemnity. Already were the parties betrothed; the holy benediction was already
pronounced; and forever was Adela to be the wedded spous^ of Edgar. Now, with
pompous show and attendance, the banquet was served up to dames and knights,
the flower of courtesy and valor. The castle resounded with minstrelsy, and the
dance; when a stranger, in the simple garb of a pilgrim, entered the hall. He
cast his eyes around on the goodly company, and with an ai^ of sanctity and
respect, implored a blessing on their fellowship. He was received with
hospitable welcome, and the reverence due to his holy semblance. He spoke in
meek and modest guise; his eyes were often fixed on Adela; they were sometimes
dimmed with a glistening tear; and ever and anon his bosom heaved with
involuntary sighs. He took the harp of a minstrel; he touched the strings with
masterly cunning and accompanied the notes with a melodious voice. Tuneful, but
melancholy was the strain: for he sung the sorrows of those that are forsaken;
the anguish of a desponding spirit; and the wounds inflicted on a faithful
heart, by inconstancy and proud disdain. He desisted, with marks of grief and
inward contention. "Holy pilgrim, said Albert, the sense of calamnity devours
thy spirit. Inform us of thy mishap, that, if possible, we may administer
comfort. Nor think it incompatable with bridal festivity, to indulge
compassion, and as^^age the torment of heart felt care."

"I am the son of a freeman, replied the stranger; and tho my birth was not
enobled by splendid titles, nor my ancestry distinguished by the parade of
blazonry, my bosom burned with the love of arms, and my heart was upright. In
an unlucky hour I became enamored of a gentle dame, the only daughter of a
noble baron. My sincere, tho presumptuous suit, seemed not displeasing to that
peerless beauty; and with the rash, intemperate boldness of a lover, I asked
her in marriage of her s^^e. Go, said he, gain thee a name in arms, and then
aspire to the envied alliance of my house. I departed, not without a tender
interchange of vows and tokens of affection with the beloved idol of my heart.
I hastened to the plains of Catalonia, where the Saracen was waging fierce
battles against the banner of the holy cross. I proffered my service to the
chief of the Christians; and that my sword was not idle, and that I was not,
backward in the strife of arms, my honorable wounds can testify. Neither were
my services, nor my thirst after martial fame unrewarded. Fair recompenses have
I received, and the sun of glory has gilded the obscurity of my birth.
Rejoicing in my success, I hastened my return. But what power of utterance can
express the agony of my soul, when I learned that the faithless and inconstant
fair had yielded to the vows of another? I who was so true and loyal to my love
and plighted truth, to be so soon forgotten, so soon forsaken!"

"Enough, enough, cried Adela, O ill requited lover! pierce not my soul with
deeper wounds. O Edwin! Edwin! never was I inconstant. Bear witness, ye holy
angels! but traitorous guile has been practiced: thy integrity has been
impeached, and my vexed heart betrayed into error."

The eyes of all were now turned on the stranger: he threw off his disguise,
and, instead of a pilgrim's staff, he grasped a keen and trenchant weapon.
Resentment glowed in his cheeks, and flashed from his fiery eyes. "And who,
said he, has impeached mine integrity? Stand forth, thou proud, but dastard
baron, whose glossing tales have betrayed the unwary heart of a maiden: it is
Edwin demands reparation." Conscious fear was manifest in the disordered
features, the pale cheek, and disconcerted air of Edgar. He nevertheless
accepted the challenge: and the warriors, arraying themselves in complete
armor, descended into the court of the castle. In the first onset, the well
tempered steel of Edwin cleft the crested helm of his adversary; he threw him
to the ground, and disarmed him. "Confess thy guilt, said the conqueror, and by
what infamous arts thou have accomplished the design." -- By gifts and
glittering gold he replied, I corrupted the page of Adela, who with
counterfeited semblance of fidelity and regret, accused thee of inconstancy,
and imposed falsehood on the ear of his mistress. I embraced the season of her
excited resentment, and forwarded my suit with success. She is mine by the
indissoluble ties of wedlock: and know, proud boy that, if thy hands be stained
with my blood, it is the blood of Adela's husband; and if she receives thee to
her bosom, she receives the slayer of her spouse."

Edwin started with apparent horror. He paused; but recollecting himself,
"arise he cried, and by another trial, prove thyself worthy of that envied
title." So saying, he raised him from the ground, and both warriors addressed
themselves a second time to the fight. Edgar, burning with exasperated rancor,
aimed his spear at his rival's breast. Edwin neither averted nor avoided the
deadly blow. The keen weapon cleft his breast, and was tinged in the purple
springs of his heart. He fell to the ground. "Farewell, he cried, Adela! lady
peerless! and dearly beloved. I have proved myself worthy of thy esteem: I die
a sacrifice to thy repose. With my hands red with thy husband's blood, could I
ever aspire to thy love? Could I survive and behold thee wedded bride of
another?" He heaved a sigh, and died. "Inhuman deed! cried Adela, tearing her
lovely tresses, and beating her snow white breast: she ran, she threw herself
on the lifeless body. O stay! she exclaimed, O leave me not in my woe! Return,
fleeting spirit! reanimate these pallid features. He heeds me not. -- I heard a
voice! a dreary voice! it was Edwin! he summons me away! -- I come! I come! Let
the nuptial bed be prepared! The clay cold bed?" -- So saying, she clasped the
corpse, and expired.

Instantly the page, who had been corrupted by Edger, seizing a daggar, rushed
behind that teacherous baron, and pierced him to the heart. "Perish! he cried,
author of my ruin, and of the ruin of the House of Albert." He grew immediately
frantic: he ran forth furious and screaming: the memory of his crimes pursued
him, and his reason was never restored.

The obsequies of the deceased were celebrated with due solemnity: holy
requiems; and pious priests preferred orisons for their eternal repose. Albert,
unable to sustain the weight of his misfortune, forsook the habitation of his
ancestors; and exposing his old age to the fatigues of a pilgrimage, he sought
the holy land, and there passed the remnant of his days in a monastry.

MIRZIM AND SELIMA. A TURKISH TALE.
IN one of those incursions formerly made by the Tartars on the Russian
monarchy, Osman, who at that time headed a party, had the good fortune to
preserve a beautiful gi^l, about seven years old, from falling a sacrifice to
the relentless sword; and conceiving great expectations form her surprising
charms, carried her into Tartary, and educated her with all those
accomplishments necessary to render her a fit present for the Sultan. The
perfections of her mind and person being improved to his wish, she was no
sooner arrived at a proper age, than he set out with her toward
Constantinople. In their journey meeting with a company of Polanders, he was in
great danger of losing his prize, and the innocence of the beautiful Selima had
certainly been the prey of the savage hand, had not Mirzim, a great favorite of
the Sultan, happened to come that way with a numerous retinue, and put the
ravishers to flight.

The deliverer and the delivered were in the same instant inspired with a
mutual passion for each other; but Mirzim, understanding Osman's design, made
no public show of his affection; and Selima as carefully concealed her^s. To
retard, however, as long as possible being carried to Constantinople, she
pretended sickness, and was every day visited by her lover disguised as a
physician; and this frequent intercourse making them perfectly acquainted with
each other's merit, established a tenderness, which ended not but with their
lives.

Thus they continued giving and receiving all the marks that virtue would
permit of the fondest and most disinterested passion, till Mirzim received a
mandate from the Sultan, creating him Grand Visir, and at the same time
commanding him to go at the head of a powerful army to the relief of Buda, then
besieged by the Emperor of Germany. The cruel separation must be now endured,
not all his love could render Mirzim neglectful of the duty be owed to his
imperial master, his country, and his honor; and Selima had too true sense of
the latter to delay his hastening where glory called. He took his leave, and
she was now obliged to acknowledge herself recovered, lest a real physician
should discover she had but counterfeited indisposition. Osman prosecuted his
journey, and in a short time reached Constantinople; where, he agreed with the
K^ster Aga of the Sirago and the charming maid was to be delivered to him, in
order to be presented to the sultan at a sit opportunity. The dry appointed
being arrived, she could no longer restrain the struggling emotions of her
soul, she kneels, she weeps: she entreats Osman to change his resolution, and
at last reveals the secret of her love for Mirzim; but all is now too late, the
compact is made and she must by force submit.

Mirzim returned from his expedition the same day* but in a condition far
different from what he had hoped at his embarking in it: he had flattered
himself with being able to do things which might enable him to beg the charming
Selima of the Sultan as a reward of his services; but instead of laurels, he
was covered with confusion; all his designs had proved unsuccessful; Buda was
taken before his face, and he was obliged to acertificate from the subaltern
officers to clear his conduct to the Sultan. If any shadow of comfort appeared
to him, it was in the friendship of the Kisler Aga, who promised him to conceal
the beauty of Selima as much as possible from the Sultan's knowledge; but tho
this eunuch kept his word inviolably a new and undreamed of misfortune befell
their loves. Zara, a creature of Prince Mustapha, the brother of the Sultan, no
sooner beheld this lovely maid, than she began to cast about in her mind how to
procure her for him, and soon after introduced him to her apartment: he was
immediately e^amored of her beauty, but her behavior gave him equal despair.
Mirzim being informed of this visit, and the effects of it, writes a letter to
a friend complaining of the severity of his face in raising him a new rival.
The Kisler Aga had the charge of delivering it but being called away on some
important business, entrusts it to a slave, who gives it into Zara's hand, she
communicates it to Prince Mustapha, who, ignorant of the character, and no name
being subscribed, is fired with extreme impatience to discover this happy
favorite. At this instant Achmet and Ibrahim, two discontented courtiers, enter
his apartment; to them he relates the story of his love and jealousy, and is by
them informed, the letter which gave him so much pain, was the Visir's hand;
and they take this opportunity of persuading him to appear at the head of a
party already formed for dethroning the Sultan; this they assure him is the
only means by which he can attain the enjoyment of his mistress, or the
destruction of his rival.

How great soever the weight of these reasons were to him as a lover, those of
nature and of duty had not less efficacy; he could not presently be brought to
take up arms against his sovreign and brother, nor yet could he think of seeing
his adored Selima torn from him; he therefore desires time for consideration
and in this tempest of his soul, the Kisler Aga having found the miscarriage of
the letter, and judging into whose hands it was fallen, makes him an offer of
his service, and so artfully gains the belief and confidence of this
unsuspecting prince, that he prevails with him to give him the letter on
pretense of confronting Mirzim, and obliging him by menaces to desist.

In the mean time Achmet and Ibrahim, having perceived that the only way to
bring Mustapha into their plot, is the immediate danger of losing Selima,
secretly inform the Sultan how beautiful a creature is in the Kisler Aga's
possession; on which the impatient monarch commands she shall be brought
instantly to his presence* as soon as she appeared, her charms had their
ordinary effect, the Sultan's heart yielded to a passion not inferior to that
she had inspired in his brother or the Visir; and finding her wit and virtue as
matchless as her person, he resolves to make her Empress, and defer the
gratification of his love till the celebration of those rites, which should
yield her to him without a blush.

All the scruples which had hitherto subdued the dictates of ambition in
Mustapha, were now silenced by the calls of a more powerful passion: he enters
into the measures Achmet and Ibrahim had proposed, and perceives they had
already carried things to such a height, that there wanted little more than his
consent to pluck his brother from the throne; the Visir's well known loyalty
was the only impediment he had to struggle with; it was therefore necessary to
begin with his destruction, and chance soon furnished means.

That despairing lover had prevailed with the Kisler Aga to admit him in a
disguise to take a last farewell of his dear Selima, and the contrivance by
which he was to be introduced being overheard by Achmet, he that moment
dispatches Ibrahim to the Sultan to acquaint him with it; who going in person
to the apartment of Selima finds Mirzim with her. All denials of their mutual
passion would be now in vain; they boldly own it, and the Visir is ordered to
immediate death. Mirzim in the confusion of this dreadful incident drops a
paper, which the Sultan t^kes up and reads. This was the letter wrote by him,
that Zara had intercepted, and which the Kisler recovered from the hands of
Mustapha; but the ^ame of that prince not being mentioned in it, the Sultan is
distracted to know who is that rival, or whose love and visits the Visir has
complained of; both are obstinate in concealing him, and Mirzim is ordered to
be put on the rack till he confesse^ it.

While the Sultan is thus employed, the Divan and army have declared for
Mustapha; but that prince being informed of the Visir's generosity in choosing
rat^er to endure the rack than betray him, tho his rival, sends his commands
for his preservation.

The Sultan hearing what was done against him, goes at the head of his
janissaries, to oppose his brother, but they revolting, at the sight of
Mustapha, he was compelled to yield to his destiny, and pass the remainder of
his life divested of all power. Achmet having entered into this conspiracy in
hopes of gaining the Grand Visir's place, finding that Ibrahim had obtained it
of the new Sultan, provokes him to sight, and both these villain^ fall by each
other's hands.

Mustapha, now supreme, thinks of nothing but sharing the Imperial dignity with
Selima; but that faithful maid assuring him, that she had long since made a vow
to Mirzim, her unshaken fidelity, and the consideration how much he was
indebted to so generous a rival, determined him after a long and severe
struggle with himself to crown the happiness of so deserving a pair; and to
restore Mirzim to the dignity of Grand Visir.

THE WEASLES AND THE FERRETS. AN OCCASIONAL FABLE.
IN ancient days, before man extended his dominion over the extremest limits of
the earth, there was an island in the Northern Seas, inhabited only by the
different species of the quadruped kingdom; who, for a time, having no general
ruler or master, lived in perfect case and happiness. Tranquil states, however,
never are of long duration; the want of one general lord made them soon begin
to lord it ever one another, and the Ferrets, a knavish and cunning, as well as
extremely ambitious, tho weak people, look it into their heads to establish an
universal monarchy, of which their king should always be at head.

Slavery is a contagious evil; the king of the Ferrets had found means to make
himself an absolute and despotic tyrant over them, and the subjects seemed
intent on nothing so much as reducing the whole island, which was to them a
world, into the same abject state with themselves. Their tyran^ had taught them
to think his grandeur their greatest glory. This seemed a very absurd doctrine
in the first age, when it was advanced; but as all opinions mellow by use, and
the most ungrateful things become familiar by habit, the favorite opinion of
the court had been handed down from father to son, till in a few reigns it
became as absurd to dispute, as it had at first been to believe it. In this
state were things in our island, when the king of the Ferrets, summoning his
people about him, addressed them in these words: You see, my subjects, we live
among a great number of different states, each of which has its peculiar king,
but there is yet no monarch of the whole. Is it not your interest and glory,
that I should become that king, and you the subjects of that monarch, who will
then be master of the world. If this appears plain to you, the means are easy;
force can command the weaker. The stronger must be attacked by treachery, and
the most powerful and obstinate of all will be overcome with gold. Be you
unanimous, I will make you great* Before this is suspected abroad, let all our
schemes be settled; let some Ferrets of distinguished address and abilities
immediately depart for the courts of the several nations; of these, let some be
supported in figure and equipage, to converse with the great in public, and
others enter as menial servants, to pry into their secrets at home; let these
all foment whatever broils or intestine divisions they find, for they who
quarrel with one another half conquer themselves, and save an enemy the
greatest part of his expense and trouble; let those who reside at the Weasel
court be rich, to bribe at all things; and those at the Polecats be cunning, to
swear or forswear all things; these last, we may use as friends a while, and,
when by their means we have conquered the rest, they fall of course, and thus
in a few years the world is ours. But in the whole attempt be this the great
lesson, the greater the supplies the sooner the great work is finished;
therefore, come every Ferret into the field of battle, and send in every penny
you are possessed of to the public use. The more soldiers appear, the fewer
perish, because none dare resist them; thus the exposing your lives shall be
the means of you^ safety; the mean while, you will want no riches, while in the
field, and all you send in shall be restored you ten fold, out of the spoils of
your enemies, the conquered provinces. Thus, continued the monarch, I have
reasoned with you like friends; now, as your king, you know my will, and I
command you all to execute it.

As the fire eyed tyrant ended his speech, he stalked away in a majestic
manner, attended by his courtiers: great murmurs were raised among the people;
many scrupled to give in their money, more to expose their lives, and some to
murder innocent people, who had done them no injury, only at his command; but
they had made a tyrant, and they found they must obey him. The Ferrets of
broken fortunes entered readily to mend them, and those in better
circumstances, because they could not help it* however, all entered. The whole
country inhabited by these animals was stripped of its inhabitants, and the
tyrant saw himself at the head of a very numerous and powerful army. With his
bribes and emissaries at the stronger courts, and this army at his heels, he
marched against the weaker provinces; he flattered himself every thing was in
his power, all business, but that of conquest was neglected, and all thoughts
but that of victory at once deserted the souls of prince and people. The
inhabitants of this island were all of the smaller kind of animals, so that
they had no destroyers of their own kind to fear; the lion, the leopard, and
the wolf were not known there: only a creature of another kind swept them off
with a very fatal havoc; this was a monstrous serpent known among them by a
name which in their language signified death. He was cunning enough to way lay
them in a thousand different manners, and their only defense against him was by
means of water, for he hated swimming, so that, while he was kept off from them
by trenches filled with water, he only now and then came over and snapped them
up one by one, as his natural hunger required; but, if this defense was away at
any time, he devoured them by millions. Every province therefore allotted a
great number of its inhabitants to work high up in the country, at the sources
of rivers and brooks, to turn their currents in, and give annually a fresh
supply of this their liquid wall; this was a necessary service, and on the
labor of these the lives of all depended. The Ferret king however, inflamed
with the lust of universal tyranny, spared not even his subjects, who were thus
employed, but commanded all into his army; in vain was it represented to him,
that, when the first or second year was out, he would have no water, and that
by that time his neighbors would be all too much his enemies to supply him; he
arrogantly answered fear not that, they shall by that time be all my slaves and
then we cannot want what they are possessed of.

Full of this tyrannic spirit, he now considered where first to bend his
murdering course. The kingdom of the Mice, whose provinces lay very distant
from his, but who had some possessions in his neighborhood, was at that time
governed by a female sovereign, who had suffered many indignities and injuries
from her neighbors, and the state was in a very declining condition: to be weak
was provocation enough to our tyranni^ sovereign of the Ferrets; he immediately
attacked these her distant possessions, and, at the same time detached large
bodies of forces toward two or three other of his weak neighbors. His army was
too numerous to be resisted in the field, and his gold too heavy not to weigh
down all arguments in the cabinet; in short, he was conquering some provinces
and buying others, while the adjoining kingdoms, yet unhurt, saw wi^^ despair
his destructive views, but no way to stop his progress.

One of the neighbor kingdoms was that of the Weasels; these were a race of
animals happy in a robust habit of body; and penetrating turn of mind, and
formed at once for the field and council. The great were bred up in all the
pomp of knowledge, the lower class in honest industry; and all the generous
principles of courage nursed by freedom. This happy nation had a king like the
rest, but that king was bound to rule them justly, and acted only according to
laws themselves had made; so that they had all the benefits of a regal
government without the oppression, and their sovereign all the joys of power
without its crimes. Great souls are formed by generous examples, and every king
of this community had all the virtues of the subject, while every subject had
all the honor of a king. The Weasels, alarmed at the progress of the Ferrets
arts and arms, addressed their king, who rejoiced to be reminded of his duty to
the world by his subjects; and answered their remonstrance in the following
words:

"My faithful people, we are a nation born to the inheritance of virtuous
liberty, and as we know the worth of that invaluable blessing, it is our duty
not only to preserve it for ever among ourselves, but to propogate it as far as
the world's utmost limits among other nations. Ours is a land of freedom, and
him, whom his own wishes arm not in such a cause, we know no power to force;
let him enjoy his infamy, and we our honor. The designs of our ambitious
neighbor yet* affect not us, but we live not solely for ourselves: the generous
virtue of the free soul knows the whole world for its home, and every creature
for its brother. Let us with this view arm to check the devastations of his
forces; and, could we be too cold to stir in such ^ cause, even our own
interest will engage us to the war, since what he now bestows on others will
hereafter be our own fate; he aims at universal power, and has entered into an
union with our sworn enemies, the Polecats, hoping by their means to conquer
us; and lastly, to subject themselves. These are his views, and it is both our
duty and our interest to disappoint them. To this purpose let us march an army
against him in the field, but let us not, like him, depopulate our kingdom to
do it: no let us leave enough here to manage the great business of the floods
against our general destroyer, that those who remain at home may be secured
from perishing; but, as our numbers thus may be too small, let us by solomn
embassy invite our neighbor powers to join with us, and, in the place of these
we leave at home, hire with our money strangers from provinces too much
peopled; who may thence be spared, and do their country as much service by
their absence as ours do by their residing in it." The whole nation of the
Weasels applauded to the clouds, the wisdom of their sovereign; and an army was
soon formed on this pla^. These met the great power of the Ferret tyrant, while
others were engaged in different places with his parties. He stirred up private
dissentions where he could not come or send his troops in person; and even
stripped his best friends of all their possessions, under the specious pretense
of keeping them for them, and preserving them from falling into the hands of
his, and, as he chose to express it, their enemies. Thus the whole island,
before so peaceable and happy, was by the ambitious views of one prince turned
into a scene of blood and murder.

Battles were fought with various success in different places, but the
resistless numbers of the main body of the Ferret army made it every where too
successful, and victories and conquered provinces crowned all its attempts. The
island was alarmed with the impending danger, when the illconstructed fabric
began to sink by its own weight. The armies of the Weasels and their friends
though they could not prevent, had greatly stopped the rapid progress of the
Ferrets, and as these could be supported without injuring their country, being
raised on judicous plans, so the Ferret army, gathered in haste, and managed
without true prudence, now found itself perishing with its country, and soon
fell into despair amidst its glorious conquests.

The supplies of water failed, the trenches became dry, and the grand
destroyer, the Serpent, marched in horrid pomp with all his retinue over them,
and thousands fell before him every day. The tyrant now beheld his army
perishing, before his work was yet half done: he knew there was no way to save
them, but by the relief and assistance of those he was now at war with, and he
therefore humbly sued for peace.

The Weasels, who had armed only for the sake of peace, which they wished to
give to the whole earth, readily consented, and to encourage the new humbled
tyrant to better behavior for the future, gave it on easy terms. His subtle
heart, however, was not to be won by good; he had a deeply destructive plan
contrived, while all was open and free on the Weasels side. Both agreed to send
off their armies to different quarters, and, as soon as articles of peace were
agreed on, the generous Weasels stopped the rage of death among their late
enemies, by throwing water from their own rivers into their trenches. The
Serpent was now driven off again, and no hostilities were thought of against
the Ferrets, when a thousand scenes of rapine and murder were at once let
loose upon the Weasels, by the perfidious enemy; when this was complained of,
the double dealing tyrant delared his subjects had not done this, but that it
was the Polecat nation who had been guilty of it, and with whom the Weasels had
no dispute.

The Weasel monarch received the lying answer as he ought; Ask your perfidious
king, said he, to the ambassador, whether he thinks Weasels have not eyes to
distinguish black from white, and tell him withal, his actions and those of his
subjects stink to the whole world, though their carcases do not; and they shall
be revenged. Let him beware: he has begun his treachery too early, and will
find by the event, that the stings of his perfidy will return with tenfold
violence on the head of him who is guilty of it. He dismissed him with these
words, when an old and sage Weasel, well known to his country by his services,
arose and addressed his sovreign in these words:

"What I have to offer seems but the tenor, of your majesty's own thoughts;
let us now punish this breaker of treaties as we ought; he soon must bend to us
again, and let us then make him feel the weight of his last crime. The supply
we have given him to preserve him and his people from the common death, that
else must have devoured them by this time, was but small in comparison of the
occasion, and will be soon exhausted; though we sent, him rivers of water, the
earth by its trenches, long parched with drought, will suck it all up in a few
days; he then must apply and sue to us again: but, O my sovereign! let me
entreat that he may then sue in vain; let him feel the sharpness of the
Serpent's sting some days, and let us then impose new conditions of the peace
on him, and make him agree to such as will disable him from disturbing the
world again."

This just advice was followed; a few years brought the haughty victor again to
be a supplicant; death raged among his subjects with an uncontrolled sway, and
swept them daily in such numbers from his side, that he was forced to yield to
such conditions as made the whole island afterward happy for many ages.

STORY OF FLORIMORE AND LEONTINE.
FRIENDSHIP has often been the theme of the poet and the pros^ist. -- The
beauties and adadvantages concomitant on a cultivation of this sacred
principle, between kindred souls, have been displayed in productions, replete
with the brightest effusions of human genius. But so unstable, and momentary
are the bonds which connect minds apparrently in unison, that many, very many,
join with the poet; who says,

"And what is friendship but a name?
A charm that lulls to sleep;
A shade that follows wealth or fame,
But leaves the wretch to w^ep."
There are, however, (though rare) instances which confirm the existence of a
principle so dear to the feeling heart. Instances, in which the mind (truly
great) has triumphed over the pitiful prejudicies of what is called the
fashionable world, and rose superior to the censures and sarcasms of those, who
vainly and arrogantly style themselves, " the better sort." An example of this
kind it pourtrayed in the following fact.

Florimore and Leontine were the only sons of two gentlemen, whose estates were
contiguous, and who resided in a town situate in the western part of
Massachusetts. In the innocent amusement of childhood, they were constant
partners; through the playful scenes of youth, they walked hand in hand. They
were instructed by the same preceptor; tasted the sweets of science from the
same cup, and the same college witnessed the progressive improvement of two
minds, which bid fair, in their expansion, to enlighten and bless society.

Having completed their collegiate education, they retired to spend a few
months in their native town, and to enjoy the company of those whose paternal
fondness had enabled them to tread the paths of knowledge with honor; and whose
attention to the improvement of their understandings, in the days of youth, had
assisted them to gain the applause of the learned world.

The time at length arrives when they must part. -- It was the wish of
Florimore's father that he should devote his talents to the ministry of the
gospel of peace -- with that wish the willing son coincided. -- Leontine's
disposition led him to the study of physic. -- They part, in pursuit of their
different callings. -- No vows were necessary to cement and perpetuate the
friendship -- an intimacy for years had formed an union, which nothing but
death could dissolve.

Florimore, had completed his studies, and was inducted into the pastoral
office, to take charge of a flock, who delighted in his ministry, and who were
enraptured with the propriety and amiableness of his conduct in the private
walks of life -- indeed, his heart was the receptacle of every finer feeling;
the sigh of sympathy ever escaped him, at the tale of another's woe, and the
tear of pity streamed from his eye, at the sight of human misery. But the sigh
of sympathy, and the tear of pity, were not the only consolations which
Florimore afforded to the sons and daughters of distress. His hospitable board
bid welcome to the hungry and the thirsty, and his wardrobe often furnished a
cloak for the naked, shivering mendicant.

About this time Leontine was ushered into the notice of the world, as a
Physician. He was soon celebrated for an uncommon share of skill in his
profession, and for his attention and humamity to his patients. His practice
became extensive, and his prospects were flourishing. Though the love of wealth
is predominant in most minds, Leontine ever made it subservient to the calls of
humanity. His attention and skill were employed equally with those who moved in
the obscure, humble paths of life, and those whose opulence enable them to
revel in every luxury the world afforded.

At the close of three years attention to the duties of his calling, Florimore,
was seized with a disorder, which his physicians apprehended would prove
mortal. Leontine flew, on the wings of friendship, to the assistance of the
beloved of his soul. His skilful aid, and the smiles of an overruling
Providence, soon dispelled that anxiety, under which his parish and friends
labored, lest a blossom so useful should be nipt in its opening. But though the
respectable Clergyman got the better of his disorder, it left him in a very
weak and debilitated state; and it was the decided opinion of the faculty, that
he must bid adieu to the walks of a clerical life. This intelligence impressed
the minds of the people of his charge, with the deepest sorrow; -- nor was
Florimore unaffected on the occasion, though he was sensible of the necessity
of a compliance with the opinion of his physicians. He, however, collected
sufficient strength and fortitude, once more to ascend the sacred desk, and
take an affectionate farewell of his beloved flock. Tears often choked the
passage of his words; while melancholy, and heartfelt grief were depicted in
the countenance of his audience. After this, he quitted the place of his late
residence, and the prayers and blessings of hundreds followed him to the
mansion of his affectionate parent.

A short time previous to this event, his father, from ^he natural goodness and
disposition of his heart, had become bound, to a large amount, in order to save
a distant relation from the walls of a prison. (But, oh! ^ngratitude, thou
worst of fiends, how shall I relate ^he tale of thy baseness.) This relation,
in contempt of ^he most solemn obligations, hardened against the operation of
every principle of honor and generosity, ^ecamped, and left his too credulous
benefactors to the mercy of an unfeeling creditor, who sternly demanded of
Florimore's father the payment of every farthing. To satisfy the demand the
whole property of the unfortunate gentleman was sold at public auction, nor did
even the venerable mansion or household furniture remain the property of its
former owner. -- This event made so deep an impression upon the aged
gentleman's mind, that it brought on a disease, which soon closed his eyes upon
all temporary objects; and he was entombed beside the remains of a once fond
partner, who had not lived to behold this melancholy reverse of fortune.

For soms time Florimore remained inconsolable -- nor could every assistance
which the genuine friendship of Leontine bestowed, dispel the gloom from his
mind, or revive his depressed spirits. At length, however, calm reflection
resumed her place in his soul; and a disposition to submit with resignation to
the divine will, triumphed in his mind. " The Lord has given (said he) the
Lord has taken away; and blessed be his name."

At the pressing solicitations of his friend, Florimore repaired to the
hospitable dome of Leontine; and every hour which could be spared from the
calls of his profession, Leontine devoted to solace the cares, and sweeten the
hours of him whom his soul loved.

Florimore's state of mind, and his bodily infirmities, prevented him from
taking a part in the active pursuits of life -- and his friend had assured him
that no other separation than that which dissolves all human ties, should ever
take place between them. -- In this situation, one of the most important
objects of Florimore was the cultivation of the infant mind of the young son of
Leontine. And "well were all his cares repaid," by the progress which his pupil
made in knowledge and information.

Those who, from their wealth and rank in life, move in what is termed a more
exalted sphere, are often necessitated to associate, in some degree, with that
class who have nothing but wealth to recommend them. It was Leontine's
misfortune to be thus situated. At an entertainment given to the neighboring
gentlemen, Vespers made one of the company. He abounded in wealth but was an
entire stranger to every finer feeling of the soul. The tale of distress made
little or no impression upon his mind; and the poor, tho encircled with merit
and virtue, be ever treated with rudeness and disdain. His rough and uncouth
manners led him to express his contempt of humble worth on all occasions. -- He
was no stranger to Florimore's situation and circumstances; and notwithstanding
his presence, took occasion to fling out the most bitter reflections and
pointed sarcasms, upon dependent objects. -- Leontine perceiving the drift of
his observations, and was sensible to whom they pointed. His noble soul took
fire at the affront, and he openly accused Vespers not only of ill manners, but
brutality. His resentment led him further; he bid him depart from his presence,
nor ever darken again his doors with an object, that could beast of nothing but
an human form; the world, continued he, can furnish me if I want, with hundreds
like yourself; but the world cannot give me another Florimore.

Leontine and Florimore passed many years in the mutual enjoyment of the
sublimest friendship -- The seeds of Florimore's disorder at length made their
second appearance, and the power of medicine was ineffectual to preserve a life
so precious. He yielded up his breath to him who gave it -- and left the best
of friends to deplore an irreparable loss -- When Leontine's grief had in some
measure abated, he erected a monument over the remains of his friend, upon
which he inscribed the following short epitaph.

Of nobler worth, the dear remains
Beneath this polished marble lies;
The soul immortal bliss obtains;
By angels welcomed to the skies.
JUSTICE AND GENEROSITY. OR, THE REMARKABLE HISTORY OF SIR WILBRAHAM WENTWORTH.
THERE is a particular injustice amongst mankind which, tho glaring, has
hitherto been unnoticed, and which so far from being censured is never thought
culpable in the practices -- this injustice is the custom which people have of
possessing property without scruple, which their ancestors have acquired by
dishonesty; a man will readily acknowledge that his father's wealth resulted
from the oppression of the unfortunate, but he will not refund a single
shilling to the lawful owners when it descends into his own hands; -- on the
contrary, tho he is convinced it is in equity the actual right of another, he
thinks he may retain it without the least shadow of reproach, and the world is
so extremely polite that while it perhaps excerates the memory of the first
spoilor, it compliments the latter with the reputation of unquestionable
probity -- to elucidate this position clearly, and to let my readers see in
what manner people should act, when they are made the heirs of ill gotten
fortunes shall be the business of the following little narative.

Sir John Wentworth was a younger brother of a family, who by the death of an
uncle in Oxfordshire became possessed of a title, but of nothing else; the
baronet, whom he succeeded in honor, had it in his power to bequeath every foot
of his estate, as he thought proper, and as he never entertained any cordial
affection for Sir John, he left it to a more distant relation. This was rather
an unfortunate circumstance for Sir John, whose finances were not in a very
flourishing situation -- however as his person was handsome, his address
elegant, and his education finished, he did not quite despair of obtaining a
fortune somewhat suitable to his rank -- nor was our baronet's expectations
altogether without reason -- to the qualities we have already described Sir
John, added a deep dissimulation, and a fascinating plausibility -- he knew
mankind well, and was inclined upon every occasion to profit by the weakness or
generosity of his acquaintance, nor was an opportunity long wanting to gratify
his avarice -- a young widow who had been left in the possession of a large
estate by the last will of a doting husband, saw Sir John by accident at Bath,
liked, and married him; as love is seldom accompanied by prudence, she would by
no means lock up her fortune from the man she had honored with her person. --
It is true she had a daughter by her former husband but what of that? She was
in love with her present, -- and we generally believe those people are really
worthy of our regard, whom we eagerly wish to deserve it: -- Besides this, Miss
Milmour her daughter had ten thousand pounds settled on her by her father's
will, which Lady Wentworth thought a very handsome provision; and it was so in
reality, if her mother had not been her guardian, and this guardian's fate
entirely at the disposal of Sir John. It is unnecessary to dwell minutely upon
particulars; -- our baronet had married totally from interestive motives, and
as we have already observed, he was not the most conscientious of mankind, --
he was not therefore united two years to his lady till he got possession of
Miss Milmour's fortune, and in less than two years after, both the mother and
the daughter were negligently loft at a miserable old ^eat above two hundred
miles from the capital, where Lady Wentworth after undergoing every species of
mortification, and knowing that the man whom she loved to distraction publicly
cohabited with another woman, died of a broken heart; leaving Miss Milmour
wholly dependent on the generosity of a wretch whom she herself had found so
utterly divested not only of sentiment, but shame, and not only of gratitude
but of honesty.

Miss Milmour's relations in this exigence took the young lady home, and having
in vain applied to Sir John for her fortune, endeavored to recover it by law;
but unhappily justice is not always successful; the glorious uncertainty of the
courts fatigued them for many years, and in the end totally deceived their
expectations. This greatly cooled the affections of the young lady's friends,
whose regard had for some time been gradually declining, from the unpromising
appearance of affairs, and she was at last induced from motives of prudence as
well as tenderness, to throw herself into the arms of a worthy young fellow who
had a company in a marching regiment, and to whom she was rendered additionally
dear, by the melancholy turn in her circumstances.

All this time it must be confessed the world made very free with Sir John
Wentworth's character; they exclaimed at his inhumanity in the very moment they
acknowledged his politeness, and tho the law had pronounced in his favor, the
decision by no means removed the reflections which were eternally thrown upon
his character. -- But though his name was frequently mentioned with abhorrence,
his company was never avoided; and those who acknowledged the cruelty of his
disposition, were the first to give him invitations, and though they could say
nothing in favor of his principles, they were always ready to declare that he
was infinitely agreeable: Death, however, did not treat him so politely as the
world did; it took him away in the midst of all his ill-gotten wealth, without
a moment of previous intimation, and an apoplexy snatched away at a splendid
assembly as great a wretch as ever was a disgrace to humanity. --

Sir John was succeeded by a son, who tho untainted with his crimes was not
what a good man should reverence as an amiable character. He knew his father
had robbed, (for justice authorizes no elegant pallia^i^n of terms) the poor
Miss Milmour, now Mrs. Ormsby of her whole fortune, and was sensible, that this
very Mrs. Ormsby with her husband and an infant daughter, were laboring under
the greatest distresses; yet so far was he from restoring what she had been
plundered of, that he thought it extremely generous to send them an occasional
five guineas for temporary relief. -- Nay, the world thought it extremely
generous also, and Sir Charles was every where mentioned in consequence of this
conduct as a man of the greatest benevolence. -- His son Wilbraham however, the
hero of this little story, had scarcely reached his twelfth year when he felt
much compassion for Mrs. Ormsby; he would teaze his papa to send the unhappy
family something, frequently added his pocket money to the present, but
unknown, when he knew the servant was sent to their house. -- Yet
notwithstanding this solicitude in their favor, he had never seen them; -- his
only spring of action was the natural rectitude of his heart, and he would
often wish Sir Charles would place them in some comfortable independency. -- As
he grew older, he felt more strongly for them, and secretly blushed at the
cruelty of his grandfather; -- But his studies, and the tour of Europe, in some
measures diverted his attention from their necessities; and as his allowance
from rather a severe and parsimonious father was pitifully slender he could
only secretly grieve at the lamentable state of their circumstances. --

Besides this, a circumstance happened while he was in Italy, which principally
engrossed his heart. -- In Sienna he had the misfortune of wounding a gentleman
dangerously who grossly insulted him, and thought it necessary to fly to a
neighboring state as fast as possible, and to avoid the resentment of the
gentleman's numerous relatians who loudly threatened to revenge their friend,
he changed his name, and lived for some time very privately. -- Notwithstanding
this cautiousness of conduct, an English family, then resident at the place of
his retreat, quickly discovered that they had a countryman in town, and gave
him an invitation so good naturedly importunate, that he embraced it with a
double degree of satisfaction, because it rendered his safety more secure, and
furnished him with an opportunity of spending many an hour very agreeably,
which at this time hung uncommonly heavy upon his hands. --

The good natured family which took so kind a notice of Mr. Har^ington, for
that was the name assumed by Mr. Wentworth, was Colonel Mortimer's. -- It
consisted of the colonel, his lady, Miss Mortimer their daughter and Miss
Dashwood a distant relation -- the colonel and his lady were people of the
first breeding, and if any thing could equal the politeness of their behavior,
it was the benevolence of their hearts -- Miss Mortimer, tho the apparent
heiress of a large fortune, and extremely amiable in her person, was affable
and condescending -- she did not imagine that opulence gave her any claim to
extraordinary respect, nor did she believe that a fine face could furnish her
with a just title to be arrogant -- on the contrary, she considered sweetness
of temper to be one of the most essential ingredients in the composition of the
female character, and strove rather to merit the good opinion of her friends,
than to obtain their admiration -- the charms of her person however, and the
gentleness of her manner^ were not the only accomplishments which distinguished
her; she had a fine understanding admirably cultivated, and was mistress of a
sprightliness so captivating that, to make use of a strong metaphor, she
pleased her acquaintance up to an actual pain of vivacity.

Mr. Harrington found great entertainment in the company of this amiable young
lady, but the just sensibility which he felt for her merit could by no means
render him unmindful to the attractions of Miss D^shwood. This young lady was
no less formed for general esteem than her beautiful relation, and yet she was
distinguished by very different accomplishments.

Miss Mortimer, for instance, was the very soul of cheerfulness, whereas a
continual air of dejection sat on the features of Miss Dashwood -- the first
loved company and conversation, the latter was remarkably silent and fond of
retirement -- Miss Dashwood however, was no way surpassed either in depth of
sense, or dignity of sentiment by Miss Mortimer -- and if her fair cousin's
vivacity rendered her universally beloved, she possessed a voice which, to
borrow an expression from Milton,

-- "Could take prisoner
The tranc'd soul, and lap it in Elysium."
Upon the whole, if there was a sweetness in Miss Mortimer's face, that excited
love, there was a majesty in Miss Dashwood that commanded respect; and, if the
endless good humor of the one gave every body pleasure, there was a softness
in the melancholy all of the other which filled the whole soul with a
tenderness unutterable -- Not to trespass on the reader's patience, Mr.
Harrington considered Miss Mortimer with esteem -- Miss Dashwood he beheld with
reverence -- his different sensations for each increased with his acquaintance,
and while the first imperceptibly engaged his friendship, the latter as
imperceptibly took possession of his heart -- Mr. Harrington was himself
naturally grave, and he found a congenial something in Miss Dashwood which
riveted his inclination; desirous therefore of rendering himself agreeable to a
lady on whom his felicity immediately depended, he doubled his assiduities to
please her, and did not despair of obtaining his father's consent could he but
happily make her propitious to his wishes -- Satisfied of this, he went so far
as to open the secret of his passion to Colonel Mortimer, and the two ladies,
requesting their influence with Miss Dashwood, and declaring he must he
miserable for ever, unless she condescended to approve his addresses. --
Colonel Mortimer was a man of great prudence, tho he was a man of great honor
-- ^ could not enter warmly into the interests of a man in such an affair with
whose fortune and connexions he was wholly unacquainted -- he believed Mr.
Harrington to be a person of condition, he found him amiable in his person,
enlarged in his mind, and finished in his education -- but still a marriage
with his relation, a relation too immediately under his protection, was a
business of importance in which compliments were entirely out of the case; he
accordingly declined to assist Mr. Harrington's views at that time, but
politely hinted, that he should in a short time return to England, and that if
Mr. Harrington still retained his sentiments for Miss Dashwood, and could make
a settlement suitable to her fortune, there was not any body whom he would
sooner recommend to her for a husband.

Just as Colonel Mortimer had given this reply, Miss Dashwood entered the room,
and begging Mr. Harrington would favor her with a short audience, she
proceedted in the following manner -- "I have just this moment been informed by
Miss Mortimer. Sir, that you honor me with a very favorable opinion, and I
will neither doubt your veracity nor my own little merits so far as to imagine
such a circumstance utterly impossible. -- But, Sir, I should be utterly
unworthy the attachment you profess for me, if I was to delude you with the
shadow of a hope, where I do not mean to give the least encouragement -- I am
therefore under a necessity of declaring that I never can be yours. -- Your
person and manners are unexceptionable, Mr. Harrington, and there is not a
gentleman of my acquaintance who possesses a higher place in my esteem: -- Yet
Sir, notwithstanding this acknowledgment, I must beg to decline your addresses
-- and to convince you I must, -- I will now heartily own what I never before
confessed, -- that any heart I possess is already engaged -- engaged, Sir,
romantically, nay ridiculously, to a man I never saw, nor possibly ever shall
-- but it is unalterably fixed -- I have a right to indulge peculiarity -- and
after this information I am sure you will have too much pride, as well as too
much humanity, to distress me with any solicitation."

The moment Miss Dashwood ended, she quitted the room in very visible
confusion, and Mr. Harrington sat in a ^tate of inconceivable surprise staring
wildly at Colonel Mortimer, who seemed himself to labor under no inconsiderable
degree of astonishment -- Mr. Harrington with a deep sigh at last recovered
himself, and promised to sustain his fate with as much fortitude as possible,
wishing that a continual round of felicity might be the lady's portion, tho he
could expect nothing but endless wretchedness for his own. --

In a little time after this, Colonel Mortimer and his family returned to
England, leaving poor Harrington to brood in secret over the anguish of his own
reflections -- Harrington's parting with these deserving people was a
considerable aggravation of his distress -- though refused as a lover by Miss
Dashwood he still visited at the Colonel's with his usual assiduity, and was
even received with an increased regard on account of the implicit submission
which he paid to that lady's injunctions -- this in some measure soothed the
bitterness of his disappointment, he found a melancholy kind of pleasure in
looking at, or conversio^ with, the object of his affections, and flattered
himself that time would restore his former tranquillity; -- but the moment he
lost this consolation, he became a victim to the most poignant despair, and
would probably have fallen a sacrifice to his passion, if the death of his
father which happened about this time, had not driven the tide of sorrow into a
new channel, and opened a scene of business that helpe^, in some measure to
rescue him from the gloom of his own imagination.

It was now so long since the unfortunate affair in which Mr. Harrington
wounded his (...) that he was under no apprehension of s^ttin^ (...) to England
on the first intelligence, especially (...) the ga^^^^ar^ b^^ perfectly
recovered -- he there (...) depa^^ed with the utmost expedition -- and when his
father's funeral (...) solemnised, every debt discharged, and his mother of
whom he was extremely (...), settled to his wi^^, the first object which
recurred to his memory was ^he (...) of which his grandfather had said to (...)
the poor Mrs. Ormsby. On a minute (...) into the affair he found the charge
against his ancestor was but too just, and he determined immediately (...)
restore what could not honestly belong to him. -- His (...) was extremely
ample, not less than eight thousand (...) year with a prodigious sum of (...)
money consequen^ly there could be no necessity for procrasti^ating the payment;
accordingly, ordering his stewa^d to get (...) ready to the account of twenty
thousand bounds, ^^ desired him to carry them with a letter which he ha^
written to Captain Ormsby. -- "Captain Ormsby is dead, Sir, answered the
steward, and so is Mrs. Ormsby." -- "Good God, (replied Sir Wilbraham) how
unfortunate -- but they had a daughter." -- "She was taken by some of her
father's relations, Sir, returned the steward, and left as we are told in very
good circumstances by the will of a grand aunt, who, during the Captain's life
would not give a shilling to relieve his necessities." -- "Well Mr. Willis,
rejoined Sir Charles -- I shall write a letter to the young lady -- you can
easily find her out I suppose." -- "Yes Sir, I believe I can," said Mr. Willis;
on which Sir Wilbraham immediately sat down, and dismissed him with the
following epistle: MADAM,
IT is with infinite concern I recollect that your good mother, by some
unaccountable means, was greatly injured by my family, and I blush to think
that reparation has been delayed so long -- give me leave therefore for the sum
which was Miss Milmour's right, to beg your acceptance of the twenty thousand
pounds enclosed in this letter, and to consider the extraordinary ten as a
legal debt due for the interest of the original demand, and the expenses which
she was at in her unfortunate endeavor to recover it -- do not hesitate a
moment, madam, to receive your own, and be assured that the knowledge of your
happiness will always give the greatest satisfaction to your

Most obedient humble servant WILBRAHAM WENTWORTH.




The steward carried this letter in conformity to orders, and returned in a
little time, producing a receipt for the money, and informing his master that
the lady would do herself the pleasure of waiting on him immediately. -- In
about an hour she arrived accordingly attended by a gentleman and was shown
into Sir Wilbraham, who exclaimed, Miss Dashwood! Colonel Mortimer; pray how
long have you been in town? Miss Dashwood and the Colonel replied, by asking
how long he had been in England, and expressing their great satisfaction at
seeing him so well. -- After congratulations had mutually passed -- Colonel
Mortimer began by asking where Sir Wilbraham was, saying that his cousin was
come to thank him for a most extraordinary act of generosity, and expressing a
little surprise that they did not find him in that room -- Sir Wilbraham to
this replied. "My dear Colonel you must now know Sir Wilbraham Wentworth is
your old friend Harrington, and I shall be extremely happy --

The Baronet would have proceeded but he was interrupted by a violent shriek
from Miss Dashwood -- who just, pronounced, "You Sir Wilbraham!" -- and fell
lifeless on the floor -- If the surprise of the Colonel and Sir Wilbraham was
great at this unexpected circumstance, their astonishment was still greater
when on recovering Miss Dashwood, she went on to this purport.

If you are Sir Wilbraham Wentworth the hand of heaven is certainly working
miracles, -- when I thought you really Mr. Harrington, I told you my affection^
were unalterably fixed upon a man I had never (...) -- but at that moment they
were fixed upon the son (...) Sir Charles Wentworth -- after my poor father
(...) obliged to part with his commission, and after he, with his little
family, discarded by all their relations, we^^ plunged in the deepest distress,
(we did not then know Colonel Mortimer was our relation) I have a thousand
times heard my unhappy parents lavish in praise of you^ humanity; I have a
thousand times heard them declare that had it not been for the assistance which
you procured them, they must have absolutely perished for want of bread -- I
loved my parents tenderly, Sir Wilbraham, and my heart greedily imbibed early
sentiments of gratitude for their preserver. -- As I grew up I found this
gratitude imperceptibly softening into tenderness, and the character which we
continually received of you was so amiable, that I determined never to alter my
situation, unless I could obtain Mr. Wentworth for my husband -- Silly, idle
and ^himerical as my resolution may seem, my resolution was unalterable, and I
do not blush to acknowledge my self the strenuous admirer of virtue -- On the
death of my father and mother, which happened while you were a broad, Mrs.
Dashwood, who was aun^ to the former, took me under her protection, though she
never would take any notice or me before, and I had the good fortune to be such
a fovourite with her that at her decease she left me a large fortune on
condition that I adopted her name -- the name I accordingly assumed, the
fortune I still possess, and if Sir Wilbraham Wentworth is actuated by the
sentiments which were once acknowledged by Mr. Harrington, my person and my
estate are at his service, whenever he thinks proper to demand them -- I have
not been two days in town and I signed the receipt for the twenty thousand
pounds, with my original name, because I purposed immediately to wait upon Sir
Wilbraham, to thank him for his unparalled generosity, to acquaint him with the
happy revolution in my circumstances."

Miss Dashwood having ended, Sir Wilbraham immediately accounted for his
assuming the name of Harrington, which clearly explained this comedy of errors
the two principal actors were in a little time after united, and live in the
most perfect happiness that humanity can know, proving beyond a doubt, that
however virtue may suffer for a time, even in this world, it is generally sure
of being rewarded in the end.

THE FATAL EFFECTS OF GAMING.
THE most certain causes of ruin and misery, are often the most alluring. There
is a strength in some temptations which subdues us by slow degrees, and when we
look back on the means of our destruction, we wonder by what fatality we were
first led astray. Few vices are more prevalent in our days than gaming; few
more destructive; few which, for all this, meet with more encouragement from
men of rank, fortune, and mental abilities. To be initiated in the mysteries of
gaming seems an innocent and pleasing employment, but (...) proceed in the
practice of it never fails to end in shame* poverty, and distress.

These reflections naturally arise to me, from the office I have just been
performing: paying the last duties of friendship to two young men, whose
untimely death has been occasioned by a fatal propensity to the worst of all
vices, gaming, a vice which they practiced against the advice of friends, the
knowledge of experience, and even the conviction of their own minds.

These unhappy youths were the twin sons of a gen^tlemen in the west, whose
name (for the sake of the narrative) is Hargrave. Educated by their parents
with tenderness and attention, they grew up the admiration of their friends. --
They were the companions (...) the virtuous, whose society they courted, and by
whom they were beloved. Their father's fortune was scanty, yet sufficient to
furnish them with the means of polite education, and it was his constant study
to instruct them in virtuous principles, and to teach them to set a value on
piety as their best possession, and on time, no^ an hour of which they could
ever recall. Such instructions were not lost upon them. Their parents lived to
see them tread the steps of true goodness, and they fondly hoped they never
would stray from the path of real happiness.

But vain and delusory are the hope of parents. The morning of their children's
existence arose with brightness, and bade fair for a day of serenity. Their
youth passed on, and every day was remembered with pleasure. Their dispositions
were amiable as their person^; their sensibility forbade all fears of
declension, and it was with confidence that their parents sent them from under
their inspection, to pursue their studies at a distant university.

Youth, liveliness of temper, and ingenuousness of mind, pointed them out as
the proper objects of a gamester's attention. One Leeson was at this time the
main support of the profession of gaming, and ever watchful to seduce the
unwary. For this purpose (if it is not impious to speak it) he seemed even
formed by nature. His person, wit, and acomplishments, reccommended him to
general notice. His language was copious, elegant and persuasive: and his
memory and understanding were of the highest degree of strength. He had studied
human nature for no intention but to prey on its weaknesses, and he well knew
when to take an opportunity to insinuate his pernicious principles. Gaming was
his business, and to seduction of females he was no stranger. His personal
courage was established in the fashionable world, but upon no better foundation
than his having killed in a duel the husband of a woman whom he had ruined,
plundered and exposed to shame. With the undiscerning part of the world, he was
a man of honor and of abilities. -- In fact, he was totally destitute of every
virtue that can dignify man, and he practiced those vices which brutes are
incapable of, but which the imperfect state of our legislature leaves "unwhipt
of justice."

The young' Hargraves soon become acquainted with L^^sen. They were charmed
with his vivacity, and seduced by his persuasion into gaming. At first he
practiced the usual arts, allowing them to win; which mo^^ and more led them
on, until at length they lost all they were possessed of, and after extorting
as much money from their father, under false pretenses, as he could possibly
spare, they were reduced to the necessity of subsisting on the chance of that
employment, which had already stripped them of every shilling they possessed.

Had the loss of fortune been the only consequence, frugality and abstinence
from the company into which they had been introduced might have retrieved, or
at least lessened their misfortune. But they had lost that which can seldom be
recalled; they lost the spotless purity of their minds; they scarcely ever
recollected the principles of their early education. The sensibilities of love
and friendship were no longer felt. Avarice, envy, and rancour were now the
leading passions, as they are the natural consequence of gaming. The distresses
into which they were from time to time plunged, they did not seek to alleviate
by sobriety and attention to duty. As their expenses multiplied, they found it
necessary to have recourse to other means than formerly: their father might
weep over their infatuation, but he could no longer supply their wants. The
friends (as they were wont to call them) who had profited by their folly,
refused to contribute any assistance. The gaming table was their only place of
refuge; but ignorant of the tricks of sharpers, they found that their success
here was but temporary, and only served to chain them down to a torture of
which they began to have the most alarming apprehensions.

An offer was made by an opulent relation to purchase a commission in a
regiment destined for foreign service. This was represented to them by their
parent, and the eldest accepted the offer, while the other agreed to apply to
the study of commerce in the house of an eminent merchant in London, to which
they now removed, and their parents rejoiced at their departure from a place in
which their fondest hopes had been so sadly disappointed.

Happy had it been, if their follies had now ended; if they had profited by
their experience, dear bought as it was, and been reclaimed from vicious
indulgencies. But the company they fell into in London, a place to which they
were before strangers, added to their imprudence. In a short time, by the
common transitions of the life of a gamester they were reduced to the greatest
distress. To complete all, when they found themselves beyond all hopes of
retrieving circumstances, they took the desperate resolution of going on the
highway, determined to plunder or die in the attempt. They carried their
purpose into execution; weary of life, they also resolved that if there should
be danger of detection to rid themselves of life by pistol or poison. If they
succeeded, they were to leave of the pernicious practice off gaming, and amend
that life which in its present state was a burden. Such is the sophistry with
which a gamester grown desperate amuses his mind.

They disguised themselves in coarse great coats, and in one fatal evening sat
out toward a public road. -- Observing a po^^ -- chaise they rode up to it,
and commanded the postilion to stop which he refused, and while they threatened
him, a voice which they were well acquainted with cried out from the carriage,
"My son, my son!" But it was too late. The eldest of them had fired at the
postilion, and the ball missing him, mortally wounded the gentleman in the
carriage, who was no other than their own father! -- The other who had not
heard the voice, rode up to the door of the chaise, and was about to discharge
his pistol, when h^ perceived his father almost dead.

Horror seized upon them; they uttered the bitterest execrations against
themselves, cursing the hour in which they were born, and the wretches who had
undone them. -- Stripping off their disguise, and retiring into a neighboring
field, the one swallowed poison, and was almost instantly dead, while the other
finished his miserable life by a pistol.

The postilion seeing some passengers come up, implored their assistance in
apprehending the murderers. They found one already dead, the other lived just
to mention the particulars of their story, then expired in great agonies. The
good old man had died while they were in pursuit of his sons. He departed
first, as if to plead for mercy to his unhappy sons at the tribunal of heaven,
before which they were s^on to appear.

Such and so fatal are the effects of gaming. When a harmless game of cards, as
it is called, becomes a habit of gaming every game may be reckoned a step
toward inevitable ruin. They are also pernicious when the ^utabiliies of the
game disturb the mind, which often happens even when the sums played for are
too inconsiderable to be mentioned. -- There are few objects more disagreeable
than a lady of youth and beauty, whose features are distorted by another's good
fortune, and who becomes a fiend in temper from the loss of an odd trick, or of
a sum that effects not her fortune.

But gaming, when it is made the business of life, is pernicious in every
respect. Ruin and reproach are the portion of that unhappy female who is prone
to a vice so inconsistent with the delicacy of the sex. All the horrors of
despair, and an untimely end await the man who beggars himself and family,
consumes his time and strength, and gives with a lavish hand and an infatuated
heart all he possesses to sharpers and profligates. Banished for ever from
reputable society be all games of hazard, if from apparently harmless playing
of them in youth, it can be proved that one unhappy victim may date his
destruction! And may he who reads this unhappy tale, and thinks himself so
little addicted to gaming as to be out of the reach of misfortune like this,
remember that what he is now, these young men once were, and as much
presumptuous in their own strength, and as little suspicious of misfortune as
himself.

THE UNHAPPY LOVERS.
WHEN I view the surprising advancement that has been made in literature and
politeness, and see the justness of sentiment, the elegance of style, and force
of expression, which adorn the manly productions of some American geniuses;
being at the same time conscious of my own inexperience and want of education,
I am almost deterred from the prosecution of my theme. But being touched by the
wrongs of innocence, and sensible, of my obligations to the unhappy sufferers,
I can no longer justify a concealment of their case from the public eye:
Resting, therefore, upon the candor of the age, I shall give a free and
unbiassed account of a circumstance, that lately befell me in a country town.

I called one day at Mr. -- 's a gentleman of my acquaintance, where I had
promised myself an agreeable afternoon; but finding my friend was gone out, I
resolved to entertain myself as well as I could. Accordingly, being invited by
the lovely songsters, and prompted by a natural curiosity, I took a walk into
the fields; and, intent upon great nature's works, carelessly sauntered about,
till I was quite lost among the inextricable mazes of mountains, lawns, and
meadows. The sun had set, and the sables of night were covering the earth; when
I found myself alone in a sequestered vale. From whence I had come, or whither
to go, I knew not. In this bewildered condition, I came to an high mountain,
and sat down under a large tree; that the boughs might shelter me from the
damps of night. The winds ceased, and a s^rene calm ensued. I reclined my head
against my favorite tree, and was just closing my eyes in sleep; when I was
startled from the ground by the broken accents of grief. At first, I imagined
it to be the love lorn turtle, who was co^ing her plaintive ditty: but the
repeated sighs, joined with almost articulate sounds, soon convinced me of my
mistake. The ascent of the mountain, that the sound came from, was exceeding
steep, and appeared to be insuperable; yet nature, at the voice of human
distress, irrisistably urged me to offer relief. With much difficulty, and at
the expense of much time, I climbed up the precipice; and guided by the
mournful sound, I came to a cave where the object of pity was. The morning
light by this time favoring me, I had a clear view: A young woman of surpassing
beauty, was sitting on the ground within the mouth of the cave: her dishevelled
hair hung neglected down her neck, and her languishing head reclined on her
shoulder; while she was pouring forth her moans to the empty winds. For a few
minutes I stood surprised at the piteous sight; then, moved with an humane
passion and kind sympathy, I stepped to the cave, and took her by the hand to
raise her up, till then she took no notice; but feeling my hand, she looked up
and thus spoke: "Ah! depart, and leave me, the most wretched of my sex." If
your misfortunes, said I, are great, as this your condition, is miserable, and
you have no sympathising friend to bear the burden with you, thou art wretched
indeed "Friend!" she replied, "sympathising friend! O Artamenes! had not I
injured thee, I should now possess a warm and generous friend." Perceiving that
she was oppressed with a load of sorrow, I begged to be informed of the cause;
and made every proffer of assistance. "Kind stranger," she replied, "your
curiosity is laudable, and your offers generous; the former, if it will afford
you any satisfaction, I am willing to gratify; but the latter, through a
consciousness of my own unworthiness, I am resolved never to accept. All the
pleasure I enjoy, is the indulgence of my grief; and all the assistance I
desire is a pitying tear."

"I am the unhappy Cleora; born in the year 1753; and the only child of my
worthy parents: who took unwearied pains to instruct me in the principles of
virtue and benevolence. But ^y reason of an ill grounded prejudice, I had
conceived an utter aversion to your sex; and resolved never to change my manner
of life. It was not long before a train of flatterers, as I thought them, paid
me their compliments; but with a kind of pleasing vanity I treated all with
disdain; and took a secret satisfaction in finding that the more I slighted,
still the more I had to engage. At length A^tamenes of modest and winning
deportment, pr^st his suit with the most delicate softness. With the same
apparent coldness I listened to his passion. But he soon retired, desiring the
honor (as he termed it) of calling upon me the next day. I felt some strange
emotions; but what they meant, I knew not. I reflected with pleasure on every
thing that had passed* the modesty of his expression, the brightness of his
sentiment, the sweetness of his countenance, the languishment of his eyes, and
the justness of his features, crowded into my mind, and made me waver in my
former resolution. But how, said I, shall I now become a slave to that passion,
over which I have so often triumphed? Reason forbids it: -- or if I do, I will
first give Artamenes the torture of an imaginary disappointment. Thus I was
fixed on a new stratagem. The next day he returned, according to his desire,
and renewed the attack with the greatest civility and warmest persuasion. But
like the monster guilt my tongue said no, when my heart and coun^enance gave it
the lie. This undoing folly, O tyrant custom, have thou introduced to our sex,
and blanched it over with the smooth name of modesty! He remained constant to
his purpose, and often renewed his request. Indeed I admired his person, and
was charmed with his sensibility; yet had the folly, incident to my sex, whilst
I was in his presence to banter his passion and ridicule the sincerest
professions of his love: but no sooner could he leave me, than I pined with the
same vehemence of passion, and wished for an opportunity to disclose it. At
length being wearied with ungenerous treatment, and despair of success, he made
this last resolve: (ah, too fatal resolution!) "Tho thou art dearer than life;
tho death should sooner separate me from the world, than aught from thy arms;
yet, since my misery is so nearly blended with thine, I cannot desire to be so
wretchedly happy, as thereby to make you miserable; as you intimate, if ever a
union betwixt us should ensue: therefore, I fly thy presence, having this
comfort only, that I may feed on thy sweet remembrance, which is so deeply
fixed in my breast, that not life, nor death can erase it."

"This he spoke with so much tenderness, and yet resolution that I was at a
loss what to do: and whilst I was considering whether false named modesty, or
open sincerity should guide my way, he took his last farewell. Still I had the
vanity to think that he would break (...) his resolution and return; when I
intended, to have thrown off the mask, and made myself happy in his arms. But I
was soon informed that he took leave of his friends, and told them that he
should never return. It is impossible for you to conceive of my distress and
anxiety: a thousand ideas, and a thousand stratagems continually passed through my
mind. My spirits sunk, and I pined away in grief and sorrow. And although the
slightest occurrence would raise my expectation, yet they were all ideal and
momentary. My parents no sooner saw me disordered, than with the kindest
concern they used all means for recovering my health. Physicians far and near
were consulted, but to no purpose; for being ignorant of the cause, the cure
was beyond their reach. I continued in this state for a considerable time,
avoiding all company as much as possible. But as I was sitting alone one
evening in my chamber, having secur^d myself from interruption by locking my
door, I fell into a drowse. My fancy, ever busy at such times now placed me in
the midst of a large and populous city. The streets were lived on one side with
a stern soldiery, and on the other filled with a distracted crowd. I spoke to a
person, who was standing by, and asked the cause of the tumult. He replied,
that life, or liberty, must now be resigned. Just as he spoke, I espied through
the crowd the long wished for Artamenes. The rose blushed on his cheek and the
serenity of the morning sat upon his countenance; length of time had added new
elegance to his form, and melting love, mingled with cheerful innocence
sparkled in his eye. Transported beyond expression, I was just leaping to
embrace the object of my love -- but ere I could reach his lovely arms; (Oh
horrid to relate! let flowing tears buy off the mournful tale) ere I could
taste the sweetness of his lips; the cruel soldiers discharged the winged fate.
Artamenes was the first! pale, and ghastly he fell to the ground! the blood,
than worlds more precious, streamed from his body! besmeared with gore, he
wallowed on the cold ground! and his head, without any friendly hand to support
it, was bruised upon the rough pavement! he groaned! he gasp'd! he died!"

Here she was so affected, that her power of speech was suspended for a
considerable time; but at length she thus continued.

"I startled in wild amaze from my sleep, raved with staring horror; and, then
swooned with overwhelming grief. When I had recovered again my enfeebled
strength, I thus spoke with myself; O Artamenes! if my dream be true, how
changed! a pale, lifeless corpse! trampled with the common earth under foot!
sacrifice to savage lust! and the second victim at liberty's shrine! O cruel,
cursed -- but be ye hushed, revengeful passions; they were only the agents, I
the cause. Oh! I could weep my spirit from mine eyes! perhaps in the pangs of
death he remembered Cleora, and called her cruel! wretched me! what have I
done! I will seek some lonely cavern where I may forever mourn his unhappy
fate. The next day at evening I had the sorrowful news of his murder from a
person who was present at the massacre. I retired to my chamber, and spent the
night in grief and impatience, being haunted with the dying groans and injured
shade of my butchered lover. At length the morning light just glimmering upon
the mountains, I left my kind, indulent parents to bewail my loss, and sled in
all the pangs of despair to this mountain. Unknowing, and unknown, I wandered
about; till I chanced to light upon this cave. I viewed it wishfully on every
side; the ground I saw, was covered with a mossy gray; the dark walls seemed to
weep for my hard fate; and every object was tinged with a sullen gloom; it
appeared every way adapted for the ^ecess of dejected and unpitied mourners.
Here I entered, and have been kindly sheltered from the inclemencies of the
weather, being supported, by the spontaneous product of the mountain. Here, in
this gloomy cavern, will I spend my remaining sands in mourning and sorrow, the
just reward of folly."

It is impossible for any person to imagine, or me to express, the grief and
sympathy that agitated my breast, whilst she was relating her story. When she
had finished, I endeavored with all the rhetoric I was master of to persuade
her from her cave: but all to no effect. And when I saw she was obstinately
fixed, I left her sitting upon the cold ground sighing and mourning to the
deaf, but the weeping walls of her cavern.

I came down from the mountain, and with some difficulty found the way back to
my friend's house. After the usual compliments, and a transient conversation
were passed; being very much fatigued with what had happened, I retired to an
apartment, and slept till the next morning. I then gave my friend an account of
Cleora's misfortunes, and made some enquiries about her character. He expressed
a great deal of surprise at what I told him, and replied: "She was the
sweetest, and most lovely creature upon eerth: no body was ever better
respected or more beloved: but she has been lost ever since the unhappy period
mentioned in her dream. We imagined, that being drowned in grief, for her
lover, she had put an end to her life. But if she be yet alive, let us hasten
to her relief, and force her from her cave; for her parents are now expiring
with grief, end every countenance through the village is veiled with sorrow."
Upon this I went back with him to the mountain; and just before we entered
(...) cave, we heard her thus speaking in a most (...) and dej^cted tone:

"Where? who am I? like a loathed adder, I crawl about in this ^^inty cave. No
company, but growling bears! no comforters, but croaking ravens! the sun
glimmers like the pale moon; the moon, like a dying taper: the earth dwindles
into nothing, and grief swells its place! O Artamenes! once I thought of thee,
and happiness! once I hoped to feast on a world of pleasure, bathe in a sea of
love and die in thy encircling arms; but ah! no more! my folly has blasted my
ripening hopes and stripped me of every joy. Artamenes! Artamenes, the sweet,
the kind, the lovely, and the brave, has left the world? and now I hate it. Be
gone, thou insipid toy; for I am tired of my rattling. O injured lover! O
wronged Artamenes! point me where thou art! I am coming, and with my last gasp
will groan for pardon: nay, frown not, thou gentle ghost! for I am just leaving
the empty, loathsome, world, to attest my love in Heaven: yes, the lazy blood
crawls slowly through my veins, and I feel a cold sweat spreading death upon me --
Ha! what shapes do I see?"

We had now presented ourselves to her view, and when she spoke to us, made
answer, that we come to bring relief.

"Impossible, she returned, for I have none upon earth: but stay -- now it is
well; death mocks your kindness, O Artamenes! I loved -- I die."

"O Cleora! (I cried) you demanded a pitying tear; I pay a flood! hear me! look
up! but Oh, she is gone. See, my friend, see her deadened eye! her pale cheeks!
and her ashy lips! feel, she is already cold and lifeless! Was there ever
innocence that lived and died like this! Ah! (says my friend) you can speak
your grief; but mine is too great for utterance. Let us carry her with us, and
pay the last solemn duties that we owe her." At length we took the corpse, and
with tears and silence brought it to the village. But who can imagine, or what
pen describe, the grief and sorrow, that filled the place? "Cleora is dead!
Cleora is dead!" was the distracting news; till the whole village reechoed with
a groan. They crowded around, and mourned, and wept her unhappy fate.

But a mother swooning* and dying by her daughter; and a father seeing, and
retreating, in all the greatness of a silent anguish; was a scene too highly
wrought for a description.

Thus, while cities fl^at with blood;
Our lesser towns are drenck'd in tears.
THE HAPPY DELIVERANCE.
IN one of those ages when despotism was the engine of resentment, of passion,
of civil fury, and political rage, Alphonso, the son of Ferdinand, king of
Arragon, lived. This young prince was distinguished not more by the robust
valor of the times, than by the gentle and generous qualities of the heart,
which are thought to belong more properly to modern manners. The son of a cruel
and ruthless tyrant, he was mild, humane, and forbearing; the flattery of
courtiers was heard by him with indifference, and to the fawning of sycophants
he was ever averse. He led a retired life even in the bustle of a court, and
devoted his hours to love and the Muses. The object of his passion was the
daughter of his father's treasurer Orlando -- her name Isabella -- a virgin
universally admired for her extreme beauty, and the lovely qualities of her
mind. She was not insensible to the passion of Alphonso, but whether from dread
of Ferdinand, who she was convinced had too much pride to allow his son to
marry the daughter of one whom he had raised from obscurity -- or whether
Orlando had forbid her interviews with the young prince, she avoided meeting
with the prince, who could not but venerate her prudence while he lamented the
unhappy cause.

Ferdinand about this time sent for his son, and informed him of a march he had
prepared for him, and which he had ordered him instantly to accept, forbiding
him on pain of his displeasure to offer any argument against it. Alphonso was
not more alarmed at this information than astonished at the injunctions which
accompanied it. "Surely," though he, "my father suspects my passion for
Isabella, else why imagine that I was about to refuse his offer." Ferdinand,
however, most absolute in all his commands, immediately gave orders to prepare
the solemnities usual on the marriage of the king's son. Alphonso had no
alternative -- He flew to Isabella -- and by stealth got into her apartment,
notwithstanding every precaution her father had used to prevent their meeting.
-- Fatal was that interview; he was discovered entering Isabella's apartment,
and betrayed to his father by a domestic. Ferdinand, enraged beyond
description, sent for Orlando, and reproaching him for encouraging an illicit
connection between his son and Isabella, ordered him instantly to be beheaded;
the cruel sentence was no sooner executed than the king sent some trusty
servant to seize Isabella and remove her to a secret place of confinement on
the borders of his dominions, and commanded her to be treated with every
possible severity, and that every precaution should be taken to prevent her
escape. The minions of tyrants are frequently sacrifices to their own
treachery; when those servants returned to inform him that his orders were
obeyed, he put every one of them to death, lest they might betray the secret of
Isabella's imprisonment.

Mean time Alphonso, in the height of his despair, a th^usand times meditated
his own destruction; but fortitude and resignation suggesting to him that he
ought to live to redress the wrongs of Isabella, he became inspired with the
romantic hope; and that he might no longer be subject to his father's tyranny,
suddenly disappeared on the very morning appointed for his detested nuptials,
as he now more than ever accounted them. -- Messengers were sent into every
part of the kingdom to seck for him, but in vain. -- Ferdinand's fury became so
great as to end in madness, a disorder rendered still stronger by the
recollection of his many cruelties and murders; and in a few days he died,
calling upon his son to come and forgive him. The news of his death soon spread
over the kingdom; and Alphonso, who had hid himself at no great distance from
the city, returned and was proclaimed king; the first act of his power was to
dismiss those men who had been the agents of his father's tyranny, and redress
the grievances of those subjects who had suffered by their oppression. His
virtues had long been the theme of popular applause, and the whole kingdom
reechoed "Long live Alphonso!"

To Alphonso, however, these proofs of loyalty afforded little relief. The
remembrance of Isabella's wrongs, nothing could efface. His imagination
represented her as in misery and distress, and his dreams were filled with
horrible apparitions of her sorrows. Every means he had hitherto used to find
out the place of her confinement were in vain. Such precautions were taken by
Ferdinand that this might for ever have remained a secret had not accident
discovered it.

To divert Alphonso's mind the griefs of which had a visible effect on his
person, his courtiers recommended him to visit his kingdom throughout.
Alphonso, indifferent whether to live or die, careless of himself and dead to
pleasure, agreed however, to their proposal. One day when he was riding near
the frontiers of his kingdom with only one attendant, he missed his way, and in
endeavoring to recover it, had to go through a wood; the evening approached,
and he had no hopes of being able to join the body of his guards at the village
where he had left them. In this dilemma, he came up to an old tower, the
greater part of which was in ruins; the only habitable part was a prison, but
apparently in decay. Alighting from his horse he entered the horrible place,
and ordered his attendant to tell the persons in the prison, that he was a
benighted traveller, and begged shelter until morning, The keeper received him
courteously, and even satisfied his curiosity as to the nature of the place,
and, ignorant of the late king's death, informed him tha^ it was a state
prison, where criminals that had rendered themselves obnoxious to the king,
were confined for life, but that at present there was only one lady in it. At
the word lady, Alphonso started, and in the wildest manner begged to know her
name and crime. Of that the keeper told him he was perfectly ignorant; the
persons who brought her never having informed him, nor returned themselves; but
that his orders were she should be kept in chains, and every possibility of
escape provided against. Alphonso could contain no longer -- He begged,
protested, and assured the keeper that if he would but permit him to see her,
the secret should never be divulged to his prejudice. -- The keeper hesitated
for some time, but at length, prevailed on by the fears and entreaties of the
handsome stranger, in whose looks he thought he discovered something noble and
generous, he conducted him to the cell, where sat a female chained down to the
ground, her lovely countenance settled to a deep melancholy -- but gracious
heavens! what were her transports and those of Alphonso! when thy recognized
each other -- IT WAS ISABELLA!

HAMET: OR THE INSUFFICIENCY OF LUXURY TO THE ATTAINMENT OF HAPPINESS. AN
ORIENTAL TALE.
HAMET the son of Morat was descended from the ancient princes of Persia: led
by the fame of Cha Abbas, he resorted to his court and was treated with all
those marks of distinction which he could expect from so generous a monarch.

He had a fine house and gardens allotted him in the city of Ispahan with a
numerous retinue, and an ample revenue to maintain them. His table was loaded
with all the luxuries of the east, his seraglio was filled with the most
beautiful women in the world, He was high in favor with the Persian Monarch,
and seemed to possess every thing that could contribute to ensure human
felicity.

Yet there was a strange void in his heart, a sort of chasm which to him was
the source of perpetual uneasiness. -- The rising day beheld him a prey to
cares, and the shades of night brought him no repose.

One day as he was wandering abroad alone, full of anxious thoughts, he came to
a little spot of ground where he found a shepherd who was reclining on a green
bank warbling out a pleasant air, while his flock was feeding beside him; every
now and then he cast a look toward a small cottage at a little distance, then
ceasing his melody would cast up a grateful look to heaven as full of
thankfulness for its benefits.

Hamet had approached as yet unseen, and as there was something in the peasant
that attracted his notice, he stood for a while observing him. At length
discovering him "shepherd, said he, thou appearest delighted with thy
occupation, and by thy countenance thy heart seems to be unacquainted with
trouble." It is so indeed, illustrious stranger, returned the shepherd, my
occupation answers all my wants and is well suited to my inclination; but I
have besides yet other sources of happiness. -- Then thou art happy? exclaimed
Hamet, but what are these sources of felicity, and wherefore do thou regard
that cottage with such satisfaction, and lift up thy eyes to heaven as in
prayer or rather in thanksgiving." -- "My sources of happiness my lord,
answered the shepherd, are in a woman whom I tenderly love, and a faithful
friend who regards me as himself. -- That cottage suffices to contain us all,
and I am for ever pouring out my thanks to heaven that has preserved them to
me, and thus has made me happy."

This speech touched the very source of Hamet's anxiety: "Alas he cried, I have
an hundred slaves and concubines, and friends without number, and yet I am
unhappy!"

So saying he left the shepherd, and advanced on his walk buried in meditation
till the hour of noon, when the weather which he had before little attended to,
grew suddenly very boisterous. -- A cloudy curtain veiled the skies, the
fighting winds rushed forth, loud thunders roared and lightning flashed around
him, -- A deluge of rain poured down while the very ground seemed to shake
beneath him.

Driven by their tempests, he hasted to seek shelter in a wood, whose thickest
branches however were not sufficient to repel its force. But in the midst of
this distress, by the glare of the lightning he discerned somewhat like a
little mistic building in the wood; encouraged by the hopes that it was
inhabited, he eagerly pressed forward to it. When he arrived, a venerable man
opened the door to him, whose hair and beard were silvered over by age, it was
the hermit Hassan, who kindly invited him to take refuge from the storm while
it lasted. Perceiving the anxiety that dwelt on the bow of his guest, he
inquired the cause of his uneasiness -- Hamet concealed nothing of it from him,
as far as he knew himself; -- When he came to speak of the shepherd's happiness
and compare it with his own situation, "what said Hassan, do thou say, thou
have an hundred slaves, concubines and friends without number -- ah! deluded
wretch, thou have no love, no friend, thy luxury indeed has provided thee with
a number of women and thy high station has caused thee to be attended by a
number of dependants, but amongst an hundred concubines thou may not find
one love, nor amidst an hundred thousand flatterers, one friend. Would thou
seek for love and friendship, fly the court, quit Ispahan, seek them in some
distant province. Lay by thy rich attire, and conceal thy grandeur, so shall
thou better judge of human kind, when divesting thyself of the prince thou
find those who regard plain Hamet."

The son of Morat withdrew, when the tempest was over, fully determined to
follow the advice of the hermit, he went home and changed his attire for plain
clothing and disguised his face as much as possible; then having concealed a
quantity of rich jewels in his garment, he sat out on a journey to Cachemire.
Passing thus along through tha public streets of Isaphan as a traveller he
received no marks of respect from any one and was obliged often to give the way
to his own domestics and dependants.

As he was traveling one evening late on the confines of Cachemire, he found
himself suddenly attacked by a number of armed robbers, against whom he
defended himself with great bravery, but must have fallen in the contest, had
not a young man timely came up, who with three servants were traveling on the
same road -- These fell upon the robbers flew some and put the rest to flight,
and afterward the youth took Hamet home with him, and having provided him with
a surgeon insisted on his staying at his house till the wounds he had received
should be cured. This generous stranger whose name was Heli, was forever
present with his guest succouring and consoling him, till at last such a mutual
regard grew between them, as for the first time made Hamet taste of real
friendship -- yet one thing more was wanting; his heart had yet a vacancy left,
when by chance one day he beheld a beautiful young female at the window of the
women's apartment; struck with her charms, he flew to Heli to know whom she
was, "she is Abra my sister said the youth, would to heaven she were, --
returned Hamet, in broken accents -- what! cries he impatiently -- my wife,
said his guest -- the generous youth then told him he would bestow her on him
in marriage if he approved her, but he who first knew love, begged only to
converse with her, and declared he should prove unhappy if he possessed not her
heart as well as her person." -- He saw her and finding she entertained a
mutual passion for him, whom she had often looked upon undiscovered, they were
married according to the manner of the east, after which Hamet discovered
himself, and rewarded the love and fidelity of his wife and friend, by making
them sharers in his high estate: he took them both with him to the court of
Ispahan, where Abra was received as his princess, and Heli was promoted to one
of the highest offices in the court of Cha Abba^, who caused the story to be
recorded in the Chronicles of Persia, -- to which was affixed this concluding
sentence. "Mortals who are exalted among the princes of the earth, learn that
splendour may be attended with anxiety, and that without love and friendship
there can be no true happiness."

LINDOR TO CAROLINE. CONTAINING THE STORY OF PHILANDER AND HONORIA.
I FELICITATE you on the happy event of the arrival of your brother, and feel
myself entitled to a participation with the rest of his friends in the general
joy. I read with much pleasure, and equal anxiety, his little adventure, and
can conceive by my own feelings the force of his. Delia has made too deep an
incision in my heart to be soon healed, yes! the wound will accompany me to the
silent tomb. Until the blood shall cease to glow in my veins, the name of Delia
will be remembered. I sometimes meet with her at concerts and balls, but a
lover's fears restrain and prevent the discovery of his wishes, and the
overwhelmings of his heart are silently endured. The blood in burning torrents
flows, and sometimes an abulition takes place, the the fair Delia be unmindful
of the cause, and the constant misery of her ardorer.

I feel a just sense of my obligation for your partial correspondence, and am
duly impressed with the purity of your intentions and the genuine goodness of
your heart, where generous sentiments dwell. Be assured that I know how to
appreciate the words your lips impart. The rose may fade and the lily die, but
the laurel that shall decorate the temples of any one, by you bestowed, shall
be immortal.

I have experienced the want of a father. I was young and ignorant of the worth
of a tender parent when I was deprived of mine. I have reflected on my loss
with deep sensibility; frequently have envied the fortunate lot of others, more
favored in this respect, by the most high.

The occurrences of human life, however pleasurable and full of mirth, are not
always so favorable as to secure from causes of the most real grief, a mind
susceptible of impressions of the tender passion of virtuous love. To love
witout return, is hard and cruel^; pitiable and u^enviable indeed, is the lot
of him, who falls within the limits of this description; his fate is severe,
and his future prospects of felicity but very small. Happy he who, in these
moments finds a friend, to whom he may impart his grief, and receive
consolation from a symphathizing heart. Happy the man who possesses fortitude
firm enough to banish from his mind the tormenting idea, and drive from his
imagination the object of his woe, but transcendantly more happy, the man, who
is fortunate enough to fix his choice on a person* not ungrateful to the
sentiments her worth inspires. Warmed with congenial transport, the friendly
spark is gently fanned, until blazing into a flame of mutual affection, Hymen
crowns them happy, and their terrestial felicity terminates alone in death. It
is, however, a melancholy truth, that the connubial state is unfortunately too
often attended with undesirable, I wont say unavoidable, hapless moments of
disputes and animosities, which ought never to enter therein. Deception on
either hand may take place before the gordian knot is tied; and above every
thing disappointment in the temper, disposition and real merits, is ever to be
deplored and lamented; they form a source of continual rancour, and are the
bane of harmonious agreement and conjugal love. A man cannot conceal his real
temper from the world; he cannot dissemble altogether his true character; a
female can in a great measure; seen by few persons she may appear charming,
while she is in fact quite the reverse, and by a continual chain of duplicity
and artful affability, captivate an unhappy victim, to partake in the inherent
misery, nature had intended for her alone. But these instances are rare in
happy America. Her daughters are virtuous as fair. The luster of whose charms
shine resplendent in the face of day, and the lucid brightness of their
characters, form the devoted objects of heaven's care.

I would never make interest a prevailing motive for a change of condition, nor
would I advise any one to aspire at the attainment of a person, above the
sphere of life, in which he is placed by the opinion of the surrounding world;
disappointment is too often the consequence, and sometimes misery results from
the unhoped for denial. The man who marries from interest alone, find out
pretty generally the error of his choice, and meets sooner or later with just
cause of repentance, especially should misfortune happen, which none are
altogether exempt from. It is absolutely necessary that there should be a
competency, without which the expectations are very confined. A pretty girl, or
a pretty fellow, form no sufficient food for sustenance, by no manner of means.
I seldom knew love to be durable where the means of subsistence were wanting;
at most, it is a very rare case. An union of this kind adds misery to want, and
makes penury the wretched condition of at least two persons, when one alone
might have been the subject. I would not be understood as having a positive
aversion to matrimony; the feelings of my heart evince the reverse. I should be
happy in being the cause of its promotion on principles of general happiness
and general good.

A young man, as soon as he finds himself established in business, provided he
meets with a person of amiable qualities, whose esteem he can flatter himself
with, and with whom he has every ground to promise himself future felicity, I
think does perfectly right in entering into the connubial state; his generous
companion i^ the soother of his sorrows and the partner of his joy. If she is
well disposed to his interest and her own, she will calculate the income of her
husband, and from annual reduce it to diurnal, and never extend her daily
expenses beyond his real earnings, but by frugality and decent economy,
endeavor that at the close of the year he shall find a favorable difference in
his affairs, and a recompense and a reward for his past and incessant toils and
industrious labors. If she is a woman of good conduct and sense, she will be
careful what debts she contracts on her husband's account; she will be cautious
of ^unning into extravagancies to equal her neighbors and acquaintances in
finery, superfluous dress, and unnecessary furniture. She will be neat and
clean in her attire and her apartments will evince the good house wife and the
devoted mistress of her family. Thus frugality and well meditated economy will
procure to them lasting joy and durable felicity, exceeding by far the
brilliancy of a moment, or the torpid and lifeless duration of a few days
pleasure, too frequently the source of endless pain.

In this country we are born to inherit an equal proportion of our parents'
fortune at their decease, provided our conduct does not render us unworthy
their care: by this means a large estate is subject to being divided into many
hands; thence the basis of equality and the incitement to industry and caution:
and the example of frugality may operate with the same if not superior force,
in preserving the respectability of families in this country, as the pernicious
custom of inheritance, which the laws have established in some parts of Europe,
are capable of doing. But even the mildest laws, and customs the most generous
and well founded, will not alone insure and maintain respectability. Virtue and
good morality are necessary. These are the most munificent guardians, these the
consolations of a dying parent. Precepts may be futile and examples vague, when
the mind is not prone to virtue. It therefore is a parents duty to early infuse
into the minds of his offspring a just idea of their expectations and their
situation in life, and prepare them by an education calculated to the part they
are to act, upon the grand theater of the world. A liberal extensive education
is not always attended with success, even in the superior walks of life; and I
think they must be often still less so, in the more humble. A young man with no
rich protector, when he comes from college, is very often destitute; he is
obliged to become schoolmaster in some small village, the fees of which will
not always produce sufficient for his support: This is discouraging to a genius
that might have been better employed in tilling the ground, and making
improvements in agriculture, which he is now by the brilliancy of his education
and perhaps false ideas of his talents, led to regard as below the sphere of
life which nature had designed him for. Long accustomed to a life of ease, he
despises laborious employments, and the wrong notions his education has induced
him to imbibe, become the source of his wretchedness, and deprives his country
of otherwise a valuable subject and the respect of a flourishing posterity.
Thus population is cramped.

Agriculture and manufactures are the substantial riches of a state; they ought
to go hand in hand in promotion. These are the sources of commerce, and when
the former are encouraged and protected, the lattter will consequently flourish
and improve.

The disconsolate heart and the gnawings of conscience, resulting from a wrong
decision in Lavina, exhibited in your Nymph of the Grove, prove that a female,
left as Lavina was, cannot be too cautious in disposing of herself. Her
affections, however excite commise^ation, they were kindly relieved by the
generous Sylvander. A young lady at the age of Lavina, coming into the world,
with which she was before almost entirely unacquainted, must have experienced
emotions altogether strange, and it is not surprising, that a mind,
uncultivated and inexperienced, should be led away from the object who warmed
her youthful heart. Tho it discovers little firmness and some caprice, yet it
can be easily conceived of. But this was not the case with Honoria, the worthy
and generous consort of Philander. Honori^ was the daughter of a rich merchant
in America, whose generous heart and hospitable board, were the resorts of the
affl^cted and unfortunate: whose soul was formed for the relief of the
distressed, and in whose bosom the warm sentiments of friendship dwelt. Born
and brought up in affluence, he educated his only daughter agreeable to his
station in life, and the expectations his fortune allowed her to look forward
to. She is amiable and discreet, kind, compassionate and possessing charms
personal and mental. The smiles and the graces are her c^mpanions, and he loves
her protectors. The father of Honoria, whom we shall here call Mercator, had
taken Philander an orphan, whose parents were snatched from him at a tender
age, and the care of whose education devolved on relations who were not
unmindful of their charge. They furnished him with learning sufficient for a
counting house, and at a proper age good fortune directed the kind hand of
Mercator, to take Philander, into the bosom of his family. Honoria was then at
an age when those sentiments which have since expanded and allayed
unmeasureable sorrows, began to take root in her heart. She saw Philander with
no indifference; innocence was painted on his brow, simplicity, artless
affability, and obliging manners, evinced the sincerity of a mind which his
outward deportment announced. Qualities like these could not escape the already
penetrating eye of Honoria; she determined to be the friend of Philander; a
mutual confidence soon took place, and from friendship, which grew up with
them, resulted the purest love. When Philander had attained his twenty first
year, he retired from the house of his friend to enter into business in a town
some ways distant from that of his protector; but not before giving him the
most demonstrable assurances of his obligations and the indeliable impressions
his generous and kind partiality had made on his heart. When he comes to take
leave of the lovely Honoria, the recollection of past pleasures and the
confidential friendship that had so early enkindled and united their
affections, served to augment the natural regret of his departure, and cause
the moment of their separation to be equally painful and unhappy.

Mercator was not unknowing to their friendship, and suspected their mutual
attachment; but far from being disposed to suppress, he watched the spontaneous
flame, and promoted the object of his generosity by setting him forward in
business and making him still his care. An explanation had long before taken
place between the lovers, and they swore to each other at the shrine of
Philander's departed father, that their hearts should never swerve, and when
mountains and lakes should intercept them, the pen should become subservient to
oral intercourse. Philander, by his industry and strict economy, soon acquired
a handsome property, and his business daily increased. During his absence
Mercator died, and left his daughter chief heiress to his large fortune; but by
some fatality, at this important and afflicting period, the letters of Honoria
were intercepted, and their enemies, to effect certain purposes, gave rise to
reports equally painful to both lovers. The business of Philander at this time
happened to call him near to the capital, the former residence of his departed
friend, and he was there informed of his death. Greatly alarmed at the
melancholy news, he flew to his mistress, and with hers mixed the tear of
sympathy and sorrow. He was soon made acquainted with the vile purposes of his
enemies, and controverted all their infamous intrigues, and at a proper time
the angelic Honoria granted her hand, and presented her fortune, to the
grateful object of so rich a prize.

THE STAGE-COACH: A MORAL TALE.
HUMAN life is composed of pleasure and pain. Success and disapointment,
anxiety and hope, form the portion allotted to humanity. Our wishes are
unbounded; we grasp at the shadow and lose the substance. We consider
disappointment as one of the greatest evils, tho it often proves our greatest
happiness. Blinded with desire, and agitated by ardour, we porsue the object of
our passion, without reflecting on the consequences, or whether it ultimately
tends to procure happiness or regret.

Frank Sanders was the son of an eminent merchant, and well known at all the
places of public diversion; but his good sense assisted by a liberal education,
still prevented his being a dupe to the artifices of the insidious, and enabled
him to escape the snares of the designing. He visited the gardens of pleasure
without losing himself in their labyrinths, and paid his devoir^ at the shrine
of beauty without being fascinated by her charms. Frank was no stranger at
Bath, Bristol, Scarborough, and Brighthelmstone; and he began to shatter
himself that he had gained so much wisdom by experience, that it would be
almost impossible for him to be deceived, even by the most artful.

His prudence was soon put to the trial. Passing in a stage-coach from London
to York, he was struck with the sight of a young lady, whom he considered as
the most beautiful of her sex. She appeared modest even to a fault, and gave
the most prudent answer to the questions she was asked by any of the
passengers. As she became more familiar with the company, she became more
entertaining, and it was soon evident that the charms of her conversation were
not inferior to those of her face and form. 'This, said Frank to himself, is
certainly the most beautiful, and the most accomplished woman in the world. I
thought beauty had no power to make me her slave: But I was mistaken. The
charms of Delia have been victor in the contest, and I shall willingly resign
my liberty at her feet. There can be no deception here. Innocence and good
nature have been her constant companions The roses of youth and health bloom in
her countenance, and all the graces have contributed to render her complete.'

Determined if possible, to gain this amiable object, Frank redoubled his
assiduities, obtained permission to visit her at her lodgings, and every thing
seemed to promise that his attempt would be crowned with success. One evening,
as Frank was walking with the object of his wishes, he accidentally met a
gentleman, who had been a very particular acquaintance of his father. Surprised
to see him in that part of the world, without having received the favor of a
visit, he complained in a friendly manner of such unmerited neglect, and begged
the favor of his company the next day to dinner. Frank, promised to attend
him, and after mutual compliments they parted. Delia seemed confounded at the
presence of this gentleman, whom we shall call Horatio; and, during the
conference, kept her eyes fixed upon the ground. Her lover imputed her
behavior entirely to modesty, and the incident seemed rather to increase, than
lessen the esteem he had conceived for her. But Delia's confusion arose from a
very different motive: She was no stranger to the face of Horatio, and used
every artifice in her power to prevent Frank from performing the promise he had
made to his friend. She proposed a tour into the country, where she promised to
show him some remarkable pieces of antiquity, Frank expressed his desire of
attending her but wished the tour might be postponed for a day or two, as he
should then have paid the visit he had promised; and Delia, fearing that any
farther importunity might attend to alarm him, consented to postpone the tour,
declaring at the same time that his engagement had slipped her memory.

Frank repaired at the time appointed to Horatio's house, and was received with
most cordial affection. After dinner, when the company were retired, Horatio
asked his friend how long he had been acquainted with the lady whom he saw
yesterday in his company. Frank ingenuously told him the whole of his
adventure, that he had never seen her till he had accidentally met her in the
stage coach; adding that her innocence and beauty had inspired him with the
most tender passion; and that he hoped to spend the remainder of his life with
her in happiness and peace.

'I wish, for the sake of our common friendship, and that harmony which has
always subsisted between our families,' replied Horatio, with some vivacity,
'that I could approve your choice. I would willingly congratulate your on the
prospect of your approaching happiness with all the ardour of a friend. But,
believe me, Frank, you have placed your affections on an undeserving object.
She has put on the cloak of innocence to deceive you; and will, if you persist
in completing the connection you wish; soon triumph in your ruin.'

'It is impossible,' answered Frank, with great emotion, 'that I can suspect
your uttering a premeditated falsehood; but are you not deceived in the object?
You may have seen a person that nearly resembles her; and it is possible you
may load her with crimes which are the property of another.' 'I am too cautious
Frank,' replied Heratio, 'to be easily deceived; and I have too much reason to
remember her: The injuries I have received are too great and too recent to be
forgotten. To her hypocritical innocence I owe the greatest misfortune of my
life. My eldest son, your old schoolfellow and companion, was seduced by her
arts, and, had not I snatched him from her company, his ruin had been
completed. She then practiced her arts in the capital, and is now I suppose
endeavoring to extend her pernicious influence in the country. Believe me,
Frank, though very young, she has already been the ruin of several, and
possibly you yourself might have been the next victim at her altar. You seem
astonished, but I will convince you that I have uttered nothing but the truth:
I will to morrow attend you to her lodgings, and force her to confess that I
have not injured her character.'

Frank readily consented, and it was agreed that the visit should be paid in
the morning. Frank was persuaded that his friend was mistaken, and that this
inteview with Delia would only tend to give an additional luster to her
innocence and virtue. He believed he had seen too much of the world to be
deceived; and that tho vice might for a time assume the mask of virtue, yet the
unnatural character would soon be conspicuous, and capable only of deceiving
the ignorant and the credulous.

As soon as the morning appeared, Frank visited his friend, and could hardly be
persuaded to stay till breakfast was over before they repaired to the scene of
action. But what was his astonishment to find that Delia, the innocent Delia,
was fled, and had taken Frank's pocket book, with notes to a considerable
value, which he had imprudently entrusted to her care! They were informed that,
immediately after Frank's departure, she had discharged her lodgings, and took
post for London.

Frank was now sufficiently convinced he had been deceived, and that all his
experience was not sufficient to defend himself against the snares of infidious
artifice. He told his friend at his departure that he could wish his
unfortunate adventure might be published for the benefit of the young, the
thoughtless, and the innocent.

THE PARADISE OF SCHEDAD: AN EASTERN TALE.
A LONG time before the prophet of true believers had enlightened the world,
and the holy Alcoran had descended from the seventh heaven, Schedad reigned in
Yemen, with absolute power, which he used without moderation. He was a
voluptuous, an extravagant, and an impious tyrant: He was a monster rather than
a man, and he had the ambition of being a god. If he had wished to be so only
in his court, they say the courtiers of these times would have adored without
scruple, himself, his monkey, and his paroquet: But Schedad was desirous that
all his subjects should recognize his pretended divinity, and that they
seriously and in good faith should believe in it.

To succeed in this project, he conceived a scheme, which to him appeared
infallible. He made a circular wall, of prodigious height and extent, built in
the most beautiful spot of Yemen. This wall was bordered on the inside with a
forest of pine trees, which served as a belt or crown to the greatest and m^st
magnificent garden one can possibly imagine. There were meadows adorned with
all the flowers of the spring, and orchards which promised all the riches of
autumn. There were rivulets which glided in silence over golden sands; or which
rushing rapidly over a bed of pearls, mixed their murmurs with the warbling of
the birds On one side, a person might admire himself in a sma^l like, where
fish of all kind and colors were sport^ng: On the other, one might descend
into a delicious valley, whose freshness is preserved by a sheet of water which
tumbles from a rock.

A little further on, one might walk among perfumed arbours always green, where
the spikenard, the balm, and the aloes, grow at the foot of palm trees and
cedarr. Nature every where shows herself with all her charms; and the timid art
which has unveiled her, hardly allows herself to be perceived.

In the center of this enchanted solitude, a round hill arises with a gentle
slope; then growing flat at once, forms on the summit a vast esplanade. There
Schedad constructed a superb palace, which he furnished with equal elegance and
magnificence.

Here the pomp of luxury was found joined with the acquirements of affeminacy,
and the immense apparatus of little conveniences. And one might there find the
artists of pleasure, cooks, musicians, dancers, buffoons, and even poets.
Schedad thought little of these last; but what he prized above all the rest was
a numerous swarm of young girls, whom he took care to scatter over the palace
and the gardens. -- They were beautiful as the heavenly houris somewhat less
pure, but much more lively and sprightly.

When every thing was ready for the execution of his design, Schedad was in
haste to publish this strange edict, which was affixed on all the temples.

"Schedad, the god of Yemen, to our faithful adorers, sends health and
happiness. As we intend to surpass in liberality all other gods, who only
promise happiness after death, we make it known unto you, that we have created
in the plain of Iram a paradise where you shall enjoy all the pleasures of this
life. We shall admit into that place, at a convenient season, all those among
you, who, neglecting every superfluous virtue, shall believe sincerely in us,
and shall submit themselves without reserve to our divine will. We shall admit
there at present, and without any further proof, our blessed servants, whose
names are comprehended in the list annexed to this present edict* -- O people
of Yemen! encourage yourselves to follow the example they leave you, and merit
the crown which they have obtained."

Should you wish to know who were these blessed servants of Schedad? Some of
the most impudent flatterers; some ministers of his oppression and of his
debaucheries; some despicable women who had yielded to his desires; some others
more artful who only promised to repair there, and these were best treated in
this promotion. Scarcely was this edict published, when Schedad kept his word
with the new saints. He conducted them with great solemnity to the palace of
Iram, where he left them, desiring them to enjoy in peace the happiness he had
prepared for them, which his frequent visits should render more perfect. -- He
himself in going out shut the gate of the sacred enclosure, with an order to
the soldiers who guarded it without, to kill without mercy all the profane who
should dare to approach it.

In the mean time, the blessed gave themselves up without reserve to the
raptures into which the view alone of their new habitation had thrown them. For
the first time in their life they admired, nay almost loved, the tyrant of
Yemen. They even believed, as if he had been present, that the author of so
many delights could be only a god. But their faith was of no longer duration
than their happiness, which was indeed extremely short. Pleasures varied in
appearance, but which at bottom were eternally the same; pleasures easy to be
procured, constant, and immoderate; soon became insipid employments or hateful
drudgery. By being obliged to enjoy them, they had no longer relish for hem;
they perceived, on the other hand, that disgust and disquiet paid little
respect to the paradise of Schedad, and that diseases without intermission paid
still less. This was not all. The blessed had been a little acquainted in the
world, and did not like each other; but on seeing one another nearer, they
became better acquainted, and mutually detested each other. From that time, no
more society, no more conversation. Shut up in their apartment, or dispersed
over the terraces of the palace, they looked with sorrow on the delicious
gardens which surrounded them; They only saw there the verdure of their prison.
Their eyes were more willingly fixed on the red sea, and on a chain of
mountains they perceived at a distance. What would they not have given to
wander at liberty through these frightful rocks, or to sail on that sea,
discredited by so many shipwrecks.

In this situation were the blessed when the god of Yemen honored them with his
first visit. He came to add the supreme good of his presence to the pleasures
with which he believed them enchanted. But who can figure his surprise and
indignation when he saw sorrow painted on every countenance: And when in place
of hymns and songs, he heard only complaints and murmurs! he dissembled,
however, and contained himself as much as possible! He joined caresses to
reproaches; and by threatening and cajolling his saints, he made them promise
that they would endeavor to accustom themselves to paradise, and to enjoy
their good fortune with patience. But this extorted promise hardly removed his
fears. He trusted more to an order he left with the guards of the outer wall;
which was to put to death no longer the profane, but the saints themselves, if
they attempted to scale the wall.

In spite of all these precautions, Schedad returned to his capital with the
most lively inquietude, which was but too well founded. He no longer flattered
himself; he saw that his paradise and his divinity would tumble together into
such discredit as never more to raise themselves. To parry this fatal stroke,
he had recourse to the only expedient which remained. He proclaimed, by a
second edict, that seeing the ingratitude of his people, and their little
eagerness to deserve paradise, he was about to create a hell, where unbelievers
and impious persons should no longer mock him. As it is more easy to torment
men than to make them happy, the new project would probably have succeeded
better than the other: But they did not leave Schedad time to execute it. That
cruel extravagance alarmed people of all ranks, and exhausted their patience.
The tyrant was dethroned; and they deliberated a long time on the punishment
they should inflict. At last, they could think of none more proper than to shut
him up in the garden of Iram with the vile wretches with whom he had peopled
it, and to shut the gate of that infernal paradise. There, torn with remorse,
and overwhelmed with affronts, the god of Yemen ought to be convinced, that
there is a supreme God, who confounds the projects of impiety; and who has only
promised happiness to virtue.

TWO LETTERS FROM MR. EVERARD, F.S.M. CONTAINING AN ADVENTURE, OF WHICH HE WAS
AN EYE WITNESS, AT THE QUICKSILVER MINE OF IDRA.
LETTER I.
THE pleasure I always take in writing to you wherever I am, and whatever
doing, in some measure dispels my present uneasiness; and uneasiness caused at
once by the disagreeable aspect of every thing round me, and the more
disagreeable circumstances of the Count Alberti, with whom you were once
acquainted. You remember one of the gayest, most agreeable persons at the court
of Vienna; at once the example of the men, and the favorite of the fair sex. I
often heard you repeat his name with esteem, as one of the few that did honor
to the present age, as possessed of generosity and pity in the highest degree;
as one who made no other use of fortune but to alleviate the distresses of
mankind. That gentleman, Sir, I wish I could say, is now no more; yet, too
unhappily for him, he exists, but in a situation more terrible than the most
gloomy imagination can conceive.

After passing through several parts of the Alps, and having visited Germany, I
though it I could not well return home without visiting the quicksilver mines at
Idra, and seeing those dreadful subterranean caverns, where thousands are
condemned to reside, shut out from all hopes of ever seeing the cheerful light
of the sun, and obliged to toil out a miserable life under the whips of
imperious task masters. Imagine to yourself an hole in the side of a mountain,
of about five yards over; down this you are let, in a kind of bucket, more than
an hundred fathom, the prospect growing still more gloomy, yet still widening
as you descend.

At length after swinging in terrible suspense, for some time, in this
precarious station, you reach the bottom, and tread on the ground, which, by
its hollow sound under your feet, and the reverberations of the echo, seems
thundering at every step you take. In this gloomy and frightful solitude, you
are enlightened by the feeble gleam of lamps, here and there disposed, so as
that the wretched inhabitants of these mansions can go from one part to another
without a guide. And yet, let me assure you, that tho they, by custom, could
see objects very distinctly by these lights, I could scarce discern, for some
time, any thing not even the person who came with me to show me these scenes of
horror.

From this description, I suppose, you have but a disagreeable idea of the
place: yet let me assure you, that it is a palace, if we compare the habitation
with the inhabitants. Such wretches my eyes never yet behold. The blackness of
their visages only serves to cover an horrid paleness caused by the noxious
qualities of the mineral they are employed in procuring. As they, in general,
consist of malefactors condemned for life to this task, they are fed at the
public expense; but they seldom consume much provision, as they lose their
appetites in a short time; and commonly in about two years expire, from a total
contraction of all the joints of the body.

In this horrid mansion I walked after my guide for some time, pondering on the
strange tyranny and avarice of mankind, when I was accosted by a voice behind
me, calling me by name and enquiring after my health with the most cordial
affection. I turned and saw a creature all black and hideous, who approached me
and with a most piteous accent demanding, "Ah! Mr. Everard do not you know me!"
Good God, what was my surprise, when, through the veil of his wretchedness, I
discovered the features of my old and dear friend Alberti. I slew to him with
affection: and after a tear of condolence, asked how he came here? To this he
replied, that having fought a duel with a general of the Austrian inf^n^ty,
against the emperor's command, and having left him for dead, he was obliged to
fly into one of the forests of Istria, where he was sheltered by some banditti,
who had long infested that quarter. With these he had lived for nine months,
till, by a close investiture of the place in which they were concealed and
after a very obstinate resistance, in which the greater part of them were
killed, he was taken and carried to Vienna, in order to be broke alive upon the
wheel. However, upon arriving at the capital, he was quickly known, and several
of the ass^ciates of his accusation and danger witnessing his innocence, his
punishment of the rack was changed into that of perpetual confinement and labor
in the mines of Idra; a sentence, in my opinion a thousand times worse than
death.

As Alberti was giving me this account a young woman came up to him who at once
I saw to be born for better fortune; the dreadful situation of the place was
not able to destroy her beauty, and even in this s^ene of wretchedness, she
seemed to have charms to grace the most brilliant assembly. This lady was in
fa^t daughter to one of the first^families in Germany; and having tried every
means to procure her lover's pardon without effect, was at last resolved to
share his miseries, as she could not relieve them. With him she accordingly
descended into these mansions from whence few of the living return; and with
him she is contented to live, forgetting the gaities of life, with him to toil,
despising the splendors of opulence, and contented with the consciousness of
her own constancy.

LETTER II.
MY last to you was expressive and perhaps too much so, of the gloomy situation
of my mind. I own the deplorable situation of the worthy man described in it,
was enough to add double severity to the hideous mansion. At present, however,
I have the happiness of informing you, that I was a spectator of the most
affecting scene I ever yet beheld. Nine days after I had written my last, a
person came post from Vienna to the little village near the mouth of the
greater shaft. He was soon after followed by a second, and he by a third. Their
first inquiry was after the unfortunate count, and I happening to overhear the
demand, gave them the best information. Two of these were the brother and
cousin of the lady, the third was an intimate friend and fellow soldier to the
count: they came with his pardon which had been procured by the general, with
whom the duel had been fought, and who had perfectly recovered from his wounds.
I led them with all the expedition of joy down to his dreary abode, and
presented to him his friends, and informed him of the happy change in his
circumstances. It would be impossible to describe the joy that brightened upon
his grief -- worn countenance; nor was the young lady's emotion less vivid at
seeing her friends and hearing of her husbands freedom. Some hours were
employed in mending the appearance of this faithful couple, nor could I without
a tear behold him taking leave of the formers wretched companions of his toil.
To one he left his mattock, to another his working cloths, to a third his
little household utensils, such as were necessary for him in that situation. We
soon emerged from the mine, where he once again revisited the light of the sun,
that he had totally despaired of every seeing. A post chaise and four were
ready the next morning to take them to Vienna, where I am since informed by a
letter from himself, they are returned. The empress has again taken him into
favor; his fortune and rank are restored; and he and his fair partner now have
the pleasing satisfaction of feeling happiness with double relish, as they once
knew what it was to be miserable.

This letter ought to precede the one from Lindor to Caroline. See page 118.
CAROLINE TO LINDOR. INCLUDING THE NYMPH OF THE GROVE. A SENTIMENTAL
HISTORIETTE.
YOUR letter, kind Lindor, I perused with peculiar satisfaction. I feel much
gratified, and you have the purest acklowledgments of my heart for your
interesting story. To merit your confidence, I shall ever rank among my most
valuable acquisitions; and be persuaded of the warm emotions of my bosom, when
you inform me, that any words my lips can pronounce, are capable of abating the
sorrows which corrode your mind. If my advice has been serviceable, if it has
been the means of calming the turbulence of your fruitless burning flames, I am
richly compensated by its event; my intention is thereby sanctioned, and by
following it in this instance, I may without ostentation say, you add a sprig
of laurel to your own brow. It is not common, for two sexes to correspond with
each other, on the subject you have chosen. It is rather the province of ours
alone. But what is uncommon, is not always vicious; if therefore, our
correspondence should be condemned by the maidens of sixteen, my age of six and
thirty will justify me; add to this, our connection and early acquaintance, and
I may flatter myself of being secure from censure. I often think on your
father's anxity for you, and the pleasure he fondly anticipated in the
enjoyment of your society, after the completion of your education, which he had
determined to watch over with a parental care.

I well remember his gray dishevelled locks, falling upon the shoulders, on
which, he has often borne you with peculiar delight, while you remained
unconscious of his devoted affection toward you. He was snatched from this
scene of woes, this theater of short lived pleasures, to mount the realms of
eternal bliss, while yet you needed his parental precepts. His examples however
have afforded you the purest model of rectitude, and his virtues offer you a
complete and worthy rule of human perfection. Follow them, my friend; and if
the sympathy of Caroline can at any time alleviate your grief, recur to her,
and receive those reflections which result from her little experience, with the
same pleasure she takes in offering them; and be assured of the joy she ever
feels in suppressing the sorrows of thy wounded heart, and the animation it
affords her, to draw upon thy blooming cheek, a gentle smile.

While I was writing you, Charles came running into the parlor, to inform me of
the arrival of my brother Sylvander; (who you know we heard was dead) the
assurance he gave me of the fact, left me no room to doubt the truth of it. He
told me he had enquired for my father, and ran immediately into his chamber;
luckily he found him sleeping* and would not, notwithstanding his anxiety,
disturb him: I had been up as usual ever since five.

You may well judge of my joy and surprise to see an only brother, who all of
us had concluded to be dead nearly six years since; our conjectures of his
decease were founded on va^ious reports, which though they could never be made
to correspond, yet the silence he suffered to take place, served to destroy on
our part, the smallest hope of his existence, o^ doubt of his death; you may
readily suppose I could write no more, 'till my anxious wishes were suppressed
or accomplished; laying my pen across the inkstand, I went and threw myself
upon the sofa, at the other end of the room; my mind felt agitated with a
variety of thoughts on the subject of the arrival of a beloved brother, after
so long separation; the blood began to boil in my heart, and a certain
dizziness seized my head.

Indeed I was almost distracted, fearing it a dream; at the moment of my
deepest indecision, he came into the parlor; I made a fruitless effort to run
to meet him; with difficulty I preserved myself from fainting; my strength
failed me, and I fell back upon the sofa almost lifeless; he flew and caught me
in his arms, and by the help of some salvolatile from my smelling bottle, which
had dropped from my hand, I was very soon recovered. Is it possible, my dearest
sister, cried he, that my presence can afflict? rather let it inspire within
your heart a lively gladness, and exhibit with mine the proof of mutual
transport. Tho he p^^^ended to demonstrate: degree of fortitude superior to
mine, I could readily perceive his feelings were not less affected. I have
frequently heard you mention the pathetic and touching scenes you have
witnessed, on the meetings of the French, with their friends or near
connexions, after a long absence, and the apathy of the Americans, who are, I
must confess, often insensible to appearance: Their feelings on occasions like
these are for the most part concealed in their breasts, and from custom alone,
are not testified with that warmth, for which the former are so justly
celebrated; the ardor of each, rises, I believe, to the same degree of pure
sincerity; and your opinion of the Americans, would have been altered, could
you have seen our meeting.

I felt extremely glad that Sylvander did not disturb my father, for the shock
might have overcome him. We have now taken the precaution, to advise him of the
pleasing news of my brother's arrival, when he shall awake. This will prepare
his mind, for the interview, and at the same time prevent a too sudden effusion
of joy, which might prove fatal to one in his declining years. After the mutual
inquiries consequent on the meeting of friends, separated from each other for
so long a term of years, my brother informed me that last evening he met with
his "ever adored Lavina," as he called her, which prevented his arrival in town
sooner; indeed he told me, he had almost determined to tarry to day wi^h his
charmer, and send us a letter to announce his arrival. He had already written a
lengthy missive to me; I will transcribe that part which concerns the unworthy
mistress of his heart, where you will read the manner of their extraordinary
rencontre. He styles this little story, the Nymph of the Grove. It is a tender
na^rative which I am persuaded will not displease you, and if simplicity of
composition is a recommendation, it has the necessary etiquette; but because it
^^^^^ishes another proof of female inconstancy, don't let it lead you to
conclude, that this capricious temper is confined alone to the female part of
rational beings; let me beseech you not to suffer such strange ideas to pervert
your natural candor; it is not universally the character of the female world. I
do assure you, many striking proofs of the reverse, can be very readily
produced.

THE NYMPH OF THE GROVE. A Sentimental Historiette.
THE evening was beautifully serene; the moon, blushing with crimson hue, had
just emerged from the horizon; and I was directing my steps toward an
elevation, from whence, I promised myself with reason, the most delightful
perspective view of the fine country around. -- Arrived at this summit, I was
contemplating the sweet prospect, and dwelling with rapture upon the variety of
the scene. On the one side were verdant plains and flowery meads; on the other
side, an orchard of trees in blossom, exhaling in profusive plenty the sweetest
fragrance, wafted by the gentle zephyr with fanciful delight; the ruffling of
the leaves and the murmuring sound from the little brook close by me, arrested
attention with peculiar pleasure; the wide extended ocean glittering in
tranquil calmness, attracted thought, and the little interspersed isl^s, whose
green surfaces rose in majestic beauty above the shining waters, formed also a
part of pensive meditation. As the day retired, the silver moon advanced to
replace the diurnal star, and prevent the dark canopy of night from being
unfurled. I wandered from hill to hill, contemplating in transport the
brilliancy of the prospect, till I had really lost myself; and entering an
adjacent grove, I heard the voice of a female, uttering her complaints in soft
accents, to the meandring brook, by the side of which she had seated herself on
a rock. I crept softly when I perceived her, and came near to her, while she
was yet melodiously continuing her tender tale, unconscious of an interruption.
Pardon my intrusion, said I, unknown fair, whoever thou art, and if the
almighty ruler of events, shall have thus directed my steps to afford you
relief, command the exertions of one, who will take a pleasure in presenting
the balm of comfort, to the fair distressed. Her ebony hair was displayed in
ringlets over her well formed neck, and divided in front, falling carelessly in
gentle curls upon her temples. A gloom was visible on her countenance, and she
appeared to behold me with very little surprise. I told her the bright evening
had induced me to wander till I had quite lost my way, and begged her to inform
me in what direction I might walk to regain the road. She replied, with a
syren's voice, "yonder house borders on it." And pray is that your dwelling?
She answered in the affirmative. The tear was not dried from her lively eye,
sparkling, tho in distress, and animating to a charm. Her cheeks seemed to have
been once emblems of the blooming rose, but now become almost pale; her
features were regular, and her countenance displayed a degree of virtuous
dignity, at once commanding and agreeable; in a word, she appeared the Nymph of
the Grove. And may I solicit the cause of your wandering, and the melancholy
that harbors itself in your lovely bosom?

"I was induced to walk" replied this charming fair, "from the same motive
which seems to have prompted you, and coming to this winding brook, I felt a
symphathy which touched my heart, issue from the sound of its curling streams,
gliding still softly, roaring over the bed of rooks, which seemed to attempt in
vain, to stop its determined course. Fancy, had captivated my imagination, and
I did not discern you until you spoke. You must have taken by surprise, part of
the subject I was musing on, the cause of my mourning and source of my
i^^mediable grief." I heared but part, replied I, and that part has made me
extremely solicitous to learn the whole of your history; pardon the confidence
I have assumed in urging it of you. I am induced to it from an anxiety I cannot
suppress, and in which my very soul seems to take a distinguished part.

"Your civility, kind stranger, and the sympathy visible upon your countenance,
together with the disinterested concern you seem to take, in the afflictions
which corrode my mortal frame, and a secret impulse within, almost inspire me
to a recital of my melancholy tale, concious it can neither add or deminish the
afflictions of my perplexed heart, or augment the perturbations of a distracted
mind. The impression the part you have heard may have made on your mind, and
the anxiety excited in consequence may take its rise from a curiosity incident
to human nature. -- Enough has been said to amply induce me to gratify your
curiosity, though I may predict with certainty, that the history of my
misfortunes must be very far from entertaining, to the ear of any one.

"My Father was a tradesman in the capital. By a strict application to
business, favored in some measure by good fortune, and availing himself of
every adventitious circumstances in trade, he acquired a very handsome estate.
My mother died when I was but an infant, and the care of my education devolved
consequently upon my father, who never put it out of his hands, until he
resigned his breath!" Here a stood of tears stopped her utterance for some
moments, when she resumed again her story.

"The attention of a father to the necessary education of a daughter, is
sometimes to be complained of; in some degree this was unhappily my case. I was
therefore, at his decease, advised by my friends, to put myself to a boarding
school, where I should be able to acquire, in a very short time, all the
advantages of a polite education. I felt obliged by their advice, though at the
age of seventeen, I must confess it appeared awkward, to begin the rudiments of
necessary learning. It was however, a duty I owed myself, and so greatly
beneficial to my future welfare, that I should have heen highly culpable to
have dispensed with this all important necessity, and should have paid too
severely the price of my ignorance. My father left a will, by which his large
fortune was divided between an elder brother and myself. The idea of a fortune
without control, was an attractive charm, and brought me many pretended
admirers, and in swarms I was seemingly infested every time I made my
appearance in public. My situation demanded the most determined fortitude, and
peculiar foresight, to prevent being imposed upon, being ush^red into the
world, unprepared for such a change, and at an age, when the imagination is too
easily captivated by sophistry and airy tales; for I must inform you that my
father utterly detested every kind of public amusement.

"I had an adorer, as sincere, methinks, as the loves can paint; a tear is due
to his momory! my heart swells and is ready to burst when I speak of him. I
have him always in my thoughts. His image continually follows me. My fancy
conducts me to him, when sleeping on my bed, where he receives the homage of my
awakening sigh! -- time will never erase him from my mind. I live but to lament
his misfortunes, and mine, or rather my imprudence. It always seemed that one
soul animated both our frames. I became acquainted with him early in life; his
ingenouous and disinterested friendship imperceptible endeared me to him; and
the sincerity of his mind, together with his particular and attached attention,
which he was ever anxious to demonstrate, captivated my heart. To him, in the
sight of righteous heaven, I had sworn eternal constancy. My vows forsaken, and
my promise forgotten, I am doomed the just object of vengeance by the powers
above. I encouraged his visits, and his company was not disagreeable to my
father at that early day, while he remained ignorant of his motives; but
malice, that fiend and tormentor of the virtuous, seated in a female breast,
was exercised against him and me. One who pretended to be my friend, intimated
to my father that the amiable Sylvander visited him for the sake of his
daughter, and was actually paying his addresses; this was sufficient to induce
my father to refuse Sylvander any future admission to his house, and order me
to forbid his coming. My duty obliged me to perform the painful task; this did
not, however, by any means dissolve my passion; on the contrary it seemed
rather to augment it, and I endeavored to alleviate the poignancy of his grief,
by giving him every opportunity I was able, to be in my company; but the plot
was soon discovered, and for my own peace and the inclination I ever had to
follow the dictates of my beloved parent, I was obliged to beg my lover never
to see me more. To forget him was impossible. His views were represented in so
unfair a light, that my father, on almost all occasions, seemed to take pains
to make his name odious to me. I acquiesced as much as possible in his wishes,
yet the name of Sylvander was ever an agreeable sound to my ears, and joyfully
harmonious to my heart. To hear so much injustice done his merits, excited
often times tears of rage; these eff^ctually served my purpose, and silenced my
father's reproaches. He thought the cause of my tears arose from a different
source; this induced him to believe me obedient, and contributed to obliterate
from his memory the though it of Sylvander. His attention, from the idea of my
obedience to his will, rendered my situation not unhappy. Every thing I wished,
relating to dress, was cheerfully granted me on mentioning it. The precious
moments he fondly dedicated to my diversions served to dissipate, in some
measure, the pains of an aching heart, and reconcile my mind to the hard laws
of fate. Our attachment and our affection were mutual. At his death -- I felt
all the force of his observations concerning my unfortunate Sylvander, and in
the agony of my grief protested never to encourage his addresses. I have to my
sorrow kept my word. When I told him my determination, and the impression the
sentiments of my father had made on my mind, a pale coldness seemed to
overspread his face, and a tear startling from his eye, melted my very heart in
his favor. Had he urged with energy his proposals, my innate fortitude was
incapable of withstanding the force of his arguments, or making any powerful
resistance to the well applied observations he might have made -- but he was
diffident! -- However tenderly I might have loved the dear author (after God)
of my existence, I must be allowed to suggest that the attempt of a parent to
control the propensities of a child in this point, is exceedingly wrong; it is
too frequently the means of their misery, and never of benefit; a child will
always harken to a parent's advice when reasonably offered, but severity
oftentimes injuries the point they mean to enforce. -- I was now exposed to the
the world, without a friend, as it were, to recur to, for the least advice.
Every young f^llow in the town seemed anxious to acquire my acquaintance, and
endeavored to obtain with my person, that part of my father's hard earnings
which fell to my lot. I refused many offers; at length I concluded on one who
in many respects resembled my Sylvander; there seemed a great similarity in
their manners, and I affected to have a necessary fondness for the one I had
singled out, for the partner of my life. I was married in less than twelve
months after the death of my father, and shall I add, in spite of myself, to a
person I never could love with any degree of sincerity. I have however this
satisfactory reflection that I never caused him a moment's disquietude on
account of his extravagant dissipation, which augmented my aversion to him. I
carefully concealed my hatred, and notwithstanding the regret with which I
parted with him, I found that had not heaven have been pleased to call him
hence, my situation would have been reduced to the most abject state of
beggary. When my affairs came to be liquidated, I found that the greater part
of my fortune was spent, and that the small house and farm adjacent were the
only remnants of my riches.

Shortly after my marriage Sylvander embarked for England, much out of health,
his spirits broken, and dejected to a degree exciting pity. I learned some time
after, that he had jumped or fallen overboard on the passage. There seemed to
be every affliction consequent on my unhappy union with a man I affectedly
pretended, I could live with and love. In a year after my nuptials I was
presented with a son who lived only three months; -- to add to my grief, death
prematurely snatched him from me; -- the los^ of this dear little object, in
whom I placed a hope of future joy, together with other misfortunes, depressed
and sunk my spirits in such a manner that I have never been in health since. I
am now left to worry out the remainder of an existence, scarce worthy
preserving. My mind is continually on the rack, incited by just reflections of
an erroneous fear offending the manes, and suffering the caprice of a parent
(if I may say and be forgiven) to be procurer to my misery, and the means of
the death of one I ever did love, and on whose memory I shall ever contemplate
with the most affectionate sensibility and tender regard, while I cannot refrain
from execrating the hard fortune I am bound by the fates to submit to."

I heard the story of this lovely woman with a^ attention and anxiety beyond
the limits of description. I wanted frequently to interrupt her and tell her
Sylvander still lived, and had added so much to his own fortune as to be able
to place her far beyond penury and very little below affluence. When she had
finished her story I clasped her in my arms, calling my Lavina by name,
embracing her, while every resistance was feeble. I told her the happy
Sylvander still lived, and that a few moments would restore him to her,
together with her fondest wishes. I am your adorer, your once unhappy but now
happy Sylvander. She faintly replied, "It cannot be, may heaven grant that this
be no vision; Sylvander has been dead many years; boundless ocean has found him
an ignoble grave; into its wide bosom has he been precipitantly plunged, from
whence he will never again emerge; five revolving years have passed since his
friends and myself have had the most ample assurance of his death." -- Step
into the house replied I, and you shall be convinced that I am your adorer,
your Sylvander. We walked into her little neat cottage; there was a middle aged
woman whom she had made choice of for a companion, and at the same time
houskeeper; the apartment was beautifully neat and elegant. After we were
seated, the lovely Lavina looked on me hopeless and despairing. She at last
recognized her Sylvander, and immediately fell into a swoon. It was with the
greatest difficulty imaginable we were able recover her from it. She would
often open her eyes and looking on me, cry out in the greatest agony of grief,
"Worthless wretch that I am." After the greatest exertions, we brought her to
herself, and calmed the agitations of her mind. I reassured her of my
constancy, and begged her to add to my felicity in granting me her hand. "It is
impossible," replied she, "you cannot possess, and your friends will never
suffer you to cherish a passion my conduct has rendered me unworthy to be the
object of; my fortune is gone, my health declining, and in a word, I am but one
step from the tomb." I persuaded the dear girl of the constant sincerity of my
heart, and the purity of my sentiments, which no circumstance had been powerful
enough to destroy; for real affection and genuine love are durable as life, and
no change in human affairs can extinguish the pure disinterested flame. I at
length forced, as it were her consent.

"You must new," replied this lovely woman, make me acquainted with your
history since your departure from America, and let me know what kind guardian
angel has preserved you, what M^ntor has protected you, and to what peculiar
good fortune I am indebted for your visit to this s^questered s^ot." I informed
her my time would not admit of a particular recital at present, that I would
give her an ample detail of my adventures the next time I should be in her
company. I have not yet seen my friends, continued I; late this afternoon I
arrived in this place, and to morrow morning I must go to the capital, and in
the evening will return and be every thing you wish. "I feel too anxious,
replied the charming Lavina, to dispense so long with what so materially
interests my feelings." I then told her, in a few words, that after leaving
America, my fixed melancholy was noticed during my passage to London by the
Captain and crew. I happened to be the only passenger on board, and I
frequently begged the Captain and likewise the sailors at several times, to
throw me into the sea, but none would so far befriend me. I wished to be
relieved from my wretched disquietude of mind, but shuddered at the idea of
self destruction. I told the Captain the cause of my grief, and the affliction
of my heart; his benevolence and philanthropy, virtues which shone
conspicuously in the character of this execellent man, induced him from that
moment, to become my sincere friend. He informed me I might embark very
advantageously in an Eastindiaman belonging to his friend in London, and place
to advantage the funds I had with me in the enterprise, and that he would
undertake to conduct the affair. I really felt obligated for so timely a
benefactor, thanked him as you may imagine with the purest sincerity of heart,
for his confidence and good intentions, and begged him to do me the favor if
ever he or any of the crew should return to America, to represent that I had
fallen overboard on the passage. Although he laughed at the idea, yet it appears
that some of them have executed with success this piece of business. I tarried
so short a time in London, and made so few acquaintances, and having never
wrote my friends in America, either from thence or India, from whence I now
arrive by the way of Philadelphia, that I suppose I shall appear to them as one
arisen from the dead. The fair Lavina sighe (...) ^ressing my hand, burst into
tears at the recital of my (...), and in broken accents she uttered these
words. "Ah, Sylvander, is it you I behold, or is all this a dream? if it is a
dream, may I never awake! the phantom shall afford me delight, which when
awake, I shall find myself deprived of." It is no vision lovely Lavina, be
persuaded it is not. I will now leave you, calm yourself and tomorrow morning
before the sun shall have peeped above the horizon in the East, I will come and
bid you adieu till I have seen my friends in the capital. I calculate upon the
promise you have made me of your hand; your heart you have involuntarily
assured me I have been long in possession of; a similar assurance on my part is
unnecessary, my conduct proves to you sufficiently the purity of my sentiments
and the force of my flame.

My brother Slyvander, is as much in love as you seem to be, and though his
mistress has been ungrateful, he is still generous enough to contribute to her
happiness, in making her the partner of his remaining days. -- Though however
derogatory it may appear to many, through their feeble conception of things,
that a man should repay ingratitude by so generous an action; yet he justifies
his decision with a warmth the sentiments he feels inspire; and positively
declares he should forever despise his own heart, did he think himself capable
of forsaking the object who inspired his youthful days with impressions so
forcibly favorable, because she had followed the dictates of her conscience in
obedience to a parent's will, and because her earthly blessings, called riches,
had taken to themselves wings and flown from her.

KINTAIR AND SEATON; OR, THE UNFORTUNATE SISTERS.
IN the north west parts of Scotland, in the reign of Malcolm, and cotemporary
with the usurper Macbeth, whose history our immortal Shakespeare has made the
subject of one of his tragedies, there lived two young noblemen, at the head of
two parties, the mortal enemies of one another. Scarce a week passed, at those
times when the families were near one another, without accounts of rapes, of
duels, and of private murders; for the hatred was so universally strong through
the whole multitude, that from the lord to the meanest servant, all thought it
a merit and an honor to injure, even in the most dishonest manner, any body
that belonged in any degree to the enemy's party.

The names of the two young noblemen, at this time at the head of these
parties, were Seaton and Kintair; the former, a youth of a most promising
genius and great abilities, joined to great integrity, and an earnest love of
virtue; his hereditary hatred to the Kintairs was, in short, the only thing
that could sully his character; and that he governed in such a manner, that had
it not been for the temper of his enemy, the world saw the family quarrel might
have been made up between them, and a deal of misery and bloodshed prevented to
the country; but such was the implacable hatred and native cruelty of the young
Kintair, that all offers of this kind in his life must have been vain, and
could only have exposed the goodness of the offerer to the imputations of
weakness, cowardice, and fear. The violent Kintair was in his temper bloody,
revengeful, pityless, and savagely cruel, to a degree scarce to be conceived;
ye all these violent passions and all his hatred to the Seaton family, could
not prevent his falling in love, at first sight, with one of that house, indeed
the sister, though he at first knew it not, of the very lord he hated so
implacably.

This lady, whose name was Margaret, had nor only a very charming person; but
the innate virtues of her soul displayed themselves outwardly in her face* and
whole deportment, and gave her an air and manner not to be resisted; she had a
twin sister, so like her in every feature and lineament of face, that they were
not easily to be known asunder, these were the only relations of the young
Seaton; and, with him, made all the remainder of that noble and ancient family.

Opportunities of meeting, it is easy to imagine, were not very frequent
between these two families, especially between the heads of them: in short, it
happened that the rough Kintair had never seen this lady, till one evening as
she was returning on horse back from a visit to a friend at some miles
distance, he met her, as he was going across the country, attended by half a
dozen servants, to a party of diversion. The moment he beheld her, he stopped
his horse, ordered as polite a message a^ he could dictate to be delivered to
her, and begged h^ might have leave to speak to her: the lady alighted from her
horse, and readily admitted him: when he approached her, he threw himself upon
his knees, entreated her to tell him her condition; and, if the laws of honor
would permit it, he would make her wife to the first nobleman of the country;
for that he was the lord Kintair. The lady, who had till that word heard him
with a downcast look, and a face covered with a blush of modesty, now
immediately leaped on her horse again, and told him; young lord, one word will
answer you; my name is Maraget Seaton. And, thus saying, she pursued her
journey.

Words are too faint to describe the conflict of raging passions in the breast
of the wild Kintair, on this occasion; love, anger, pride, revenge, the lost
hopes of enjoyment of the lady, and the disdain of a refusal, all combating
together in his breast, left him no room at first for words, or for any
resolution: he thew himself on the ground, and tore up the very earth in agony:
at length, arising in a fury, he bade his servants follow, and bring her and
her attendants back to him: they were not got far, however, before he changed
his opinion; and, thinking of the uncertainty of their success, as the lady's
attendants were equal to them in number, and determining to trust his revenge
to nobody but himself, he mounted his horse and followed them.

Love and revenge gave him wings; he soon overtook his own servants, and,
quickly after, the lady Margaret and hers: he rode up to her, and addressed
himself to her a second time in these words: Insolent idiot, did you imagine
you could escape me thus, and that I would let you go home to make your brother
sport with my entreaties, and your proud refusal? no! think not that I would
marry the sister of a man I hate; or be the scandalous means, by a boyish
passion, of making up an enmity, which has so just a cause as that between our
families; and which I hope, will be eternal. There is a shorter way for me to
satiate my desires; one that gives me too a double pleasure; as it seeds at
once my hatred and my love, and gives me the noblest revenge on all your house,
that my hate can even wish: with these words, he gave the signal of murder to
his attendants, who destroyed all the unhappy lady's servants, after a short
conflict; during which, the inhuman lord ravished their miserable mistress.
Within a moment after this, tho too late, alas! to prevent it, a party of near
an hundred of the Seatons appeared upon a neighboring hill; they, however, saw
nothing of this; but the savage ravisher, fearing to be overpowered by numbers,
mounted his horse, and with his attendants rode off in haste through the woods.
The Seatons passed another way; and the wretched lady was in a moment left
alone, encompassed with the horrors of her own fate, the carcases of her
murdered servants, and the bloody weapons of the murderers, which their haste
to get away, on sight of the other party, had made them leave. Her first
resolution was, to end her life and misery together, by plunging one of the
daggers into her own bosom; but religion forbidding, and her own shame
preventing her returning home, she came to a final resolution, of hiding
herself from the world for ever; and picking up the weapons to lay before her,
as an eternal remembrance of the horrid scene: she made her way to a distant
cottage, where she told her story; and, giving to the poor honest hands her
money, jewels, and whatever else of value she had about her, swore them to an
eternal secrecy, and conjured them to let her spend the remainder of a
miserable life with them.

The bloody Kintair, as soon as he had got to a place of safety, sat down with
his attendants, exulted with them in the success of his monstrous villainy, and
^swore he never tasted the pleasures of revenge before; he praised their
courage, gave them a number of presents, promised them a thousand more; and,
finally, bound himself in an association with them, to make them his companions
and his friends forever; and give them all estates, provided they joined
heartily with him in prosecuting a scene of vengeance, which he told them he
had now concerted; and of which this was but the auspicious beginning. All were
proud of the honor their lord did them; and all, with the severest
imprecations, entered into the association he proposed, of never resting till
the family of the Seatons, consisting now of three persons only, should be
extinct.

Friends and brothers in revenge, said Kintair on this, hear me now, and know
the first step to my design is this: the lady whom I have enjoyed must perish;
this must be the first act; and you shall then see, and be surprised at my
concerted vengeance. I had not spared her, but for the party that we saw above
us; but now the desperate attempt must be to seize her again ere she gets home,
and kill her on the spot where I enjoyed her; this completes my yet unfinished
vengeance on her, and leads you besides to a scene of complicated mischief,
with which my brain is full, but which you can yet have no idea of.

The words were no sooner uttered, but all were up and ready for the
enterprise; and made that haste, that they soon got forwarder than she could
possibly have been by that time, had she continued her journey homeward; here
they pitched on a thick wood, through which the road to the castle of the Seatons
lay, and waited for the unfortunate lady. She, poor creature, was otherwise
employed than they imagined; but her sister the lady Jane, unfortunately for
her, had the same day been abroad to some little distance, and returning home
in the dusk of the evening alone, the villains immediately seized on her, and,
according to the orders of their lord carried her to the fatal place where the
rape and murder had been before commmitted. It was late in the night before
they arrived there; and the moon shining bright, the distracted lady Margaret
had left her cottage and wandered to weep her sorrows at the fatal place where
the horrid act had been committed; she was here tossing herself on the ground,
and making the rocks and woods resound with her distracted cries, when the
murderers approached with their unhappy prey; the trampling of horses, the
oaths and blasphemies of the company, and the known voice of the hated Kintair
terrified the unfortunate lady Margaret so, that she crept among bushes and
thorns which wounded her tender skin as she passed on at every step, till she
came to a thicket, behind which she rested to listen to the noise of these
abandoned ruffians. They were now come to the place, and the servants throwing
down the unfortunate and mistaken victim of their fury, whose mouth they had
before stopped, and tied over with handkerchiefs, to prevent her outcries, no
voice was heard but of the savage Kintair, who, walking up to her, cried in an
insulting tone, We were prevented, lady, this morning, but here is now a favor
that you shall own strikes you to the heart: with these words he plunged his
sword into her bosom, and put an end to her life, without discovering his
mistake. As soon as the unfortunate lady fell, the inhuman murderer seating
himself on her body, yet struggling in the agonies of death, said to his
attendants, Now, friends, hear the utmost of my intentions; alarm you the
neighboring villages with cries of murder; these other bodies are yet warm,
and they shall be made to believe all fell together; I will join in the crowd
that first comes, and do you, Farquarson (speaking to one of his servants)
mount the swiftest horse, and, as you see us approach, ride with your utmost
speed toward Seaton castle, then round the heath and join us, and you shall be
rejoiced at what my revenge shall make of this. Immediately all separated to
the work; and the afflicted lady Margaret took that opportunity to get back to
her cottage; she was scarce there when the whole country was raised; the bloody
Kintair joined the mob; and Farquarson, when they came in sight, fled, as he
was ordered, before them; Kintair pursued him, with a number of the clowns; and
when he was got from them, that monster of villainy returned, assured, and
persuaded his followers, that it was lord Seaton who sled before them. The
clowns, willing to show their discernment, agreed to a man, that they knew him
all the way he went, and knew the horse he rode on; and on now viewing the
bodies of the murdered persons, the abandoned Kintair persuaded every body,
that this Seaton had debauched his sister, and brought her hither, where with
the assistance of his other servants, he had murdered her, and all who were
there present. His own people, it is easy to imagine, joined readily in this,
and the rest were soon brought over to follow their opinion: as soon as Kintair
found this, he made them a long declamation on the horror of the crime, and
persuaded them all to follow him immediately to the next large town, and relate
before the magistracy what they had seen. His persuasions, and the rewards he
promised to all that would go with him, made every one present follow; and
immediately they set forward, tho in the night, and never stopped or stayed
till they arrived at the end of their journey. All the way, as they went on,
the villainous Kintair's attendants extolled the generosity, the goodness, and
love of justice their master showed in this; and partly by these praises, and
partly by promised reward to all that should be able to give material evidence
against the murderers, the clowns were led into forming a thousand
circumstances, all positive, against the pretended murderer. When they arrived
at the town, it happened that the magistracy was at that time sitting: they
were all rejoiced at this, and went in a body to the hall; and, demanding (on
account of the horrid enormity of the crime they came to give evidence in) an
immediate ^udinence, were admitted. The arch-devil Kintair entering at their
head, recounted to the magistracy the story he had before concerted, and swore
to the identity of the person he accused; his servants all followed his
example, and, unwilling to say something from their own knowledge, each singled
out some one by name of the innocent Seaton's servants, whom they accused of
the murder of the attendants; and the clowns joining their positive oaths to
the same facts, and many other forged circumstances, the absent Seaton and six
of his attendants were accused of a most horrid murder, on the positive oaths
of more than thirty persons, who all declared themselves to have been eye
witnesses of the facts they alleged against them.

The innocent lord Seaton knew nothing of any part of this fatal tragedy, but
was returning to his castle with some of his servants, from a short journey he
had taken to meet his sisters, when he was seized by the officers of justice
sent to apprehend him: all circumstances are construed into meaning by people
possessed of an opinion; and accordingly, this unhappy lord being now found
returning with a number of his servants from that part of the country where the
murder had been committed, was looked on as a proof of his having been
committing it; and the agonies of grief, astonishment, and horror with which he
received the news of the death of his beloved sister, and his servants, were
construed into confessions of his guilt.

The mistake of the two-sisters was not found out; and the positives oaths of
all the accusers, that it was lady Margaret that was murdered, made it not at
all doubted. The unfortunate lady was glad of the mistake, wishing, since the
rape, for nothing but to be unknown to the whole world; and looking on this as
the most secure of all the means of being so, would never, had she not
afterward felt the then necessity that compelled her to it, have declared
herself to the world.

A short journey brought the accused lord before the magistracy; he entered the
room before they expected him, and immediately on his appearance all the
accusers renewed their oaths, that he and his attendants who were now with him,
were the very persons who had committed the murders; and the vile Kintair made
a long harrangue to the court, aggravating in the strongest manner the horror
of the crime, and adding a thousand reproaches. When he had done, the accused
lord advanced toward his judges with a settled countenance, and looking with
disdain on his accuser, and on his judges with that modest, but intrepid
confidence, which conscious innocence ever gives, spoke in the following
manner: My Lord and Judges,
View with an impartial eye the conduct of my past life, and you will determine
I cannot but be innocent of the horrid crimes I am accused of, and that I am
so, be it sufficient that I now i^ the most solemn manner, affirm it before you.

Consider that my accuser is the professed enemy of my house and family, and
that th^se who are accused as my accomplices, are the very friends, the fathers
and the brothers of my murdered honest servants.

Is it probable that they could for my sake, be induced to murder these; or
that I, who have been known to love my sister Margaret with more than a common
affection, could be her murderer? Impossible! think on these circumstances,
and weigh them well ere ye determine any thing; be not rash or hasty: ye know
not what hereafter may appear, that yet is not suspected.




Here the accused ended his defense, which was soon overpowered by the number
and repeated oaths of the evidences and particularly of his enemy Kintair, who
asserted that he saw him plunge his dagger in the breast of the lady Margaret,
and saw the others butchering her attendants. The supreme judge was now rising
from his seat, to pronounce sentence on the accused lord and his attendants,
when a voice was heard crying with the utmost earnestness, Forbear! forbear, oh
judge guard well the doors that none escape; and at the same instant, a woman
threw herself at the feet of the judges, crying out, I am that Margaret, whom
this innocent this best of brothers is accused of murdering; and look well
whose are these. With these words she threw down the daggers. The court all
rose in a moment, astonished at her appearance; the brother threw himself on
her neck in a transport of joy, and the court examining the daggers, and
finding on each the name of its owner, demanded of the lady the true history of
the fact. She on this related the whole catastrophe in the most pathetic terms.
And when she had heard the sentence, intended for her brother and his servants,
passed on his accusers, she retired into a nunnery, and left the innocent, but
unhappy Seaton in the possession of his own, and the forfeited estate and
titles of his accuser; which his descendants, the Seatons of that country,
enjoy to this day.

THE FATAL EFFECTS OF MISPLACED CONFIDENCE.
AMONG the variety of subjects which present themselves to my view, none excite
so forcibly my attention as the one I have selected for my present missive. The
colorings of which have been exhibited in animating strains by the poet, and
furnished a task for the essayist in numberless instances. The picture of
distress, and the throbbings of the heart at the critical moment of impending
misery; and the ungenerous tribute in return for the purest philanthropic
intentions, shall be my theme. Ingratitude, has, from the earliest ages, been
treated with just contempt, and incessant pains have been taken to publish the
deed, and lay open to mankind the hated miscreant, guilty of so vile a stain; a
crime of the greatest magnitude in the sight of heaven, and generally regarded
as heinous and contemptible by the inhabitants of this lower world.

I was led to these reflections, from a circumstance which took place not long
after the peace. It will be recollected, that at the close of the late war,
between Britain and America, the latter was as memorable for failures among its
merchants, as during the contest, the success of their trade had been
remarkable. At this period the unfortunate Douxville (as I shall here call him)
from his extensive trade, experienced repeated shocks by bankruptcies and the
death of insolvent debtors; these, added to ill success in navigation, reduced
a handsome fortune to the confines of a very small capital, all of which he
could not call his own.

Douxville, was a foreigner, of a compassionate turn of mind, and a disposition
truly amiable. It always delighted him to calm the afflictions of his fellow
countryman, who were indigent through misfortunes. These he seemed to entertain
with an extreme pleasure, even from the slightest recommendation. It was in the
days of his prosperity when mirth was the product of every moment; when
affluence had ceased to afford in real enjoyment, and the exquisite refinements
of pleasure had lost their verdant smiles, arising from a constant succession
of them, that chance presented to his hospitality board his former friend
Raymond, to whom (...) fortune had been illiberal in the distribution of her
favors. He had contracted an intimacy with Raymond in Paris, and found his
family to be rather in opulent that middling circumstances. They offered him a
handsome capital on his entrance into business; with which he purchased goods
and came to America a little before the peace; but through misfortunes on the
one hand, and entering into speculations he was entirely unacquainted with, on
the other, he reduced himself to mere penury. Raymond was a young man who
united to a getneel person and polite address, the advantages of an extensive
education; but destitute, without a hope, when introduced to Douxville, whose
generosity, from disinterested friendship alone, taught him to recognize the
friendless object. Douxville, whose hospitality was conspicious on every
occasion, and whose liberality the shadow of meanness never eclipsed, invited
him to his house, and made him his companion and bosom friend. The impressions
such distinguished kindness wrought upon feelings of the distressed Raymond,
can be easily conceived of. He accepted the invitation with all the assurances,
that a mind penetrated with the extent of the obligation is capable of
testifying: But it appears by the event, that this sentiment of gratitude was
only momentary; and these outward demonstrations were, by no means the genuine
effusions of a good heart. The time however was now arrived, when the
beneficent acts of real friendship could be in some measure repaid; fidelity
inviolable, and attachment sincere, were all that became necessary. It was at
this time Douxville, taking into serious consideration his extreme reverse of
fortune, reflected with some secret satisfaction, that a friend was left him,
to whom he could disclose without any kind of reserve, the exact estate of his
affairs. From the stagnation of business in America, he found he should be
totally ruined to continue, and therefore, suggested the plan of collecting
together the feeble remains of his shattered fortune, and sailing for the
Westindies, in a vessel which he had, to endeavor to repair his losses by a
few successful voyages in those parts. From a mistaken conception of merit, and
a false idea of friendship in the object he had selected for his companion, he
thought to place the most implicit confidence in the wretch he had prevented
from famishing; one whom gratitude ought to have very strongly influenced to
strict fidelity. But behold! a fatal reverse. The small capital that remained
in Douxville's possession would not admit of diminution without injury to his
trade; and owing several sums in the Westindies, though not very considerable,
he thought it most prudent to secure his property, in such a manner as not to
have it arrested from him by seizure in the ports where his business might lead
him. To this effect, he proposed to convey the vessel and cargo by a bill of
sale to Raymond; the latter promoted the idea with all the warmth of apparent
friendship, and the plan was duly carried into execution. They pursued their
voyage, and arriving in the Westindies, found every thing to exceed their most
sanguine expectations. Fortune to appearance began once more to display her
lucid beams over the head of the unhappy Douxville. The cargo was disposed of
in the name of Raymond, and the profits afforded Douxville the pleasing hopes
of a speedy termination with his creditors in a neighboring island. These did
not long remain ignorant of his being there, and improved the first opportunity
to send and arrest him. From the confidence he placed in the efforts, of his
pretended friend, he suffered himself to be conducted to prison, in perference
to making any attempts to escape; and the gates were shut against him, never to
be opened for his enlargement. The false Raymond continued the mask no longer
than an opportunity offered for casting off the dissembling veil; and the
property which he was first led to regard as imaginary, he now claimed as his
lawful right. He was sent for, from the darksome cell, and called on by the
voice of his benefactor from the black recess of a prison. But the hardened
wretch was deaf to the calls of him who had been his truest friend, whose
absence served to suppress all kind of fear and restraint. His answers, when he
condescended to make any, were vile as the mouth that uttered them, the imports
of which were, that he had been his friend already too long, and that the
period was now arrived that must terminate all further intercourse between
them. He pretended ignorance of having any obligations to him, and affected to
despise him as an impostor; one for whom repeated favors had become irksome,
by their constant succession.

Confined within the walls of a loathsome goal, the unhappy Douxville was
unable to justify himself to the world, or to obtain the least justice from a
wretch lost to all the feelings of humanity. In vain did the now miserable
Douxville, by pathetic remonstrances, endeavor to raise a grateful sentiment
in his breast. -- Equally vain were his attempts to prove the property his and
offer it in preference to his creditors in payment of his just debts. It was in
the possession of a wretch undaunted by threats and demands, and whose heart
was thoroughly steeled against the soft language of milder entreaties. Every
effort to obtain justice became futile, and the hardened villian sailed in a
few days from the shore, leaving his truest friend in the deepest affliction
and lowest misery, to worry out the remainder of his existence in a prison;
where he was soon overcome by the weight of his grief, surviving only a few
days the departure of the wretch who completed his ruin and terminated his
existence. How fatal the effects of misplaced confidence! The perpetrator of
this horrid deed did not however escape with impunity. The enjoyment of his ill
gotten treasures was but of short duration. Righteous heaven, to whom nothing
is unknown, who presides in justice, and who pun^shes sooner or later the
crimes of mankind, and (...) whose discerning eye black ingratitude is never
concealed, beheld in wrath the horrid deed. Raymond was overtaken by a severe
storm soon after his departure, and the blue lightning from the skies shivered
the masts from the top to the surface of the deck, and the vessel was left to
the sport of the waves. -- This storm was succeeded by another more violent and
more terrible: And the vessel was now almost incapable of longer resisting the
impetuosity of the watery element, beating without cessation against every part.
The distress of (...) was augmented by the ship's starting a plank, which let
the water in so fast, that the greatest exertions of the seamen were
insufficient to free her. The leak increased with rapidity, the storm debated
not of its fury, and the vessel must have gone down, had not a lee shore
presented; on which they run with such violence, that the bark already weakened
and exhausted by continual storms, went to pieces almost immediately. Raymond,
was the first victim of distress. He was precipitated from the quarter deck
into the sea, and tossed by the vibrating flood upon rocks which mangled his
limbs and body in a shocking manner. The inhabitants of the shore, aroused by
the misfortunes of their fellow creatures, came and relieved them; took the
almost lifeless Raymond to their house, and imitated the good Samaritan by
dressing his wounds and administering to him the kindest acts of hospitality
and friendship. The seamen however, not altogether ignorant of the
circumstances I have related, concerning this wretch, dropped several hints of
the real state of facts. This information was carried to Raymond, who began by
denying, but finding himself at the point of approaching dissolution, he had
just time to make an open avowal of his crime, and shut his trembling eyes in
torment.

A TURKISH STORY.
L^ (...) one of the handsomest girls in D^ (...) not the least pretentions to
beauty, but she was infinitely more witty than Lelia* Her father, who was an
Arabian physician, had taught her to read; she could make verses, and sing like
a fairy. G^mil was a young Arabian, rich and of a noble family. The Damascans
said, the pretty Lelia should be the wife of the rich Gamil. Scanbade, piqued
at the frequent repetition of this mortifying speech, made the following song:
'Blind and superficial mortal, think thou to find the satisfaction of thy
heart in the delight of thy eyes, or that a momentary gratification is to be
put in competition with a durable system of happiness? Insensible man open the
eyes of thy soul, and make a choice worthy of thy judgment. The beauty that so
inchants thee is but the morning flower, which in the evening fading thou will
cast it away. Quit the flowery gardens of Damascus, and seek the happy plains
of Arabia; the plants it produces will stand the test of time, and by proper
keeping, send forth an odor more sweet and lively than that of the morning.
Time, the rapid destroyer of beauty and flowers, perfects and embellishes wit,
sense and benevolence.'

This song soon found its way to Gemil. He was struck with the beauty of it,
and the truths it conveyed. Peace was a stranger to his bosom until Scanbade
became united to him for life. After a long course of years spent together in
uninterrupted enjoyment, the marriage of Gemil and Scanbade was quoted as a
pattern of fidelity and happiness.

Abdalmelech, who then reigned in Damascus, being prompted by curiosity to
visit this renowned pair, was astonished when he perceived the difference in
their external appearance, for Gemil was handsome, and of ^ lovely mein. The
Prince himself, being a tolerable poet, addressed Scanbade in the following
verses:

'What traces of beauty has Gemil discovered in your person, that he should
seiect you from all the beauties of the city, to be his wife, and the sole
object of his affections? On the contrary, can any thing be more the reverse of
beauty, both in form and features, than yourself? Is not your figure so thin as
to be scarcely palpable, and your complexion more like that of a t^wney African
than the fair Damascan?'

Scanbade, stung to the heart by this rude declamation, replied to him directly
with that freedom of sentiment which might be expected from an offended woman
of her sensibility and address:

'What merit did the people of the earth discover in you, that you above all
others was chosen to reign over them? They have been deceived, for he alone i^
worthy the esteem of mankind who possesses an unspotted soul, like the diamond,
whose brilliancy is not clouded with any speck.'

The Caliph, struck by an answer so complete with spirit and propriety, charmed
likewise with her understanding and the poignancy of her wit, presented her
with a magnificent robe, and sent her husband back loaded with presents.

THE HISTORY OF LEONORA, OR THE UNFORTUNATE JILT.
LEONORA was the daughter of a gentleman of fortune; she was tall and
well-shaped, with a sprightliness in her countenance, which often attracts
beyond more regular features joined with an insipid air; nor is this kind of
beauty less apt to deceive than allure the good humor which it indicates, being
often mistaken for good nature, and the vivacity for true understanding.

Leonora, who was now at the age of eighteen, lived with an aunt of here is in a
town in the north of England. She was an extreme lover of gaiety; and very
rarely missed a ball, or any other public assembly; where she had frequently
opportunities of satisfying a greedy appetite of vanity with the preference
which was given her by the men to almost every other woman present.

Among many young fellows who were particular in their gallantries toward her,
Horatio soon distinguished himself in her eyes beyond all his competitors; she
danced with more than ordinary gaiety when he happened to be her partner;
neither the fairness of the evening nor the music of the nightingale, could
lengthen her walk like his company. She affected no longer to understand the
civilities of others: whilst she inclined so attentive an air to every
compliment of Horatio, that she often smiled even when it was too delicate for
her comprehension.

Horatio, was a young gentleman of a good family ^red to the law, and had been
some few years called to the degree of a barrister. His face and person were
such as the generality allowed handsome: but he had a dignity in his air very
rarely to be seen. His temper was of the saturnine complexion, and without the
least ^aint of moroseness. He had wit and humor, with an inclination to satire,
which he indulged rather too much.

This gentleman, who had contracted the most violent passion for Leonora, was
the last person who perceived the probability of its success. The whole town
had made the match for him, before he himself had drawn a confidence from her
actions sufficient to mention his passion to her; for it was his opinion, (and
perhaps he was there in the right) that it is highly impolitic to talk
seriously of love to a woman before you have made such a progress in her
affections, that she herself expects and desires to hear it.

But whatever diffidence the fears of a lover may create, which are apt to
magnify every favor conferred on a rival, and to see the little advances
toward themseves through the other end of the perspective; it was impossible that
Horatio's passion should so blind his discernment, as to prevent his conceiving
hopes from the behavior of Leonora, whose fondness for him was now as visible
to an indifferent person in their company, as his for her.

It was in the midst of a gay conversation in the walks one evening, when
Horatio whispered Leonora, that he was desirous to take a turn or two with her
in private, for that he had something to communicate (...) her of great
consequence. 'Are you sure it is of con^sequence? said she smiling -- I hope,
answered ha^^ you will think so too, since the whole future happiness of my
life must depend on the event.

Leonora, who very much suspected what was coming, would have deferred it till
another time: but Horatio, who had more than half conquered the difficulty of
speaking, by the first motion, was so very importunate, that she at last
yielded, and leaving the rest of the company, they turned aside into an
un^requented walk.

They had retired far out of the sight of the company, both maintaining a
strict silence. At last Horatio made a full stop, and taking Leonora, who stood
pail and trembling, gently by the hand, he fetched a deep sigh, and then
looking on her eyes with all the tenderness imaginable, he cried out in a
faltering accent; 'O Leonora! it is necessary for me to declare to you on what
the future happiness of my life must be founded! Must I say, there is something
belonging to you which is a bar to my happiness, and which unless you will part
with, I must be miserable?' 'What can that be,' replied Leonora? -- 'No
wonder,' said he, 'you are surprised that I should make an objection to any
thing which is yours, yet sure you may guess, since it is the only one which
the riches of the world, if they were mine, should purchase of me -- Oh it is
that which you must part with, to bestow all the rest! Can Leonora, or rather
will she, doubt longer? -- Let me then whisper it in her ears, -- It is your
name, Madam. It is by parting with that, by your conde^cension to be for ever
mine, which must at once prevent me from being the most miserable, and will
render me the happiest of mankind.'

Leonora, covered with blushes, and with as angry a look as she could possibly
put on, told him, that had she suspected what his declaration would have been,
he should not have decoyed her from her company; that he had so surprised and
frightened her, that she begged him to convey her back as quick as possible;
which he, trembling very near as much as herself, did.

Many weeks had not passed after this interview, before Horatio and Leonora
were what they call on a good footing together. All ceremonies except the last
were now over; the writings were now drawn, and every thing was in the utmost
forwardness preparative to the putting Horatio in possession of all his wishes.
I will, if you please, repeat you a letter from each of them which I have got
by heart, and which will give you no small idea of their passion on both sides.

HORATIO TO LEONORA.
"HOW vain, most adorable creature, is the pursuit of pleasure in the absence
of an object to which the mind is entirely devoted, unless it has some relation
to that object! I was last night condemned to the society of men of wit and
learning which, however agreeable it might have formerly been to me, now only
gave me a suspicion that they imputed my absence in conversation to the true
cause. For which reason, when our engagements forbade me the extatic happiness
o^ seeing you, I am always desirous to be alone; since (...) sentiments for
Leonora are so delicate, that I cannon bear the apprehension of another's
prying into those delightful endearments with which the warm imaginations of a
lover will sometimes indulge him, and which I suspect my eyes then betray.

"To fear this discovery of our thoughts, may perhaps appear too ridiculous a
nicety to minds not susceptible of all the tendernesses of this delicate
passion. And surely we shall suspect there are few such, when we consider that
it requires every human virtue, to exert itself in its full extent. Since the
beloved, whose happiness it ultimately respects, may give us charming
opportunities of being brave in her defense, generous to her wants,
compassionate to her afflictions, grateful to her kindness; and, in the same
manner, of exercising every other virtue, which he who would not do to any
degree, and that with the utmost rapture, can never deserve the name of a
lover: It is therefore with the view to the delicate modesty of your mind that
I cultivate it so purely in my own; and it is that which will s^fficiently
suggest to you the uneasiness I bear from those liberties, which men, to whom
the world allow politeness, will sometimes give themselves on these ocasions.

"Can I tell you with what eagerness I expect the arrival of that blessed day,
when I shall experience the f^^shood of a common assertion, that the greatest
human happiness consists in hope? A doctrine which no person had ever stronger
reason to believe than ^yself at present, since none ever tasted such bliss as
(...) my bosom with the thoughts of spending my fu^ure days with such a
companion, and that every action of my life will have the glorious satifaction
of conducing to your happiness."

LEONORA TO HORATIO.
"THE refinement of your mind has been so evidently proved by every word and
action ever since I had first the pleasure of knowing you, that I thought it
impossible my good opinion of Horatio could have been heightened to any
additional proof of merit. This very thought was my amusement when I received
your last letter, which, when I opened, I confess I was surprised to find the
delicate sentiments expressed there, so far exceed what I sho't could come even
from you, although I know all the generous principles human nature is capable of,
are centered in your breast, that words cannot paint what I feel on the
reflections, that my happiness shall be the ultimate end of all your actions.

"Oh Horatio! what a life must that be, where the meanest domestic cares are
sweetened by the pleasing consideration, that the man on earth who best
deserves, and to whom you are most inclined to give your affections, is to reap
either profit or pleasure from all you do! In such a case profits must be
turned into diversions, and nothing but the unavoidable inconveniences of life
can make us remember that we are mortal.

"If the solitary turn of your thoughts, and the desire of keeping them
undiscovered, makes even the conversasion of men of wit and learning tedious to
you, wh^^ anxious hours must I spend who am condemned by cu^^tom to the
conversation of women, whose natural curiosity leads them to pry into all my
thoughts, and whose envy can never suffer Horatio's heart to be possessed by
any one without forcing them into malicious design^ against the person who is
so happy as to possess it: but indeed, if ever envy can possible have any
excuse, or even alleviation, it is in this case, where the good is so great,
and it must be equally natural to all to wish it for themselves, nor am I
ashamed to own it: and to your merit, Horatio, I am obliged, that prevents my
being in that most uneasy of all the situations I can figure in my imagination,
of being led by inclinations to love the person whom my own judgment forces me
to condemn."

Matters were in so great forwardness between this fond couple, that the day
was fixed for their marriage and was now within a fortnight, when the sessions
chanced to be held for that county in a town about twenty miles distance from
that which is the scene of our story. It seems it is usual for the young
gentlemen of the bar to repair to these sessions, not so much for the sake of
profit, as to show their parts, and learn the law of the justices of peace; for
which purpose one of the wisest and gravest of all the justices is appointed
speaker or chairman, as they modestly call it, and he reads them a lecture, and
instructs them in the true knowledge of the law.

Hither repaired Horatio, who as he hoped by his profession to advance his
fortune, which was not at ^resent very large, for the sake of his dear Leonora,
^e resoved to spare no pains, nor lose any opportunity of improving or
advancing himself in it.

The same afternoon in which he left the town, as Leonora stood at her window,
a coach and six passed by, which she declared to be the compleatest,
genteelest, prettiest equipage she ever saw; adding these remarkable words, 'O
I am in love with that ^quipage!' which, tho her friend Florella at that time
did not greatly regard, she has since remembered.

In the evening an assembly was held, which Leonora honored with her company:
but intended to pay her dear Horatio the compliment of refusing to dance in his
absence.

O why have no women as good resolution to maintain their vows, as they have
often good inclinations in making them!

The gentleman who owned the coach and six came to the assembly. His clothes
were ^s remarkably fine as his equipage could be. He soon attracted the eyes of
the company; all the smarts, all the silk waist coats with silver and gold
edging, were eclipsed in an instant.

He had on a cut velvet coat of a cinnamon color, lined with a pink satin,
embroidered all over with gold: his waistcoat, which was cloth of silver, was
embroidered with gold likewise. I cannot be particular as to the rest of his
dress: but it was all in the French fashion; for Bellarmine (that was his name)
was just arrived from Paris.

This fine figure did not more engage the eyes o^ every lady in the assembly,
than Leonora did his. He had scarce beheld her, but he stood motionless and
fixed as a statu^e, or at least would have done so, if good breeding had
permitted him. However, he carried it so far, before he had power to correct
himself, that every person in the room easily discovered where his admiration
was settled. The other ladies began to single out their former partners, all
perceived who would be Bellarmine's choice; which they however endeavored, by
all possible means, to prevent: Many of them saying to Leonora, 'O, Madam, I
suppose we shall not have the pleasure of seeing you dance to night;' and then
crying out, in Bellarmine's hearing, 'O Leonora will not dance, I assure you;
her partner is not here.' One maliciously attempted to prevent her, by sending
a disagreeable fellow to ask her, that so she might be obliged either to dance
with him, or sit down: but this scheme proved abortive.

Leonora saw herself admired by the fine stranger, and envied by every woman
present. Her little heart began to flutter within her; and her head was
agitated with a convulsive motion; she seemed as if she would speak to several
of her acquaintance, but had nothing to say: for as she would not mention her
present triumph; so she could not disengage her thoughts one moment from the
contemplation of it: she had never tasted any thing like this happiness. She
had before known what it was to torment a single woman; but to be hated and
secretly cursed by a whole assembly, was a joy reserved for this blessed
moment. As this ^^st profusion of ecstacy had confounded her under^^anding; so
there was nothing so foolish as her behavior; she played a thousand childish
tricks, distorted her person into several shapes, and her face into several
laughs, without any reason. In a word, her carriage was absurd as her desires,
which were, to affect an insensibility of the stranger's admiration, and at
that same time a triumph, from that admiration, over every woman in the room.

In this temper of mind, Bellarmine, having enquired who she was, advanced to
her, and with a low bow begged the honor of dancing with her, which she with a
low court'sy immediately granted. She danced with him all night, and enjoyed
perhaps the highest pleasure that she was capable of feeling.

Leonora retired about six in the morning, but not to rest. She tumbled and
tossed in her bed, with very short intervals of sleep, and those entirely
filled with dreams of the equipage, and fine clothes she had seen, and the
balls, operas, and ridottos, which had been the subject of their conversation.

In the afternoon, Bellarmine, in the dear coach and six, came to wait on her.
He was indeed charmed with her person, and was, on enquiry, so well pleased
with the circumstances of her father (for he himself, notwithstanding all his
finery, was not quite so rich as Croeius or an Attalus.) He was so pleased I
say, that he resolved to make his addresses to her directly. He did so
accordingly, and that with so much warmth and briskness, that he quickly
baffled her weak repulses, and obliged the lady to refer him to her father,
who, she knew, would quickly d^^clare in favor of a coach and six.

Thus, what Horatio had by sighs and tears, lov^ and tenderness, been so long
obtaining, the French English Bellarmine with gaiety and gallantry possessed
himself of in an instant. In other words, what modesty had employed a full year
in raising, impudence demolished in twenty four hours.

From the opening of the assembly till the end of Bellarmine's visit, Leonora
had scarce once thought of Horatio; but he now began, tho an unwelcome guest,
to enter into her mind. She wished she had seen the charming Bellarmine and his
charming equipage, before matters had gone so far. 'Yet why (says she) should I
wish to have seen him before; or what signifies it that I have seen him now? Is
not Horatio my lover? almost my husband? Is he not as handsome, nay handsomer,
than Bellarmine? Aye, but Bellarmine is the genteeler and the finer man; yes,
that he must be allowed. Yes, yes, he is that certainly. But did not I no
longer than yesterday love Horatio more than all the world? Aye, but yesterday
I had not seen Bellarmine. But does not Horatio dote on me, and may he not in
despair break his heart if I abandon him? Well, and has not Bellarmine a heart
to break too? Yes, but I promised Horatio first; but that was poor Bellarmine's
misfortune; if I had seen him first, I should certainly have prefered him. Did
not the dear creature prefer me to every woman in the assembly, when every She
was laying out for him; When was it in Horatio's power to give me such an
instance of affection? Can he give me (...) equipage, or any of those things
which Bellarmine ^ill make me mistress of? How vast is the difference ^etween
being the wife of a poor counselor, and the wife of one of Bellarmine's
fortune! If I marry Horatio, I shall triumph over no more than one rival: but
by marrying Bellarmine, I shall be the envy of all my acquaintance. What
happiness! -- But can I suffer Horatio to die? for he has sworn he cannot
survive my loss: but perhaps he may not die; if he should, can I prevent it;
Must I sacrifice myself to him? besides, Bellarmine may be miserable for me
too.' She was thus arguing with herself, when some young ladies called her to
the walks, and a little relieved her anxiety for the present.

The next morning Bellarmine breakfasted with her in presence of her aunt, whom
he sufficiently informed of his passion of Leonora: he was no sooner withdrawn,
than the old lady began to advise her nice on this occasion -- 'You see, child,
(says she) what fortune has thrown in your way; and I hope you will not
withstand your own preferment.' Leonora sighing, 'begged her not to mention any
such thing, when she knew her engagements to Horatio.' 'Engagements to a fig,'
cried the aunt; 'you should thank heaven on your knees, that you have it yet in
your power to break them. Will any woman hesitate a moment, whether she shall
ride in a coach, or walk on foot all the days of her life? -- But Bellarmine
drives six, and Horatio not even a pair.' 'Yes,' 'but, Madam, what will the
world say?' answered Leonora; 'will they not condemn me?' 'The world is always
on the side of prudence.' cries the aunt, 'and would surely condemn you, if you
sacrificed your interest to any motive whatever. O, I know the world very well:
and y^^ show your ignorance, my dear, by your objection. O^ my conscience! the
world is wiser. I have lived longer in it than you; and I assure you there is
not any thing worth our regard besides money: ^or did I ever know any one
person who married from other considerations, who did not afterward heartily
repent it. Besides, if we examine the two men, can you prefer a sneeking
fellow, who has been bred at the university, to a fine gentleman just come
from his travel^? All the world must allow Bellarmine to be a fine gentleman,
positively a fine gentleman and a handsome man.' -- 'Perhaps, Madam, I should
not doubt it if I knew how to be handsomely off with the other.' 'O leave that
to me,' says the aunt. 'You know your father has not been acquainted with the
affair. Indeed, for my part, I thought it might do well enough, not dreaming of
such an offer: but I Will disengage you; leave me to give the fellow an answer. I
warrant you shall have no farther trouble.'

Leonora was at length satisfied with her aunt's reasoning; and, Bellarmine
supping with her that evening, it was agreed he should the next morning go to
her father and propose the match, which she consented should be consummated at
his return.

The aunt retired soon after supper, and the lovers being left together,
Bellarmine began in the following manner: 'Yes, Madam, this coat I assure you
was made at Paris, and I defy the best English tailor even (...) imitate it,
There is not one of them can cut, Mad^^, they cannot cut. If you observe how
this skirt is ^^rned, and this sleeve, a clumsy English rascal can do nothing
like it. -- Pray how do you like my liveries?' Leonora answered, 'she thought
them very pretty.' 'All French,' says he, 'I assure you, except the great
coats; I never trust any thing more than a great coat to an Englishman; you
know one must encourage our own people what one can, especially as, before I
had a place, I was in the country interest, he, he, he! but for myself, I would
see the dirty island at the bottom of the sea, rather than wear a single rag of
English work about me; and I am sure after you have made one tour to Paris, you
will be of the same opinion with regard to your own clothes. You cannot conceive
what an addition a French dress would be to your beauty. I positively assure
you, at the first opera I saw since I came over, I mistook the English ladies
for chamber-maids, he, he, he!'

With such sort of polite discourse did the gay Bellarmine entertain his
beloved Leonora, when the door opened on a sudden, and Horatio entered the
room. Here it is impossible to expess the surprise of Leonora.

A long silence, prevailed in the whole company: If the familiar entrance of
Horatio struck the greatest astonishment into Bellarmine, the unexpected
presence of Bellarmine no less surprised Horatio. At length Leonora collecting
all the spirit she was mistress of, addressed herself to the latter, and
pretended to wonder at the reason of so late a visit. 'I should, indeed,'
answered he, 'have made some apology for disturbing you at this hour, (...) not
my finding you in company assured me I do (...) break in upon your repose.'
Bellarmine rose from (...) chair, traversed the room in a minuet step, and
h^^med an opera tune, while Horatio advancing to Leonora, asked her in whisper,
if that gentleman was not a relation of hers; to which she answered with a
smile, or rather sneer, 'No, he is no relation of mine yet*' adding, 'she could
not guess the meaning of his question.' Horatio told her softly, 'it did not
arise from jealousy.' 'Jealousy!' 'I assure you, it would be very strange in a
common acquaintance to give himself any of those airs.' These words a little
surprised Horatio; but before he had time to answer, Bellarmine danced up to
the lady, and told her, 'he feared he interrupted some business between her and
the gentleman.' 'I can have no business,' said she, 'with the gentleman, nor
any other, which need be any secret to you.'

'You'll pardon me,' said Horatio, 'if I desire to know who this gentleman is,
who is to be entrusted with all our secrets.' 'You'll know soon enough,' cries
Leonora; 'but I cannot guess what secrets can ever pass between us of such
mighty consequence,' 'No, Madam!' cries Horatio, I Am sure you would not have me
understand you in earnest.' ''Tis indifferent to me,' says she, how you
understand me; but I think so unreasonable a visit is difficult to be
understood at all, at least when people find one engaged; though one's servants
do not deny one, one may expect a well-bred person should soon take the hint.'
Madam,' said Ho^^tio, 'I did not imagine any engagement with a stran^er, as it
seems this gentleman is, would have made ^y visit impertinent, or that any such
ceremonies were to be preserved between persons in our situation.' Sure you are
in a dream, said she, or would persuade me that I am in one. I know no
pretensions a common acquaintance can have to lay aside the ceremonies of good
breeding.' 'Sure,' said he, 'I am in a dream; for it is impossible I should be
really esteemed a common acquaintance by Leonora, after what has passed between
us!' Passed between us! Do you intend to affront me before this gentleman?' 'D
-- n me, affront the lady,' say Bellarmine, cocking his hat, and strutting up
to Horatio. 'Does any man dare affront this lady before me, d -- n me?'
'Hearkee, Sir,' says Horatio, 'I would advise you to lay aside that fierce air;
for I am mightily deceived, if this lady has not a violent desire to get your
worship a good drubbing.' 'Sir said Bellarmine, 'I have the honor to be her
protector, and d -- n me, if I understand your meaning,' 'Sir,' answered
Horatio, 'she is rather your (...) but give yourself no more airs, for you
(...) I am prepared for you,' (shaking his whip at him) 'Oh! Serviteur tres
humble,' says Bellarmine, ' Je vous entend perfaitment bien.' At which time the
aunt, who had heard of Horatio's visit, entered the room, and soon satisfied
all his doubts. She convinced him that he was never more awake in his life, and
that nothing more extraordinary had happened in his three days absence, than a
small alteration in the affections of Leonora; who now burst into tears, and
wondered what reason she had given him to use her in so barbarous a manner.
Horatio desired Bellarmine to withdraw with him: but the ladies prevented it,
by laying violent hands on the latter; upon which, the former took his leave
without any great ceremony, and departed, leaving the lady with his rival to
consult for his safety, which Leonora feared her indiscretion might have
endangered: but the aunt comforted her with assurances, that Horatio, would not
venture his person against so accomplished a cavalier as Bellarmine; and that,
being a lawyer, he would seek revenge in his own way, and the most they had to
apprehend from him was an action.

They at length therefore agreed to permit Bellarmine to retire to his
lodgings, having first settled all matters relating to the journey which he was
to undertake in the morning, and their preparations for the nuptials at his
return.

But alas! as wise men have observed, the seat of valor is not the countenance;
and many a grave and plain man, will, on a just provocation, betake himself to
that mischievous metal, cold iron; while men of fiercer brow, and sometimes
with that emblem of courage, a cockade, will more prudently decline it.

Leonora was waked in the morning, from a visionary coach and fix, with the
dismal account, that Bellarmine was run through the body by Horatio: that he lay
languishing at an inn, and the surgeons had declared the wound mortal. She
immediately leaped out of the bed danced about the room in a frantic manner,
tore her hair, and beat her breast in all the agonies of despair; in which sad
condition her aunt, who likewise arose at the news, found her. The good old
lady applied her almost art to comfort her niece. She told her, 'while ^here
was life there was hope; but that if he should die, her affliction should be of
no service to Bellarmine, and would only expose herself, which might probably
keep her some time without any future offer; that as matters had happened, her
wisest way would be to think no more of Bellarmine, but to endeavor to regain
the affections of Horatio.' 'Speak not to me,' cried the disconsolate Leonora;
'is it not owing to me, that poor Bellarmine has lost his life? have not these
cursed charms' (at which words she looked steadfastly in the glass) 'been the
ruin of the most charming man of his age? Can I ever bear to contemplate my own
face again? (with her eyes still fixed on the glass.) 'Am I not the murdress of
the finest gentleman? no other woman in the town could have made any impression
on him.' 'Never think of things past,' cries the aunt, 'think of regaining the
affections of Horatic.' 'What reason,' said the niece, 'have I to hope he would
forgive me? No, I have lost him as well as the other, and it was your wicked
advice which was the occasion of all; you seduced me, contrary to my
inclinations, to abandon poor Horatio,' at which words she burst into tears;
you prevailed upon me, whether I would or not, give up my affections for him;
had it not been for you, Bellarmine never would have entered into my thoughts;
had not his addresses been backed by your persuasions, they never would have
made any impression on me; I should have defied all fortune and equipage in the
world; but it was you, it was you, who got the better of my youth and
simplicity, and forced me to lose my dear Horatio for ever.'

The aunt was almost borne down with this torren^ of words; she however rallied
all the strength she could, and drawing her mouth up in a purse, began: I am
not surprised, Niece, at this ingratitude. Those who advise young women for
their interest, must always expect such a return: I am convinced my brother
will thank me for breaking off your match with Horatio at any rate.' 'That may
not be in your power yet,' answered Leonora; 'tho it is very ungrateful in you
to desire or attempt it, after the presents you have received from him.' (For
indeed true it is, that many presents, and some pretty valuable ones, had
passed from Horatio to the old lady: but as true it is, that Bellarmine, when
he breakfasted with her and her niece, had complimented her with a brilliant
from his finger, of much greater value than all she had touched of the other.)

The aunt's gall was on float to reply, when a servant brought a letter into
the room; which Leonora, hearing it came from Bellarmine, with great eagerness
opened, and read as follows: MOST DIVINE CREATURE,
THE wounds which I fear you have heard I received from my rival, is not like
to be so fatal as those shot in my heart, which have been fired from your eyes,
tout brilliant. Those are the only cannons by which I am to fall: for my
surgeon gives me hopes of being soon able to attend your Ruelle; till when,
unless you would do me an honor which I have scarce the Hardiesse to ^ink of,
your absence will be the greatest anguish that ^n be felt by,

Madam, Avec toute le respect in the world, Your most obedient, most absolute
Devote, BELLARMINE.




As soon as Leonora perceived such hopes of Bellarmine's recovery, and that the
gossip Fame had, according to custom, so enlarged his danger, she presently
abandoned all further thoughts of Horatio, and was soon reconciled to her aunt,
who received her again into favor, with a more christian forgiveness than we
generally meet with. Indeed, it is possible, she might ^e a little alarmed at
the hints which her niece had given her concerning the presents. She might
apprehend such rumors, should they get abroad, might injure a reputation,
which, by frequenting church twice a day, and preserving the utmost rigor and
strictness in her countenance and behavior for many years, she had established.

Leonora's passion returned now for Bellarmine, with greater force after its
small relaxation than ever. She proposed to her aunt to make him a visit in his
confinement, which the old lady, with great and commendable prudence, advised
her to decline: 'For,' says she, 'should any accident intervene to prevent your
intended match, too forward a behavior with this lover may injure you in the
eyes of others. Every woman, till she is married, ought to consider of and
provide against the possibility of the affair's breaking off.' Leonora said,
'she should be indifferent to whatever might happen in such a case: for she had
now so absolutely pla^^ed her affections on this dear man,' (so she called hi^
'that if it was her misfortune to lose him, she shou^^ forever abandon all
thoughts of mankind.' She therefore resolved to visit him, notwithstanding all
the prudent advice of her aunt to the contrary, and that very afternoon
executed her resolution.

Leonora having once broke through the bounds which custom and modesty impose
on her sex, soon gave an unbridled indulgence to her passion. Her visits to
Bellarmine were more constant, as well as longer, than his surgeon's; in a
word, she became absolutely his nurse, made his water-grewel, administered him
his medicines, and, notwithstanding the prudent advice of her aunt to the
contrary, almost entirely resided in her wounded lover's apartment.

The ladies of the town began to take her conduct under consideration; it was
the chief topic of discourse at their tea tables, and was very severely
censured by the most part; especially by Lindamira, a lady whose discreet and
starch carriage, together with a constant attendance at church three times a
day, had utterly defeated malicious attacks on her own reputation: for such was
the envy that Lindamira's virtue had attracted, that, notwithstanding her own
strict behavior and strict inquiry into the lives of others she had not been
able to escape being the mark of some arrows herself, which however did her no
injury; a blessing perhaps owned by her to the clergy, who were her chief male
companions, and with two or three of whom she had been barbarously and unjustly
calumniated.

The extreme delicacy of Lindamira's virtue was ^^^elly hurt by those freedoms
which Leonora allowed ^^^self: she said it was an affront to her sex; 'that she
did dot imagine it consistent with any woman's ho^or to speak to the creature,
or to be seen in her company; and that, for her part; she should always refuse
to dance at an assembly with her, for fear of contamination by taking her by
the hand.'

But to return to my story: as soon as Bellarmine was recovered, which was
somewhat within a month from his receiving the wound, he sat out according to
agreement, for Leonora's father's, in order to propose the match, and settle
all matters with him touching settlements, and the like.

A little before his arrival, the old gentlemen had received an intimation of
the affair by the following letter; which I can repeat verbatim, and which,
they say, was written neither by Leonora nor her aunt, tho it was in the
woman's hand. The letter was in these words: SIR,
I am sorry to acquaint you, that your daughter Leonora has acted one of the
basest, as well as most simple parts with a young gentleman to whom she had
engaged herself, and whom she has, (pardon the word) jilted, for another of
inferior fortune, notwithstanding his superior figure. You may take what
measures you please on this occasion; I have performed what I thought my duty;
as I have, though unknown to you, a very great respect for your family.




The old gentleman did not give himself the tro^^ble to answer this kind
epistle; nor did he take an^ notice of it after he had read it, 'till he saw
Bellarmi^^* He was, to say the truth, one of those fathers who look on children
as an unhappy consequence of their youthful pleasures; which as he would have
been delighted not to have had attended them, so was he no less pleased with an
opportunity to rid himself of the incumberance. He passed, in the world's
language, as an exceeding good father, being not only so rapacious as to rob
and plunder all mankind to the utmost of his power, but even to deny himself
the conveniences and almost necessaries of life; which his neighbors
attributed to a desire of raising immense fortunes for his children; but in
fact it was not so: he heaped up money for his own sake only, and looked on his
children as his rivals, who were to enjoy his beloved mistress, when he was
incapable of possessing her, and which he would have been much more charmed
with the power of carrying along with him: nor had his children any other
security of being his heirs, than that the law would constitute them such
without a will, and that he had not affections enough for any one living to
take the trouble of writing one.

To this gentleman came Bellarmine on the errand I have mentioned. His person,
his equipage, his family, and his estate, seemed to the father to make him an
advantageous match for his daughter; he therefore very readily accepted his
proposals: but when Bellarmine imagined the principal affair concluded, and
began to (...) the accidental matters of fortune; the old gentle^^^ presently
changed his countenance, saying, he (...) never 'to marry his daughter on a
Smithfield ^^tch: whoever had love for her to take her, would, when he died,
find her share of his fortune in his coffers: but he had seen such examples of
undutifulness happen from the too early generosity of parents, that he had made
a vow never to part with a shilling whilst he lived. He commended the saying of
Solomon, He that spares the rod, spoileth the child: but added he might
likewise assert, that he that spares the purse saves the child.' He then ran
into a discourse on the extravagance of the youth of the age; whence he
launched into a dissertation on horses, and came at length to commend those
Bellarmine drove. That fine gentleman, who, at another season would have been
well enough pleased to dwell a little on that subject, was now very eager to
resume the circumstance of fortune. He said, he had a very 'high value for the
young lady, and would receive her with less than he would any other whatever;
but that even his love to her made some regard to worldly matters necessary;
for it would be a most distracting sight for him to see her, when he had the
honor to be her husband, in less than a coach and six,' The old gentleman
answered. 'Four will do, four will do;' and then took a turn from horses to
extravagance, and from extravagance to horses, till he came round to the
equipage again, whither he was no sooner arrived, than Bellarmine brought him
back to the point; but all to no purpose; he made his escape from that subject
in a minute; till at last the lover declared, that 'in the present situation of
his affairs it (...) impossible for him, tho the loved Leonora more (...) tout
le monde, to marry her without any fortune.' (...) which the father answered,
'he was sorry then (...) daughter must lose so valuable a match; that if he h^
an inclination at present, it was not in his power to advance a shilling; that
he had great losses, and been at great expenses on projects; which, tho he had
great expectation from them, had yet produced him nothing: that he did not know
what might happen hereafter, a^ on the birth of a son, or such accident; but he
would make no promise, or enter into any article: for he would not break his
vow for all the daughters in the world.'

In short, to keep you no longer in suspense, Bellarmine having tried every
argument and persuasion which he could invent, and finding them all ineffectual
at length took his leave, but not in order to return to Leonora; he ^proceeded
directly to his own fea^, whence, after a few days stay, he returned to Paris,
to the great delight of the French, and the honor of the English nation.

But as soon as he arrived at his home, he presently dispatched a messenger
with the following epistle to Leonora.

ADORABLE AND CHARMANTE,
I AM sorry to have the honor to tell you I am not the heureux person destined
for your divine arms. Your pappa has told me so with a politesse not often
seen on this side Paris. You may perhaps guess his manner of refusing me -- Ah
mon Dieu! You will certain^^ ^elieve me, Mada^, incapable myself of delivering
(...) triste message, which I intend to try the French air (...) cure the
consequences of -- A jamais! Coeur! ^^^ge! -- Au diable! -- If your pappa
obliges you (...) a marriage, I hope we shall see you at Paris, till when the
wind that blows from thence, will be the warmest dans le moan! for it will
consist almost entirely of my sighs. Adieu, ma Princess! Ah l'amour!

BELLARMINE.


I shall not, attempt, to describe Leonora's condition, when she received this
letter. It is a picture of horror which I should have had as little pleasure in
drawing, as you in beholding. She immediately left the place, where she was the
subject of conversation and ridicule, and retired to that house I showed you
when I began the story; where she has ever since led a disconsolate life, and
deserves perhaps pity for her misfortunes, more than our censure for a behavior
to which the artifices of her aunt very probably contributed, and to which very
young women are often rendered too liable by that blameable levity in the
education of her sex.

Horatio remains still unmarried, and has applied himself so strictly to his
business, that he has raised, I hear, a very considerable fortune. And what is
remarkable, they say he never hears the name of Leonora without a sigh, nor
has ever uttered one syllable to charge her with her ill conduct toward him.

THE STORY OF THE TWO SISTERS.
TOWARD the end of those troubleso^^ times, when ENGLAND was shaken by the
feuds of the houses of York and Lancaster, there resided, in a village near the
bank of the Medway, a gentleman, whose name was Geoffry de Saint Clair,
descended from a family of great antiquity and repute in those parts. The many
lances, and pieces of armor, that hung round the old hall, did not render it
more respectable, that did the unbounded benevolence of its present possessor.
The poor sat at his gate, and blessed his liberal hand; and never a pilgrim
reposed in his porch, without remembering, in his orisons, its hospitable owner.

Saint Clair had allied himself in marriage with the Lady Margaret de Boys, a
woman of high birth and rare endowments; whose accomplishments might have
embellished the greatest scenes, had not a love of domestic life and a
religious cast of mind, induced her to prefer retirement. All her leisure
hours, which her family did not call for, were spent in duties, which, in that
age, ladies of the noblest rank exercised, without thinking they demeaned their
stations; -- she relieved the indigent, -- advised with the unfortunate, --
visited the sick, -- and brought up her Twin Daughters, Frances and Isabella,
in the same sentiments; -- accustoming them very early, to attend upon her in
all those acts of primitive piety. As these young ladies were the sole issue of
Saint Clair and Lady Margaret, they devoted their whole attention to their
education; and and the comfort to find in their minds, so rich a soil, that
every thing prospered which was planted in them: -- no useful knowledge was
omitted, -- no external accomplishment neglected.

Frances and Isabella were now arrived at the age of twenty five. The
amiableness of their characters, their enlarged understanding, and the
gracefulness of their persons, won the admiration and esteem of all who
approached them. They had, from similitude of manners, and sentiment,
contracted such a rare affection for each other, that it seemed as if Nature,
by forming them together in the womb, had prepared them for that extraordinary
union, which was to distinguish their lives, -- and for those effusions of
elevated friendship, which the loss of their exemplary mother was one day to
call forth. Nor was this event very remote; Lady Margaret was seized by a
sudden illness which, in a few days, carried her off, and desolated one of the
happiest families in the world.

It would be difficult to describe the sounds of woe, which on this occasion,
echoed through all the mansions, or the sighs of the disconsolate poor, under
the windows. -- The grief of Saint Clair, after the many years of uninterrupted
happiness that he had enjoyed with lady Margaret, in its first attack, almost
overpowered his reason; -- whilst Frances and Isabella had the weight of a
father's sorrow added to their own; which compelled them to smother their
feelings, great as they were, and to assume a fortitude their hearts disavowed.

-- Lovely mourners! -- more lovely in your tea^^ -- Fancy pictures you before
me, bathed in filial ^or^^^ -- standing by and supporting your distracted
parent -- striving in vain to tear him from the coffin, which you will not
suffer his servants to close, still demanding in wild utterance, again, and
again -- one last -- last look! --

-- Heavens! -- how severe a distress! -- If any reader has been in a
situation, to ask for a last look of what is most dear to him, -- and what he
is going to be deprived of forever -- he alone can best judge how much that
bosom agonizes, that urges the request! --

The Saint Clair called in aid all his philosophy, to support himself under the
loss of his beloved Lady Margaret, yet he was worn, by a silent sorrow, which
had so visible an effect on his health, as to menace his life; and which, in
about a year, put an end to it.

In this mournful interval, the greatest comfort his dejected daughters
received, was from the frequent visits of their uncle, John de Saint Clair --
who was at that time Abbot of the monastery of Saint Augustine, in Canterbury;
of which place there are, at this day, such noble remains existing. He was the
younger brother of Geoffry, though there was but the difference of a year
between them; and was reputed to be a man of so much learning and virtue, that
Saint Clair, by his will, recommended his children to his care and protection;
bequeathing to each of them a very large inheritance.

-- The manner in which Frances had been brought up, added to her natural turn
of mind, and the example of a mother she so much revered, determined her to a
life of religious retirement; -- and a great convent of Bene^^^tine Nuns, not
very distant from Feversham, happening a few months after, to lose their
principal (who was always one of a considerable family) the Abbot of Saint
Augustine, perceiving her fixed in her scheme of life, procured her to be named
the Lady Abbess of it.

Isabella, who had never as yet been separated from her sister, would on this
occasion, most willingly have taken the veil. "The same roof," says she, "has
ever hitherto covered us, -- the same have been our wishes -- the same our
pursuits; -- the grave has divided us, from those, who taught us the
amiableness of friendship, -- and shall alone divide us from one another!"

-- The Abbot was much hurt by this declaration of his niece. He desired her to
banish from her thought, such a resolution; -- and failed not to intimate to
her, that Frances, having devoted herself to the cloister* she remained the
only support of the family of Saint Clair; that her virtues should rather
embellish society, than be lost within the walls of a monastery; -- and wished
she would, by accepting some alliance of suitable rank and fortune, rather
permit those accomplishments to be seen by the world, which she sought to hide
in oblivion.

Frances, on her part, however she was charmed with this testimony of her
sister's affection, joined in sentiment with her uncle, -- expressing to her,
how much happier she should be, to see her settle herself by marriage, and
imitate the good life and example of their excellent mother. --

"I am not, you know," says she, "by the religiou^ office I fill, tied down to
all those rules, which must (...) coerse be imposed on you: -- my liberty
remain^^ (...) we shall have constant opportunities of continuin^ that
intercourse of love, our hearts so mutually desire. -- It will be the highest
pleasure to me, to see you united to a man worthy your choice; -- preserving in
our father's castle, that hospitality, for which it has so long been famed; --
and whenever you shall wish to make a short retreat from the bustle of the
world, our holy house will afford you a peaceable asylum." --

-- It was not but with great difficulty, nor even ^ill much time after, that,
by the repeated solicitations of Frances, and her uncle, Isabella was prevailed
on to relinquish entirely, her intentions of entering on a monastic life. --
She resided for some time, in her father's venerable old mansion on the Medway,
accompanied by a widowed aunt, her father's sister; -- who at intervals,
attended her on visits to Frances, -- and also, at particular seasons, to the
Abbot, at his house which was a noble building, adjoining to the monastery of
Saint Augustine.

-- It was in one of these visits to her uncle, that she became acquainted with
Henry de Belville, between whose father and the Abbot, there had long subsisted
a most firm friendship. He was of good birth, though much inferior to Isabella
in fortune; his father's estate having greatly suffered in the confusion of
those turbulent times.

Belville was now in his twentyninth year; -- his figure was graceful and
manly, -- and, to a disposition as amiable as his person, was joined an
understanding ^^th quick and strong, and which had been improved by the most
extensive education, that the fashion of the age allowed. -- He had been sent
to travel over Europe, -- had resided in several of its principal courts; --
and was now on his return from a short expedition into France, -- and had
stopped at Canterbury, to pay his respects to the Abbot, and to deliver him
certain letters with which he had been charged. --

Belville, on his first return to England, a few years previous to the present
period, had been honored by the patronage of Richard Duke of Gloucester; near
whose person he held an employment, which could not long dispense with his
absence; -- for that prince, being now mounted on the throne of England, the
whole nation was thrown into an hostile state.

It will not be wondered at, if after Belville and Isabella had been a few days
together, their mutual accomplishments, and their mutual desire to please,
should have made them much charmed with one another. Belville felt himself
enamoured of his fair companion, -- and had the satisfaction to perceive, that
his attention to her was not thrown away. Tho he took leave, after a short
time, to go to London, yet he found an excuse for returning very soon; -- and
having reason to think he had made a favorable impression on Isabella, did not
long hesitate to propose himself to her, as one who would be happy to pass his
life in the society of so engaging a woman. His offer was not less pleasing to
Isabella, than it was to her uncle, and Frances; -- the latter of whom agreed
to give up to her sister, her right in the castle of Saint Clair, where it was
proposed th^^ should reside.

-- Every thing was preparing for their nuptials (...) and nothing could wear a
fairer face of prosperity, than did this purposed union of true and
disinterested affection. But the successful progress that the arms of Henry of
Richmond, now made in the kingdom, had obliged Richard to oppose them with his
utmost force, and to summon all his servants to attend his camp; amongst whom,
as I before mentioned, was the intended bridegroom; who at this time would most
willingly have waved the service, had not his own nice sense of honor, and his
zeal for his royal master, overcome every private motive.

-- Were I to follow closely, the manuscript from whence the substance of this
story is drawn, it would lead me into some of the historical transactions of
those times, which are already sufficiently known; only it is worthy of being
remembered, that there are encomiums bestowed on the character, and person of
Richard; upon both of which, historians have thrown so much deformity. -- I
shall therefore pass over those circumstances, which are foreign to my subject;
and only observe, that the unfortunate Belville was amongst those of the king's
followers, who shared the fate of their royal master in Bosworth Field. -- He
was near Richard in great part of the battle, and was also a witness of his
death; -- and his own horse being killed under him either by the fall, o^ by
being trampled on in the confusion, his thigh was broken; and, after Richmond's
party had obtained the victory, this gallant ^^ath was carried, with several
others wounded, into L^^^^ester, -- where his rank being known, he was ^^^ged
in a monastery of Black Friars, in that city.

-- His page, Bertram, who had served him from his infancy, took care that
every assistance should be procured him; -- but the fever, which was occasioned
by the accident, together with the many bruises he had received, neither gave
himself, or those about him any other prospect, but that of approaching death.

Those who contemplated Belville a few weeks before, in the full vigor of
youth, flattering himself with every expectation of happiness, that virtue,
fortune, and an union with one of the loveliest of woman, could present to his
imagination; and now picture him, stretched on a poor pallet, surrounded by a
parcel of mendicant friars, -- his countenance shrunk and wan, -- and his eyes
fixed with humility, and resignation, on a crucifix which they held before him,
-- cannot surely, by the contrast, avoid dropping a sigh, at the fallacy of
human hopes! --

-- A little before he expired, he desired to be left alone with his Page, that
he might give him his latest orders.

"Bertram," says he, -- looking wistfully on him -- "the day that has ruined
our Sovereign's fortune, has blasted mine! -- and that too, in the moment when
it shone the fairest! -- Thou will soon render me the last of thy faithful
services! -- Let my body rest with the fathers of this house, -- and as soon as
thou have seen its due rites performed, speed thee to Canterbury, -- and
acquaint the holy abbot of Saint Augustine, with the bloody event of yesterday.
-- Conjure (...) that he unfold it to my intended Bride, in such (...), as his
discretion shall advise. Bear her this (...) from my finger, in token that my
last thoughts dw^^ on her; -- and tell her, my only sigh in leaving the world
was for the losing her, whose virtues so embelished it!"

-- The faithful Bertram dopped a tear of affection and gratitude, over the
grave of his gallant master; -- and journeying to Canterbury with a bursting
heart, presented himself before the Abbot, with such a countenance, as hardly
needed a tongue to tell his melancholy errand.

The arrival of Belville's Page, could not be long a secret to Isabella, who
was then at her uncle's; and whose mind instantly foreboded some extraordinary
event; -- tho the news of the battle had not yet reached that city.

When Saint Clair was himself sufficiently composed, to open the mournful
business to his niece, he spared none of that ghostly comfort, which a good man
would offer on such an occasion; -- tho the amount of all that can be said to
the sons and daughters of affliction, is no more than this, -- that it is our
duty, and our interest, to bear, with patience, that which it is not in our
power to alter! -- The emotions of nature must subside, before the soothing
voice of reason can be heard!

Isabella, after giving way to the first transports of passion, assumed a
fortitude, and resignation, which her piety alone could inspire. She desired
that Bertram might be detained, two, or three days, at the mon^stery, -- and as
soon as her mind was more fortified, (...) ^ould dispatch him to her sister
Frances, whom she ^ould then bear to see with more calmness; -- and to whom she
sent the following letter, by the hands of the Page.

Most beloved Sister,
I am plunged from the height of imaginary happiness, into the depth of real
distress! -- The messenger who delivers this, will inform you of my situation,
-- and to him I refer you for particulars, which I am unable to dwell on.
Belville is no more! -- All that dream of happiness, which I hoped for, from an
alliance with that dear, that amiable man, is vanished in an instant! -- and I
wake into the world, that has no object for my regard, but the affection of my
ever tender Frances! -- I support my adversity with all the fortitude I can
summon up; -- but heaven only knows the struggles of my heart! -- From the time
that the united solicitation of you, and my Uncle, prevailed on me (though
reluctantly) to absent myself from you, my soul has been agitated between hope
and disappointment! -- I will trust the fallacy of the world no more; -- the
remainder of my days shall be passed with you; -- and we will end life as we
began it, in an inseparable union. Your converse, and the solitude of a
cloister, can alone restore tranquillity to the mind, of your ever faithful,
and disconsolate.

ISABELLA.


When the Lady Abbess saw her Sister, she found her still more confirmed in her
resolution of entering on a monastic life. Her uncle, conceiving it might be
restore a calm to her troubled spirits, no longer opp^^^ it; -- and as soon as
her affairs were properly adju^^^^ and every thing prepared, she took the veil
in the co^^vent where Frances presided.

-- Isabella now found in religion, the only consolation for her past
misfortunes; -- and tho the remembrance of her Belville, would often come
across her, and spread a temporary gloom over her mind, -- yet she constantly
strove to dispel it, by piety and resignation. The two Sisters enjoyed all that
heart felt pleasure, which arises from rooted friendship; -- and, as the
effects of benevolent dispositions operate on all around, theirs served to
commmunicate happiness to all the Sisterhood.

The Louvain Manuscript informs us, that after these ladies had passed near
fourteen years in this peaceful retirement, the Abbess was seized with an
alarming fever, the effects of which hung so long upon her, that they greatly
endangered her life. It is not difficult to conceive, how severe Isabella's
sufferings were, in this dreadful interval of suspense and apprehension, or the
anxieties of her mind, till her Sister was restored to health.

FRANCES during her illness, had made a private vow to the Blessed Virgin Mary,
that if she recovered, she would send some costly offering to a chapel, which
was consecrated to her, at a little Port, called Bradstow or Broadstairs, in
the isle of Thanet (part of which chapel is at this day ^^maining); -- and in
which, her image was esteemed to work such great miracles, that Pilgrims came
from parts very remote, to visit it; -- and it was held in such veneration,
that all ships passing within fight of it; are reported to have constantly
lowered their top sails, to salute it. And the feast of the Invention of the
Holy Cross, which was the third day of May, being to be celebrated there, with
great solemnity, -- her gratitude for her recovery, and for the supposed
intercession of the Virgin, determined her to go herself at that time and
fulfill her vow.

Isabella obtained permission to accompany her sister in this devout purpose;
-- and the roads being little frequented in that age, and a horse almost the
only conveyance -- they resolved to put themselves, with two attendants, aboard
a passage-sloop, that usually went at stated times, from Feversham to
Broad-stairs, and other parts along the coast, between that place and the Downs.

-- They set sail in the evening, but had not been at sea above two hours,
before a violent storm arose. Every one who is acquainted with the navigation
of this coast, quite to the mouth of the Thames, knows how difficult it is
rendered, by reason of the many flats, and banks of sand, that obstruct it.

-- The suddenness and fury of the storm, together with the thunder and
lightening that accompanied it, threw* dismay amongst all the passengers; --
and the mariners, from the opposition of the wind and tide, were unable to
direct the vessel. To pursue their course was impracticable; -- they therefore
attempted to save themselves, by running in on the shore, at a place called
Reculver (which is a small village, tho of great antiquity situate on the
border of the isle of Thanet;) -- but the advance of night, and a thick fog,
prevented them (...) discerning exactly, whereabout they were. (...) endeavor
to reach the shore was frustrated by the (...) driving them from it; -- and
their sails being all sha^^tered, a sudden swell of the sea, bore them quite
out o^ their direction, and struck the vessel on a bank of sand, called the
Horse, that lies a little off from Reculver.

-- The surprise -- the confusion -- and the image of death, that must
naturally rush into the minds of people, who are on the point of being wrecked,
-- can only be justly felt, or described by those who have stood in so dreadful
a situation. Each one recommended himself to God, and to his Tutelar Saint. The
mariners hoisted out their long boat as precipitately as they could; and that
which most agitated the thoughts of Frances and Isabella, was the mutual
preservation of each other.

Scarce was the boat on the surface of the waves, when every one was eager to
rush into it; for it was certain the vessel must bilge in a few hours, -- and,
to add to the horror, night advanced. The Captain, almost by force, dragged the
Lady Abbess, and her Sister, from the cabin, -- and scarce had he helped the
first, half dead as she was, down the side of the ship, when those who were
already in the boat, finding they must all perish, if more got in, pushed off
instantly, and rowed toward shore, -- in spite of the menaces of the Captain,
who stood on deck, supporting Isabella, -- the entreaties of the Abbess, who
was wild to return, -- or the cries of the passengers left behind.

-- The only faint hope which now remained to ^^ose on board, was, that the
vessel might possibly hold t^^^^her, till some assistance could be obtained
from the (...); which they still flattered themselves would come, in case the
boat reached the land, -- which it providentially did, tho with the utmost
risk. Every one who remained in the vessel was resigned to his fate; -- and
surrounded as Isabella was, by impending death, it afforded no small
consolation to her, to think, there was a possibility that her Sister had
escaped.

-- It was four hours after the arrival of the boat, before any one durst
venture out; when, the storm abating with the departure of the tide, and the
day being near dawning, a large boat put off to the wreck. When those who went
to assist, got to it, they found all the people on board, retired to different
places beneath the deck, -- great part of which was broken away. Isabella had
remained in the cabin; one side of which was also washed off, and the room half
filled with water; -- she was almost exhausted, by the terrors she had
sustained, -- the bruises she had received, -- and the extreme cold in which
she had so long suffered. They led her with the utmost gentleness from this
wretched place, -- while she, all pale and trembling, scarcely comprehended at
first what they were doing; -- yet life seemed to flush anew in her
countenance, on hearing that her Sister was preserved. --

-- As soon as they had brought her on shore, she was supported by several
women, who were waiting to receive her; and conducted to the house where the
lady Abbess was. Frances, transported at the first sight of her Sister, ran out
to meet Isabella, -- who the moment she approached, made an effort to spring
forwa^^ to her, but sunk down, overpowered, into the arm^^ her attendants.
Frances cl^sped her hand, and in^^^ eager joy, would have uttered some^^^^^ but
could only faintly pronounce her name, and (...) feet in a swoon.

Isabella was immediately put into bed, and received every assistance that
could be procured; -- but her strength and spirits were so far exhausted, by
the terror and fatigue, which her mind and body had undergone, and by remaining
so many hours in water, that she lived but till the evening of the following
day.

Frances, tho still sinking from the shock and agitation of the preceding
night, forgot, in her attention to her Sister, her own sufferings. She never
stirred from her bedside, -- and often accused herself, as being the fatal
cause of all that had befallen her, by suffering her attendance in this
expedition. Isabella chid her for thinking so, -- declaring it was the will of
heaven, to, which she patiently submitted. "Tho we came into the world
together," says she, "yet as we were not destined to perish together, -- a time
must inevitably have come, when death would have dissolved our union. I rejoice
that I am not the survivor. I die, where I have ever wished to live, in the
arms of the most beloved of sisters. Pray for the repose of my soul; -- and lay
me in the tomb which you have allotted to be your own -- that one grave may in
death hold our remains, who in life had but one heart."

The loss of Isabella plunged the lady Abbess into that deep distress, which
minds, formed like here is with the noblest sentiments of tenderness, and
benevolence, (...), on such a trial, inevitably feel. She caused the body of
her unfortunate sister to be transported in solemnity to their convent; --
where, after it had been exposed with accustomed rites, it was deposited, with
every mark of respect, in a vault, on one side of the shrine of Saint Benedict,
-- bedewed with tears of the most heartfelt sorrow, dropped from the eyes all
the sisterhood.

When time and reflection had somewhat calmed her affliction, Frances failed
not to transmit, by the hands of her Confessor, (her uncle, the Abbot, having
been sometime dead) her intended offering to the Virgin of Broad-Stairs, --
accompanied by a donation of twelve masses, to be said for the repose of
Isabella's soul. And soon after, to perpetuate the memory of her Sister, -- as
well as to direct mariners in their course, -- that they might escape the sad
calamnity herself had so fatally experienced, -- she caused a very ancient
church, that stood on a rising ground just above the village of Reculver, and
which was greatly fallen into decay, to be restored, and much enlarged, -- and
at one end thereof erected two Towers with lofty Spires upon them, -- the which
she directed should be called THE SISTERS! -- and to this day it retains the
name, and is a sea mark of great utility.

In less than seven years, the whole church was completed; which she endowed
very liberally, by a grant out of her own fortune; -- and ordained, that there
should be celebrated one solemn mass on the first day of every month (the wreck
having happened on the first of May;) and that a perpetual litany sho^^ be
sung, for the eternal peace of the departed Is^^^^la.

She lived to see this her Will executed, -- as well a^ to bestow many other
charitable donations, -- not only on the convent over which she presided, --
but on several other religious institutions; -- and was, from her amiable
character, and pious example, beloved, and respected to the last hour of her
life.

She survived Isabella eleven years, and died most sincerely, and deservedly
lamented, toward the end of the year 1512.

Her remains, pursuant to her own desire, were deposited by the side of those
of her Sister, with all that solemnity due to her high rank and office. A
monument was erected near to the place, where they were interred, with their
figures kneeling, hand in hand, before a cross, -- and beneath it a plate of
brass, recording their unshaken friendship.

-- Faithful, -- congenial spirits! -- in whatsoever world ye reside, peace be
your lot! -- as virtue was your portion here! -- Long, long may this memorial
of your love remain! -- to guide the dubious vessel in its course, and make
your names blessed by the wanderers of the deep! --

ALCANDER AND ROSILLA.
IN the time of Heptarchy lived in the kingdom of Kent, a certain gentleman,
whose property was immense; he had one child only, an heiress, whose name was
Rosilla, whose beauty was insurpassable, and whose qualities of mind were in no
degree inferior to her external accomplishments; in short, she was esteemed as
the most finished piece of perfection which nature could boast of being the
author of; she was celebrated not only through the kingdom of Kent, but
furnished a topic of conversation for all the people, and a subject for the
employment of the genius of all the bardo through the whole seven kingdoms; and
every person of quality was striving to recommend themselves to her favorable
notice. Then, thus situated, her father, who was of a disposition ambitious in
the extreme, had nurished in his bosom a hope of raising her to the bed of the
king of Kent, who was a prince excessively fond of beauty, and no effort was
left unassayed to recommend her to him; the king himself had a deep impression
made on his mimd by the many concurrent reports he had heard of her external
and mental accomplishments, and was determined to make a visit to her father in
a tour through that part of his kingdom where he lived, and if she answered the
idea he had formed of her by reports, to raise her to his bed and throne, of
which he informed her father in a letter sent by express.

The father of Rosilla with transport read the (...) tents of the king's
letter, and his eyes sparkled (...) joy at anticipating the having his daughter
a (...) and being father in-law to a king; his mind form^^ reveries of future
greatness, pomp, splendour, and power; but while he was indulging himself in the
most pleasing anticipations, which his ambitious mind could invent, there
entered his apartment his beloved Idol, his beautiful and accomplished daughter
having by the hand a beautiful and sprightly young gentleman of about twenty
one, dressed in a manner the most genteel, and whose aspect bespoke something
great in his soul. Her father's eyes began to kindle into rage at a sight his
imagination suggested to him was omnious of no good. His daughter's perception
informed her of the sensations which occupied the indignant breast of her
father; she thus accosted him. -- Dear, honored, and beloved father,
I humbly ask your paternal pardon for thus interrupting your contemplations,
but a matter of the greatest consequence made it my duty. I am the only
surviving child of four you have been the father of, and your tender conduct
toward me has been such, as to convince me that my happiness is your great
pole star and I have the fullest confidence that I need only to inform you of
what would make me completely happy, in order to your reducing the idea to
event, when it is in your power; I am now in a capacity to inform you of what
will make me happy in the highest sense of the word, and that a want thereof
cannot fail of rendering me the most completely unhappy of mortals.




Her father stood gazing, his eyes being fixed in aston^^^ment while she
proceeded; you see sir, I have by (...) hand a young gentleman, his person you
are no doubt totally unacquainted with, but his virtues you may depend are not
to be surpassed by any one which this or any other country can boast of; long
have I in private admired him, he has had full possession of my soul and
affections for a long time before he was informed thereof; tho, often had an
opportunity of being a witness to his genius, his knowledge, and his virtues,
yet till very lately I had no proper opportunity of letting him understand the
high value I had for him, and of the deep wound he had unintentionally given,
and which no one could do any thing which could contribute to its cure but
himself.

I have at last had an opportunity to inform him of my passion for him, which I
did in the most engaging manner I was capable of; and tho a novice in the art
of wooing, yet such was my pathos that it fully convinced him that nothing but
the purest sensations of uncontaminated affection was the cause of the
overtures I made him; when I had made an end of my address to him, the rose
bloomed in all its verdue in his cheeks, while in accents the most engaging, he
vainly endeavored to persuade me to give over what he was pleased to call so
improper and unsuitable a pursuit, telling me that I was heiress to one of the
most wealthy and consequental characters in the kingdom; that was qualified to
grace the bed of a monarch; that he himself was a most obscure character; that
his birth and parentage were totally unknown even to himself; that when (...)
infant he was taken out of a box tossing amidst the (...) which beat on our
shore, that he had been broug^^ (...) by the hospitable charity of a gentleman,
and that (...) had no means of supporting himself except the charity of his
benefactor, and the education which he had given him, that such a difference of
^uality totally disqualified him for a conjugal connection, but that apart from
those considerations, the want of my father's approbation would be an
insurmountable obstruction thereto, and therefore desired and begged of me to
banish every idea of him from my mind.

Of little consequence was this harangue; I still continued inportunate to the
last degree, nor would I suffer him to leave me, till he had promised at a
certain time and place to meet me again on the subject: thus ended our first
interview, from which time 'till our second meeting each moment crept off with
the imperceptable motion of an age, and I was a stranger to quietness, peace or
sleep 'till the happy time arrived, but to my mortification he persevered in
his resolution, until he perceived I grew desperate, and an idea that I might
fall into a phrenzy, the efforts of which might prove fatal, occasioned him to
express his resolution in terms less strong, which by degrees softened down to
an implicit accquiescence with my proposal to him.

Three weeks have passed since this event took place, in which time we have
spent every moment together, which we had any opportunity for, which (...)
served only to highten my esteem and regard for (...)* and has raised his
affections for me to a pitch ^^^rly equal to mine for him, and our happiness is
suspended on your approbation of our mutual love, and on your consent to our
being united in the connubial state. This sir, is the occasion of my thus
introducing him to you, and with the greatest pathos of soul I beseech you sir,
if you tender the happiness of your only child, and if my welfare is an object
which you put any value upon, that you grant me this request."

Her father who scarcely contained himself while she was addressing him, as
soon as she had ended broke out in the most bitter invectives against the young
man, and the most severe reprehensions to his daughter, for the criminal
overtures she had made him, and in the end by the ringing a bell, called in a
number of servants when he ordered them to take the young man and convey him on
board of a vessel lying in the harbor, then immediately bound on a voyage to
sea, which command was instantly obeyed, while the poor Rosilla, lay senseless
in a swoon, at the first time seeing her father disapprove of her conduct, and
at the loss of him who was dearer to her than life itself.

Every effort was made use of to restore her to her senses, which at last
proved effectual, but the most apparent dejection was seated on her contenance,
and in vain was every method used to erase from her mind the memory of him; to
no purpose, was she informed of the King's intention toward her, the gaudy
trapings of royalty had no allurements in them that could induce her to
withdraw her affections from the young man, whom she looked on as the ornament
and glory of (...) man nature.

For a week she remained in an inconsolable (...) when her invention suggested
to her a probability of once more meeting with her admired Alcander (for that
was his name) and she immediately formed a resolution of putting the scheme
into execution, in order to effect which, she procured a suit of seamen's
apparel, with which she attired herself; with this habit she entered on board
a vessel as a common seamen, hoping by this mean to meet with him whom she
prized more than all the riches in the world.

It is foreign from my present design, to give a particular detail of what the
poor Rosilla passed through on board of the vessel under the name of Evander, and
of what hardships she experienced in a long and fruitless search after her
beloved Alcander; suffice it to say, that she acquitted herself so honorably
that she became the second commander in the vessel on the death of her
prececessor, in which station she possessed the highest degree of confidence of
all who were on board the vessel; but what amazement and horror seized not only
Rosilla, but the Captain and the whole crew, one fair and pleasant morning,
when they espied a vessel but a small distance from them, having a piratical
flag hoisted at their mast heast; to attempt an escape was in vain, as they had
been long at sea, and very soul, and but a dull sailor at best, and no hopes
could rationally be entertained of success in a combat.

In this confused situation they held a consultation, the result of which was,
to make as good a defense as they could, and knowing that fortune favors the
brave; they rested only on this ground that there was a possibility of avoiding
being captured by this merciless pirate.

By the time this was agreed on, the pirate was along side of them, when a
furious attack was begun by the pirate and an obstinate defense by the other.
Perhaps never was more valor discovered than by this little band of heroes;
'till at length being overpowered, their Captain slain, and above half their
men killed and wounded, they were boarded by the assailants, on which a
complete victory soon ensued.

The prisoners were indiscriminately hurryed on board of the pirate, and
huddled in below the deck, while the captors were busily employed in plundering
their new acquired booty. This business being ended, said the Lieutenant to the
Captain, it is time a council should set to determine the fate of those sturdy
prisoners who have put us to so much cost of time, pains, and blood to conquer
them, not less than one third of their crew being either killed or wounded,
those miscreants ought to be sacrificed to appease the manes, of our fallen
brethren, and to alleviate the pains of those who are suffering under their
wounds; what say you Captain? "You are quite right, (answered the bloody
disposed Captain) but I am so exhausted with fatigue, and the loss of blood, by
a large (tho not mortal) wound, that I must substitute you and place you on the
tribunal of retribution, and your determination shall be fate." Every thing
being prepared, the Lieutenant took the seat of judgment, and ordered the
prisoners to be brought out one by one, safely ironed. The first whose fate it
(...) to be arraigned was the tender and delicate (...) bound in fetters and
brought before the bench of (...) where the sole arbitor of life and death,
with a countenance, frowning vengeance and eyes sparkling with rage, and a
voice rendered the most horifick, he thus addressed the prisoner, "poor pitiful
misecrant, you have obstinately refused to submit to our regency of the seas,
and put us to much trouble and hazard, and deprived us of a considerable number
of our best men, in consequence of which it has become our incumbent duty to
make example of you, especially of your person, as you had the chief command
devolved on you after the death of your superior, therefore hold up your guilty
hand and hear your sentence, for by the infernal Gods, within half an hour you
shall be wrapped in sheets of liquid sulphur, impregnated with fire; for you in
the first place shall be made fast to the deck with your face upwards, your
mouth extended with a gag in each corner, of an inch thickness, two quarts of
lead melted and mixed with sulphur, shall be poured down your throat, and if
this is not sufficient to satiate your appetite, the dose shall be doubled, and
my impatience is such, that each moment is an age till I see this decree
carried into effect."

The terrified Rosilla under the name of Evander, raised her distracted eyes to
her judge; but what was her sensations when in the person of him who had
pronounced this awful sentence against her, she discovered her long sought for
Alcander! The color in her face alternately charged from red to paleness, and
from paleness to the vivid color of the rose, and the highest degree of
confusion was legible in her countenance, her different emotions of mind for
some time divested her of the power of utterance; at last she collected her
scattering ideas, and thus addressed the judge. "Dear sir, it is enough -- I
have seen you once more -- You have given the most bloody sentence which the
compass of human ideas is capable of forming against your best friend, against
one who loved you better than every other earthly enjoyment -- against one who
despised a diadem and a scepter for the affection she had for you, against one
who has left every thing near and dear for the hopes of finding you -- You have
given sentence against one who might have remained possessed of every human
tranquillity, had it not have been for the love of you; thousands and thousands
were annually at my command, but I have left every thing for your sake, and
this is the benediction you bestow on me therefore -- Here sir, is the ring you
once gave me as a pledge of your inviolable love to me -- you must remember
that happiest of moments, when you bestowed this on her you called your
adorable Rosilla -- pray sir then, from whence comes this strange alteration.

Alcander stood in a maze 'till he heard her mention the name of " Rosilla" at
the naming of which, he burst into a flood of tears -- and quiting his seat,
clasped her in his arms, and embraced her in extacy -- exclaiming yes! yes my
dear Rosilla! I recollect! I recollect, you was mine, you are mine still, and I
am yours! the most inviolable -- the most indissoluble bond, bind us together,
a cement that is stronger than that of blood, has (...) us, and nothing below
the power of omnipotence (...), or can put an end to that union -- It is
sufficient I have found my adorable Rosilla -- I will prove to my vows -- I
will never more part from her -- my bloody sentence I totally reverse and
repeal -- we will shape our course for the chalky cliffs of Albion, and will
spend our days in peace, and no more hazard ourselves over the boisterous
billows of the tempestuous ocean -- we will unite our hands at the sacred altar
of Hymen and retire to the peaceful enjoyments, of domestic life.

The spectators stood astonished at this transaction, and notwithstanding their
piratical dispositions, seemed pleased at the occurence, 'till the Captain
interrupted the pleasing sensations they enjoyed, by addressing the Judge in
the following manner -- "Pray sir, take care of mistakes -- we do not repeal
laws for the sake of a true lover. If you had not given sentence, you might
spare her from death, but as it is, the sentence should be put in execution if
she was a wife of my own." -- A Sergeant, whose affections were much moved on
the occasion, stepped to the Captain, saying, pray sir, let this determination
of yours be varied in a small degree; let the Lady be acquitted, and I myself
will submit to the sentence which is pronounced against her; but spare her I
pray you -- The Captain enraged, drew his sword and sheathed it in the poor
fellow's bosom, who dropped dead at his feet, and then with a voice that bespoke
the malignity of his heart, he thus addressed the Lieutenant, whom he had
constituted as Judge. " Vile Reptile! thou pretend to be a man? -- Thou think
(...) be esteemed not only worthy the human shape, but (...) to be capable of
enterprise, and to put on the name (...) soldier, and inlist under the banner
of Mars, and to cross the ocean in search of adventures, and at the fame time
to have thy femenine heart melted down by a whimpering woman's tears? No, thou
art a disgrace, a scandal, and in irreparable blemish to our function; thou
must learn to hearden thy waxen heart or expect to fall a sacrifice to our just
indignation: I Will give you a lesson which shall divest you of those disgraceful
tender feelings, under the sensations of which you haVe sullied all your former
acts of valor and forfeited that worthless life which animates that body of
thine, which now ought to be on a rack; seize that worthless woman, which is
the cause of thy unmanning thyself; take her with thy own hands, as unnerved as
they are, bind her fast to the windlass, then put lead over the fire, and see
you make it boil instantly-then, when it has received as great a degree of heat
as it is capable of -- pour it down her throat, but not too fast, that she may
take a true relish of all it is opening qualities: This do instantly; for a
refusal or even a show of reluctance, will involve yourself in the same
malediction.

Alcander was struck with horror at this infernal mandate; but being sensible
of his situation, and knowing that his life depended on a momentary exertion,
he drew his sword, and with one push, pierced the heart of this insuperable
Captain, who with a hideous yell gave up the ghost, and whose body was
instantly committed to the deep for food to the ravenous uncouth animals which
inhabit the caverns th^^^^of.

Alcander now being the sole commander, directed his course for the famed isle
of Britain, enjoying his incomparable lady, whom he caused to be decked in the
best of women's attire, and Neptune favoring their purpose, soon introduced
them into the harbor from which he at first sailed, when he was forced away by
her remorseless father; but unhappily for them, the vesse^ ^hey were in was no
sooner in port than she was known; and poor Alcander was taken into costody as
a pirate, together with the crew, (Rosilla excepted, who was kept as a witness.)

Alcander soon underwent a trial, and received sentence of death, and his death
warrant was instantly made out, in order that it might be put in execution the
next day, when he was taken out of the dungeon with all the awful formalities
of execution. He was carried to the fatal spot, where in the most finished
agony, he was just going to make his exit; Rosilla, who was dismissed the day
before, came up and demanded a release of the prisoner; for said she, "There is
a law in the Kingdom of Kent, from before the memory of man to the contrary,
that when any man, sentenced by the laws of the kingdom to death, and brought
to the place of execution, should be demanded by a woman that would marry him
then under the gallows, that her demand should be granted, and the malefactor
liberated accordingly -- I therefore, a woman of one of the first families in
Britian, demand this malefactor in marriage, and am ready to solemnize the
nuptials in the manner by law provided." The officers of j^^^ice who attended
on the execution, on hearing this, or^^red that he be taken from the stage
erected for his execution, and married as the law directs -- which was done
accordingly, and Alcander set at liberty.

Having taken lodgings at an inn for a few days, they made preparation for
repairing to her father's, reasonably supposing that the old gentleman would
not fail of properly rewarding any one who should be the introducer of his
daughter to him; and a journey of two days brought them to his gate: they
entered his house, where falling on their knees, they informed him of the whole
of their history, and concluded by humbly, and in tears, asking his blessing.

The father could scarcely contain himself while they were asking his blessing,
and no sooner had they finished their petition, for his benediction, than the
old man knitting his brows, with a countenance full of wrath, thus uttered
himself -- Shall it be said that my daughter, the heir to my immense fortune,
has for a husband a Pirate, one that has been condemned to a gibbet! No! no!
this never shall be endured -- I Will see him safely imprisoned, and there he
shall spend the remainder of his days in close confinement. -- Dear father
(replied Rosilla) whatever offense has been committed, was done by me, and me
alone; my dear Alcander is entirely innocent -- in justice therefore he should
not be a sufferer -- Whatever revenge you think proper to be inflicted, let it
fall on me only, and let my husband be clear -- Her father in stern accents
replied, do you think Madam, you are so well able to bear the weight of mine
anger? I will assure you, (...) shall have as much of it as you are able to
bear, to (...) extent, and he shall have the rest -- I shall shut co^^^^sion
from my breast, and pity from my heart, and my eye shall not spare the objects
of my displeasure -- Having said this, he sent him well guarded to a prison,
and her be confined to a dark chamber, there to spend the disconsolate hours in
heart rending anguish -- in which situation they kept her until the time of her
travail arrived, and she was delivered of a smiling pretty son -- which by her
father's special order was forced from her; she tenderly kissed the little
innocent, and with melting tears parted with it -- she soon heard the little
thing give a direful scretch or two, and was still -- they soon sent the
blanket back (in which they had taken away the child) all covered with blood;
at the sight of which she swooned away, and it was with difficulty they
recovered her to her senses -- she continued to lament the loss of her darling
infant and her dear husband, while her father continued to conduct toward her
in the severest manner he was capable of inventing -- there was no person
suffered to come within her sight, but an old deformed ill natured Hag, whose
aspect was so dreadful as to be sufficient to inspire any beholder with horror,
who would do any thing in her power to render the situation of the unfortunate
Rosilla more insupportable, -- In this situation they kept her a year longer --
when one morning, her father came into her apartment, and said, Daughter, --
notwithstanding your former foolish conduct, I have taken pains to procure you
a suitable husband, whom if you will now consent (...) marry you shall be
received to my favor, and shall (...) made as happy as the enjoyments of life
can render (...).

" Dear father, (replied the disconsolate lady) how long will you continue to
add to my distresses, which are altogether intolerable already. -- I have been
married two years to him who has the full possession of my affections -- I can
never love another -- it is in vain to urge it upon me, for none in this world
shall ever enjoy me besides my inestimable Alcander -- My body is in your power
-- you will dispose of it as you think proper, but my soul is free from your
disposal, and let you inflict what you will upon me, it will never induce me to
prove false to the man whom I esteem preferable to all others."

Her father, on hearing this, retired from her; finding it was in vain to make
any further attempts to induce her to break her resolution, sent to the prison,
and fetched away Alcander, dressed in the most elegant attire; caused his
daughter to meet him in his parlor, in all the decorations which dress was
capable of ornamenting her with; recognized her marriage -- presented her son
to her embraces, and joy and gladness once more filled the hearts of Alcander
and Rosilla, and nothing but mirth was heard in the house of her father,

MATRIMONIAL INFIDELITY DETECTED
FRANK GAYLOVE is the third son of a man of fortune. His father finding him
averse to business, and disposed for a military life, gave him at an early
period his small patrimony, with which he purchased a pair of colors in the
guards. Being a genteel hansome young fellow, he made a very elegant
appearance, and did credit to hi^ corpse. In this situation he was soon
distinguished by many demireps upon the ton, and having a natural passion for
gallantry, failed not to improve every opportunity that presented itself for
promoting an ^mour. In these pursuits he found that the pay of an ensign would
scarce pay coach^hire, and he soon discovered, that he was so much in arrears
with his agent, that he would advance Frank no more money.

In this situation he saw no other hope than having recourse to play, in which
he was for sometime pretty successful, and was, by his good fortune at the
hazard table, enabled to make a more splendid figure than ever, and even his
mistresses more valuable presents. He set up a chariot, upon the death of his
father, which hapened about this period, he gave out that he had come to the
possession of an estate of two thousand a year, when, in fact, all he gained by
this demise was fifty pounds for mourning, and a ring.

Frank having persuaded (...) his acquaintance of the truth of his good
fortune, i^ ^oon got wind, and was a strong recommendation to the ladies, who
now viewed him with more partial eyes than ever; and finding his influence, he
resolved to turn it to some account, and to realize his nominal estate, in that
of a wise. He had scarce come to this resolution, before a lady presented
herself with about fifteen thousand pounds in her possession, being of age, and
out of the clutches of her guardian. Miss Ellis was about twenty-three, tall
and genteel, rather showy than handsome; but, upon the whole, very well
calculated to make an agreeable wise, and a domestic life completly comfortable.

Frank let no opportunity escape of advancing his suit: and the lady had so far
consented, and the day of their nuptials was appointed. In the interim, a most
unfortunate affair happened to Frank. He one night engaged in a party at
picquet with a celebrated Black legs, well known upon the turf, to whom he lost
two hundred pounds. An apology was sufficient for the evening; but on the
morrow, a farther apology was fruitless, Paddy said, this is 'tother side of
enough -- a man with two thousand a year, to make two apologies for such a
trifle as two hundred -- no, no -- my dear, it will not do -- I had a miserable
ill run myself last week at Newmarket -- and so do you see, I shall meet you
here to morrow at twelve, and we must settle it one way or other." Saying this
he took a French leave, and left poor Frank to his own melancholy reflections.
What was to be done? -- If he asked Miss Ellis to lend him money, it would ruin
his match, that was to take place in about a week -- To morrow he must either
pay or fight, which was a very disagreeable alternative. In a word, he found
there was no other resource than (...) his commission, which he immediately did
to (...) great disadvantage.

Unfortunately for Frank, Miss Ellis had a near relation in the same regiment,
and as occurrences of this kind soon get abroad, and become the subject of
animadversion among officers of the same corpse, it became, in a day or two, the
subject of conversation at miss Ellis's teatable. She was greatly alarmed at
the intelligence, but suppressed her astonishment at the information, and
endeavored to account for the transaction, by saying, "She heard Mr Gaylove
was on the point of being married, and doubtless that was the cause of his
selling out of the army." But her kindsman assured her that she was mistaken in
this respect, as he was informed Mr. Gaylove had sold his commission to pay a
gaming debt. -- "Pay a gaming debt (said 'miss Ellis) Heavens does he game? you
astonish me, I have always heard him declare the greatest abhorrence for play."
Ha! ha! ha! resumed the captain, you are very much deceived; there is not a man
who plays deeper in all the purlieus of St. James's. Miss Ellis now became very
serious; and of course very bad company, when her relation retired.

He had not long gone before Frank made his appearance, when he found Miss
Ellis in a very melancholy situation -- Her answer to all his questions were
very cool and concise. He urged her very strenuously to explain the cause of
her very uncommon behavior, when eclaricissement ensued: she then said, that a
soldier was the idol of her heart, and that she had resolved never to marry any
other; and if he had that esteem for her which he pretended, he would buy it
again the first opportunity, for that she would not give him her hand till he
bore a commission.

Frank took his leave in a promise to obey her mandates -- but, alas! it was
impossible in his present situation. He had but one chance, which was very
unpromising -- but one glimmering of hope; which was very forlorn. He was in
possession of about a hundred and fifty pounds, the residue of the sale of his
commission; and with this he was resolved to make a push at the gaming-table,
in the flattering expectation that the blind goddess would, for once, smile
propitiously on him.

He accordingly had recourse that very evening, to the box and dice; and the
bones, to speak in the gambling phraseology, were pretty favorable to him: but
twenty pounds were no objects to him in his present situation. In fine, he
pursued his plan for about three weeks; at the end of which time, he was
neither a considerable loser or gainer -- but his expenses had eat up near a
moiety of the relics of his fortune. He, nevertheless, continued paying his
visits to Miss Ellis, but did not meet with that cordial reception he had
hitherto done, and not a sylable of the nuptial day ever now transpired; tho he
assured her he was then in treaty for a cornet^y of dragoons.

Three weeks were expired, and affairs still remained in statu quo, till one
morning at breakfast, at the coffee house, he read with astonishment --
"Yesterday morning was married at St. James' church captain D -- of the guards,
to Miss Ellis, a beautiful young lady* with a handsome fortune." He slung down
the paper in rage, broke all the tea equipage, damned the whole sex and slew
out of the room; to the great astonishment of every one present, who for the
most part judged he was mad.

Thus situated -- the came up with Miss Eills -- He had another game to play,
and he was resolved to pay more attention to his cards, and never make such
another matrimonial revoke. He was by this time reduced to his last ten pieces,
when being at a city ball, he danced with a lady whom he found to be a widow,
and in possession of a handsome jointure. Having gained this intelligence, he
resolved to cultivate the acquaintance, and waited upon her the next day, to
inquire after her health, and hoped she had taken no cold.

Mrs. Harrison, the lady in question, received him very politely, as she had
entertained some prejudices in his favor the night before, from the elegance of
his person, and the graceful manner of his dancing. His conversation she now
found to be as lively and entertaining, as his figure had been pre-engaging;
and an involuntary sigh soon convinced her; that he had made no small
impression on her.

Mr. Harrison, her former husband, was a plodding cit old enough to have been
her father; it was a match of interest, and very disagreeable to her: she
therefore resolved to please herself in a second mate.

Mrs. Harrison's partiality for Frank was soon discovered by her relations, who
strenuously dissuaded (...) from the match; pointing him out as a rake and
sp^^d thrift, who would ruin her; and that she would have the pungent
mortification of finding her fortune transferred to harlots and sharpers. But
these remonstrances had little or no effect; she was resolved to have him, her
vanity prompting her to believe her charms and attractions were sufficient to
reclaim a rake, let him be ever so abandoned. In this presumption she listened
to his addresses, and, in a short time gave him her hand; but not before she
had prudently settled his whole fortune upon herself.

The honey moon had scarce clapsed, before she was sensible of his coolness. He
was frequently absent from home all night; and, when he returned, seemed to
have forgot that Mrs. Gaylove was his wife* Stung to the quick at this
behavior, she resolved to trace his haunts, and discover what happy female had
supplanted her in his affections. It was not long before one of his emissaries
pursued him from the chocolate house to the apartments of a celebrated Thais,
in the new buildings. This intelligence was immediately communicated to Mrs.
Gaylove, who instantly took a coach, and repaired to the scene of infidelity,
where having inquired for Miss Shep -- d, she gained admittance, and rushed up
stairs, threw open the dining room door, when she detected her perfidious
husband, in amorous dalliance with his mistress. His sword was hung up, and
every circumstance tended to testify that he proposed taking up his quarters
there that night.

Mrs. Gaylove's remonstrances to Miss Shep -- d, were doubtless pretty severe
upon the occasion; but could no way equal the emba^^^ssment and distraction
Gaylove.

No sooner had Mrs. Gaylove returned home, than she packed up all her clothes,
with what belonged to her, and repaired to a relation, with whom she remained
till such time as she could obtain proper apartments for herself, leaving upon
the table the following mortifying billet.

"Ungrateful wretch! adieu for ever! From this moment I take a final farewell,
and leave you to the ^upport of your generous mistress, upon whom you have,
doubtless, lavished sums that were my property, and which will, certainly,
entitle you, from her generosity and gratitude, to make a suitable provision
for you."

Upon Frank's return, finding the situation of affairs, he was almost frantic
-- he inquired of the servants whither their mistress had flown. The only
answer he could obtain was, that she had paid them their wages, and dismissed
them.

In this situation he disposed of the household furniture, the produce of which
supported him for some time. But, during this period, he was greatly tormented
by Jew usurers, who had lent him large sums, at enormous interest upon the
presumption that he was in possession of his wife's fortune; but now
discovering their error, they arrested him, and threw him into goal, where he
remained a considerable time before he applied to Miss Shep -- d for relief,
who wrote him an insulting answer, refusing him the loan of a guinea, tho he
had squandered thousands upon her: concluding with this aggravating sentence,
"She made it a rule never to keep up a corespondence with beggars."

His elder brother, hearing of his distress, sent a friend to him, who afforded
him present relief; and having gained his liberty by the late act of
insolvency, through the interest of his brother, he obtained a commission, and
went over to America in one of the new regiments, which then served under
general Clinton.

HISTORY OF MISS HORTENSIA MELMOTH.
HOW frail is beauty, unguarded by a true sense of virtue and modesty. Inquire
the reason, why so many of the fair s^^ have deviated from the path of
rectitude, and you will find that it is generally occasioned by their not
having at an early period of life, proper notions of the beauty of virtue, and
the deformity of vice, instilled into their young minds. Hence it is that
having no ideas but those of dress, and making conquests, which, instead of
being nipt in the bud, have generally the greatest encouragement given to them;
and Miss is applauded for a young lady of high spirit, till, poor girl, she is
brought to the state of the hen, finding a snake's nest, and carefully hatching
it. The very things she takes pains to rear and improve, when brought to the
wished for perfection (like the poor hen's) prove her destruction, and she
falls an easy prey to her seducer; and this, more from want of knowledge, as I
said before, than a vitiated inclination or a depraved heart. I shall no longer
trespass upon my reader's patience, but proceed to give a melancholy proof of
(...) assertions in the following story.

Hortensia Melmoth, the heroine of this history, was the daughter of Sir Cecil
Melmoth, a man whose highest ambition was to be reckoned the leader of the beau
monde in all the fashionable pursuits of pleasure, so that it was almost
proverbial when any thing particularly elegant appeared, to say, "this is quite
in Sir Cecil's style:" his fortune was large, and he had a heart sensible of
the most delicate feelings; generous, and good natured to a fault: blessed with
a wife in whom every virtue, every grace was concentered, to render the state
of matrimony as perfectly happy as that of our primitive parents before their
fall; yet had she none of that rigid sternness, which so many hypocrites
affect, and call it virtue. No, she was all that was lively, gay, and debonair,
would enter freely into most of the modish amusements, dress elegantly
according to the taste of the times, and often, to please her husband, would
even lead them.

One would imagine that nothing could now exceed Sir Cecil's felicity; happy in
a woman's love with whom (after being satiated with a continual round of
dissipation) he could pass his hours in social converse, with such heartfelt
satisfaction, that, were it to be made known to the world even in idea, it
would be the means of domesticating half the popinjays of the age. Flattered in
his favorite foible of having the polite circles implicitly following him through
all the mazes of pleasure; and possessed of a fortune ample enough to supply
him in his darling passion without the least difficulty; had not that bane of
society, that disturber of connubial tranquillity GAMING, gained an ascendency
over him, amidst the other follies of the day, and without which, it would be
impossible for him to preserve that high rank, as a man of the ton, which he
had taken such pains to acquire, he must have been as happy as this mundane
state would admit. The consequence was, he fell a dupe to the designs of
knighted pick pockets, and ennobled sharpers, who, according to their deserts,
should have a cord instead of a ribbon. Sure there never was a truer saying in
regard to gaming than that of the French poet, "On commence par etre dupe, et
on fi nit par etre fripon." His repeated and heavy losses brought a gloom upon
his temper to which he was heretofore a stranger; and his breast, which used to
be the mansion of pleasantry, was now the seat of anguish. This his lady, who
was than pregnant, observing, pressed him, with all the eagerness of virtuous
love, to make her acquainted with the cause, and unreservedly pour his sorrows
in her hosom, that, by participation, they might be lessened. For a time he
evaded her sociliations, fearing the dangerous effect it might occasion, but at
length he yielded to her repeated entreaties, he confessed he had lost what
ready money he was possessed of, and had mortgaged his estate for more than he
ever had any hopes of retrieving.

Here instead of reproaching him, she, with all the engaging softness of a fond
female, who sees the object of her affection oppressed by misfortune,
endeavored to sooth his sorrows, and calm his melancholy. This she in part
effected; his countenance began to brighten, and (...) again pursued his former
train in hopes of regainin^ his former losses; instead of which he was obliged
(...) sell his estate to pay his debts of honor; and he had been the father of
two beautiful children (Hortensia and Charles) but about three months, when an
execution was put into his house by some of his tradesmen. This was too severe
a shock for the delicate frame of lady Melmoth to sustain -- she sunk under it
-- it threw her into a decline; and she survived but a few months. For a time
Sir Cecil was quite bereft of his reason; at first he was a mere bedlamite, to
think of being deprived of all he held dear in the world, and from an affluent
fortune to be reduced to the scanty pittance of a small annuity purchased with
the overplus of the sale of his estate. At length his frenzy subsided, and he
was seized with a settled melancholy that seemed likely to last his life. In
this state he continued about seven years; when, unexpectedly, by the death of
a distant relation, a fortune much larger than his former devolved to him --
his first care was to place his children in a more eligible situation than they
were at present, as they had been till now under the care of the nurse who had
reared them from their tender infancy. His melancholy decreased imperceptibly,
and he once more returned to gaiety and pleasure; yet he took care to avoin
gaming of every species. He bought a large house in Portland-place, and engaged
a tutor for his son; his daughter he placed at an eminent boarding school near
Londnn; where instead of that strict regard being paid to the morals, and
proper care taken to implant the love of virtue and goodness in the breasts of
the fair pupils, which, through the course of their lives, would protect their
innocence and honor from the wily arts of wicked and designing men, ever
watchful to seize upon the hearts and persons of unguarded females, and then
leave them a prey to reflection and despair; I say, instead of a proper
attention to these things; the grand and only object is to make them
accomplished in those external qualifications which serve to catch the eye, but
seldom to win the affections. At the age of thirteen Miss Melmoth was by far
the best dancer in the school, played tolerably upon the harpsichord and
guittar; spoke French fluently, and understood a little Italian. Already did
she begin to distinguish that elegant taste for dress which had so
characterised her father; for whatever Miss Hortensia wore, that fashion was
sure to prevail throughout the school.

This Sir Cecil observed with a joyful eye, and far from checking this vanity,
put it in her power to indulge her fancy to its utmost latitude -- Here she
continued till she was sixteen, daily making improvements in those ideal
accomplishments which had been her early study, when her father took her home,
and introduced her into the great world. The fame of her great beauty, fortune,
and accomplishments, made his house a rendezvous for all the young men of
fashion of the age. She kept her heart secure from the most vigorous attacks
for a long time, coquetting with some, and laughing at others, till chance
happening to bring the young lord Derwood (a young nobleman of a most
bewitching person, and large fortune) to her acquaintance, she surrendered at
discretion. His princip^^ unfortunately for Hortensia, were detestable,
parti^^^larly with regard to the fair sex. Here then our heroine lost her
heart; and a man so deeply skilled in all the mysteries of intrigue as lord
Derwood, soon found means that her chastity should follow. Having accompassed
his designs, far from observing any secrecy, he boasted publicly of his
triumph, and assured his riotous companions, that Miss Melmoth was (to use a
fashionable phrase) come at-able. This soon reached Sir Cecil's ears; and he
would immediately have wreaked his revenge on the despoiler of his child's
honor; when then the reflection of himself having, as it were, been accessory
to her ruin, both by his own example, and encouraging that levity, and love of
dissipation, which had thrown her off her guard, and made her fall an easy
victim to premeditate villiany, had such an effect upon him that threw him into
a violent fever, accompanied by a high delirium. On the sixth day after he was
taken ill, his reason seemed to return, he begged for a few minutes to be left
alone; his attendants, not apprehending the consequence, easily complied with
his request; when, taking advantage of their obsence, he threw himself out of
the window, and expired on the spot. Three days had scarcely elapsed, after the
interment of Sir Cecil, when Charles Melmoth, who had been making the tour of
Europe with his tutor, arrived in Portland-place. Struck with horror, by the
news of his sister's ruin and father's death, and fired with indignation
against the gay seducer, he immediately challenged him, and, after a few passes
ran him through the body; upon which he absconded, and no account whatever has
since been heard of him. Hortensia, who upon the first discovery of her
seduction, had taken refuge at the house of a female friend, hearing of the
deaths of her father and lover, and the absconding of her brother, was almost
instantaneously struck with infanity, in which situation there is great reason
to believe she will remain during her residence in this world.

FINIS.

