Mr. Peabody's ELECTION SERMON.

A SERMON, DELIVERED AT CONCORD, BEFORE The Honorable General Court OF THE
STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE, AT THE ANNUAL ELECTION, HOLDEN ON THE FIRST WEDNESDAY
IN JUNE, 1797.

BY THE Rev. Stephen Peabody, A. M. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN ATKINSON.

Published by Order of the General Court.

Concord: PRINTED BY GEORGE HOUGH.

M.DCC.XCVII.

State of New Hampshire. In the House of Representatives, June 9, 1797.
VOTED, That Mr. Freeman, Mr. Abel Parker, and Mr. Godfrey, be a Committee on
the part of this House, to join such of the Honorable Senate as they may
appoint, to wait on the Reverend Mr. Peabody, and return him the thanks of the
Legislature, for the ingenious Discourse delivered yesterday before the General
Court, and desire of him a Copy for the Press.

Sent up for concurrence. William Plumer, Speaker.
In Senate -- the same day. Read and concurred: Mr. Blanchard appointed.

Nathaniel Parker, Deputy Sec'ry.



AN ELECTION SERMON.
EXODUS XVIII.21. Moreover, thou shall provide out of all the people, able men,
such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness; and place such over them,
to be rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and
rulers of tens.
IN the great scale of beings, mankind hold a dignified station. The human
mind, capable of improvement, under advantageous cultivation, progresses in
knowledge and refinements, honourary in their nature, and ornamental in their
consequences. Individuals, with privileges of this kind, shine as lights in the
world. Societies, composed of characters improved in science and virtue, have
every advantage in their social connection.

BY long experience, the jarring passions and interests of men, show the
necessity of Government. Various have been the forms, by which mankind have
enjoyed distinguished privileges. A particular discussion of all the principles
of Government, will not be expected upon this occasion, as many of this
respectable audience are better acquainted with them, than the speaker. An
attempt of this, would be a departure from duty.

THAT Ecclesiastical Conscitution, exhibited in the sacred Scriptures, is the
foundation upon which the Ministers of Religion are placed. It contains those
rules and regulations which we are called to vindicate, (...) we are furnished
with a code of laws and precepts, admirably suited to governors, and governed
-- rules designed to promote general happiness here, and to prepare for a far
more exalted state in the regions of immortality. These are peculiar
excellencies in the Oracles of Truth.

IN the early ages of time, Government was confined to private families; but
when men multiplied, it was consistent with infinite wisdom to point out
methods by which there should be a Government upon a more extensive scale. This
took place with the people of Israel, while in the land of Egypt. The
Egyptians, under a pretense that Israel would increase in numbers and power,
treated them in a manner incompatible with humanity. Whereupon the Lord was
pleased to provide for them a deliverer -- to raise up Moses, remarkably to
preserve him in his infancy, to appear unto him in a burning bush, to appoint
him a ruler, and to accompany him with such proofs of his divine mission, as
were convincing to a mind not clouded with ignorance, or blinded with prejudice.

THE good man, with reluctance, modestly accepted the appointment, with Aaron
his brother, his assistant in the arduous task. Mutually supporting each other,
the Lord was with them. Happy for them, and thrice happy for the people, they
were united by the most endearing ties, when placed, the one a political, the
other an ecclesiastical leader. Aiming at the same great object, under the
particular direction of Heaven, they went on, hand in hand, through a series of
unexampled trials, conducting and protecting their charge, as faithful
shepherds guide their flocks. Connected with an ungrateful people, those
worthies met with singular difficulties in their way, were censured when
performing the will of God, and exerting every power to advance the best
interest of society.

JETHRO, the priest of Midian, father-in-law to Moses, anxious for his son's
welfare, and sensible that his task was insupportable, proposed some
alterations, that a part of the burden might be removed from him, and placed
upon others. These we have in the theme under consideration -- the manner of
executing their several trusts specified -- the extent of their power defined
-- and, in cases of intricacy, an appeal open to the chief magistrate, their
last resort. Here the privileges of the people were in a great measure to be
secured by the amiable characters of their rulers, and especially by his who
was their supreme judge, and under the immediate influence of the King of kings.

THIS was the form of Government then established. It was a theocracy; and its
permanency shows it was suited to the genius of the people in that period of
the world, as it continued in the days of Moses, Joshua, and till Samuel's
time, sanctioned with the approbation of Heaven. -- They were governed by wise
judges, given them by a God who was their guardian and friend, till his favor
was forfeited by a revolt from him, casting off his authority, and determining
to have a king of their own, in imitation of the heathen nations. This conduct
proceeding from a factious disposition, was displeasing to God. Yet he granted
their request, gave them a king -- but a king in judgment.

THE Oracles of Truth are not decisive, respecting any particular, permanent
form of civil polity. We are left at liberty to adopt rules and laws agreeable
to our inclinations. In a state of ignorance and barbarism, a despotic power
may be necessary; but where knowledge is diffused, and reason enlightened, the
bastile bars are seen -- the shackles eluded.

A REPUBLICAN Government, as defined by an eminent writer, "in which all men,
rich and poor, magistrates and subjects, officers and people, masters and
servants, the first citizen and the last, are equally subject to the laws," is
doubtless the most unexceptionable. This is the general principle which
supports the Government of United America, happily removed from that monarchy,
aristocracy, or democracy, which have injured mankind. This form has the public
good for its principal object. It rests primarily in the hands of the people;
and when delegated, is exercised a limited period, and returns to its origin. A
people with a good constitution, judicious laws, in the hands of an executive
authority influenced by the maxims of wisdom and goodness, attentive to their
true interest, will acquire strength and stability, as they improve in
knowledge and virtue.

THE directions given in my text, are adapted to any people, under whatever
form of Government, when wisdom and probity are their guide. And in this view,
we trust they are peculiarly applicable to the people of America, and demand
attention in all our elections to fill the offices of State, supreme and
subordinate. Though under dissimilar forms, electors may be different, yet the
characters of the elected should be the same.

THE subject before us exhibits the duty of a people in the choice of their
rulers, and delineates the leading traits essential to those in public office.

I SHALL attempt to make some observations upon the several particulars here
specified, to form good rulers -- speak of the duties of their station -- then
draw some inferences -- and conclude with addresses suited to the present
occasion.

THE first particular in the choice of rulers, should be natural abilities.
Able men, are such as have been distinguished by the God of nature. As in the
ecclesiastical department, a novice is excluded; so in the civil, men of sense
and judgment are to be preferred. Men of fortitude, of resolution, who fear not
the faces of the unprincipled; but when occasion requires, can oppose them with
firmness. Men of clear heads, and determined hearts. But it is not enough that
men should have natural endowments; more is necessary. The gifts of nature
should be improved by study and close application, and truth investigated in
the paths of science. There should be a general knowledge of the principles of
natural and political law. And without this, men are exposed; they are easily
deceived, and led into errors, disgraceful to themselves, and injurious to
their constituents. Designing individuals have every advantage of the
illiterate, to influence their conduct to the accomplishment of sinister
purposes. -- A good natural understanding, therefore, (...) decent and liberal
acquirements, are necessary ingredients in the able statesman.

ANOTHER qualification in an accomplished ruler here recommended, is the fear
of GOD. This being granted, an atheist can have no part or lot in this matter.
A being who is believed not to exist, cannot be feared. -- But besides these,
there are those in an enlightened age of the world, who acknowledge the being
of GOD, and yet are not afraid to offend him by trampling on his authority.
Such are poorly qualified for eminent stations in Government. An important
trait in the character of a good ruler, is wanting.

THE fear of God is the best guard against temptations to a deviation from the
rules of right. By this, human passions are regulated, and men are influenced
to "run the ways of God's commandments, rendering to all their dues -- tribute
to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to
whom honor." A consciousness of his omnipresence to whom we are all
accountable, fixes a lasting impression upon the heart, fans every spark of
moral rectitude, and calls forth patriotic exertions. The belief of an entire
dependence on him, is an impenetrable mound against an inundation of
immoralities. It is the best constructed fortress against the savage artillery
of the prince of darkness. -- Shielded with a helmet from the God of armies,
the intrepid ruler marches at the head of his battalions, with prudence,
fortitude, and perseverance, which insure protection, and lead on to victory.
-- Examples of wisdom and virtue, originating from the fear of God, have a
commanding influence upon the human mind; and in all our elections, such
qualifications should invariably direct our choice.

WE pass on to a third particular essential in Jethro's rulers. -- They were to
be men of truth.

POSSESSED of a principle opposed to falsehood and deceit, they were to be
eminent for their integrity. This was a qualification necessary in the
lawgivers of Israel. To a man of this description, "his yea, and nay, are
Amen." His tongue is a faithful index of his mind. He strictly observes the
words of inspiration, "Wherefore, putting away lying, speak every man truth
with his neighbor." Sensible that he is always in the presence of the God of
truth, he never allowedly deviates from its laws. Such a character, the more it
is examined, the more illustrious it will appear. It will be "like the path of
the just," po^rtrayed by the wise king Solomon, "which as the rising light,
shines more and more unto the perfect day."

ONE thing more, necessary for accomplished rulers. -- They should hate
covetousness.

HOWEVER contemptible a covetous disposition may be, in the sight of God and
man, we are constrained to acknowledge it is too prevalent to give full liberty
for any ^ne class of men to cast a stone at others. Rigid parsimo^^ should not
be indulged in a ruler; and it certainly is (...) who fears God, and has a
sacred regard to truth. A principle of virtue is discovered, in a generous
disregard to personal wealth, when it comes in competition with the interest of
the public. When a good ruler is engaged in his office, his duty to the station
arrests his first attention; self, has only a secondary place in his mind. When
called to act in public, he leaves his private concerns behind him; they drop,
till he has faithfully performed his higher engagements. -- Presuming that the
electors in this State for the present year, so far as they have proceeded,
have been actuated by the foregoing principles; that they have provided able
men, fearers of God, men of truth, haters of covetousness, to compose the
present Legislative Assembly -- let us proceed to offer a few thoughts upon the
duties annexed to the trust reposed in them.

IT was the advice of Jethro to Moses, that the proposed characters should be
placed over the people, to be rulers of thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers
of fifties, and rulers of tens. With great propriety this may be applied to the
several officers of a Republic, in a succession, from the first magistrate. --
The Federal and State Governments in America, have furnished us with
constitutions and laws, by which the duties peculiar to each office are
ascertained. Our laws, however, are not like those of the Medes and Persians,
which cannot be altered. The people have always a right to the exercise of
their power, as the public interest may require. And may we not affirm, that in
theory there is no Government so rational as where elections are frequent, the
elected under the public eye, and to continue during the people's pleasure?
This is a privilege we enjoy. Our annual elections give us an opportunity to
select our best citizens to transact our public and most important business, to
enact new laws, and make appointments according to the exigencies of the State.

A GENERAL Assembly to a Republic, in many respects stands in the place of a
Moses to Israel; the refulgence of whose virtues should resemble the face of
Moses, after he had received the law of the Lord on Mount Sinai. The Authority
of a State is to provide men duly qualified to act in the necessary
departments. The reins of Government are to be given into their hands for those
purposes. Their trust is important, and when they are under the solemnity of an
oath, they are bound by the strongest ties: By them, the duties of every office
should be contemplated previous to a choice. And any station had better remain
vacant, than be improperly filled. -- Those passages of inspiration will always
remain true, "When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice; but when
the wicked bears rule, the people mourn." "He that rules over men must be
just, ruling in the fear of God."

A CONSCIENTIOUS regard to the principles of rectitude in general, and a strict
adherence to the duties annexed to each office, either in the legislative or
executive, whether relative to the civil, military, or ecclesiastical
departments, instamp upon it a dignity, by which the vicious are restrained,
and the virtuous encouraged. In short, the duties incumbent upon mankind,
relative to their God and each other, obligatory upon all, and those peculiarly
adapted to the various offices in a well regulated Government, will be regarded
with undiverted attention by every man deserving public confidence.

PERMIT me to enumerate some of the objects which naturally present themselves
to the mind of the wise guardians of a country. -- The most perfect body of
human laws ever framed, have their defects; and these are made obvious by
practice. In their operations, they in all respects do not answer the designs
proposed. Wise legislators, upon a discovery of imperfections, by which the
citizens are embarrassed or wronged, by which any class of men are injured,
will exert themselves for a reformation, and not give over the pursuit till it
be accomplished. As they are the guardians of the people, fidelity to their
trust demands their attention. Laws should be founded upon the principles of
reason and justice -- should be few in number, perspicuous, and punctually
executed. Those which have been made, and are now in force, ought they not to
be made plain and intelligible? Might not perplexities, expenses, and great
injustice, be prevented, and society highly favored? -- Explicit laws, binding
mankind to the rules of justice, are an admirable security to all branches of
society. Under them, contracts are valid, peaceable members of the community
are protected in the enjoyment of their interests, the profligate restrained
and punished, and in a sense the "wrath of man is made to praise God."

A FREQUANT revision of the laws and constitutions of a country, with such
alterations as good policy may suggest, promotes that general utility which
cements the various parts of society, and forms a complete harmonious whole.

AGAIN. -- An important object in the minds of good rulers, is, the increase of
useful knowledge.

A FOUNDATION placed in the minds of youth, is like "good seed sown in good
ground," in its proper season; and gives the fairest prospects of a happy
increase to the well being of society. The principles of virtue and knowledge
early implanted, naturally take root, and produce a luxuriant harvest. Those
who are thus favored, are "trained up in the way they should go," the best
prompter on life's devious journey. -- Hence the propriety of having able
instructors, whose morals and language are worthy of imitation. And hence the
necessity of giving ample encouragement, in a business so important and
laborious. Though honorable donations have been made for the promotion of
literature, yet the fostering hand of our civil fathers may be required for
bringing to maturity. May it not then be expected, that every aid and
encouragement will be given to education? The views of such as are young, are
hereby extended; they are raised above the grovelling vulgarisms too common to
that age, which will have a happy influence upon society, in preparing the
rising generation to fill with honor the most dignified stations, when they
may be called to act upon the theater of life.

Is there not a third and an important object in the mind of rulers, viz. the
increase of virtue and religion?

THE ideas which have by some been adopted, that the civil authority should
never interpose in matters of religion, are erroneous. It is granted by the
most learned politicians, that the religious forms which have been established
and supported, have had a powerful tendency to promote civility, to restrain
vicious men, to protect the innocent, to countenance worthy pursuits, and to
discountenance the immoralities which have contaminated mankind! Sentiments of
this nature have flowed from knowledge and experience. And if they be well
founded, is it not a truth, that establishments of this kind invite the
attention that civil policy which is the support of Government? If therefore,
virtue and religion form the principal pillar which upholds the civil sabrick,
it is evidently a duty for wise rulers to contribute something for its support.
Upon this principle, many professed deists contribute with cheerfulness and
liberality to public teachers of morality; they are patrons to the worship of
God in gospel order. They have considered it as a measure wisely adapted to
uphold Government -- and in this they deserve an encomium.

SUCH as fully believe the Christian religion, and receive the Scriptures as
the Word of God, have additional motives for their utmost exertions that
sobriety and goodness may be promoted. It is indisputable, that the more a
society live in the practice of virtue, the greater prosperity they enjoy: The
more they are under the influence of vicious principles, the more unhappiness
they will experience. The sacred Oracles give us the best directions. In them,
no unreasonable restraints are imposed, no rational enjoyments are forbidden.
Excess alone is transgression. So far as the Scriptures are strictly regarded,
so far every member of the community conducts with propriety. The various
propensities and passions peculiar to human nature, are directed to right
objects. And there, CHRIST, a most faithful and compassionate legislator,
stands, giving law to his subjects. In those records, his character is
exhibited, his maxims are registered, his example left for our imitation; and
the whole perfectly reconcilable to virtue, religion, and the best policy.
Thence may be extracted wisdom and instruction to guide us into the paths of
rectitude; to save us from destructive courses of error and delusion. Here is a
constitution worthy the particular notice of every man who holds an office in
Government; that under the influence of its rules, he may be instrumental in
diffusing virtuous and benevolent principles. Directed by this, he will give
his public testimony in favor of those who are engaged professionally to
prepare mankind for blessings in this life, and a glorious future reward.

ONE farther essential in good rulers, is, that they are themselves exemplary.

THERE can be no greater burlesque upon the character of rulers, than when,
under binding obligations to God, and their constituents, they are making laws
which they are the first in violating! -- But how agreeable are the prospects,
when judicious laws are made, are esteemed sacred, and are punctually observed
by the enactors? A sanction is hereby placed upon them, which impresses every
mind. And societies having their eye upon their rulers, observing their
consistency, are led to follow their example, which naturally tends to rectify
the vices and to reform the manners of the community. When precept and example
are harmonious in rulers, every observer is charmed with the character; when
they are at variance, they cannot fail to produce contempt. Of great importance
then it must appear, for those who are clothed with authority, to have the
qualifications described in my text, to be themselves exemplary, and let their
light shine before men, who, aiming at one great object, the best interest of
the public, are filled with present animation; and their views, not confined to
this life, are extended, and terminate in immortality.

THE discourse shall be closed with an improvement -- and with addresses suited
to the present occasion.

THE suggestions which have been given, exhibit the necessity of a Government
established upon the principles of reason, and guarded by the maxims of justice
and virtue. The passions natural to men, indicate that we were formed for
society -- and they powerfully excite us to enter into social connections. From
a state of natural equality, communities are formed. The infirmities of men
require protection -- their vices, restraints and punishment. A free
Government, therefore, under which the virtuous are encouraged, and the vicious
punished, is the palladium of the rational mind. How important, then, that it
should be supported; that every aid should be given to those who are entrusted
with authority, so long as they perform their duty. Vigilance respecting
rulers, a check to prevent an undue exercise of power, are requisite, to
preserve inviol^te the liberties and privileges of a people. -- An unrestrained
authority is dangerous; witness Hazael, Haman, and the unfortunate Charles.
Extremes are always attended with consequences most unfavourable. Tyranny and
anarchy, equally pernicious! An opposition to good Government is inexcusable,
as it "resists an ordinance of God." A tame submission to an unjust authority,
discovers a pusillanimity derogatory to the human mind. -- Wherever a just
Government is wanting, as an "hidden treasure" it should be sought and
established. Where it has been enjoyed, and is become deficient, it should be
carefully amended, as was before hinted. Too great efforts cannot be made to
uphold and perpetuate a well-founded Government -- and continued exertions will
facilitate its rising in respectability.

FROM the ideas which have been brought into view, may not the people of
America felicitate themselves under our present forms of Government, and in the
general characters of our rulers, especially those in exalted stations? Though
we may not be favored with supreme magistrates who have an immediate
intercourse with Heaven, as had Moses the lawgiver of Israel; yet we may
presume that they have been, and are, favored with the approving presence of
God.

OUR constitutions of Government, though they may be imperfect, stand high in
the estimation of the enlightened and impartial among the nations of the earth:
And under them, we have reason to rejoice in a general prosperity. If virtue
and attention are not with us dormant, little can be wanting to complete the
system.

WHEN we take a retrospect of the scenes through which we have passed, since
the commencement of our late contest, our minds upon the recollection are
impressed with a trembling, grateful pleasure. In consequence of injuries and
insults, with but little more than a sling and stone we encountered the Giant,
and foiled Britain!

A PROPITIOUS Providence, like the "pillar of a cloud and of fire to Israel,"
led the American armies. -- And not less apparent has been the hand of God, in
our civil operations. The organization of our Governments, has been attended
with salutary effects in the increase of property and respectability. -- After
our thankful acknowledgments to God, the great Superintendent, we should not
neglect to express gratitude to a WASHINGTON, a Franklin, (...) A^^^^, a Jay,
and to other heroes who have been instrumental in accomplishing those great
purposes, so much for the honor and interest of the American States, and for
the happiness of future generations.

SHALL we not spend a moment in contrasting our present circumstances in a
state of peace, with what we experienced when involved in the horrors of war?
-- in contrasting our situation, with many of the European nations whose
garments are now stained with human blood? -- Let us read the history of the
French revolution, and we shall have additional reason to rejoice in God for
his favors, and in the language of inspiration must say, "hitherto has the
Lord helped US."

AGAIN. -- From the reflections we have been making, we learn the advantages of
a virtuous Government. -- If we look into the sacred history, we find the
prosperity of Israel ebbing and flowing with the morality of their sovereigns.
When they had good kings, heavy judgments were averted; but when their rulers
were vicious, they forsook the Lord, ran into idolatry, exposed themselves, and
judgments came upon them like a flood! They became so abandoned, that God said
of them by his prophet, "Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, my heart
could not be toward this people; cast them out of my sight, and let them go
forth."

AND has it not been generally true, that ignorance, a neglect of God and his
worship, idleness, luxury, dissolute manners, and factions, have been certain
preludes to the destruction of States and Empires? Is not this abundantly
proved by the histories of ancient times? Was not this verified in the
destruction of Sparta, Athens, Rome? -- And if we may reason from past events,
we may safely presume, that like causes will produce similar effects, however
WE may be involved in the issue.

THOUGH it pleases God not to reward or punish individuals in this life,
according to their merit or demerit, as appears by the histories of the
Prophets and Apostles, by the parable of Dives and Lazarus, by the prosperity
of Nero, and the misfortunes of LOUIS; yet Heaven has balanced national virtue
by affluence, and vice by a counterpoise of adversity. Nothing, then, can be a
greater stimulus to a virtuous Government, to adopt the most energetic
measures, that religion and every species of virtue may be encouraged. On the
other hand, that vice, with its baneful retinue, and whatever may be derogatory
to the citizen, the statesman, or the christian, may be discountenanced, and
meet with an exemplary punishment! -- The officers of Government have a price
put into their hands, to promote the interest of their brethren, and the common
cause of virtue. And when they are repeatedly, by the suffrages of their
country, called into office, it is an evidence in their favor, and a public
declaration, that their past conduct has been approved.

MANY of our civil Fathers, upon the present anniversary, have frequently been
selected to act as guardians to the people of this State. Their past fidelity
has been a sufficient recommendation to their present promotion; and we trust,
the transactions of the ensuing year will* with resplendency, evidence the
wisdom and judgment of the people in their choice.

HIS Excellency the Governor, the Honorable Council, Senate and House of
Representatives, will please to accept my cordial congratulations upon the
present joyful occasion. -- Regularly introduced into your several offices,
clothed with authority, we cheerfully anticipate the salutary effects of your
deliberations, in the advancement of the general prosperity, the safety and
interest of every class of citizens. -- May wisdom, integrity, and unanimity,
attend your councils, and concentre in all your decisions. May that spirit
which directed Moses in the government of Israel, preside in all your pursuits;
that under your administration, order and regularity may be conspicuous,
knowledge and undissembled religion may spread their benign influences,
illuminating every part of the system.

THE present anniversary, which has collected the guardians of our civil rights
from the several parts of the State, has brought together numbers in the
Ecclesiastical department, who wish to be considered as fellow-helpers in the
cause of our country. May I be permitted to address my brethren, upon this
auspicious day, and rejoice with them under a Government, where harmony
pervades the various departments, and so happily unites, in one common center,
the Civil and Ecclesiastical influence?

My Brethren and Friends,

EVERY effort of ours, to promote virtue, and to oppose the prevalence of vice,
contributes something to strengthen the hands of our civil rulers: Their
exertions for the accomplishment of the same purposes, encourage our hearts.
With satisfaction we attend upon our annual Convention, to unite our best
endeavors that religion may be promoted at the season and place of our public
elections. And our pleasure is heightened by that generous friendship which has
ever appeared in the guardians of the State, to our order, and by that
reciprocity of affection which has glowed in every countenance. -- Ardently
wishing the present harmony may be perpetuated, and to unite our efforts in
aiding the civil magistrate, we have great confidence in having that assistance
and support from the same Government, which may terminate in a general increase
of mutual happiness.

SOMETHING by way of address to this respectable audience, shall finish the
present discourse.

My Friends and Fellow Citizens,

AFTER a series of signal interpositions, the inhabitants of this land are
placed upon the shores of Freedom, with the olive branch flourishing in their
hands. Heroes in the field, wise men at the head of the civil polity, with a
prevailing intercourse with Heaven, have brought on the present Era. For years
past, no nation ever experienced greater prosperity. "The voice of joy and
health have been heard in our habitations;" the earth has teemed with a
profusion of rich treasures; "the little hills have rejoiced on every side."

ARTS and Sciences have flourished; and a spirit of enterprise, before unknown
in the annals of our country, has been displayed, not in opening deep waters,
that travelers may go through dry shod, but in providing safe passages over
them; and also to divert the watery element into different channels, to
facilitate the labors of men. -- Perhaps no period was ever so favorable for
the general increase of property, as what we are now experiencing.

THIS life is a changing scene. Prosperity and adversity await mankind, under
the superintendency of unetring wisdom. Though we have been a highly privileged
people, this may not continue. Prosperity too often produces luxury, which
leads to a decay of virtue, to irreligion, and ruin. -- May Heaven divert our
feet from paths so dangerous, and lead us on in the way of truth and safety.
This is the course to preferments -- it is the high way to honor and
happiness, and a prologue to immortal joys.

LET us then cultivate virtue in ourselves -- carefully avoid shading the light
of reason, counteracting remonstrances of conscience, and what is recorded in
God's word. In the steady practice of every duty to God, to society, and
ourselves -- under the influence of caution, candor, and generosity -- we may
expect the divine approbation. -- When we act as electors, our eyes should ever
be upon the "faithful of the land." We shall, no doubt, have frequent calls for
elections to the most important offices. This is verified by late experience --
by the retirement of our worthy Chief Magistrate, at a critical period; and the
choice of a successor, whose past eminent services have given him the best
title to public confidence. Calls of this nature should be improved to awaken
our vigilance, that we may obtain a true knowledge of the most deserving, and
of those of a contrary description; that our future proceedings may be
consonant to the principles of reason and sound policy.

MAY the Great Superintendent give wisdom to our Supreme Government at their
present session, in transactions of the highest moment to the States of America
-- that prudence, fortitude, and unanimity, may mark every movement, and
instamp a dignity upon our national character. With a rational confidence in
that authority, under God, we rest our political safety. -- We rely upon their
wisdom and integrity.

PRESUMING that we shall not be deceived, we shall ever be ready to support
Government, to reward all who are faithfully discharging the duties of their
stations, from those who are rulers of thousands, to such as are only rulers of
tens.

UPON a reflection, that we have all a part to act in the drama of life, our
minds cannot but be impressed; that our several stations require various
exercises! "That though on earth the powers that be are ordained of God," and
cannot be disregarded but by incurring the divine displeasure; yet we are
accountable to Higher Powers, and ere long must assemble at the Bar of the
Great Judge of all the earth!

KEEPING that solemn period ever in view, let us perform our parts in life with
a cheerful seriousness, as in the presence of an Omniscient God. With lives
regulated by the maxims of truth, by the illuminations of the divine spirit,
let us "run the ways of God's commandments," disseminating light and knowledge,
till we are prepared to enter into a world of glory, where virtue alone will
dignify and exalt every immortal spirit, in the immediate presence of God, of
the Redeemer, in the society of Angelic Hosts and innumerable glorified Saints
-- where one chorus of praise shall commence, progress in ceaseless ages, and
subordinate power be absorbed in Heaven's Sovereign.

AMEN.

