AN ENQUIRY RELATIVE TO THE MORAL and POLITICAL IMPROVEMENT OF THE HUMAN
SPECIES.

AN ORATION, DELIVERED IN THE CITY OF NEW YORK ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, BEING THE
TWENTY-FIRST ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY ELIHU PALMER.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY JOHN CROOKES, 1797.

ARGUMENT.
1. A Sketch of the American Revolution, and of the Consequences which have
resulted from it.

2. Remarks on the Political Apostasy which has appeared in this Country.

3. The Primary Objects of Political Association, and the Author's Opinion on
the best Mode of Organization to attain those Objects.

4. An Enquiry into the Effects of this important Revolution upon the moral,
scientific, and political Condition of the Human Species,

ORATION.
[It is hoped the readers of the following production will glance over with a
less critical eye any inaccuracies they may perceive, on account of the
peculiar situation of the Author. He to whom Nature has become a blank, from
the total loss of sight, cannot be supposed to be in a habit of committing his
ideas to paper with that nice precision, elegance, regularity, or method, which
they can command who have never been visited with this greatest of an human
misfortunes. The ideas, however, in this Address will be found strong and
vigorous, and frequently original -- a proof that loss of sight does by no
means impair the energy of the contemplative faculties of man:

"So much the rather, thou CELESTIAL LIGHT,
"Shine inward, and the mind through all her powers
"Irradiate --."
MILTON] Editor.
FRIENDS and FELLOW-CITIZENS,
PERMIT me to solicit your attention, and the indulgence of your candor, while
I attempt to develope some of those important principles which are connected
with the nature of this anniversary -- the establishment of our independence,
and the ground of hope to all the oppressed and unfortunate nations of the
earth.

The period is at length arrived when man is about to take cognizance of the
dearest interests of his species. His intellectual powers are excited to action
upon an elevated scale, comprehending an indefinite extent of human felicity.
Reason has determined to examine with a scrutinizing eye the nature of every
principle which can be employed for the productive benefit of the species; or
which, on the other hand, can possibly operate destructively to the happiness
of man. The philosophers, the patriots, the philanthropists of all countries
are combining the wishes of their hearts and the efforts of their minds to
meliorate the condition of the human race; and, so enrapturing is the object
that lies before them, that while they view, even at a distance, its
accomplishment, the benevolent sensations which animate their hearts add to the
mind new energy of thought, and bestow upon intellect a peculiar force of
beneficial operations. They behold, in the progressive movements of
intellectual power, the certain ruin, the inevitable destruction of those
pernicious systems of error and superstition, of civil and religious despotism,
which have so long desolated the world and degraded the character of man. It is
not difficult to discern the effects of applying the energy of human intellect
to that ancient order of things now crumbling into dust by the powerful
exertions which are opposed to its iniquitous principles.

The grand object of all civil and religious tyrants, those privileged
impostors of the world, has been to suppress all the elevated operations of the
mind, to kill the energy of thought, and through this channel to subjugate the
whole earth for their own special emolument. When men are kept in a total
ignorance of their rights by those whom they are taught to revere as beings of
a higher order, it is not to be expected that they will be capable of that
activity by which alone their privileges are to be regained. Slavery and fear
have rendered them torpid and senseless, without acquiring knowledge sufficient
to exercise a holy indignation against their oppressors.

Retrospectively examining the condition of man, we behold the most fruitful
sources of human degradation and calamity. In all the ancient world, Man, every
where bending beneath the weight of a compound despotism, seems almost to have
lost the erect attitude assigned to him by the power of Nature, and to grovel
upon the earth the miserable victim of ignorance and tyranny. In those regions
of slavery and wretchedness all the advantages, all the enjoyments, which would
have resulted from a cultivated understanding and the establishment of liberty,
are concealed from the view of the human eye; and the philanthropic mind is
compelled to contemplate a scene of ruin and distress capable of being
exhibited only by the royal butchers and ecclesiastical impostors of the world.

The extent of this mischief, and the pressure of these misfortunes, are not
distinctly perceived or realized by the American citizens, enjoying all the
bounties of nature and the blessings of a free government, excluded from the
double despotism of church and state, and disposing at will the fruits of their
industry for the cultivation of their minds, or other purposes, suited to the
acquisition of that moral happiness, for the attainment of which man every
where exhibits such strong desires.

To all the enjoyments which can possibly result from the possession of his
faculties, Man is justly entitled by the laws and constitution of Nature; but
which, in all ages, he has been shamefully deprived of by the Tyrants of the
earth, who have never had any other object in view than that of robbing him of
his just rights, for the purpose of carrying into effect their own nefarious
intentions.

It is impossible at this time, nor is it necessary, to carry the mind over the
vast regions of the ancient world, in order to exhibit the terrible spectacle
resulting from those political and religious institutions which have served
only to degrade and corrupt the species, and which have robbed man of the
brightest ornaments of his character. The earth for ages past has drank the
blood of innocent beings, and this blood is justly chargeable to the crimes of
Priests and Tyrants of detestable memory. Not a spot of this fair creation has
been exempt from their ravages; and their names will descend to posterity
covered with that odium which will ever attach itself to such criminal
transactions.

The powers of Man, however, in the progress of their improvement, were
destined to give to the species a melioration of their unfortunate condition.
It is the energy of Intellect that has taken cognizance of the rights of human
nature; and it is this alone which can correct the errors of ancient systems
and renovate the world. The present state of the human mind affords good ground
to hope that all retrograde motion in human concerns is already excluded from
the catalogue of probable events; and we look forward to a new order of things,
comprehending the most beneficial exertion of our rational faculties, and an
unprecedented diffusion of human felicity.

Among all the events recorded in history, the most important is that of the
American Revolution, by which the cord that bound us to the corrupt government
of Britain was severed for ever. It is not necessary at this time to disclose
in detail the historical facts productive of this astonishing event. they are
still fresh in every American mind; and it is most ardently to be hoped that
they will never be forgotten. They evince in the British cabinet the most
unequivocal design to establish tyranny and despotism in the New World: but, by
protruding the schemes of domination beyond the point of suffering sensibility
among the people of this country, the malignant and destructive intention was
destroyed, and the objects on whom this wicked plan was intended to operate
avenged themselves upon the heads of the projectors.

The corrupt designs of Britain to enslave America being distinctly perceived,
it was all that was necessary to excite the citizens of this country to
vigorous action in defense of their liberties. They were roused by a sudden
impulse, the effects of which circulated with the rapidity of electrical fire.
They said with a mighty voice, a voice that shall one day sound dreadful in the
ears of every tyrant on earth, We are not born to be enslaved by the corrupt
governments of the trans-Atlantic world. Lamenting the necessity of war, and
appealing to the Supreme Judge of the Universe for the rectitude of their
intentions, they pledged their lives, their fortunes, and their sacred honor,
for the defense of their dearest rights, and the security of their most
important privileges. They armed with alacrity, and exhibited the most
unexamped efforts. They shed their blood and dissipated their treasure in the
glorious contest, and Liberty was triumphant in this Western world.

In regard to the consequences which will eventually result from this important
revolution, it is impossible to make any accurate calculation. But we already
behold some of the effects which have flowed from this political contest. We
behold them in the operations of the human mind -- in the energy which has been
displayed by the intellectual powers of man, and the consequent gradual decay
of superstition and fanaticism -- in the progressive and extensive improvements
exhibited in the American country -- in the cultivation of science, the
discovery and application of principles, the more general diffusion of
knowledge, and the melioration of that unfortunate condition to which man by
the tyrants of the earth has been devoted -- in the French Revolution, an event
of the most astonishing nature, and extremely dissimilar to any thing recorded
in the page of ancient history, but which presents to afflicted humanity the
consoling hope of sufferings alleviated or wholly destroyed.

It is true that the philosophers and philanthropists of France, by their
writings and dissemination of general principles, had been gradually preparing
the way; and, when the contest between America and Britain commenced, the court
of Versailles obeyed the sentiments of the nation without intending to gratify
them.

In addition to the previous preparations for this beneficial event, the
impulse received by the French army in this country was transferred to the
center of France, and despotism received a shock destructive to its very
existence; and communicated with a new energy, resulting from a combination of
operating causes, and especially the suffering sensibility of a magnanimous
nation. The throne of the tyrant, and the instrument of tyranny, the Bastile,
felt the just resentment of an injured people. They commanded them to be
demolshed, and they were seen no more. They spoke, and a new order of things
presented itself to view.

In vain have the despots of the earth combined to strangle in its birth the
child of Freedom. Liberty is impelled to action b^ a righteous zeal unknown to
the slaves of kings. She walks erect in conscious dignity, and defies the
insulting powers of her enemies. She moves with an energy divine, and proclaims
happiness to the human species.

Nothing but the ardour and force attached to the cause of liberty would have
sustained France in the perilous hour of her distress, convulsed as she was
internally, and laboring under an unparalleled weight of despotic malignity,
resulting from the combined intentions of the corrupt courts of Europe. It is
not difficult to discover the motives of action in the profligate despots of
the Old World: but it is lamentable and astonishing to observe a similar spirit
actuating the minds and influencing the wishes of some of our American
citizens. Whence this political apostasy, this dereliction of good principles
in our own country? It is not, says an excellent writer, because good
principles have been violated that they are to be abandoned. Humanity deplores
the cruel excesses which are attached to great and important revolutions: but
the enemies of Freedom have charged these excesses to the wrong side of the
account. They cannot, with justice, be charged to the true spirit of Liberty;
but to that wicked Despotism which opposes the righteous progress of general
emancipation. If human nature, in the fervor of its anxiety to obtain the
privileges of which it had been unjustly deprived, should exhibit a degree of
resentment toward its oppressors, it is to be considered as a natural result
of that WEIGHT OF OPPRESSION under which man has groaned for so many ages.

When the condition of France previous to the Revolution is considered, and the
objects to be obtained and the means to be made use of for this purpose are
brought into the calculation, the events to be deplored are not so numerous as
might have been expected. But admitting them to be more numerous and shocking
than the highest statement represents, this can produce no serious influence on
the mind of the philanthropist, sincerely attached to the liberty and happiness
of man.

There is no price too great to pay for such inestimable blessings. The
American citizen, who relinquishes his attachment to the cause of liberty on
this account, knows not how to distinguish between primary principles and the
vicious actions of a turbulent individual; between political truth and the
sinister machinations of a party. It is not an uncharitable conjecture to
suppose that those who indulge such violent resentments against the French
nation, on account of the EXCESSES of the revolution, are influenced by other
sentiments than those which are purely humane and benevolent; and that some
secret attachment to the British system of government has united itself with
their political opinions. Nor is this a mere conjecture; since it is evident
that those who feel the strongest attachment to the French Revolution are the
most decidedly opposed to those measures of our own government resembling the
British schemes of policy; while, on the other hand, those who advocate those
measures are not observed to speak with much affection relative to the true
interests of France.

The virtuous citizen, attached to the interests of mankind, will admit with
reluctance the political opinion that nations are incapable of governing
themselves: but this opinion is indulged by some in our own country, who were
not inconsiderable actors in our revolution.

It is not our wish to criminate the intentions of man; therefore it is perhaps
more charitable to call these errors of judgment, resulting from a wish to
maintain a beneficial stability in government. But, from the experience of
future ages, the necessary data will be discovered on which a decision of this
kind must ultimately depend. In the mean time it is the duty of every
enlightened citizen to apply the force of his genius to the discovery and
application of those fundamental principles which are connected with the true
interests and the progressive improvement of the human species.

The political associations hitherto established in the world have had no just
regard to the improvement of the active powers of man. They have served only to
bury and suppress the operation of all his talents; they have not regarded
essentially any of the primary objects for which civil institutions are
necessary; and they have established those vicious and injurious principles
which have caused ruinous and destructive inequalities, degrading to the very
existence of intellectual power, while the true interests of society have been
concealed from the view of the multitude.

The primary and fundamental objects of all civil and political institutions
are the preservation of personal and individual existence -- the establishment
of Liberty on its true basis, the principles of Equality -- the security of the
fruits of man's industry, and of his pursuit of happiness in every possible
way, not inconsistent with the welfare of any member of the community -- and
also the free exercise of the mental faculties in the discovery, disclosure,
and propagation of important truths.

These objects being essentially important in every associated body of men, the
more perfectly a civil constitution secures and establishes them, the nearer it
approaches the true point of political truth and perfection. Every code of
fundamental laws, which departs from the actual attainment of the objects
beforementioned, infringes upon the real liberty and happiness of every member
of the community.

To develope a plan which would secure to man all the improvements, and every
enjoyment of which his nature is susceptible, is extremely difficult. The
decisions of the strongest minds on this subject have been extremely different;
and the intellect of man is now anxiously enquiring into the best mode of
organizing a civil or political constitution. The enquiry is important, and
deserves the most serious attention.

The political philosophers and the reflecting men of all countries are
solicited to devote their talents to this useful and benevolent enquiry. It is
not to be presumed that in any country man has arrived at perfection in
political science. It is true that many important and fundamental principles
have been discovered and applied to the melioration of the human condition: but
much remains yet to be done to complete the work of human happiness.

The American Constitutions are, undoubtedly, more perfect than any others that
ever were formed, the effects of which have been fully experienced. But will
any one dare to say that there is no room left for improvement? Will prejudice
here step in with her usual tenacity of opinion, and bar the door for ever
against all future progressive arrangements? Have we not seen what blind
attachment was bestowed for many ages upon the British government? And shall
Americans at this time exhibit similar imbecility and prejudice, by proclaiming
impossibility of improvement in the primary arrangements of our political
institutions?

It ought to be perceived by reflecting men, that scientific improvements are
in their own nature indefinite; and that the discovery of principles, and the
methods of application, move on in an endless progression. That fondness which
every parent feels for his own offspring is perhaps one cause why some American
citizens admit with reluctance the possibility of further improvements in the
fundamental arrangements of our government. But attachment and truth are
different things; and a thousand causes may operate to attach the human mind to
a misshapen and imperfectobject. Nothing herein asserted is intended to
depreciate the merits of those who formed the American constitutions, or to
diminish the beneficial effects resulting from their establishment. But it is a
duty which we owe to ourselves, to our posterity, and to all human nature in
future ages, to examine with a scrutinizing eye the nature and construction of
our fundamental institutions; and to enquire with candor whether there be any
defect, any opportunity of beneficial alterations.

It seems to be an opinion pretty generally prevalent, that the exercise of the
legislative power ought to be entrusted to different branches, and that it is
unsafe to suffer it to be exercised by one body alone. This may be a solemn and
important truth: but the candid political enquirer ought certainly to be
permitted to doubt it. On this question no prejudices should be indulged. The
grand object is Liberty, and the establishment of Equal Rights; and that
government which will best secure these blessings is the best government.

The first thought that occurs in this enquiry is, From what source did this
principle in government proceed? It is interwoven into all the American
constitutions; and it is not difficult to perceive that it had its origin in
the construction of the British government, and certainly deserves no
additional respect on this account. President, Senate, and House of
Representatives, are the legitimate offspring of King, Lords, and Commons. It
was the nature and construction of the one government that suggested the idea
of a similar arrangement in the other. But this distribution of powers is not
to be rejected on this account. If it is a righteous distribution, it is of
little consequence whence it originated. But the investigation and discussion
of this subject rests upon the nature of the case, and the enquiry extends
itself on the grounds of political truth and general utility, having reference
to the distribution of legislative powers only, without including the organic
arrangements necessary to the executive and judiciary departments. Would not
one branch in the legislature, if it were equally numerous with both branches,
probably possess as much wisdom, as extensive a knowledge of the interests of
the country, as much prudence and discretion, as if it were divided into two
houses? Does the division augment either the wisdom or the integrity of the
members? Does it make them more patriotic in their intentions, more faithful to
their constituents, or more acute in the examination of interesting political
subjects? Are they inspired by this division with a knowledge of legislation,
of which they otherwise must have been destitute? Does this confer upon them
any new moral or mental powers by which the welfare of the country would be
better secured and protected? Does this method of legislating subjugate the
pride and tranquilize the passions of the human heart? Will this method exclude
more effectually the sinister motives and injurious schemes to which man is too
frequently disposed to yield his assent? But it is contended that this
arrangement and this mode of legislation prevent that precipitancy which a
single body would be apt to indulge. This objection is perhaps not
substantiated by very satisfactory evidence, and goes upon the principle that a
single body is necessarily tumultuous and passionate, while separate bodies
could move with order and philosophic tranquillity.

It is difficult to perceive how this should be the result, unless the division
conferred upon the members a greater portion of knowledge, a higher share of
integrity, or a more effectual command of their temper and their passions. If
the talents and the virtue of the members were exactly the same in the two
cases under consideration, it is not easy to discover any benefits which could
result from this separation; on the contrary, these different branches
necessarily excite the pride and the obstinacy of the members, and they
frequently become opposed to each other for no other reason than that of
showing that they have the power of doing so. The protraction resulting from
this circumstance answers no other purpose than that of increasing the
expenditure of the public money. But it will perhaps be said that the
experiment has been tried, and the knowledge derived from it substantiates the
opinion of a complex method of legislation. It is not true to say, that the
experiment has been fairly and extensively made; some partial experiments only
have been made by some of the American States and by the French nation; but not
of sufficient duration to form a final decision on so interesting a question.
Besides, these experiments were not made at those times and under those
circumstances that ought to preclude the propriety of obtaining further
information on this subject. The distressing period of a revolution is not the
time of making a fair experiment relative to the effects of any given specific
organization of a political constitution. Let the experiment be made in days of
peace and public tranquillity, by an enlightened and free nation, and for a
considerable length of time; and if the information resulting from such a trial
militated against a simple mode of legislation, the enquiry and the contest
ought to be instantly relinquished by every friend to humanity. But till this
period arrives it will not be thought unreasonable or useless to entertain some
doubts relative to a final decision on this important subject. If the subject
in the point of view in which it has been hitherto considered appears to be
problematical, it becomes more capable of a positive decision, when the enquiry
is made whether the executive branch of government ought to have any share in
legislation? It seems to be reposing too much confidence in the wisdom and
opinion of one man, when that opinion is permitted to oppose itself to a
majority of both the other branches of the legislature. If after a bill has
undergone a fair and full discussion in the two principal branches of the
legislature, it is to be defeated by the negative voice of the executive alone,
it is declaring in positive terms that the executive possesses more talents and
virtue than all those members by whom the bill was passed, and gives to the
executive a despotic influence degrading to the dignity and information of a
free people. It would perhaps be more consistent with the interest, honor and
information of a cultivated and enlightened nation to deprive the executive of
all legislative influence or authority whatever, and trust to the general will
and real knowledge of the majority of the nation. But on these points an
obstinate tenacity of opinion does not at the present day become the true
philanthropist or friend of man in any country. Science is every where
extending itself, and further experience will teach mankind the true ground of
decision relative to this, and many other subjects, essentially interesting to
the human race. Having disclosed the foregoing reflections, it now becomes our
duty to enquire how the American revolution will probably affect the moral,
scientific and political condition of the human species? -- The hopes of man
all center in the power and activity of intellect, and to this fundamental
source every specific amelioration must be attributed. The despotism of kings
and priests trembles only when it is approached by the vigorous power of
thought, and the efforts of a philosophic mind.

Tyrants oppose to each other the armies which they have subjugated to their
will, but tyranny feels no shock: the power of the tyrant is not diminished,
principles are not discovered, moral enquiry is excluded from the attention of
all parties; and scenes of carnage, and peace, alternately distress and
tranquilize the world, without its becoming either wiser or better. The cruel
ravages and intentions of all despotic government bear no relation to any thing
but the pride of the tyrant, or the misery of the subject: but the intellectual
world in its exertions is productive of consequences totally different, and
bearing an immediate reference to the moral happiness and progressive
improvement of the human species. All the shackles which civil and
ecclesiastical tyrants have hitherto formed for the human mind have not been
able totally to suppress its operations! some sparks of genius have been
emitted from amidst the general darkness, in which the world has been
enveloped, and the accumulation of science was gradually extending itself,
while it was unperceived by those, whose ruin and just disgrace it was destined
to effectuate. It was the development of some few fundamental truths by strong
and benevolent minds, that established the basis on which must be erected the
future dignity, improvement, and happiness of the species. But the efforts of
individual philosophers and philanthropists were destined to be aided by events
which, in one point of view, are to be considered as the effects of their
labors, and in another as operating causes, producing new energy of intellect,
productive of the most extensive benefits, and pointing to a new era of moral
happiness.

While tyrants viewed with astonishment the struggles of the new world, for the
establishment of liberty, and while they perceived in this event nothing more
than some immediate political consequences, the discerning philosopher made his
calculation of effects upon a more extensive and comprehensive view of the
subject -- he discovered the inevitable ruin and universal destruction of those
unnatural institutions and corrupt principles which have so long disgraced the
character of man, and robbed him of his highest happiness. It was these corrupt
institutions, which made a renovation in the moral condition of man extremely
necessary. The ignorance, the deception, and the crimes of priests had
corrupted and brutalized all human nature; and in order the more effectually to
accomplish their wicked designs, they pretended to hold a high and social
intercourse with celestial powers, and to receive immediately from them the
mandates by which man was to be directed in his conduct. These mandates were
frequently inconsistent with social and natural morality! The consequence was
that when these religious impostors had effectually established their
supernatural scheme with dogmas and principles of a very extraordinary and
awful nature, human virtue was considered of but little consequence, and the
moral condition of man became truly deplorable.

The reign of this moral despotism has been, if possible, more destructive to
the human mind than the influence of civil tyranny. The latter being now
considered by enlightened men as essentially erroneous and destructive, the
former of course will be subjected to a severe examination by the active
operations of the human mind. It is not to be presumed, that men will long
remain ignorant of their moral condition in nature, after being instructed in
the principles of civil science. The moral condition of man will be as
essentially renovated by the American revolution as his civil condition; and
certainly it is equally necessary, and equally important that this should be
done. The science of morality is of all sciences the most necessary to the
happiness of man; and it is totally impossible that he should reason well on
this interesting subject, while he is bound by the strong cords of
superstition, and insulted by the unnatural religions, which the holy impostors
of the world have exhibited to his view. Nor is it possible that the human
heart should be cordially attached to the practice of social virtue while it is
under the destructive influence of a cruel and ferocious fanaticism. But
awakened by the energy of thought, inspired by the American revolution, man
will find it consistent with his inclination and his interest to examine all
the moral relations of his nature, to calculate with accuracy the effects of
his own moral energies; and to relinquish with elevated satisfaction, those
supernatural schemes of superstition which have circumscribed the sphere of
beneficial activity, for which Nature designed him. To overthrow those systems
of error and imposition which have so long corrupted the morality of the human
heart, it is only necessary that man should take cognizance of their absurdity.
When once he shall engage in a candid enquiry on this subject, and perceive
that he is situated in a world of unnatural representations; he will return
with cordiality to the dictates of pure reason, and the clear deductions of an
uncorrupted understanding. A system of ethics out of the order of nature cannot
for many ages obtain credence amongst a free and enlightened people. It is
ignorance that is tenacious of superstitious systems of religion, and interest
and bigotry step in to retard the progressive dissemination of the principles
of natural morality. The corrupt governments of the ancient world are
calculated to suppress all useful enquiries relative to the moral improvement
of the species -- church and state formed a villainous copartnership to rob man
of all the moral excellencies of his character, and to blind his understanding
that he should not see the real principles which are connected with the
attainment of the most exalted felicity. But the charm is broken, the clouds of
mysticism are dispersing, and the bright rays of truth are about to illuminate
the world.

The scientific condition of the human race will not be less beneficially
affected by the important revolution now under consideration. The very nature
of man's individual existence so essentially circumscribes the extent of his
mental activity, that when the unnatural obstacles of despotism are super
added, he becomes weak and incapable of elevated conceptions; but we know not
the extent of his energies under a system of moral and political liberty. And
although weak by nature, his researches would be inconceivably useful, important
and extensive, if he were not retarded in his progress by civil and religious
despotism, and by those fears and distressing apprehensions which are
interwoven with all unnatural and fanatic establishments.

The pernicious effects of such cruel institutions have been constantly
diminishing since the commencement of the American revolution, and their
decrease and final destruction will be essentially accelerated by the
revolution of France, and by many other revolutions, which will probably be
consequential upon that important event. The hopes of all good men are revived
by a view of the present condition of the world; and France in the Old World
will be the firstborn among many republics, destined to diffuse science and
happiness over the Eastern hemisphere. When man shall have no fears relative to
the investigation of knowledge, and no obstacle to obstruct the beneficial
activity of his faculties, he will subject the whole mundane system of
existence to the energetic examination of his intellectual powers. All the
relations of nature will be the subject of his enquiry; and the laws and
principles of universal existence will alone circumscribe the extent of his
mental acquirements.

The discoveries thus made by the force of his understanding will be applied to
the practical concerns of life; a new train of consequences will appear to
dissipate the ignorance and alleviate the misfortunes of associated existence
-- while that ancient order of things so long the cause of human misery will be
found gradually to disappear, and the whole world will assume a new aspect,
cheering to the heart, and animating to the mind, of every intelligent being.
Say not that these are the dreams of delirium -- the anticipation of
unreasonable desires -- No! the ground of such expectation is already
established by the progressive improvements already made. Future generations
will rise up, and in reading the history of past ages will declare the whole to
be fabulous, because in their view no such degraded state of society could ever
have existed.

To point out the vast variety of subjects on which the human mind will operate
to enlarge the compass of knowledge, would exceed the bounds of this inquiry;
but it ought to be observed, that man, relinquishing the pursuits connected
with fiction and fanaticism, will take nature and her laws as the real basis of
all his reasoning; and by protruding the power of intellect into this extensive
field of real and important truths, he will be enabled to develope the primary
principles by which all existence is influenced and governed.

In regard to the political alterations and improvements among the human
species the most animating prospect is exhibited to view. Nations begin to
assume their natural dignity and force, and are about to declare eternal war
against that detestable race of tyrants, so long the privileged -- murderers
and robbers of the earth. The despotic governments of the old world are
tumbling into ruin: Reason has said with a mighty voice -- they shall exist no
longer. -- She proclaims liberty to the whole earth, and she has pledged her
strength and her reputation for the accomplishment of the object. The liberty
of nations will be founded on its only true basis the equal rights of man: and
when this liberty shall have extended itself into every part of the globe,
those national prejudices and animosities, which have so long disturbed the
peace of society, will be destroyed, and a social and friendly intercourse will
mutually influence the conduct of nations. That savage ferocity, which for so
many ages has stained the page of history, and covered the earth with human
gore, will gradually diminish and finally disappear. Philanthropic affection
will begin to animate the hearts of all people, and a civility of intercourse
will be reckoned among the most powerful causes of ameliorating the condition
of man.

Among those causes of human improvement, (says the celebrated Condorcet) that
are of most importance to the general welfare, must be included, the total
annihilation of the prejudices which have established between the sexes an
inequality of rights, fatal even to the party which it favors. In vain might
we search for motives by which to justify this principle, in difference of
physical organization, of intellect, or of moral sensibility. It had at first
no other origin but abuse of strength, and all the attempts which have since
been made to support it are idle sophisms.

"The people being now enlightened, and having resumed the right of disposing
for themselves of their blood and their treasure, will learn by degrees to
regard war as the most dreadful of all calamities, the most terrible of all
crimes. The first wars that will be superceded, will be those into which the
usurpers of sovereignty have hitherto drawn their subjects for the maintenance
of rights pretendedly hereditary. -- Nations will know, that they cannot become
conquerors without losing their freedom; that perpetual confederations are the
only means of maintaining their independence; that their object should be
security, and not power. By degrees, commercial prejudices will die away; a
false mercantile interest will lose the terrible power of imbruing the earth
with blood, and of ruining nations under the idea of enriching them. As the
people of different countries will at last be drawn into closer intimacy, by
the principles of politics and morality, as each, for his own advantage, will
invite foreigners to an equal participation of the benefits which it may have
derived either from nature, or its own industry, all the causes which produce
envious, and perpetual national animosities, will one by one disappear, and
will no more furnish to warlike insanity, either fuel or pretext."

The nations of the earth having learned by experience the fatal consequences,
that are connected with this warlike and ferocious disposition will turn from
these horrid scenes with emotions of disgust, and seek in the establishment of
peace that tranquillity of which for so many ages they have been unjustly
deprived.

The human mind relieved at length from the pressure of innumerable misfortunes
will discover in the constitution of nature those principles on which its real
happiness must be ultimately founded. When this period of peace and national
happiness shall arrive, the writings of the philosophers and philanthropists of
the present day will be found to bear a strong relation to the progressive
improvement and real welfare of the human species; and although superstition,
from her dark and gloomy abodes, may hurl her envenomed darts, yet the names of
Pain, Volney, Barlow, Condorcet, and Godwin will be revered by posterity, and
these men will be ranked among the greatest benefactors of the human race. The
time is undoubtedly approaching when the dreams of fanaticism, the crimes of
superstition, and the detestable actions of civil tyrants, will disappear
forever; when man, elevated to the true point of natural dignity, shall
develope from the system of nature, the fundamental principles of his real
felicity, when truth alone shall be the object of intellectual power, and
social virtue the object of the human heart, and when the benevolent effects of
reason, science, and true philosophy shall extend over the face of the whole
earth, and render happy the great family of mankind!

FINIS,

