THE OLD ENGLISH BARON: A GOTHIC STORY

FIRST AMERICAN EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by STEWART and COCHRAN, No. (...) South
Second-street,

M,DCC,XCVII.

THE OLD ENGLISH BARON: A GOTHIC STORY.
IN the minority of Henry the sixth, king of England, when the renowned John,
duke of Bedford, was regent of France, and ^^^phrey, the good duke of
Gloucester, was ^^^tector of England, a worthy knight, (...) Philip Harclay,
returned from his (...) England, his native country. He had (...) under the
glorious king Henry the (...) distinguished valor, had acquired (...) was no
(...) virtues than (...) deeds of chivalry (...) the death of his prince he
entered (...) Greek Emperor, and distinguish (...) his courage against the
encroachment^ (...) Saracens* In a battle there, he (...) gentleman, by name
(...) extraction, but brought up (...); this man (...) after (...) of
friendship (...) to continue with his (...) he determined to return to his
native land, and to spend the remainder of his life in peace; and, by devoting
himself to works of piety and charity, prepare for a better state hereafter.

This noble knight had, in his early youth, contracted a strict friendship with
the only son of the Lord Lovel; a gentleman of eminent virtues and
accomplishments. During sir Philip's residence in foreign countries, he had
frequently written to his friend, and had for a time received answers; the last
informed him of the death of old Lord Lovel, and the marriage of the young one;
from that time he had ^eard no more from him. Sir Philip imputed it not to
neglect or forgetfulness, but to the (...) of intercourse, common at that time
(...) travelers and adventurers. When he was returning home, he resolved after
looking (...) affairs, to visit the castle of (...) into the situation of his
friend. (...) in Kent, attended by his Greek (...) two faithful servants, one
of which (...) by the wounds he had received (...) of his master.

(...) went to his family seat in York^^^^ (...) ^^und his mother and sister
were (...) and his ^^^ates sequestered in the (...) appointed by the (...) to
prove the reality of (...) identity of his person (...) of the old servants
(...) which every thin^ was (...) him. He took possession of his own house,
established his household, settled the old servants in their former stations,
and placed those he brought home in the upper offices of his family. He then
le^t his friend to superintend his domestic affairs; and attended by only one
of his old servants, he set out for the castle of Lovel, in the west of
England. They traveled by easy journies; but, toward the evening of the second
day, the servant was so ill and fatigued, he could go no further; he stopped at
an inn, where he grew worse every hour, and the next day expired. Sir Philip
was under great concern for the loss of his servant, and some for himself,
being alone in a strange place; however, he took courage, ordered his servant's
funeral attended it himself, and having shed a tear of humanity over his grave,
proceeded alone on his journey.

As he drew near the estate of his friend, he began to enquire of every one he
met, whether the Lord Lovel resided at the ^eat of his ancestors? He was
answered by one he did not know; -- by another, he could not tell; -- by a
third he never heard of such a person. Sir Philip thought it strange that a man
of Lord Lovel's consequence should be unknown in his own neighborhood, and
where his ancestors had usually resided. He ruminated on the (...) ^^^tainty of
human happiness. "This (...) said (...) has nothing for a wise man (...) upon.
I have lost all my relations, and most of my friends* and am even uncertain
whether any (...) remaining: I will, however* be thankful for the blessing^
that are spare (...) me; and I will endeavor to replace (...) that I have
lost. I^ my friend lives, he shall share my fortune with me; his children shall
have the reversion of it; and I will share his comforts in return. But perhaps
my friend may have met with troubles that have made him disgusted with the
world: Perhaps he has buried his a^^able wife, o^ his promising children; and
tired of public life, he has retired into a monastery. At least, I will know,
what all this silence means."

When he came within a mile of the castle (...) Lovel, he stopped at a cottage,
and asked (...) draught of water: A peasant, master of (...) house, brought it,
and asked if his honor (...) alight, and take a moment's refresh^^^^. Sir
Philip accepted his offer being (...) to make farther inquiry before he
approached the castle. He asked the same questions of him that he had before of
others. -- Which Lord Lovel, said the man, does your (...) enquire after? --
The man whom I (...) was called Arthur, said Sir Philip, -- Ay, (...) peasant,
he was the only surviving son (...). Lord Lovel, as I think. -- (...) friend,
he was so. -- Alas, (...) said the (...) he survived his father but a (...) --
Dead! say you? (...) (...) years, to the (...) -- Sir Philip sighed deeply --
(...) said he, what do we, by living long but (...) friends! but pray (...) --
I will, sir, to the best of my knowledge. An't please your honor, I heard
(...) that he attended the King when (...) against the Welsh Rebels, and ^e
left his ^^dy big with child* and so there was a battle ^ought, and the King
got the better of the Rebels: There came first a report that (...) of the
Officers were killed; but a few days after there came a messenger with an
account very different, that several were wounded, and that the Lord Lovel was
slain; which sad news overset us all with sorrow, for he was a noble Gentleman,
a bountiful Master, and the delight of all the neighborhood. -- He was indeed,
said Sir Philip, all that is amiable and good; he was my dear and noble friend,
and I am inconsolable for his loss: But the unfortunate Lady, what became of
her? -- Why (...) please your Honor, they said she died (...) grief for the
loss of her husband; but (...) death was kept private for a time, and we did
not know it for certain till some weeks afterward. -- The will of Heaven be
obeyed! (...) Sir Philip; but who succeeded to the title (...) estate? The next
heir, said the Peasant, a kinsman of the deceased, Sir Walter Lovel by name. --
I have seen him, said Sir Philip, for (...); but where was he when these events
(...)? -- At the castle of Lovel, Sir; he (...) there on a visit to the Lady,
and wait^^ (...) to receive my Lord at his return from Wales. When the news of
his death arrived, Sir Walter did every thing in his power to comfort her, and
some said he was to marry her* but she refused to be comforted, and (...) it so
to heart that she died. -- And does the present Lord Lovel reside at the
Castle? -- No, Sir. -- Who then? -- The Lord Ba^^^ Fitz-Owen. -- And how came
Sir Walter to leave the ^eat of his ancestors? -- Why, Sir, he married his
sister to this said Lord: and so he sold the castle to him, and went away, and
built himself a house in the north country, as (...) as Northumberland, I think
they call it. -- That is very strange, said Sir Philip. -- So it is, please
your honor; but this is all I know about it. -- I thank you, friend, for your
intelligence; I have taken a long journey to no purpose, and have met with
nothing but cross accidents. This life is, indeed, a pilgrimage! (...) direct
me the nearest way to the next (...) -- Noble Sir, said the Peasant, it is
(...) miles off, the night is coming on, and the ways are bad; I am but a poor
man, and cannot entertain your honor as you are used to; but if you will
enter, my poor cottage, and every thing in it, are at your service. (...)
friend, I thank you heartily, said (...) Philip; your kindness and hospitality
might shame many of higher birth and breeding; I will accept your kind offer:
But pray (...) know the name of my host? -- (...) an honest man, though a poor
(...) a Christian man, though a sinful one -- Whose cottage is this? -- It
belongs to the Lord Fitz-Owen. -- What family have you? -- A wise, two sons and
a daughter, who will all be proud to wait upon your honor; let me hold your
honor's stirrup whilst you ^light. He seconded these words by the proper
action, and having assisted his guest to dismount, he conducted him into his
house, called his wife to attend him, and then led his horse under a poor shed,
that served him as a stable. Sir Philip was fatigued in body and mind, and was
glad to repose himself any where. The courtesy of his host engaged his
attention, and satisfied his wishes. He soon after returned, followed by a
youth of about eighteen years. -- Make haste, John, said the father, be sure
you say neither more nor less than what I have told you. I will, father, said
the lad; and immediately set off, ran like a buck across the field, and was out
of (...) in an instant. I hope, friend, said sir Philip, you have not sent your
son to provide for my entertainment; I am a soldier, used to lodge and fare
hard: and, if it were otherwise, (...) courtesy and kindness would give a (...)
the most ordinary food. -- I wish heartily, said Wyatt, it was in my power to
entertain your honor as you ought to be; but, as I cannot do so, I will when
my (...) returns, acquaint (...) the errand I sent him on. After (...)
converted together on common (...) fellow creatures of the same natur^^^ (...)
and endowments, though different education had given a conscious superiority to
the one, and a conscious inferiority to the other; and the due respect was paid
by the latter, without being exacted by the former. In about half an hour young
John returned -- Thou have made haste, said the father^ Not more than good
speed, quoth the son. -- Tell (...) then, how you sped? -- Shall I tell all
that passed? said John. -- All, said the father; I don't want to hide any
thing. John stood with his cap in his hand, and thus told his tale. -- I went
straight to the castle as fast as I could (...)* it was my hap to light on
young master Edmund first, so I told him just as you bade (...) a noble
gentleman was come a long journey from foreign parts to see the Lord Lovel his
friend; and having lived abroad many (...) not know that he was dead, and that
the castle was fallen into other hands; that (...) these ^^dings he was much
grieved and disappointed, and wanting a night's (...) to rest himself before he
returned to (...) home, he was fain to take up one at (...) my father thought
my Lord (...) with him, if he were not told (...) journey and intentions,
especi^^^^ to let such a man lie a our cottage where (...) lodged nor (...)
quality. Here (...) Lord of the message; he stayed a while, and then came back
to me. -- John, said he, tell the noble stranger, that the Baron Fitz-Owen
greets him well, and desires him to rest assured, that though Lord Lovel is
dead, and the ^^stle fallen into other hands, his friends will always find a
welcome there; and my Lord desires that he will accept of a lodging there,
while he remains in this country -- so I came away directly, and made haste to
deliver my errand.

Sir Philip expressed some dissatisfaction at this mark of old Wyatt's respect
-- I wish, said he, that you had acquainted me with your intention before you
sent to inform the Baron I was here. I chose rather to lodge with you* and I
purpose to make amends for the trouble I shall give you. -- Pray Sir, don't
mention it, said the Peasant, you are welcome as myself; I hope no offense; the
only reason of my sending was because I am both unable and unworthy to
entertain your Honor. -- I am sorry, said Sir Philip, you should think me ^o
dainty; I am a Christian soldier: and him I acknowledge for my Prince and
Master, accepted the invitations of the poor, and washed the feet of his
disciples. Let us say no more on this head; I am resolved to stay this night in
your cottage, tomorrow I will wait on the Baron, and thank him for his
hospitable invitation -- that shall be as your honor pleases (...) you will
condescend to stay here. John, (...) back and acquaint my Lord of (...) -- Not
so, said sir Philip; it is now almost dark. -- It Is no matter, said John, I can
go it blindfold. Sir Philip then gave him a message to the Baron in his own
name, acquainting him that he would pay his respects to him in the morning.
John flew back the second time, and soon returned with new commendations from
the Baron, and that he would expect him on the morrow. Sir Philip gave him an
angel of gold, and praised his speed and abilities.

He supped with Wyatt and his family upon new-laid eggs and rashers of bacon,
with the highest relish. They praised the Creator for his gifts, and
acknowledged they were unworthy of the least of his blessings. They gave the
best of their two lofts up to Sir Philip, the rest of the family slept in the
other, the old woman and her daughter in the bed, the father and his two sons
upon clean straw. Sir Philip's bed was of a better kind and yet much inferior
to his usual accommodations; nevertheless the good Knight slept as well in
Wyatt's cottage, as he could have done in a palace.

During his sleep, many strange and incoherent dreams arose to his imagination.
He thought he received a message from his friend Lord Lovel, to come to him at
the Ca^^le; that he stood at the gate and received him; that he strove to
embrace him but could not, but that he spoke to this effect: -- Though I have
been dead these fifteen years, I still command here, and none can enter these
ga^e^ without my permission; know that it is (...) that invite and bid you
welcome; the hopes of my house rest upon you. -- Upon this he bid Sir Philip
follow him; he led him through many rooms, till at last he sunk down, and Sir
Philip thought he still followed him, till he came into a dark and frightful
cave, where he disappeared, and in the stead he beheld a complete suit of
armor, stained with blood, which belonged to his friend, and he thought he
heard dismal groans from beneath. Presently after, he thought he was hurried
away by an invisible hand, and led into a wild heath, where the people were
enclosing the ground and making preparations for two combatants; the trumpet
sounded, and a voice called out still louder, -- Forbear! it is not permitted
to be revealed till the time is ripe for the event: wait with patience on the
decrees of heaven. -- He was then transported to his own house, where going
into an unfrequented room, he was again met by his friend, who was living, and
in all the bloom of youth, as when he first knew him: he started at the sight
and awoke. The sun shone upon his curtains, and perceiving i^ was day* he sat
up and recollected where he was. The images that impressed his sleeping fancy
remained strongly on his mind waking; but his reason strove to disperse them;
it was natural that the story he had heard should create these ideas, that they
should wait on him in his sleep, and that every dream should (...) some
relation to his deceased friend. The sun dazzled his eyes, the birds serenaded
him, and diverted his attention, and a wood-bine forced its way through the
window, and regaled his sense of smelling with its fragrance. He arose^ (...)
his devotions to heaven, and then carefully descended the narrow stairs, and
went ^^t at the door of the cottage. There he saw the industrious wife and
daughter of old John Wyatt at their morning work, the one milking her cow, the
other feeding her poultry. He asked for a draught of milk, which, with a slice
of rye bread, served to break his fast. He walked about the fields alone; for
old Wyatt and his two sons were gone out to their daily labor. He was soon
called back by the good woman, who told him that a servant from the Baron
waited to conduct him to the castle. He took leave of Wyatt's wife, telling her
he would see her again before he left the country. The daughter fetched his
h^^se, which he mounted, and set forward with the servant, of whom he asked
many questions concerning his master's family. -- How long have you lived with
the Baron? Ten years. -- Is he a good ^^^ter? Yes, sir, and also a good husband
and father. -- What family has he? -- Three sons and a daughter -- What age are
they of? -- The eldest son is in his seventeenth year, the (...) in his
sixteenth, the others several years (...); but besides th^se, my lord has (...)
young gentlemen brought up with his (...) two of which are his nephews; (...)
keeps in his house a learned clerk to teach them languages; and as for all
bodily exercises none come near them; there is a fletche^ to teach them the use
of the cross-bow^ a master to teach them to ride; another the use of the sword;
another learns them to dance; and then they wrestle and have such an activity
(...) all their motions, that it does one good ^o see them; and my lord thinks
nothing too much to bestow on their education. -- Truly, says sir Philip, he
does the part of a good parent, and I honor him greatly for it; but are the
young gentlemen of a promising disposition? -- (...) indeed, sir, answered the
servant; the young gentlemen my lord's sons, are hopeful youths; but yet there
is one who is thought to ex^^ed them all, though he is the son of a poor
labourer. -- And who is he? said the knight. -- One Edmund Twyford, the son of
a cottages in our village; he is to be sure as (...) a (...) as ever the sun
shone upon, and of ^o sweet^^ disposition, that nobody envies his good fortune.
-- What good fortune does he enjoy? -- Why, sir, about two years ago, my lord,
a^ his sons request, took him into his own family, and gives him the same
education as his own children; the young lords dote upon him, especially Master
William, who is (...) his own age: it is supposed that he will attend the young
lords when they go to the (...) which my lord intends they shall bye and bye --
What you tell me, said sir Philip, increases every minute my respect for your
lord; he (...) an excellent father and master, he seeks out merit in obscurity,
he distinguishes and rewards it: I honor him with all my heart.

In this manner they conversed together till they came within view of the
Castle. In a (...) near the house, they saw a company of youths, with
cross-bows in their hands, shooting at a mark. -- There, said the servant, are
our young gentlemen at their exercises. Sir Philip stopped his horse to observe
them, he heard two or three of them cry out -- Edmund is the victor! He wins
the prize! I must said Sir Philip, take a view of this Edmund -- He jumped off
his horse, gave the bridle to the servant, and walked into the field. The young
gentlemen came up, and paid their respects to him; he apologized for intruding
upon their sports, and asked which was the victor? Upon which the youth he
spoke to beckoned to another, who immediately advanced, and made his obeisance;
as he drew near, Sir Philip fixed his eyes upon him, with so much attention,
that he seemed not to observe his courtesy and address. At length he
recollected himself, and said, -- What is your name? -- Edmund Twyford, replied
the youth; and I have the honor to attend upon the Lord Fitz-Owen's (...) --
Pray, noble Sir, said the youth who (...) addressed Sir Philip, are not you the
stranger who is expected by my father? -- I am, Sir, answered ^e, and I go to
pay my respects to him. -- Will you excuse our attendance, Sir? we have not yet
finished our exercises. -- My dear youth, said sir Philip, no apology is
necessary; but will you savor me with your proper name, that I may know to
whose courtesy I am obliged? -- My name is William Fitz-Owen; that gentleman is
my eldest brother* Master Robert; that other my kinsman, Master Richard
Wenlock. -- Very well; I thank you, gentle sir; I beg you not to stir another
step, your servant holds my horse. -- Farewell, Sir, said Master William; I
hope we shall have the pleasure of meeting you at dinner. -- The youths
returned to their sports, and sir Philip mounted his horse and proceeded to the
Castle; he entered it with a deep sigh, and melancholy recollections. The Baron
received him with the utmost respect and courtesy. He gave a brief account of
the principal events that had happened in the family of Lovel during h^s
absence; he spoke of the late Lord Lovel with respect, of the present with the
affection of a brother. Sir Philip, in return, gave a brief recital of his own
adventures abroad, and of the disagreeable circumstances ^e had met with since
his return home; he pathetically lamented the los^ of all his friends, not
forgeting that of his faithful servant on the way; saying he would be contented
to give up the world, and retire to a religious house, but (...) was withheld
by the consideration, that some (...) depended entirely upon him, would (...)
presence and assistance; and, beside (...) thought he might be of service to
many others. The Baron agreed with him in opinion, that a man was of much more
service to the world who continued in it, than one who retired from it, and
gave his fortune for the church, whose servants did not always make the best
use of it. Sir Philip then turned the conversation, and congratulated the Baron
on his hopeful family; he praised their persons and address, and warmly
applauded the care he bestowed on their education. The Baron listened with
pleasure to the honest approbation of a worthy heart, and enjoyed the true
happiness of a parent.

Sir Philip then made further enquiry concerning Edmund, whose appearance had
struck him with an impression in his favor. That boy, said the Baron, is the
son of a cottager in this neighborhood; his uncommon merit and gentleness of
manners, distinguish him from those of his own class; from his childhood he
attracted the notice and affection of (...) that knew him; he was beloved every
where but at his father's house, and there it should (...) that his merit were
his crimes; for the (...), his father, hated him, treated him (...) and at
length threatened to turn him out of doors: he used to run here and there on
errands for my people, and at length they obliged me to take notice of him, my
(...) earnestly desired I would take him into (...) family; I did so about two
years ago* (...) to make him their servant; but his (...) genius and
disposition have (...) to look upon him in a superior light; perhaps I may
incur^^^^e censure of many people, by giving him so many advantages, and
treating him as the companion of my children: his merit must justify, or
condemn, my partiality for him; however, I trust that I have secured to my
children a faithful servant, of the upper kind, and an useful friend to my
family. Sir Philip warmly applauded his generous host, and wished to be a
sharer in his bounty to that fine youth, whose appearance indicated all the
qualities that had endeared him to his companions.

At the hour of dinner the young men presented themselves before their Lord,
and his guest. Sir Philip addressed himself to Edmund; he asked him many
questions, and received modest and intelligent answers, and he grew every
minute more pleased with him. After dinner the youths withdrew with their t^tor
to pursue their studies. Sir Philip sat, for some time, wrapped up in meditation.
After some minutes, the Baron asked him, if he might not be favored with the
fruits of his contemplations? -- You shall, my Lord, answered he, for you have
a right to them. I was thinking, that when many blessings are lost, we should
cherish those that remain, and even endeavor to replace the others. -- My
Lord, I have taken a strong liking to that (...) whom you call Edmund Twyford:
I have (...) children nor relations to claim my for^^^^ (...) share my
affection; your Lordship has many demands upon your generosity: I can provide
for this promising youth without doing injustice to any one; will you give him
to me? -- He is a fortunate boy, said the Baron, to gain your favor so soon.
-- My lord, said the knight, I will confess to you, that the first thing that
touched my heart in his favor, is a strong resemblance he bears to a certain
dear friend I once had, and his manner resembles him as much as his person; his
qualities deserve that he should be placed in a higher rank; I will adopt him
for my son, and introduce him into the world as my relation, if you will resign
him to me: What say you? -- Sir, said the Baron, you have made a noble offer,
and I am too much the young man's friend to be a hindrance to his preferment.
It is true, that I intended to provide for him in my own family; but I cannot
do it so effectually as by giving him to you, whose generous affection being
unlimited by other ties, may in time prefer him to a higher station, as he
shall deserve it. I have only one condition to make; that the lad shall have
his option; for I would not oblige him to leave my service against his
inclination. -- You say well, replied sir Philip; nor would I take him upon
other t^^ms. -- Agreed then, said the Baron; let us (...) for Edmund hither. A
servant was sent to (...) him; he came immediately, and his lord (...) bespoke
him: -- Edmund, (...) obligations to this gentleman, who, perceiving in you a
certain resemblance to a friend of his, and liking your behavior, has taken a
great affection for you, insomuch that he desires to receive you into his
family: I cannot better provide for you than by disposing of you to him; and,
if you have no objection, you shall return home with him when he goes from
hence. The countenance of Edmund underwent many alterations during this
proposal of his lord; it expressed tenderness, gratitude, and sorrow, but the
last was predominant; he bowed respectfully to the Baron and Sir Philip, and
after some hesitation spoke as follows: -- I feel very strongly the obligations
I owe to this gentleman, for his noble and generous offer; I cannot express the
sense I have of his goodness to me, a peasant boy, only known to him by my
lord's kind and partial mention; this uncommon bounty claims my eternal
gratitude. To you, my honored lord, I owe every thing, even this gentleman's
good opinion: you distinguished me when nobody else did: and, next to you, your
sons are my best and dearest benefactors, they introduced me to your notice. My
heart is unalterably attached to this house and family, and my utmost ambition
is to spend my life in your service: But if you have perceived any great and
grievous faults in me, that makes you wish to put me out of your family, and if
you have recommended me to this gentleman in order to be rid of me, in that
case I will submit to your pleasure, as I would if you should sentence me to
death.

During this speech the tears made themselves channels down Edmund's (...); and
his two noble auditors, catching the tender infection, wiped their eyes ^t the
conclusion. -- My dear child, said the Baron, you overcome me by your
tenderness and gratitude! I know of no faults you have committed, that I should
wish to be rid of you: I thought to do you the best service by p^om^^ing you to
that of Sir Philip Harclay, who is both able and willing to provide for you;
^ut if you prefer my service to his, I will not part with you. Upon this Edmund
kneeled to the Baron; he embraced his knees -- My dear lord! I am and will be
your servant, in preference to any man living; I only ask permission to live
and die in your service. -- You see, Sir Philip, said the Baron, how the boy
engages the heart; how can I part with him? -- I cannot ask you any more
answered Sir Philip, I see it is impossible, but I esteem you both still higher
than ever: the youth for his gratitude, and your Lordship for your noble mind
and true generosity: blessings attend you both! -- Oh, sir, said Edmund,
pressing the hand of Sir Philip, do not think me ungrateful to you, I will ever
remember your goodness, and pray to heaven to reward it; the name of Sir Philip
Harclay shall be engraven upon my heart, next to my lord and his family, for
ever, Sir Philip raised the youth and embraced him, saying, -- If ever you want
a (...) remember me: and depend (...) so long as (...) continue (...) deserve
it. Edmund bowed low, and withdrew, with his eyes full of tears of sensibility
and gratitude. When he was gone, Sir Philip said, I am thinking, that although
young Edmund wants not my assistance at present, he may hereafter stand in need
of my friendship. I would not wonder if such rare qualities as he possesses,
should one day create envy and raise him enemies; in which case he might come
to lose your favor, without any fault of yours or his own. -- I am obliged to
you for the warning, said the Baron, I hope it will be unnecessary; but if ever
I part with Edmund you shall have the refusal of him. I thank your lordship for
all your civilities to me, said the knight; I leave my best wishes with you and
your hopeful family, and I humbly take my leave. -- Will you not stay one night
in the castle? returned my lord; you shall be as welcome a guest as ever. -- I
acknowledge your goodness and hospitality, but this house fills me with
melancholy recollections; I came hither with a heavy heart, and it will not be
lighter while I remain here. I shall always remember your lordship with the
highest respect and esteem; and I pray God to preserve you and increase your
blessings!

After some further ceremonies, Sir Philip (...) and returned to old Wyatt's,
(...) the vicissitude of human affairs, and (...) the change he had seen.

(...) to Wyatt's cottage, he found (...) assembled together. He told them he
would take another night's lodging there, which they heard with great pleasure:
for he had familiarised himself to them in the last evening's conversation,
insomuch that they began to enjoy his company. He told Wyatt of the misfortune
he had sustained by loosing his servant on the way, and wished he could get one
to attend him home in his place. Young John looked earnestly at his father, who
returned a look of approbation. I perceive one in the company, said he, that
would be proud to serve your honor; but I fear he is not brought up well
enough. John colored with impatience, he could not forbear speaking. -- Sir, I
can answer for an honest heart, a willing mind, and a light pair of heels; and
though I am somewhat awkward, I shall be proud to learn to please my noble
master, if he will but try me -- You say well, said Sir Philip, I have observed
your qualifications, and if you are desirous to serve me, I am equally pleased
with you; if your father has no objection I will take you. -- Objection, Sir!
said the Old man; it will be my pride to prefer him to such a noble gentleman;
I will make no terms for him, but leave it to your honor to do for him as he
shall deserve. -- Very well, said Sir Philip, you shall be no loser by that; I
will charge myself with the care of the young man. The bargain was struck, and
Sir Philip purchased a horse for John, of the Old man. The next morning they
set out; the Knight left marks of his bounty with the good couple, and
departed, laden with their blessing and prayers. He stopped at the place where
his faithful servant was buried, and caused masses to be said for the repose of
his soul; then, pursuing his way by easy journeys, arrived in safety at home.
His family rejoiced at his return; he settled his new servant in attendance
upon his person; he then looked round his neighborhood for objects of his
charity; when he saw merit in distress, it was his delight to raise and support
it: he spent his time in the services of his Creator, and glorified him in
doing good to his creatures. He reflected frequently upon every thing that had
befallen him in his late journey to the west; and at his leisure, took down all
the particulars in writing.

[Here follows an interval of four years, as by the manuscript; and this
omission seems intended by the writer. What follows is in a different hand, and
the character is more modern.]

ABOUT this time the prognostics of Sir Philip Harclay began to be verified;
that Edmund's good qualities might one day excite envy and create him enemies.
The sons and kinsmen of his patron began to seek occasion to find fault with
him, and to depreciate him to others. The Baron's eldest son and heir, Master
Robert, had several contests with Master William, the second son, upon his
account: this youth had a warm affection (...) Edmund, and whenever his brother
and kinsman treated him slightly, he supported him against their malicious
insinuations. Mr. Richard Wenlock, and Mr. John Markham, were the sisters sons
of the Lord Fitz-Owen; and there were several other more distant relations,
who, with them, secretly envied Edmund's fine qualities, and strove to les^en
him in the esteem of the Baron and his family. By degrees they excited a
dislike in master Robert, that in time was fixed into habit, and fell little
short of aversion.

Young Wenlock's hatred was confirmed by an additional circumstance; he had a
growing passion for the lady Emma, the Baron's only daughter; and, as love is
eagle-eyed, he saw, or fancied he saw, her cast an eye of pre^^ren^e on Edmund.
An accidental service that she received from him, had excited her ^^ateful
regards and attentions toward him. (...) incessant view of his fine person and
qualities* had perhaps improved her esteem into (...) still ^o^ter sensation,
though she was yet (...) of it, and thought it only the tribute (...) to
gratitude and friendship.

One (...) time, the Baron and all (...) to visit a family in Wale^ (...), the
horse that carried the lad (...) to the water* Edmund (...) in a ^^^ment, and
(...) to her (...); he took her out ^o quick, that the accident (...) to (...)
part of the company. From this time (...) under ^^ine Edmund in her esteem, and
the (...) herself obliged, in (...) defend him against the malicious
insinuations of his enemies. (...) one day asked Wenlock, why he in particular
should endeavor to recommend himself to her favor, by speaking against
Edmund, to whom she was under great obligations? He made (...) little reply;
but the impression (...) deep into his (...) heart; every word in Edmund's
behalf was like a poisoned arrow that rankled in the wound, and gr^w every day
more inflamed. Sometimes he would pretend to extenuate Edmund's supposed (...)
in order to (...) him with the sin of in^^^^^tude upon other occasions. (...)
wor^^ deepe^^ in the heart that strives to (...) and, when covered by (...)
frequently (...) the appearance of candor. By these (...) did Wenlock and
Markham impose upon the credulity of master (...) and their other relations:
master William only (...) pro^^ against all their (...) ^^tions.

The some autumn that Edmund completed (...) year, the Baron declared his (...)
of sending the young men of his house. (...) the following spring, to learn the
art (...) their courage and (...)

Their ill will toward Edmund was so well concealed, that his patron had not
discovered it: but it was whispered among the servants, who are generally close
observers of the manners of their principals. Edmund was a favorite with them
all, which was a strong presumption that he deserved to (...) so, for they
seldom show much regard to dependants, or to superior domestics, who are
generally objects of envy and dislike. Edmund was courteous, but not familiar
with them; and, by this means, gained their affections without soliciting them.
Among them was an old serving man, called Joseph Howell; this man had formerly
served the old Lord Lovel, and his son; and when the young Lord died, and Sir
Walter sold the castle to his brother-in-law, the Lord Fitz-Owen, he only of
all the old servants was left in the house, to take care of it, and to deliver
it into the possession of the new proprietor, who retained him in his service:
he was a man of few words, but much reflection; and, without troubling himself
about other people's affairs, went silently and properly about his own
business; more (...) to discharge his duty, than to recommend himself to
notice, and not seeming to aspire to any higher office than that of a serving
man. This old man would six his eyes upon Edmund, whenever he could do it
without observation* sometimes he would sigh deeply, and a tear would start
from his eye, which he strove to conceal from observation. One day Edmund
surprised him in this tender emotion, as he was wiping his eyes with the back
of his hand: -- Why, said he, my good friend, do you look at me so earnestly
and affectionately? -- Because I love you. Master Edmund, said he, because I
wish you well. -- I thank you kindly, answered Edmund; I am unable to repay
your love, otherwise than by returning it which I do sincerely. -- I thank you,
sir, said the old man, that is all I desire, and more than I deserve. -- Do not
say so, said Edmund; if I had any better way to thank you, I would not say
(...) much about it, but words are all my inh^^^tance. Upon this he shook hands
with Joseph, who withdrew hastily to conceal his (...) motion, saying, God
bless you, (...), and make your fortune equal to your (...) I cannot help
thinking you were born to a higher station than what you now hold. -- You know
to the contrary, said Edmund; but Joseph was gone out of sight and hearing.

The notice and observation of strangers* and the affection of individuals,
together with that inward consciousness that always attends superior qualities,
would sometimes kindle the flames of ambition in Edmund's heart; but he checked
them presently by reflecting on his low birth and dependant station. He was
modest, yet intrepid; gentle and courteous to all* ^^ank and unreserved to
those who loved (...) discreet and complaisant to those who (...) him; generous
and compassionate to the distresses of his fellow creatures in general; humble
but not servile, to his patron and superiors. Once, when he with a manly spirit
justified himself against a malicious imputation, his young Lord Robert taxed
him with pride and arrogance to his kinsmen. Edmund denied the charge against
him with equal spirit and modesty. Master Robert answered him sharply -- How
dare you contradict my cousins? do you mean to give them the lie? -- not in
words, sir, said Edmund; but I will behave so as that you shall not believe
them. Master Robert haughtily bade him be silent, and know himself, and not
presume to contend with men so much his superiors in every respect. These heart
burnings, in some degree subsided, by their preparations for going to France.
Master Robert was to be presented at court before his departure, and it was
expected that he should be knighted. The Baron designed Edmund to be his
Esquire; but this was frustrated by his old enemies, who persuaded Robert to
make choice of one of his own domestics, called Thomas Hewson: him did they set
up as a rival to Edmund, and he took every occasion to affront him. All that
master Robert gained by this step was the contempt of those who saw Edmund'^
(...), and thought it want of discernment (...) him not to distinguish and
reward (...) requested of his Lord that he might be master William's attendant;
and when, said he, my (...) ^^^ighted, as I make no doubt (...) will (...) day
be, he has promised that I shall be his esquire. The Baron granted Edmund's
request; and, being freed from servitude to the rest, he was devoted to that of
his beloved master William, who treated him in public as his principal
domestic, but in private as his chosen friend and brother.

The whole cabal of his enemies consulted together in what manner they should
vent their resentment against him; and it was agreed that they should treat him
with indifference and neglect, till they should arrive in France: and when
there, they should contrive to render his courage ^^^pected, and by putting him
upon some ^^^^erate enterprise, rid themselves of him forever. About this time
died the great Duke of Bedford, to the irreparable loss of the English nation.
He was succeeded by Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York, as Regent of France, of
which great part had revolted to Charles the Dauphin. Frequent actions ensued.
Cities were lost and won: and continual occasions offered to exercise the
courage, and abilities, of the youth (...) both nations.

The young men of Baron Fitz-Owen's house were recommended particularly to the
Regent's notice. Master Robert was knighted, with several other young men of
family, who distinguished themselves by their spirit (...) upon every occasion.
The youth (...) employed in warlike exercises, and frequent actions; and made
their first essay in arms in such a manner as to bring into notice all that
deserved it.

Various arts were used by Edmund's enemies to expose him to danger; but all
their contrivances recoiled upon themselves, and brought increase of honor
upon Edmund's head: He distinguished himself upon so many occasions, that Sir
Robert himself began to ^ay him more than ordinary regard, to the infinite
mortification of his kinsmen and relations. They said many schemes against him,
(...) took effect.

[From this ^^ace (...) characters in the manuscript are effaced by (...) and
^^mp. Here and there some senten^^^ are legible, but not sufficient to pursue
the thread of the story. Mention is made of several actions in which the young
men were engaged -- that Edmund distinguished himself by intrepidity in action;
by gentleness, humanity and modesty in the cessations -- that be attracted the
notice of every person of observation, and also, that he received personal
commendation from (...) Regent.]

[The following incidents (...) enough to be transcribed; but the beginning of
the next succeeding pages i^ obliterated: However we may guess at the beginning
by what (...)]

AS soon as the cabal met in Sir Robert's tent, Mr. Wenlock thus began: -- You
see, my friends, that every attempt we make to humble this upstart, tu^^s into
applause, and serves only to raise his pride still higher. Something must be
done, or his praise will go home before us, at our own expense; and we shall
seem only foils to set off his glories. Any thing would I give to the man who
should execute our vengeance upon him. -- Stop there, cousin Wenlock, said Sir
Robert; though I think Edmund proud and vainglorious, and would join in any
scheme to humble him, and make him know himself (...) suffer any man to use
such (...) to effect it. Edmund is ^^^ve; (...) beneath an Englishman to
revenge himself by unworthy means; if any such are used, I will be the first
man to bring the guilty to justice; and if I hear another word to this purpose,
I will inform my brother William, who will acquaint Edmund with your mean
intentions. Upon this the cabal (...), and Mr. Wenlock protested (...) meant no
more than to mortify (...), and make him know his proper ^^^tion. Soon after
Sir Robert withdrew, and they refu^^d their deliberations.

Then spoke Thomas Hewson: There is a party to be sent out tomorrow night, to
intercept a convoy of provisions for the relief of Ro^en* I will provoke Mr.
Edmund to make one (...) this party, and when he is engaged in the action, I
and my companions will draw o^, and leave him to the enemy, who I trust will ^o
handle him, that you shall no more be troubled with him. -- This will do, said
Mr. Wenlock; but let it be kept from my two cousins, and only known to
ourselves; if they offer to be of the party, I will persuade them off it: And
you, Thomas, if you bring this scheme to a conclusion, may depend upon my
eternal gratitude. And mine, said Markham; and so said all. The next day the
affair was publicly mentioned; and Hewson, as he promised, provoked Edmund to
the trial: several young men of family offered themselves; among the (...), Sir
Robert and his brother William. Mr. Wenlock persuaded them not to go, and (...)
danger of the enterprise in the strongest colors. At last Sir Robert
complained of the toothache, and was confined to his tent; Edmund waited on
him; and judging by the ardour of his own courage, of that of his patron, thus
bespoke him: -- I am greatly concerned, dear sir, that we cannot have your
company at night; but as I know what you will suffer in being absent, I would
beg the favor of you to let me (...) your arms and device, and I will promise
not to disgrace them. -- No, Edmund, I cannot consent to that: I thank you for
your noble offer, and will remember it to your advantage; but I cannot wear
honors of another man's getting. You have awakened me to a (...) of my duty: I
will go with you, and contend with (...) glory; and William shall do the same.

In a few hours they were ready to set out. Wenlock and Markham, and their
dependants found themselves engaged in honor to go upon an enterprise they
never intended: and set out, with heavy hearts to join the party. They marched
in silence in the horrors of a dark night, and wet roads; they met the convoy
where they expected, and a sharp engagement ensued. The victory was sometime
doubtful; but the moon rising on the backs of the English, gave them the
advantage. They saw the disposition of their enemies, and availed themselves of
it. Edmund advanced the foremost of the party; he drew out the leader on the
French side; he slew him. Mr. William pressed forward to assist his friend; Sir
Robert, to defend his brother; Wenlock and Markham, from shame to stay behind.

Thomas Hewson and his associates drew back on their side; the French perceived
it, and pursued the advantage. Edmund pushed them in front, the young nobles
followed him; they broke through the detachment, and stopped the wagons. The
officer who commanded the party, encouraged them to go on; the defeat was soon
complete, and the provisions carried in triumph to the English camp.

Edmund was presented to the Regent, as the man to whom the victory was chiefly
^^ing. (...) a tongue presumed to move itself a (...) malice and envy were
silenced.

Approach, young man, said the Regent, that I may confer upon you the honor of
knighthood, which you have well deserved. Mr. Wenlock could no longer forbear
speaking: knighthood, said he, is an order belonging to gentlemen, it cannot be
conferred on a peasant. -- What say you, Sir? returned the Regent; is this
youth a peasant? -- He is, said Wenlock, let him deny it if he can. Edmund,
with a modest bow, replied, -- It is true indeed I am a peasant, and this
honor is too great for me: I have only done my duty. The duke of York, whose
pride of birth equalled that of any man living or dead, sheathed his sword
immediately. -- Though, said he, I cannot reward you as I intended, I will take
care that you shall have a large share in the spoils of this night; and I
declare publicly, that you stand first in the list of gallant men in this
engagement.

Thomas Hewson and his associates made a poor figure in their return; they were
publicly reproved for their backwardness. Hewson was wounded in body, and more
in mind for the ^ad success of his ill laid design. He could not hold up his
head before Edmund* who unconscious of their malice, administered every kind of
comfort to them. He spoke in their behalf to the commanding officer, imputing
their conduct to unavoidable accidents. He visited them privately; he gave them
(...) part of the spoils allotted to himself; by every act of valor and
courtesy h^^stro^e to engage those hearts that hated, envied, and maligned him:
But where hatred arises from envy of superior qualities, every display of those
qualities increases the cause from whence it arises.

[Another pause ensues here.]

The young nobles and gentlemen who distinguished Edmund, were prevented from
raising him to preferment by the insinuations of Wenlock and his associates,
who never failed to set before them his low descent, and his pride and
arrogance in presuming to rank with gentlemen.

[Here the manuscript is not legible for several pages. There is mention, about
this time, of the death of the Lady Fitz-Owen; but not the cause.]

Wenlock rejoiced to find that his schemes took effect, and that they should be
recalled at the approach of winter. The Baron was glad of a pretense to send
for them home: for he could no longer endure the absence of his children, after
the loss of their mother.

[The manuscript is again defaced for many ^^aves; at length the letters become
more legible, and the remainder of it is quite perfect.]

FROM the time the young men returned from France, the enemies of Edmund
employed their utmost abilities to ruin him in the Baron's opinion, and g^t him
dismissed from the family. They insinuated a thousand things against him, that
happened, as they said, during his residence in France, and therefore could not
be known to his master; but, when the Baron privately enquired of his two elder
sons, he found there was no truth in their reports. Sir Robert, though he did
not love him, scorned to join in untruths against him. Mr. William spoke of him
with the warmth of fraternal affection. The Baron perceived that his kinsmen
disliked Edmund; but his own good heart hindered him from seeing the baseness
of theirs. It is said, that continual dropping will wear away a stone; so did
their incessant reports, by insensible degrees, produce a coolness in his
patron's behavior toward him. If he behaved with manly spirit, it was
misconstrued into pride and arrogance; his generosity was imprudence; his
humility was hypocrisy, the better to cover his ambition. Edmund bore patiently
all the indignities that were thrown upon him; and, though he felt them
severely in his bosom, scorned to justify his conduct at the expense even of
his enemies. Perhaps his gentle spirit might at length have sunk under this
treatment, but Providence interposed in his behalf; and, by seemingly
accidental circumstances, conducted him imperceptibly toward the crisis of his
fate.

Father Oswald, who had been preceptor to the young men, had a strong affection
for Edmund, from a thorough knowledge of his heart; he saw through the mean
artifices that were used to undermine him in his patron's (...); he watched
their machinations, and (...) to (...) rate their designs.

This good man used frequently to walk out with Edmund; they conversed upon
various subjects, would lament to him the unhappiness of his situation, and the
peculiar circumstances that attended him. The father, by his wholesome advice,
comforted his drooping heart; and confirmed him in his resolution of bearing
unavoidable evils with patience and fortitude, from the consciousness of his
own innocence, and the assurance of a future and eternal reward.

One day, as they were walking in a wood near the castle, Edmund asked the
father, what meant those preparations for building, the cutting down tree, and
burning of bricks? -- What, said Oswald, have you not heard that my Lord is
going to build a new apartment on the west side of the castle? -- And why, said
Edmund, should my Lord be at that expense when there is one on the east side
that is never occupied? -- That apartment, said the friar, you must have
observed is always shut up. -- I have observed it often, said Edmund, but never
presumed to ask any questions about it. -- You had then, said Oswald, less
curiosity, and more discretion, than is common at your a^e. -- You have raised
my curiosity, said Edmund; and, if it be not improper, I beg of you to (...)
it. -- We are alone, said Oswald, and I am so well assured of your prudence,
that I will explain this mystery in some degree to you.

You must know, that apartment was occupied by the l^st Lord Lovel when he was
a bachelor. He married in his father's lifetime, who gave up his own apartment
to him, and (...) to retire to this (...); but the son would not permit him; he
(...) to sleep here rather than in any other. He had been married about three
(...), when his father, the old Lord, died of a fever. About twelve months
after his marriage, he was called upon to attend the King, Henry the Fourth, on
an expedition into Wales, whither he was attended by many of his dependants. He
left his l^dy big with child, and full of care and anx^^^ for his, safety and
return.

After the King had chastised the rebels, and obtained the victory, the Lord
Lovel was expected home every day; various reports were sent home before him;
one messenger brought an account of his health and safety; soon after another
came with bad news, that he was slain in battle. His kinsman, Sir Walter Lovel,
come here on a visit to comfort the lady; and he waited to receive his kinsman
at (...) return. It was he that brought the new^ (...) the ^ad event of the
battle to the Lady (...).

She fainted away at the relation; but, when she revived, exerted the utmost
resolution; saying, it was her duty to bear this dreadful stroke with christian
fortitude and patience, especially in regard to the child she went with, the
last remains of her beloved husband, and the undoubted heir of a noble house.
For several days she seemed an example of patience and resignation; but then,
all at once, she renounced them, and broke out into passionate and frantic
exclamations; she said that her dear Lord was basely murdered; that his ghost
had appeared to her, and revealed his fate: She called upon Heaven and earth to
revenge her wrongs; saying, she would never cease complaining to God, and the
King, for vengeance and justice.

Upon this, Sir Walter told the servants that Lady Lovel was distracted, from
grief for the death of her lord; that his regard for her was as strong as ever;
and that, if she recovered, he would himself be her comforter, and marry her.
In the mean time she was confined in this very apartment, and in less than a
month the poor Lady died. She lies buried in the family vault in St. Austin's
church in the village. Sir Walter took possession of the Castle, and all the
other estates, and assumed the title of Lord Lovel.

Soon after, it was reported that the Castle was haunted, and that the ghosts
of Lord and Lady Lovel had been seen by several of the servants. Whoever went
into this apartment were terrified by uncommon noises, and strange appearances;
at length this apartment was wholly shut up, and the servants were forbid to
enter it, or to talk of any thing relating to it: However, the story did not
stop here; it was whispered about, that the new Lord Lovel was so disturbed
every night, that he could not sleep in quiet; and, being at last tired of the
place, he sold the Castle and estate of his ancestors, to his brother-in-law
the Lord Fitz-Owen, who now enjoys it, and left this country.

All this is news to me, said Edmund; but father, tell me what grounds there
were for the Lady's suspicion that her Lord died unfairly! -- Alas! said
Oswald, that is only known to God. There were strange thoughts in the minds of
many at that time; I had mine; but will not disclose them, not even to you. I
will not injure those who may be innocent: and I leave it to Providence, who
will doubtless, in his own best time and manner, punish the guilty. But let
what I have told you, ^e as if you never had heard it.

I thank you for these marks of your esteem and confidence, said Edmund: be
assured that I will not abuse them; nor do I desire to pay into secrets not
proper to be revealed: I entirely approve your discretion, and (...) in your
conclusion, that Providence will (...) own time vindicate its ways to man:
(...) were not for that trust, my situation would be insupportable. I strive
earnestly to deserve the esteem and favor of good men; I endeavor to regulate
my conduct so as to avoid giving offense to any man; but I see, with infinite
pain, that it is impossible for me to gain these points. -- I see it too, with
great concern, said Oswald; and every thing that I can say and do in your
favor is misconstrued; and, by seeking to do you service, I lose my own
influence: But I will never give my sanction to acts of injustice, or join to
oppress innocence. My dear child, put your trust in God: He who brought light
out of darkness, can bring good out of evil. -- I hope and trust so, said
Edmund: but, father, if my enemies should prevail, if my Lord should believe
their stories against me, and I should be put out of the house with disgrace,
what will become of me? I have nothing but my character to depend upon; if I
lose that, I lose every thing; I see they seek no less than my ruin. -- Trust
in my Lord's honor and justice, replied Oswald; he knows your virtue, and he
is not ignorant of their ill will toward you. -- I know my Lord's justice too
well to doubt of it, said Edmund; but would it not be better to rid him of this
trouble, and the family of an encumbrance? I would gladly do something for
myself, but cannot without my Lord's recommendation; and, such is my situation,
that I ^ear the asking for a dismission would be accounted base ingratitude:
Beside, when I think of leaving this house, my heart saddens at the thought,
and tells me I cannot be happy out of it: Yet I think I could return to a
peasant's life with cheerfulness, rather than live in a palace under disdain
and contempt. -- Have patience a little longer, my son, said Oswald; I will
think of some way to serve you, and to represent your grievances to my Lord,
without offense to either: Perhaps the causes may be removed. Continue to
observe the same irreproachable conduct; and be assured that Heaven will defend
your innocence, and defeat the unjust designs of our enemies. -- Let us now
return home.

About a week after this conference, Edmund walked out in the fields ruminating
on the disagreeable circumstances of his situation. Insensible of the time, he
had been out several hours without perceiving how the day wore away, when he
heard himself called by name several times; looking backward, he saw his
friend, Mr. William, and hallooed to him. He came running toward him; and
leaping over the ^tile, stood still awhile to recover breath. -- What is the
matter, Sir? said Edmund; your looks bespeak some tidings of importance. With a
look of tender concern and affection, the youth pressed his hand and spoke: --
My dear Edmund, you must come home with me directly; your old enemies have
united to ruin you with my father; my brother Robert has declared that he
thinks there will be no peace in our family till you are dismissed (...) and
told my father he hoped he would not break with his kinsmen rather than give up
Edmund. -- But what do they lay to my charge? said Edmund. -- I cannot rightly
understand, answered William, for they make a great mystery of it; something of
great consequence, they say; but they will not tell me what: However, my father
has told them that they must bring their accusation before your face, and he
will have you answer them publicly. I have been seeking you this hour, to
inform you of this, that you might be prepared to defend yourself against your
accusers. -- God reward you, Sir, said Edmund, for all your goodness to me, be
assured you shall have no cause to blush for your kindness and partiality to
your Edmund. -- I know it, I am sure of it, said William; and here I swear to
you, as Jonathan did to David, I beseech Heaven to bless me, as my friendship
to you shall be steady and inviolable! -- Only so long as I shall deserve so
great a blessing, interrupted Edmund. I know your worth and honor, continued
William: and such is my confidence in your merit, that I firmly believe heaven
designs you for something extraordinary; and I expect that some great and
unforeseen event will raise you to the rank and station to which you appear to
belong: Promise me, therefore, that whatever may be your fate, you will
preserve the same friendship for me that I bear to you. -- Edmund was so much
affected that he could not answer but in broken sentences. -- Oh my friend, my
ma^^er! I vow, I promise, my heart promises! He kneeled down with clasped hands
and uplifted eyes: William kneeled by him, and they invoked the Supreme to
witness to their friendship, and implored his blessing upon it: They then rose
up and embraced each other, while tears of cordial affection bedewed their
cheeks.

As soon as they were able to speak, Edmund conjured his friend not to expose
himself to the displeasure of his family out of kindness to him. I submit to
the will of Heaven, said he, I wait with patience its disposal of me: if I
leave the castle, I will find means to inform you of my fate and fortunes. -- I
hope said William, that things may yet be accommodated; but do not take any
resolution, let us act as occasions arise.

In this manner these amiable youths conferred, till they arrived at the
castle. The Baron was sitting in the great hall, on a high chair with a
footstep before, with the state and dignity of a judge: before him, stood
father Oswald as pleading the cause for himself and Edmund. Round the Baron's
chair stood his eldest son and his kinsmen, with their principal domestics. The
old servant, Joseph, at (...) distance, with his head leaning forward, (...)
with the utmost attention to what (...). Mr. William approached the chair. --
My Lord I have ^ound Edmund, and brought him to answer for himself. -- You have
done well, said the Baron. Edmund come hither; you are charged with some
indiscretions, for I cannot properly call them crimes: I am resolved to do
justice between you and your accusers; I shall therefore hear you as well as
them; for no man ought to be condemned unheard. -- My Lord, said Edmund, with
equal modesty and intrepidity, I demand my trial; if I shall be found guilty of
any crimes against my benefactor, let me be punished with the utmost rigor:
But if, as I trust, no such charge can be proved against me, I know your
goodness too well to doubt that you will do justice to me, as well as to
others; and, if it should so happen, that by the misrepresentations of my
enemies (who have long sought my ruin privately, and now avow it publicly) if
by their artifices your Lordship should be induced to think me guilty, I would
submit to your sentence in silence, and appeal to another tribunal. -- See,
said Mr. Wenlock, the confidence of the fellow! he already supposes that my
Lord must be in the wrong if he condemns him; and then this meek creature will
appeal to another tribunal: To whom will he appeal? I desire he may be made to
explain himself. -- That I will immediately, said Edmund, without being
compelled; I only meant to appeal to Heaven, that best knows my innocence. --
It Is true, said the Baron, and no offense to any one; man can only judge by
appearances, but Heaven knows the heart: -- Let every one of you bear this in
mind, that you may not bring a false accusation, nor justify yourselves by
concealing the truth. Edmund, I am informed that Oswald and you have made very
free with me and my family, in some of your conversations; you were heard to
censure me for the absurdity of building a new apartment on the west side of
the castle, when there was one on the east side unin^abited: Oswald said, that
apartment was shut up because it was haunted; that some shocking murder had
been committed there; adding many particulars concerning Lord Lovel's family,
such as he could not know the truth of, and, if he had known, was imprudent to
reveal. But further, you complained of ill treatment here; and mentioned your
intention to leave the Castle, and seek your fortune elsewhere. I shall examine
into all these particulars in turn. At present I desire you, Edmund, to relate
all that you can remember of the conversation that passed between you and
Oswald in the wood last Monday. -- Good God! said Edmund, is it possible that
any person could put such a construction upon so innocent a conversation?

Tell me then, said the Baron, the particulars of it. -- I will, my Lord, as
nearly as my memory will allow me. Accordingly he related most of the
conversation that passed in the wood; but in the part that concerned the family
of Lovel be abbreviated as much as possible. Oswald's countenance cleared up,
for he had done the same before Edmund (...). The Baron called to his eldest
son, -- You hear, Sir Robert, what both parties say, (...) questioned them
separately; neither of them knew what the other would answer, yet their
accounts agree almost to a word. -- I confess they do so, answered Sir Robert,
but, Sir, it is very bold and presuming for them to speak of our family affairs
in such a manner; if my uncle, Lord Lovel, should come to know it, be would
punish them severely; and if his honor is reflected upon, it becomes us to
resent and to punish it. Here Mr. Wenlock broke out into a passion, and offered
to swear to the accusation. Be silent, Dick, said the Baron; I shall judge for
myself. -- I protest, said he to Sir Robert, I never heard so much as Oswald
has now told me concerning the deaths of Lord and Lady Lovel; I think it is
best to let such stories alone, till they die away of themselves. I had,
indeed, heard of an idle story of the east apartment's being haunted; when
first I came hither, my brother advised me to shut it up till it should be
forgotten; but what has now been said, has suggested a thought that may make
that apartment useful in future. I have thought of a punishment for Edmund that
will stop the mouth of his accusers for the present; and, as I hope, establish
his credit with every body. Edmund, will you undertake this adventure for me?
-- What adventure, my Lord? said Edmund: there is nothing I would not undertake
to show my gratitude and fidelity to you. As to my courage, I would show that
at the expense of my malicious accusers, if respect to my Lord's blood did not
tie up my hands; as I am situated, I beg it may be put to the proof in whatever
way is most for my master's service. -- That is well said, cried the Baron: As
to your enemies, I am thinking how to separate you from them effectually; of
that I shall speak more hereafter. I am going to try Edmund's courage; he shall
sleep three nights in the east apartment, that he may testify to all whether it
be haunted or not; afterward I will have that apartment set in order, and my
eldest son shall take it for his own; it will spare me some expense, and answer
my purpose as well, or better: will you consent, Edmund? -- With all my heart,
my Lord, said Edmund, I have not wilfully offended God or man; I have,
therefore, nothing to fear. -- Brave boy! said my Lord; I am not deceived in
you, nor shall you be deceived in your reliance on me. You shall sleep in that
apartment tonight, and tomorrow I will have some private talk with you. Do
you, Oswald, go with me; I want to have some conversation with you. The rest of
you, retire to your studies and business; I will meet you at dinner.

Edmund retired to his own chamber, and Oswald was shut up with the Baron;
(...) defended Edmund's cause and his own, and said open as much as he knew of
the malice and designs of his enemies. The Baron expressed much concern at the
untimely deaths of Lord and Lady Lovel; and desired Oswald to be circumspect in
regard to what he had to say of the circumstances attending them; adding, that
he was both innocent and ignorant of any treachery toward either of them.
Oswald excused himself for his communications to Edmund, saying they fell
undesignedly into the subject, and that he mentioned it in confidence to him
only.

The Baron sent orders to the young men to come to dinner; but they refused to
meet Edmund at table: accordingly he a^e in the steward's apartment. After
dinner, the Baron tried to reconcile his kinsmen to Edmund; but found it
impossible. They saw their de^^g^^ were laid open; and, judging of him by
themselves, thought it impossible to forgive or ^e forgiven. The Baron ordered
them to keep in separate apartments; he took his eldest son for his own
companion, as being (...) most reasonable of the malcontents, and ordered his
kinsmen to keep their own apartment with a servant to watch their motions. Mr.
William had Oswald for his companion. Old Joseph was bid to attend on Edmund;
to serve him at supper; and, at the hour of nine, ^^conduct him to the haunted
apartment. Edmund desired that he might have a light and his sword, le^t his
enemies should endeavor to surprise him. The Baron thought his request
reasonable, and complied with it.

There was a great search to find the key of the apartment; at last it was
discovered by Edmund himself, among a parcel of old rusty keys in a
lumber-room. The Baron sent the young men their suppers to their respective
apartments. Edmund declined eating, and desired to be conducted to his
apartment. He was accompanied by most of the servants to the door of it; they
wished him success, and prayed for him as if he had been going to execution.

The door was with great difficulty unlocked, and Joseph gave Edmund a lighted
lamp, and wished him a good night; he returned his good wishes to them all with
the utmost cheerfulness, took the key on the inside of the door, and then
dismissed them.

He then took a survey of his chamber; the furniture, by long neglect, was
decayed and dropping to pieces; the bed was devoured by the moths, and occupied
by rats, who had built their n^^ts there with impunity for many generations.
The bedding was damp, for the rain had forced its way through the ceiling; he
determined therefore to lie down in his ^oaths. There were two doors on the
further side of the room, with keys in them: being not at all sleepy, he
resolved to examine them; he attempted one lock, and opened it with ease; he
went into a large dining room, the furniture of which was in the same (...)
condition; out of this was a large (...) with books in it, and hung round with
(...) of arms, with genealogies and alliances of the house of Lovel; he amused
himself here some minutes, and then returned into the bedchamber.

He recollected the other door, and resolved to see where it led to; the key
was rusted into the lock, and resisted his attempts; he set the lamp on the
ground, and exerting all his strength, opened the door, and at the same instant
the wind of it blew out the lamp, and le^t him in utter darkness. At the same
moment he heard a hollow rustling noise, like that of a person coming through a
narrow passage. Till this moment not one idea of fear had approached the mind
of Edmund; but just then, all the concurrent circumstances or his situation
struck upon his heart, and gave him a new and disagreeable sensation. He paused
a while; and recollecting himself, cried out aloud -- What should I fear? I
have not wilfully offended God or man! Why then should I doubt protection? But
I have not yet implored the divine assistance; how then can I expect it? Upon
this, he kneeled down and prayed earnestly, resigning himself wholly to the
will of heaven; while he was yet speaking his courage returned, and he resumed
his usual confidence; again he approached the door from whence the noise
proceeded; he thought he saw a glimmering light upon a (...) before him. If,
said he, this apartment is haunted. I will use my endeavors to ^^^^over the
cause of it; and if the spirit appear^ visibly, I will speak to it.

He was preparing to descend the staircase when he heard several knocks at the
door by which he first entered the room; and stepping backward, the door was
clapped to with great violence. Again fear attacked him; but he resisted it,
and boldly cried out who is there? -- A voice at the outer door answered --
It Is I, Joseph your friend! -- What do you want? said Edmund. -- I have brought
you some wood to make a fire, said Joseph. I thank you kindly, said Edmund; but
my lamp is gone out; I will try to find the door, however. After some trouble,
he found, and opened it; and was not sorry to see his friend Joseph, with a
light in one hand, a flagon of beer in the other, and a faggot on his shoulder.
-- I come, said the good old man, to bring you something to keep up your
spirits; the evening is ^old; I know this room wants airing; and ^e side that,
my Master, I think your present undertaking requires a little assistance.

My good friend, said Edmund, I never (...) able to deserve or requite your
kindness to me. -- My dear sir, you always deserved (...) than I could do for
you; and I think I (...) live to see you defeat the designs of (...), and
acknowledge the service of year (...). -- Alas! said Edmund, I see little (...)
of that*! -- I see, said Joseph, something that persuades me you are designed
for great things; and I perceived that (...) are working about to some great
(...) ^^ve (...), my (...) my (...) high upon your account! -- You make me
s^ile, said Edmund. -- I am glad to see it, Sir; may you smile all the rest of
your life! -- I thank your honest affection, returned Edmund, though it is too
partial to me. You had better go to bed, however; if it is known that you visit
me here, it will be bad for us both. -- So I will presently: but, please God, I
will come here again tomorrow night, when all the family are a-bed; and I will
tell you something that you never heard. -- But pray tell me, said Edmund,
where does that door lead to? -- Upon a passage that ends in a staircase that
leads to the lower rooms; and there is likewise a door out of that passage into
the dining room. -- And what rooms are there below stairs, said Edmund? -- The
same as above, replied he. -- Very well; then I wish you a good night, we will
talk further tomorrow. -- Aye, tomorrow night; and in this place, my dear
master. -- Why do you call me your master? I never was, nor never can be, your
master. -- God only knows that, said the good old man; good night, and Heaven
bless you -- Good night, my worthy friend!

Joseph withdrew, and Edmund returned to the other door, and attempted several
times to open it in vain; his hands were benumbed and tired; at length he gave
over. He made a fire in the chimney, placed the lamp on a table, and opened one
of the window-shutters to (...) the daylight; he then recommended himself to
the divine protection, and threw himself upon the bed; he presently fell
asleep, and continued in that state, till the sun saluted him with his orient
beams through the window he had opened.

As soon as he was perfectly awake, he strove to recollect his dreams. He
thought that he heard people coming up the staircase that he had a glimpse of;
that the door opened, and there entered a warrior, leading a lady by the hand,
who was young and beautiful, but pale and wan: The man was dressed in a complete
armor, and his helmet down. They approached the bed; they undrew the curtains.
He thought the man said, -- Is this our child? The woman replied, -- It is; and
the hour approaches that he shall be known for such. They then separated, and
one stood on each side of the bed; their hands met over his head, and they gave
him a solemn benediction. He strove to rise and pay them his respects, but they
forbid him; and the lady said -- Sleep in peace, oh, my Edmund! for those who
are the true possessors of this apartment are employed in thy preservation:
Sleep on, sweet hope of a house that is thought past hope! -- Upon this, they
withdrew, and went out at the same door by which they entered, and he heard
them descend the stairs. -- After this, he followed a funeral as chief mourner;
he saw the whole procession, and heard the ceremonies performed. He was
snatched away from this mournful (...) to (...) of a contrary kind, a stately
feast, at which he presided; and he heard himself congratulated as a husband,
and a father: His friend William ^at by his side; and his happiness was
complete. Every succeeding idea was happiness without allay; and his mind was
not idle a moment till the morning sun awakened him. He perfectly remembered
his dreams, and meditated on what all these things should portend. -- Am I
then, said he, not Edmund Twyford, but somebody of consequence, in whose ^ate
so many people are interested? Vain thought, that must have arisen from the
partial suggestion of my two friends, Mr. William and old Joseph!

He lay thus reflecting, when a servant knocked at the door, and told him it
was past six o'clock, and that the Baron expected him to breakfast in an hour.
He rose immediately; paid his tribute of thanks to heaven for its protection,
and went from his chamber in high health and spirits.

He walked in the garden till the hour of breakfast, and then attended the
Baron. -- Good morrow, Edmund! said he; how have you rested in your new
apartment? -- Extremely well, my Lord, answered he. -- I am glad to hear it,
said the Baron; but I did not know your accommodations were so bad, as Joseph
tells me they are. -- It Is of no consequence, said Edmund; if they were much
worse. I could dispense with them for three (...). -- Very well, said the
Baron; you are a brave lad: I am satisfied with you, and will excuse the other
two nights. -- But, my Lord, I will not be excused; no one shall have reason to
doubt my courage: I am determined to go through the remaining nights upon many
accounts. -- That shall be as you please, said my Lord. I think of you as you
deserve: so well, that I shall ask your advice by and bye in some affairs of
consequence. -- My life and services are yours. my Lord: command them freely.
-- Let Oswald be called in, said my Lord; he shall be one of our consultation.
He came; the servants were dismissed: and the Baron spoke as follows: --
Edmund, when first I took you into my family, it was at the request of my sons
and kinsmen; I bear witness to your good behavior, you have not deserved to
lose their esteem; but nevertheless, I have observed for some years past, that
all but my son William have ^et their faces against you: I see their meanness,
and I perceive their motives: but they are, and must be my relations; and I
would rather govern them by love, than fear. I love and esteem your virtues: I
cannot give you up to gratify their humors. My son William has lost the
affection of the rest, for that ^e bears to you; but he has increased my regard
to him; I think myself bound in honor to him and you to provide for you! I
cannot do it, as I wished under my own roof. If you stay here, I see nothing
but confusion in my family; yet I cannot put you out of (...) disgracefully. I
want to think of some way to prefer you, that you may leave this house with
honor; and I desire both of you to give me your advice in this matter. If
Edmund will tell me in what way I can employ him to his own honor and my
advantage, I am ready to do it; let him propose it, and Oswald shall moderate
between us.

Here he stopped; and Edmund, whose sighs almost choked him, threw himself at
the Baron's feet, and wet his hand with his tears. Oh, my noble, generous
benefactor! do you condescend to consult such a one as me upon the state of
your family? Does your most amiable and beloved son incur the ill will of his
brothers and kinsmen for my sake? What am I, that I should disturb the peace of
this noble family? Oh, my Lord, send me away directly! I should be unworthy to
live, if I did not earnestly endeavor to restore your happiness. You have
given me a noble education, and I trust I shall not disgrace it. If you will
recommend me, and give me a character, I fear not to make my own fortune. The
Baron wiped his eyes; I wish to do this, my child, but in what way? -- My Lord,
said Edmund, I will open my heart to you. I have served, with credit in the
army, and I should prefer a soldier's life. -- You please me well, said the
Baron: I will send you to France, and give you a recommendation to the Regent;
he knows you personally, and will prefer you, for my (...), and for your own
merit. -- My lord, you over whelm me with your goodness! I am but your
creature, and my life shall be devoted to your service. -- But, said the Baron,
to dispose of you till the spring? -- That, said Oswald, may be thought of at
leisure; I am glad that you have resolved, and I congratulate you both. The
Baron put an end to the conversation by desiring Edmund to go with him into the
Menage to see his horses. He ordered Oswald to acquaint his son William with
all that had passed, and to try to persuade the young men to meet Edmund and
William at dinner.

The Baron took Edmund with him into his Menage to see some horses he had
lately purchased; while they were examining the beauties and defects of these
noble and useful animals, Edmund declared that he preferred Caradoc, a horse he
had broke himself, to any in my Lord's stables. Then, said the Baron, I will
give him to you; and you shall go upon him to seek your fortune. He made new
acknowledgments for this gift, and declared he would prize it highly for the
giver's sake. But I shall not part with you yet, said my Lord; I will first
carry all my points with these saucy boys, and oblige them to do you justice.
-- You have already done that, said Edmund; and I will not suffer any of your
lordship's blood to undergo any further humiliation upon my account. I think,
with humble submission to your better judgment (...) I go hence the better.

While they were speaking, Oswald came to them, and said, that the young men
had absolutely refused to dine at the table, if Edmund was present. -- It Is
well, said the Baron; I shall find a way to punish their contumacy hereafter: I
will make them know that I am the master here. Edmund and you, Oswald, shall
spend the day in my apartment above stairs. William shall dine with me alone;
and I will acquaint him with our determination: My son Robert, and his cabal,
shall be prisoners in the great parlour. Edmund shall, according to his own
desire, spend this and the following night in the haunted apartment; and this
for his sake, and my own; for if I shall now contradict my former order, it
would subject us both to their impertinent reflections.

He then took Oswald aside, and charged him not to let Edmund go out of his
sight; for if he should come in the way of those implacable enemies, he
trembled for the consequences. He then walked back to the stables, and the two
friends returned into the house.

They had a long conversation on various subjects; in the course of it, Edmund
acquainted Oswald with all that had passed between him and Joseph the preceding
night, the curiosity he had raised in him, and his promise to gratify it the
night following. I wish, said Oswald, you would permit me to be one of the
party. -- How can that be? said Edmund: we shall be watched, perhaps; and, if
discovered, what excuse can you make for coming there? Beside, if it were
known, I shall be branded with the imputation of cowardice; and, though I have
borne much, I will not promise to bear that patiently. -- Never fear, replied
Oswald, I will speak to Joseph about it; and, after prayers are over, and the
family gone to bed, I will steal away from my own chamber and come to you. I am
strongly interested in your affairs: and I cannot be easy until you will
receive me into your company: I will bind myself to secresy in any manner you
shall enjoin. -- Your word is sufficient, said Edmund; I have as much reason to
trust you, father, as any man living; I should be ungrateful to refuse you any
thing in my power to grant: but suppose the apartment should really be haunted,
would you have resolution enough to pursue the adventure to a discovery? -- I
hope so, said Oswald: but have you any reason to believe it is? -- I have, said
Edmund; but I have not opened my lips upon this subject to any creature but
yourself. This night I purpose, if Heaven permit, to go all over the rooms;
and, though I formed this design, I will confess that your company will
strengthen my resolution. I will have no reserves to you in any respect; I must
put a seal upon your lips. Oswald swore secresy till ^e should be permitted to
disclose the mysteries of that apartment; and both of them waited, in solemn
expectation, the event of the approaching night.

In the afternoon, Mr. William was allowed to visit his friend: An affecting
interview passed between them: he lamented the necessity of Edmund's departure,
and they took a solemn leave of each other, as if they foreboded it would be
long ere they should meet again.

About the same hour as the preceding evening, Joseph came to conduct Edmund to
his apartment. You will find better accommodations than you had last night,
said he, and all by my Lord's own order. -- I every hour receive some new proof
of his goodness, said Edmund. When they arrived, he found a good fire in the
chamber, and a table covered with cold meats, and a flagon of strong beer. --
Sit down and get your supper, my dear master, said Joseph: I must attend my
Lord; but as soon as the family are gone to bed, I will visit you again. -- Do
so, said Edmund; but first, see father Oswald; he has something to say to you:
You may trust him, for I have no reserves to him. -- Well, Sir, I will see him,
if you desire it: and I will come to you as soon as possible, So, saying, he
went his way; and Edmund sat down to supper.

After a moderate refreshment, he kneeled down, and prayed with the greatest
fervency; he resigned himself to the disposal of heaven: I am nothing, said he,
I desire to be nothing but what thou, O Lord, please to make me: If it is thy
will that I should return to my former obscurity, be it obeyed with
cheerfulness* and, if thou art pleased to exalt me, I will look up to thee, as
the only fountain of honor and dignity. While he prayed, he felt an
enlargement of his heart beyond what he had ever experienced before; all idle
^^ars were dispersed, and his heart glowed with divine love and affiance: he
seemed raised above all the world and its pursuit. He continued wrapped up in
mental devotion, till a knocking at the door obliged him to rise, and let in
his two friends, who came without shoes and on tiptoe, to visit him.

Save you, my son! said the friar; you look cheerful and happy. -- I am so,
father, said Edmund; I have resigned myself to the disposal of Heaven, and I
find my heart strengthened above what I can express. -- Heaven be praised! said
Oswald: I believe you are designed for great things, my son. -- What! do you
too encourage my ambition? says Edmund; strange occurrence of circumstances!
Sit down my friends; and do you, my good Joseph, tell me the particulars you
promised last night. They drew their chairs round the fire, and Joseph began as
follows. --

You have heard of the untimely death of the late Lord Lovel, my noble and
worthy Master; perhaps you may have also heard, that, from that time, this
apartment was haunted. What passed the other day, when ^y Lord questioned you
both on this head, brought all the circumstances fresh into m^ mind. You then
said, there were suspicions that he came not fairly to his end. I trust you
both, and will speak what I know of it. There was a person suspected of this
murder; and who do you think it was? -- You must speak out, said Oswald. -- Why
then, said Joseph, it was the present Lord Lovel. -- You speak my thoughts,
said Oswald; but proceed to the proofs. -- I will, said Joseph. From the time
that my Lord's death was reported, there were strange whisperings and
consulations between the new Lord and some of the servants; there was a deal of
private business carried on in this apartment: Soon after, they gave out that
my poor Lady was distracted; but she threw out strong expressions that favored
nothing of madness: she said, that the ghost of her departed Lord had appeared
to her, and revealed the circumstances of this murder. None of the servants but
one, were permitted to see her. At this very time, Sir Walter, the new Lord,
had the cruelty to offer love to her; he urged her to marry him; and one of her
women overheard her say, she would sooner die than give her hand to the man who
caused the death of her Lord: soon after this, we were told my Lady was dead.
The Lord Lovel made a public and sumptuous funeral for her. -- That is true,
said Oswald; for I was a novice, and assisted at it.

Well, says Joseph, now comes my part of the story. As I was coming home from
the burial. I overtook Roger, our ploughman. Said he, What think you of this
burying? What should I think, said I, but we have lost the best master and lady
we shall ever know? God he knows, quoth Roger, whether they ^e living or dead;
but if ever I saw my lady in my life, I saw her alive the night they say ^he
died. I tried to convince him that he was mistaken^ but he offered to take his
oath, that the very night they said she died, he saw her come out at the
garden-gate into the fields; that she often stopped, like a person in pain, and
then went forward again until he lost sight of her. Now it is certain that her
time was out, and she expected to lie down every day: and they did not pretend
that she died in childbed. I thought upon what I heard: but nothing I said.
Roger told the same story to another servant: so he was called to an account;
the story was hushed up, and the foolish fellow said, he was verily persuaded
it was her ghost that he saw. Now you must take notice that, from this time,
they began to talk about, that this apartment was troubled; and not only this,
but at last the new Lord could not sleep in quiet in his own room; and this
induced him to sell the castle to his brother-in-law, and g^t out of this
country as fast as possible. He took most of the servants away with him, and
Roger among the rest. As for me, they thought I knew nothing, and so they le^t
^e behind but I was neither blind nor deaf, though I could hear, and see, and
say nothing.

This is a dark story, said Oswald. -- It is so, said Edmund; but why should
Joseph seem to think it concerns me in particular ^ -- Ah, dear Sir, said
Joseph, I must tell you, though I never uttered it to m^^tal man before; the
striking resemblance this young man bears to my dear Lord, the strange dislike
his reputed father took to him, his gentle manners, his generous heart, his
^oble qualities so uncommon in those of his birth and breeding, the sound of
his voice -- You may smile at the strength of my fancy, but I cannot put it out
of my mind but that he is my own master's son.

At these words Edmund changed color, and trembled; he clapped his hand upon
his breast and looked up to Heaven in silence; his dream occurred to his
memory, and struck upon his heart. He related it to his attenti^^ auditors. The
ways of Providence are wonderful, said Oswald. If this be so, Heaven in its own
time will make it appear.

Here a silence of several minutes ensued when, suddenly, they were awakened
from their reverie by a violent noise in the rooms underneath them. It seemed
like the clashing of arms, and something seemed to fall down with violence.

They started, and Edmund r^se up with a look full of resolution and
intrepidity -- I am (...) said he: I obey the (...) took up a lamp, and went to
the door that he had opened the night before. Oswald followed with his rosary
in his band, and Joseph last, with trembling steps. The door opened with ease,
and they descended the stairs in profound silence.

The lower rooms answered exactly to those above; there were two parlours and a
large closet. They saw nothing remarkable in these rooms, except two pictures,
that were turned with their faces to the wall. Joseph took the courage to turn
them: These, said he, are the portraits of my Lord and Lady. -- Father, look at
this face; do you know who is like it? -- I should think, said Oswald, it was
done for Edmund! -- I am, said Edmund, struck with the resemblance myself: but
let us go on: I ^ell myself inspired with unusual courage. -- Let us open the
closet-door. -- Oswald stopped him short: -- Take heed, said he, lest the wind
of the door put out the lamp. I will open this door. He attempted it without
success; Joseph did the same, but to no purpose: Edmund gave the lamp to
Joseph; he approached the door, tried the key, and it gave way to his hand in a
moment. -- This adventure belongs, said he, to me only; that is plain; bring
the lamp forward. Oswald repeated his paternoster, in which they all joined,
and then entered the closet.

The first thing that presented itself to their view, was a complete suit of
armor, that seemed to have fallen down on an heap. Behold! said Edmund; this
made the noise we heard above. They took it up, and examined it piece by piece;
the inside of the breast-pla^e was stained with blood. -- See here, said
Edmund; what think you of this? -- It Is my Lord's armor, said Joseph; I know
it well: Here has been bloody work in this closet! Going forward, he stumbled
over something; it was a ring with the arms of Lovel engraved upon it. -- This
is my Lord's ring, said Joseph; I have seen him wear it: I give it to you, Sir,
as the right owner; and most religiously do I believe you his son. -- Heaven
only knows that, said Edmund; and, if it permits, I will know who was my father
before I am a day older. While he was speaking he shifted his ground, and
perceived that the boards rose up on the other side of the closet; upon farther
examination, they found that the whole floor was loose, and a table that stood
over them concealed the circumstance from a casual observer. -- I perceive,
said Oswald, that some great discovery is at hand. -- God defend us said
Edmund, but I verily believe that the person that owned this armor lies bu^ied
under us. Upon this, a dismal hollow groan was heard, as if from underneath. A
solemn silence ensued, and marks of fear were visible upon all three; the groan
was thrice heard: Oswald made signs for them to kneel, and he prayed ^^dibly,
that heaven would direct them how to act; he also prayed for the soul of the
departed, that it might rest in peace. After this, he arose; but Edmund
continued kneeling: he vowed solemnly to devote himself to the discovery of
this secret, and the avenging the death of the person there buried. He then
rose up. -- It would be to no purpose, said he, for us to examine further now;
when I am properly authorized, I will have this place opened: I trust that time
is not far off. -- I believe it, said Oswald; you are designed by Heaven to be
its instrument in bringing this deed of darkness to light. We are your
creatures; only tell us what you would have us do, and we are ready to obey
your commands. -- I only demand your silence, said Edmund, till I call for your
evidence; and then, you must speak all you know, and all you suspect. -- Oh,
said Joseph, that I may but live to see that day, and I shall have lived long
enough! -- Come, said Edmund, let us return up stairs, and we will consult
further how I shall proceed: so saying, he went out of the closet, and they
followed him. He locked the door, and took the key out: -- I will keep this,
said he, till I have power to use it to purpose, le^t any one should presume to
pry into the secret of this closet: I will always carry it about me, to remind
me of what I have undertaken.

Upon this, they returned up stairs into the bedchamber; all was still, and
(...) heard nothing more to disturb them. How, said Edmund, is it possible that
I should be the son of Lord Lovel? for, however circumstances have seemed to
encourage such a notion, what reason have I to believe it? -- I am strangely
puzzled about it, said Oswald. It seems unlikely that so good a man as Lord
Lovel should corrupt the wife of a peasant, his vassal: and, especially, being
so lately married to a lady with whom he was passionately in love. -- Hold
there! said Joseph; my Lord was incapable of such an action: If master Edmund
is the son of my Lord, he is also the son of my Lady. -- How can that be? said
Edmund. -- I don't know how, said Joseph; but there is a person who can tell if
she will: I mean Margery Twyford, who calls herself your mother. -- You meet my
thoughts, said Edmund; I had resolved, before you spoke, to visit her, and to
interrogate her on the subject: I will ask my Lord's permission to go this very
day. -- That is right, said Oswald; but be cautious and prudent in your
inquiries -- If you, said Edmund, would bear me company, I should do better;
she might think herself obliged to answer your questions; and, being less
interested in the event, you would be more discreet in your interrogations. --
That I will most readily, said ^e; and I will ask my Lord's permission for us
both. -- This point is (...) determined, said Joseph; I am impatient for the
result* and I ^^lieve my feet will carry me to meet you whether I consent or
not. I am as impatient as you, said Oswald; but let us be silent as the grave,
and let not a word or look indicate any thing knowing or mysterious.

The daylight began to dawn upon their conference; and Edmund, observing it,
begged his friends to withdraw in silence. They did so, and left Edmund to his
own recollections. His thoughts were too much employed for sleep to approach
him; he threw himself upon the bed, and lay meditating how he should proceed; a
thousand schemes offered themselves, and were rejected: but he resolved, at all
events, to leave Baron Fitz-Owen's family the first opportunity that presented
itself.

He was summoned, as before, to attend my Lord at breakfast; during which, he
was silent, absent, and reserved. My Lord observed it, and rallied him;
inquiring how he had spent the night? -- In reflecting upon my situation, my
Lord; and laying plans for my future conduct. Oswald took the hint, and asked
permission to visit Edmund's mother in his company, and acquaint her with his
intentions of leaving the country soon. He consented freely; but seemed
unresolved about Edmund's departure.

They ^et out directly, and Edmund went hastily to old Twyford's cottage,
declaring that every field seemed a m^le (...). Restrain your warmth, my (...),
said Oswald; ^^mpose your mind, and recover your brea^^ before you enter upon a
business of such consequence. Margery met them at the door, and asked Edmund
what wind blew him hither? -- Is it so very surprising, said he, that I should
visit my parents? -- Yes, it is, said she, considering the treatment you have
met with from us; but since Andrew is not in the house, I may say I am glad to
see you: Lord bless you, what a fine youth you are grown! It Is a long time
since I saw you; but that is not my fault: many a cross word, and many a blow,
have I had on your account; but I may now venture to embrace my dear child. --
Edmund came forward and embraced her ^ervently; the starting tears, on both
sides, evinced their affection. And why, said he, should my father forbid you
to embrace your child? what have I ever done to deserve his hatred? -- Nothing,
my dear boy! you were always good and tenderhearted, and deserved the love of
every body. -- It is not common, said Edmund, for a parent to hate his first
son without his having deserved it. -- That is true, said Oswald; it is
uncommon, it is unnatural; nay, I am o^ opinion it is almost impossible. I am
so convinced of this truth, that I believe th^^^ (...) who th^^ hates and
abuses Edmund, ca^^ (...) his father. (...) saying this, he observed (...)
^^^entively; she changed color (...). -- Come, said he, let us sit down; (...)
^o you, Margery, answer to what I have said. -- Blessed Virgin! said Margery,
what does your reverence mean? what do you suspect? -- I suspect, said he, that
Edmund is not the son of Andrew your husband -- Lord bless me! said she, what
is it you do suspect? -- Do not evade my question, woman! I am come here by
au^^^rity to examine you upon this point. The woman trembled every joint: --
Would to Heaven! said ^he, that Andrew was at home! -- ^^ is much better as it
is, said Oswald: you are the person we are to examine. -- Oh, father, said she,
do you think that I -- that I -- that I am to blame in this matter? what have I
done? -- Do you, Sir, said he, ask your own questions. Upon this, Edmund threw
himself at her feet, and embraced her knees. -- ^h my mother! said he, for as
such my heart ^w^s you, tell me for the love or Heaven! tell me, who was my
father! -- Gracious Heaven! said she, what will become of me? -- W^m^n^ said
Oswald, confess the truth, or you shall be compelled to do it by whom had you
this youth? -- Who, I? said she; I ^^d him* No, father, I am not guilty of the
black crime of adultery; God he knows my innocence: I am not worthy to be the
mother of such a ^^e^t youth as that is -- You a^^ not his mother, then, no^
Andrew his fat^^^ -- Oh, what shall (...) do? (...) Margery; Andrew w^^^ (...)
^he death o^ me! -- No, he shall not ^a^^ Edmund; you shall be protected and
rewarded for the discovery. -- Goody, said Oswald, confess the whole truth, and
I will protect you from harm and blame; you may be the means of making Edmund's
fortune, in which case he will certainly provide for you; on ^^e other hand, by
an obstinate silence you will deprive yourself o^ all advantages you might
receive from the discovery; and, beside, you will soon be examined in a
different manner, and be obliged to confess all you know, and nobody will thank
you for it. -- Ah! said she, but Andrew beat me the last time I spoke to
Edmund; and told me ^e would break every bone in my skin, if eve^ (...) spoke
to him again -- He knows it then? said Oswald -- He kn^^ it! Lord help you, it
(...) all his own doing. -- Tell us then, said Oswald; for Andrew shall never
know i^ (...) out of his power to p^^^^h you. (...) few word. -- (...) said
(...) ^it d^wn (...). -- (...) my soul i^ impati^^^ of the (...)! (...) ever
you loved me, and cherished ^e, (...) and te^l while I have (...) to a^k it.

He sat in extreme (...) of mind; ^^s words and actions ^ere equ^^^^ (...) hi^
^^wa^d (...) -- I will, (...) try to recollect all the (...) know, young man,
that you are (...). -- On w^a^ (...) born, (...)? -- The day before yesterday,
said (...) September. -- A remarkable era, said he. -- It Is ^o, indeed, said
Edmund: Oh, that night! that apartment! -- Be silent, said Oswald; and do you,
Margery, begin your story.

I will, said she. Just one-and twenty years ago, on that very day, I lost my
firstborn son: I got a hurt by overreaching myself, when I was near my time,
and so the poor child died. And so, as I was sitting all alone, and very
melancholy, Andrew came from work: see, Margery, said he, I have brought you a
child instead of that you have lost. So he gave me a bundle, as I thought; but
sure enough it was a child: a poor helpless babe, just born, and only rolled up
in a ^ine handkerchief, and over that a rich velvet cloak, trimmed with gold
lace. And where did you find this? said I. -- Upon the foot-bridge, said he,
just below the clay field. This child, said he, belongs to some great folk, and
perhaps it may be inquired after one day, and may make our fortunes; take care
of it, said he, and bring it up as if it was your own. The poor (...) was cold,
and it cried, and looked up at me so pitifully, that I loved it: beside, my
milk was troublesome to me, (...) I was glad to (...) o^ it; so I gave it (...)
and from that hour I loved the child^ (...) were my own, and so I do still,
(...) to own it -- and this is all you (...) ^^mun^'s (...). -- (...) said
(...); bu^ ^^ay (...) Andrew is coming, for I am all over in (...) twitter. --
He is not, said Oswald; ^o on. I beseech you? -- This happened, said she, as
(...) told you, on the 21st. On the morrow, my Andrew went out early to work,
along with one Robin Rouse, our neighbor; they had not been gone above an hour
when they both came back seemingly very much frightened: says Andrew, Go you,
Robin, and borrow a pick-axe at neighbor Styles's. What is the matter now?
said I -- Matter enough! quoth Andrew; we may come to be ^anged, perhaps, as
many an innocent man has before us. Tell me what is the matter, said I. I will
said ^e; but if ever you open your mouth; (...) it, woe be to you! I never
will, (...) but he made me swear by all the blessed Sa^^ in the Calender; and
then he told me, that as Robin and he were going over the foot-bridge, where he
found the child the evening before, they saw something ^^^ating upon the water;
so they followed it, t^^^ it stuck against a stake, and found it to be the dead
body of a woman; as sure as you are alive, Madge, said he, this was the mother
of the child I brought home. -- Merciful God! said Edmund: am I the child of
that hapless mother^ -- Be compose^, said Oswald: procee^^ (...) woman, the
time is precious. -- And so continued she, Andrew told me they dragged the
(...) out of the river, and it was (...), and must be somebody of consequence I
suppose, said he, when the poor lady ha^ taken care of her child, she went to
find some help; and, the night being dark, her foot ^^^pped, and ^he fell into
the river, and was drowned.

Lord have mercy! said Robin, what shall we do with the dead body? we may be
taken up for the murder; what had we to do to meddle with it? Aye, but says
Andrew, we must have something to do with it now; and our wisest way is to bury
it. Robin was ^adly frightened, but at last they agreed to carry it into the
wood, and bury it there; so they came home for a pick-axe and shovel. Well,
said I, Andrew, but will you bury all the rich clothes you speak of? Why, said
he, it would be both a sin and a shame to strip ^^e dead. So it would, said I;
but I will give (...) a sheet to wrap the body in, and (...) may take off her
upper garments, and any (...) of value; but not strip her to the (...) any
thing. Well said, wench! said (...); I w^^^ do as you say. So I fetched a
(...), and by that time Robin was come back, and a ^ay they went together.

They did not come back again until noon, and then they sat down and ate a
morsel together. Says Andrew, now we may sit down and eat in peace. Aye, says
Robin, and ^^eep in peace too, for we have done no harm. No, ^o be sure said I?
but yet I am much (...) that the poor Lady had not a christian burial. Never
trouble thyself about that, said Andrew: we have done the best we could ^o^
her: but let us see what we have got in our (...); we must divide them. So they
opened their bags, and took out a fine gown and a pair of rich shoes; but,
besides these, there was a fine necklace with a golden locket; and a pair of
earrings. Says Andrew and winked at me, I will have these and you may take the
rest. Robin said, he was satisfied, and so he went his way. When he was gone,
Here, you fool, says Andrew, take these and keep them as safe as the bud of
your eye: If ever young master is found, these will make our fortune. -- And
have you them now? said Oswald. -- Yes, that I have, answered she; Andrew would
have sold them long ago, but I always put him off it. -- Heaven be praised!
said Edmund. -- Hush, said Oswald, let us not lose time; proceed, Goody! --
Nay, said Margery, I have not much more to say. We looked every day to hear
some inquiries after the child, but nothing passed, nobody was mis^ing. -- Did
nobody of note die about that time? said Oswald. -- Why yes, said Margery, the
widow Lady Lovel died that same week: by the same token, Andrew went to the
funeral, and brought home a 'scutcheon, which I keep un^o this day -- Very
well; go on. -- My husband behaved well enough to the boy, till such time as he
had two or three children of his own; and then he began to grumble, and (...)
it was hard to maintain other folk's children, when he ^o^^^d it hard enough to
keep of own: I l^^ed the boy quite as well as my own; (...) Andrew, and made
(...) one day or other ^e (...) for (...); but (...) he grew ^ut (...), and
give over all hope^ of that kind.

As Edmund grew up, he grew sickly and (...), and could not bear hard labor;
and (...) was another reason why my husband could (...) hear with him. If,
quoth ^e, (...) boy could earn his living. I did not care; but I (...) bear all
the expense. There came an old (...) into our parts; he was a scholar, and had
been a (...) and ^e taught Edmund (...) he told him histories of wars, (...),
and Lords, and great men; and ^^^und took such delight in hearing him, that h^
would not take to any thing else.

To be sure, ^^win was a pleasant companion; he would tell old stories, and
sing old songs, that one could have s^t all night to hear him; but, as I was
^aying, Edmund grew more and more (...) of reading, and l^ss of w^^k; however
he (...) of errands, and do many (...) for the neighbors; and he w^^ (...) a
^ad, (...) notice of him. Andrew once c^tched (...) alone (...) and (...) that
not (...) some way (...), he would ^urn (...) o^t and ^o (...).

(...) told your story very well; I am glad for Edmund's sake, that you can do
it so properly; But now, can you keep a secret? -- Why, an't please your
reverence, I think I have showed you that I can. -- But can you keep it from
your husband? -- Aye, said she, surely I can; for I ^are not tell it him. --
That is a good security, said he; but I must have a better: You must swear upon
this book not to disclose any thing that has passed between us three, till we
desire you to do it. Be assured you will soon be called upon for this purpose;
Edmund's birth is near the discovery: He is the son of parents of high degree;
and it will be in his power to make your fortune, when he ^akes possession of
his own.

Holy Virgin! what is it you tell m^? How you rejoice me to hear, that what I
have so long prayed for will come to pa^^ (...) ^^e o^th required, saying after
Oswald. -- (...), said he, go and ^etch the tokens y^^ have (...).

When she was gone, Edmund's, long (...), broke out (...) he (...) down, and
(...) ha^d^ (...) returned thanks to (...) the discovery. Oswald begged him
(...), l^^t Margery should (...) and ^^sconstrue the cause. (...) returned with
the necklace and ear^^^ (...) were (...) great value; and (...) had (...) which
the (...) of (...) ^^graved. -- (...), said (...), is indeed a proof of
consequence: Keep it, Sir, for it belongs to you. -- Must ^e take it away? said
^he. -- Certainly, returned Oswald; we can do nothing without it: but if Andrew
should ask (...) put him off for the present, and hereafter ^e (...) and his
account (...). Margery con^^^^ed reluctantly to part wi^^ the jewels; and,
after some further conversation, they took leave of her. Edmund embraced her
affectionately. -- I thank you with my whole heart, said he, for all your
goodness to me! Though I confess, I never ^elt much regard for your husband,
yet for you I had always the tender affection of a son. You will (...) trust,
give your evidence in my behalf, when called upon: and I hope it will one (...)
^ower to reward your kindness: (...) own you as my fo^^er-(...) (...) be
treated as such. (...) -- ^he Lord grant it! said (...) to have you in his holy
(...) desired them to separate (...); and they returned to (...) stood a^ the
door of (...) every way to see if the (...) ^^ear.

(...), said Oswald* (...) congratulate you (...) and (...). -- ^o (...)
Edmund; (...) how (...) and what are we (...)? As (...) the present (...)
secure his title and fortune. -- And what means can we u^e to dispossess him?
said Edmund: he is not a man for a poor youth like me to contend with. -- Doubt
no^, said Oswald, but Heaven, who has evidently conducted you thus far, will
complete its own work; for my part, I can only wonder and a ^or^. -- Give me
your advice then, said Edmund; for Heaven assists us by natural means.

It seems to me, said Oswald, that your first step must be to make a friend of
some great man, of consequence enough to espouse your cause, and get this
affair examined into by authority. Edmund started and crossed himself; he
suddenly exclaimed -- (...) friend! Yes; I have a friend! a powerful one too,
one sent by Heaven to be my protector, but whom I have too long neglected. --
Who can that be? said Oswald. -- Who should it be, said Edmund, but that good
Sir Philip Harclay, the chosen friend of him whom I shall from henceforward
call my father. -- It Is true, indeed, said Oswald: and this is a fresh proof of
what I before observed, that Heaven assists you, and will complete its own
work. -- I think so myself, said Edmund, and rely upon its direction. I have
already determined on my future conduct, which I will communicate to you. My
first step shall be to leave the (...). My Lord has this day given me a (...)
upon which I purpose to ^et out ^^is (...) ni^ht* without the knowledge of
(...) the ^^^^^y. I will go to Sir Philip Harclay; I will throw myself at his
feet, relate my strange story, and implore his protection: With him I will
consult on the most proper way of bringing this murderer to public justice; and
I will be guided by his advice and direction in every thing. -- Nothing can be
better, said Oswald, than what you propose: but give me leave to offer an
addition to your scheme. You shall set off in the dead of night, as you intend;
Joseph and I, will favor your departure in such a manner as to throw a mystery
over the circumstances of it: Your disappearing at such a time from the haunted
apartment, will terrify and confound all the family; they will puzzle
themselves in vain to account for it, and they will be afraid to pry into the
secrets of that place.

You say well; and I approve your addition, replied Edmund. Suppose, likewise,
there was a letter written in a mysterious manner, and ^^opt in my Lord's way,
or sent to him afterward; it would forward our design, and frighten them away
from that apartment. -- That shall be my care, said Oswald; and I will warrant
you that they will not find themselves disposed to inhabit it presently, -- But
how s^^^^ I leave my dear friend, Mr. William, without a word of notice of this
separation? I have thought of that too said Oswald; and I will so manage, as to
acquaint him with it in such a manner as he shall think out of the common
course of things, and which shall u^^^ke him wonder and be silent. -- How will
you do that, said Edmund? -- I will tell you hereafter, said Oswald; for here
comes old Joseph to meet us.

He came, indeed, as fast as his age would permit him. As soon as he was within
hearing, he asked them what news? They related all that had passed at Twyford's
cottage; he heard them with the greatest eagerness of attention, and as soon as
they came to the great event -- I knew it! I knew it! exclaimed Joseph! I was
sure it would prove so! Thank God for it! But I will be the first to
acknowledge my young Lord, and I will live and die his faithful servant. Here
Joseph attempted to kneel to him, but Edmund prevented hi^ with a warm embrace.
My friend! my dear friend! said he, I cannot suffer a man of your age to kneel
to me: are not you one of my best and truest friends? I will ever remember your
disinterested affection for me; and i^ Heaven restores me to my rights, it
shall be one of my first cares to render your old age easy and happy. Joseph
wept over him, and it was some time before he could utter a word.

Oswald gave them both time to recover their emotions, by acquainting Joseph
with Edmund's scheme for his departure. Joseph w^^^d his eyes and spoke. -- I
have thought, said he* of something that will be both agreeable and (...) to my
dear master. John Wya^^, Sir Philip Harclay's servant, is now upon a visit at
his father's; I have ^eard that he goes home soon: now, he would be both a
guide and companion on the way. -- That is, indeed, a happy circumstance, said
Edmund; but how shall we know certainly the time o^ his departure? -- Why, Sir,
I will go to him, and enquire, and bring you word directly. -- Do so, said
Edmund, and you will oblige me greatly. -- But, Sir, said Oswald, I think it
will be best not to let John Wyatt know who is to be his companion; only let
Joseph tell him that a gentleman is going to visit his master; and, if
possible, prevail upon him to set out this night. -- Do so, my good friend,
said Edmund; and tell him further, that this person has business of great
consequence to communicate to his master, and cannot delay his ^ourney on any
account. -- I will do this, you may depend, said Joseph, and acquaint you with
my success as soon as possible; but, Sir, you must not go without a guide, at
any rate. -- I trust I shall not, said Edmund, though I go alone; he that has
received such a call as I have, can want no other, nor fear any other.

They conversed on these points till they drew near the Ca^^le, when Joseph
le^t them to go on his errand, and Edmund attended his L^^^ at dinner. The
Baron observed that he was silent and reserved; the conversation ^^^gu^^hed on
both sides. As soon as dinner was ended, Edmund asked permission to go ^p (...)
his (...) where he packed up some necessaries, and made a hasty preparation for
his departure.

Afterward he walked into the garden, revolving in his mind the peculiarity of
his situation, and the (...) of his future prospects; lost in thought, he
walked to and fro in a covered walk, with his arms crossed and his eyes cast
down, without perceiving that ^e was observed by two females, who ^^ood at a
distance watching his motions: It was the Lady Emma, and her attendant, who
were thus engaged. At length, he li^ted up his eyes and saw them; he stood
still, and was irresolute whether to advance or retire: They approached him;
and, as they drew near, ^air Emma spoke. -- You have been so wrapped in
meditation, Edmund, that I am apprehendsive of some new vexation that I am yet
a stra^^^r to: Would it w^^^ in my power to (...) you have already! But tell me
(...) gu^^^ truly^ He stood still irresolute, he answered with hesitation. --
Oh, Lady -- I am grieved, I am concerned, to be the cause of so much confusion
in this (...) family, to whom I am so much indebted (...) ^ay to lessen these
evils but to (...) o^ them. -- Meaning yourself, (...). Certainly, Madam; and I
was meditating on my departure. But, said she by your departure you will not
remove the cause. -- How ^o, Madam? -- Because you are not the cause, but those
you will leave behind you. -- Lady Emma! -- How can you affect this ignorance,
Edmund? Y^^ know well enough it is that odious Wenlock, your enemy and my
aversion, that has caused all this mischief among us, and will much more, i^ he
is not removed. -- This, Madam, is a subject that it becomes me to be silent
upon: Mr. Wenlock is your Ki^^^^an; he is not my friend; and for that reason I
ought not to speak against him, nor you to hear it from me: If he has used me
ill, I am recompensed by the generous treatment of my Lord your father, who is
all that is great and good; he has allowed me to justify myself to him, and he
has restored ^e to his good opinion, which I prize amongst the best gifts of
heaven: Your amiable brother William thinks well of me, and his esteem is
infinitely dear to me; and you, excellent Lady, permit me to hope that you
honor me w^^h your good opinion: Are not th^^e ample (...) for the ill will
Mr. Wenlock ^^ars (...)? -- My (...) o^ you. Edmund, said she, is fixed and
^^^^led: it is not ^^unded upon e^^nts of yesterday, ^ut upon long (...) and
experience; upon your (...) co^^^^t and character. -- You (...) to thin^ (...)
it. When (...) place, the (...) you (...) in my power. (...) not. (...) loves
you, Lady, and i^ he is so unhappy ^s to be your aversion, that is a punishment
severe enough. For the rest, I may ^e unfortunate by the wickedness of others,
^ut if I am unworthy, it must be my own fault. -- So then you think i^ an
unworthy action to oppose Mr. Wenlock? -- Very well, Sir: Then I suppose you
with him success; you wi^h that I may be married to him? -- (...), Madam! said
Edmund, confused; what am I, that I should give my opinion on an ^^^^ir o^ so
much consequence! You distress me by the question. May you enjoy your own
(...)! He signed, he turned away. She called him back, he trembled, and kept
(...).

^^e seemed to enjoy his confusion; she was cr^e^ enough to repeat the
question. -- Tell me, Edmund, and truly, do you wi^h to see me give my hand to
Wenlock? I insist upon your answer. All (...) a s^dden he recovered both his
(...) and ^^ur^ge, he stepped forward, his person erect, his coun^en^^^^ (...)
and intrepid -- (...) upon any answer, si^ce (...) to Wenlock, since the
cond^^^^^ (...) ask my opinion, I will (...) her my (...) my wishes. The fair
(...) in her turn; she (...), looked (...) spoken (...) (...) and ha^^ t^^^ a
certain person, a friend (...), is at (...) to solicit them: (...) to deserve,
and then obtain them. -- Your friend, Sir! said Lady Emma! her br^w clouded,
her eye dis^^^^ful. Edmund proceeded: -- My friend is so particularly (...)
that he cannot at present, with propriety ask for Lady Emma's favor; but as
soon as he has gained a cause that is yet in suspense, he will openly declare
his (...), and if he is unsucces^ful, he will (...) himself to eternal silence.
(...) Emma knew not what to think of this declaration; she hoped, she (...) she
meditated; but her attention was too strongly excited to be satisfied without
(...) after a pause, she pursud the subject. -- And this friend of yours, Sir,
of (...) and (...) is he? (...) repli(...). H^^ count^nanc^ (...). -- It is
(...) impossi^^^, said (...) man of inferior deg^^e (...) p^re (...) ^av^ur:
(...) the (...) a^^ (...) o^ they to (...) should said she (...) -- He has,
Madam. -- Then I must tell you, that I think his assurance is very great, and
^^urs not much less. -- I am sorry for that Madam. -- Tell him, that I shall
reserve my heart and hand for the man ^o whom my father shall bid me give them.
-- Very well, Lady; I am certain my Lord loves you too well to dispose of them
against your inclinations. -- How do you know that, Sir? But tell him, that the
man that hopes for my favor must apply to my Lord for his. -- That is my
friend's intention, his resolution, I should say, as soon as ^e can do it with
propriety; and I accept your permission for him to do so. -- My permission, did
you say! I am astonished at your assurance! tell me no more of ^^^r friend: But
perhaps you are pleading for Wenlock, all this time: It is all one to me: only,
say to more -- Are you ^^^^^^ed wi^h me, Madam? -- No matter, Sir. -- Yes, it
is. -- I am surprised at you Edmund: -- I am surprised at my own ^emer^^y; but
forgive me. -- It does not signify: good bye ^^e, Sir. -- Don't leave me in
anger, Madam; I cannot ^ear that: Perhaps I may not (...) you again for a long
time. He l^^ked a^^^^c^^d; she turned back. -- I do forgive you Edmund; I was
concerned for you; but, (...) you are more concerned for every body (...) (...)
himself immediately; (...) deeply, ^^^ed low, and (...) her.

The Lady (...) into ^^^ther walk, he reached the house first, and went up
again to his chamber, he threw him (...) upon his knees, prayed for a thousand
blessings upon every one of the family of his benefactor, and involuntarily
wept at mentioning ^he name of the charming Emma, whom he was about to leave
(...) and perhaps for ever. He then endeavored to compose himself, and once
more attended the Baron; wished him a good night, and withdrew to his chamber,
till ^e was called upon to go again to the haunted apartment.

He came down equipped for his journey, and went hastily for ^ear of
observation: he paid his customary devotions, and soon after Oswald tapped at
the door. They conferred together upon the interesting subject that engrossed
th^^^ attention, until (...) came to them, who brought (...) bagga^e, and some
refreshment for him before ^e set ^o^. Edmund promised to give them the (...)
who also took a^^er (...) hi^ friend Joseph. They then we^^, wi^h ^^^ence and
caution, through a long (...): they descended the (...) in ^he (...) they
crossed the (...) and hardly da^ed to (...) ^hey (...) one of the (...) which
at last they accomp^ished; they were again in ^^o^a^dy at the outward ga^e; at
length they conveyed him safely into the (...) there they again embraced him,
and prayed for his prosperity.

He then mounted his horse, and set forward to Wyatt's cottage; he hallooed at
the door, and was answered from within: In a few minutes John came out to him
-- What i^ it you, Master Edmund? -- H^^^! (...) a word o^ whom^ (...) private
business, and would not (...) know^. -- If you will go forward, (...) overtake
you: He (...) and they (...) and to (...).

(...) tip-toe into master William's chamber, placed a letter upon his pillow,
and withdrew unheard. Exulting in his heart, he attempted the Baron's
apartment, but ^ound it (...) within; finding his (...) frustrated, he waited
till the hour the Baron was expected down to breakfast, and said the letter and
the key of the haunted apartment upon the table.

Soon after, he saw the Baron enter the breakfast-room; he got out of ^ight,
but staid within call, preparing himself for a summons. The Baron sat down to
breakfast; he saw a letter directed to himself, he opened it, and, to his great
surprise, read as follows:

The guardian of the haunted apartment (...) Baron Fitz-Owen. To thee I (...)
the key or my charge, until the right own^^ shall come, who will both discover
and avenge my wrongs; then, (...) be to the guilty! But let the innocent rest
in peace. In the mean time, let none presume to explore the secrets of my
apartment* le^t they su^^er for their ^em^^ity.

The Baron was struck with (...) the letter: he took up the key, examined it,
then laid it d^^^, and to (...) up the (...), (...) was in such confusion of
thought, he kn^w not what to do o^ say for several minutes: (...) wa^. -- (...)
-- They (...) -- Has he been called? -- Yes, my Lord, but nobody answered, and
the key was not in the door. -- Where is Joseph? -- Gone into the stables. --
Where is father Oswald? -- In his study. -- Seek him, and desire him to come
hither. By the time the Baron had read the letter over again, he came.

He had been framing a steady countenance to answer to all interrogataries; as
he came in, he attentively observed the Baron, whose features were in strong
agitation; as soon as he saw Oswald, he spoke as one out of breath. -- Take
that key, and read this letter! -- He did so, shrugged up his shoulders, and
remained silent. -- Father, said my Lord, what think you of this letter? -- It
is a very surprising one. -- The contents are alarming; where is Edmund? -- I
do not know. Has nobody seen him? -- Not that I know of. -- Call my sons, my
kinsmen, my servants. -- The servants came in. -- Have any of you seen or heard
of Edmund? -- No, was the answer. -- Father, step up stairs to my sons and
kinsmen, and desire them to come down immediately.

Oswald withdrew; and went, first, to Master William's chamber. -- My dear Sir,
you must come to my Lord now directly; he has something (...) to communicate to
you -- And to have (...) father; see what I have (...)! -- Pray Sir, read (...)
before you show it to any body; my Lord is ala^^^^ too much already, ready, and
wants nothing to increase his consternation. William read his letter, while
Oswald looked as if he was an utter stranger to the contents, which were these:

Whatever may be heard or seen, let the seal of friendship be upon thy lips.
The peasant Edmund is no more: but there still lives a man who hopes to
acknowledge, and repay, the Lord Fitz-Owen'^ generous care and protection; to
return his beloved William's vowed affection, and ^o claim his on terms of
equality.

What, said William, can this mean! -- It is not easy to say, replied Oswald.
Can you tell what is the cause of this alarm? -- I can tell nothing, but that
my Lord desires to see you directly; pray make haste down; I must go up to your
brothers and kinsmen: Nobody knows what to think, or believe.

Master William went down stairs, and ^a^^^ Oswald went to the maleco^te^^^; as
soon as he entered the outward door of their apartment, Mr. Wenlock called out.
-- Here ^omes the friend: now for some new proposal! -- Gentlemen, said Oswald,
my Lord desires your company immediately in the ^reakfast parlour. -- What! to
meet your father Edmund, I suppose? said Mr. Wenlock. -- (...). -- What then,
is the ma^^er? (...) Robert. -- Something very (...) happen^^, G^ntle^^n: (...)
not to be ^^und: (...) (...) apart^^^^ (...) was conveyed to my Lord in a
strange manner, with a letter from an unknown hand: my Lord is both surprised
and concerned, and wi^hes to have your opinion and advice on the occasion. --
^ell him, said Sir Robert, we will wait upon him immediately.

As Oswald went away, he heard Wenlock say, -- So Edmund is gone, it is no
matter how, or whether. -- Another said, I hope the ghost has taken him out of
the way. The r^st laughed at the conceit, as they followed Oswald down stairs.
-- They found the Baron and his son William, commenting upon the key and the
letter. My Lord gave them to Sir Robert, who looked on them with marks of
surprise and confusion. The Baron addressed him: -- Is not this a very strange
affair? Son Robert, lay aside your ill-humours, and behave to your father with
the respect and affection his tenderness deserves from you, and give me your
advice and opinion on this alarming subject. -- My Lord, said Sir Robert, I am
as much confounded as yourself: I can give no advice: let my cousins see the
letter; let us have their opinion. They read it in turn; they were equally
surprised: but when it came into Wenlock's hand, he paused and meditated some
minute^! at length -- I am indeed surprised, and still more concerned, to see
my Lord and Uncle the dupe of an artful contrivance; and, if he will permit me,
I shall endeavor to unriddle it, to the confusion of all that are concerned in
it. -- Do so, Dick, said my Lord, and you shall have my thanks for it. -- This
letter, said he, I imagine to be the contrivance of Edmund, or some ingenious
friend of his, to conceal some designs they have against the peace of this
family, which has been to often disturbed upon that rascal's account. -- But
what end could be proposed by it? said the Baron. -- Why, one part of the
scheme is to cover Edmund's departure, that is clear enough; for the rest, we
can only guess as it: Perhaps he may be concealed somewhere in that apartment,
from whence he may rush out in the night, and either rob or murder us; or, at
least, alarm, and terrify the family. The Baron smiled? -- You shoot beyond the
mark, Sir, and overshoot yourself, as you have done before now; you show only
your inveteracy against that poor lad, whom you cannot mention with temper: to
what purpose should he shut himself up there, to be starved? -- Starved? no,
no! he has friends in this house (looking at Oswald) who will not suffer him to
want any thing: those who have always magnified his virtues, and extenuated his
faults, will lend a hand to help him (...) the time of need; and, perhaps, to
assist his ingenious contrivances. Oswald shrugged up his shoulders, and
remained silent. -- This is a strange ^ancy of yours, Dick, said my Lord; but I
am willing to pursue it; first, to discover what you drive at; and, secondly to
satisfy all here present of the truth or falsehood of it, that they may know
what value to set upon your sagacity hereafter. Let us all go over that
apartment together; and let Joseph be called to attend us thither. Oswald
offered to call him, but Wenlock stopped him. -- No, father, said he, you must
stay with us: we want your ghostly counsel and advice: Joseph shall have no
private conference with you -- What mean you, said Oswald, to insinuate to my
Lord against me, or Joseph? But your ill will spares nobody. It will one day be
known who is the disturber of the peace of this family; I wait for that time
and am silent.

Joseph came; when he was told whither they were going, he looked hard at
Oswald. Wenlock observed them: -- Lead the way, father, said he; and Joseph
shall follow us. Oswald smiled: -- We will go where Heaven permits us, said he;
alas! the wisdom of man can neither hasten, no^ retard, its decrees.

They followed the father up stairs, and went directly to the haunted
apartment. The Baron unlocked the door: he bid Joseph open the shutters, and
admit the daylight which had been excluded for many years. They went over the
^o^ms above sta^rs, and then descended the staircase, and through the lower
rooms in the same manner. However they overlooked the closet, in which the
fatal secret was concealed; the door was covered with tapestry, the same as the
room, and united so well that it seemed but one piece. Wenlock tauntingly
desired father Oswald, to introduce them to the ghost. The father, in reply,
asked them where they should find Edmund? -- Do you think, said he, that he
lies ^id in my pocket, or in Joseph's? -- It Is no matter, answered he; thoughts
are free -- My opinion of you, Sir, said Oswald, is not founded upon thought: I
judge of men by their actions; a rule, I believe, it will not suit you to be
tried by. -- None of your insolent admonitions, father! returned Wenlock; this
is neither the time nor the place for them. -- That is truer than you are aware
of, Sir; I meant not to enter into the subject just now. -- ^e silent, said my
Lord. I shall enter into this subject with you hereafter; then look you, be
prepared for it! In the mean time, do you, Dick Wenlock, answer to my
questions. Do you think Edmund is concealed in this apartment? -- No, Sir. --
Do you think there is any mystery in it? -- No, my Lord. -- Is it haunted,
think you? -- No, I think not. -- Should you be afraid to try? -- In what
manner, my Lord? -- Why, you have shown your wit upon the subject, and I mean
to show your courage: you, and Jack Markham, your confidant, shall sleep here
three nights, as Edmund has done before. -- Sir, said Sir Robert, for what
purpose? I should be glad to understand why. -- I have my reasons, Sir, as well
as your kinsmen there. -- No reply, Sirs! I insist upon being obeyed in this
point. Joseph, let the beds be well a^^ed, and every thing made agreeable to
the Gentlemen: if there is any contrivance to impose upon me, they, I am sure,
will have pleasure in detecting it; and if not, I shall obtain my end in making
these rooms habitable. Oswald, come with me; and the rest may go where they
list till dinnertime.

The Baron went with Oswald into the parlour. Now, tell me father, said he, do
you disapprove what I have done? -- Quite the contrary, my Lord, said he; I
entirely approve it -- But you do not know all my reasons for it. Yesterday
Edmund's behavior was different from what I have ever seen it; he is naturally
frank and open in all his ways; but he was then silent, thoughtful, absent; he
sighed deeply, and once I saw tears stand in his eyes: Now, I do suspect there
is something uncommon in that apartment; that Edmund has discovered the secret:
and, ^ea^ing to disclose it, he is fled away from the house. As to this letter,
perhaps, he may have written it to hint that there is more than he dares
reveal: I tremble at the hints contained in it, t^^^gh I shall appear to make
light of it: but I and mine are innocent; and if Heaven disclose^ the guilt of
others, I ought to adore and submit to its decrees. -- That is prudently and
piously resolved, my Lord; let us do our duty, and leave events to Heaven. --
But, father, I have a further view in obliging my kinsmen to sleep there: if
any thing should appear to them, it is better that it should only be known to
my own family; if there is nothing in it, I shall put to the proof the courage
and veracity of my two kinsmen, of whom I think very indifferently. I mean
shortly to enquire into many things I have heard lately to their disadvantage;
and, if I find them guilty, they shall not escape with impunity. -- My Lord,
said Oswald, you judge like yourself; I wish you to make enquiry concerning
them, and believe the result will be to their confusion, and your lordship will
be enabled to re-establish the peace of your family.

During this conversation, Oswald was upon his guard, lest any thing should
escape that might create suspicion. He withdrew as soon as he could with
decency, and lest the Baron meditating what all these things should mean: he
feared that there was some misfortune impending over his house, though he knew
not from what cause.

He dined with his children and kinsmen, and strove to appear cheerful; but a
gloom was perceivable through his deportment. Sir ^obert was reserved and
respectful; Mr. William was silent and attentive; the rest of the family
dutifully assiduous to my Lord: only Wenlock and Markham were (...) and
chagrined. The Baron detained the young men the whole afternoon; he strove to
amuse and to be amused; he showed the greatest affection and paternal regard to
his children, a^^ endeavored to conciliate their affections, and engage their
gratitude by kindness. Wenlock and Markham felt their courage abate as the
night approached: at the hour of nine, old Joseph came to conduct them to the
haunted apartment: they took leave of their kinsmen, and went up stairs, with
heavy hearts.

They found the chamber set in order for them, and a table spread with
provision and good liquor to keep up their spirits. -- It seems, said Wenlock,
that your friend Edmund was obliged to you for his accommodations here. -- Sir,
said Joseph, his accommodations were bad enough the first night; but,
afterward, they were bettered by my Lord's orders. -- Owing to your officious
cares, said Wenlock: -- I own it, said Joseph, and I am not ashamed of it. --
Are you not anxious to know what is become of him? said Markham. -- Not at all,
Sir; I trust he is in the best protection: so good a young man as he is, is
safe every where. You see, cousin Jack, said Wenlock, how this villain has
stole the hearts of my uncle's servants: I suppose this (...) old fellow knows
where he is, if the truth were known. -- Have you any further commands for me,
Gentlemen? said the old man. -- No, not we. -- Then I am ordered to attend my
Lord, when you have done with me. -- Go, then, about your business. Joseph went
away, glad to be dismissed.

What shall we do, said Wenlock, to pass away the time? It is ^lag^y dull
sitting here. -- Doll enough, said Markham; I think the best thing we can do,
is to go to bed, and sleep it away. -- Faith, says Wenlock, I am in no
disposition to sleep! Who would have thought the old man would have obliged us
to spend the night here? -- Don't say us. I beg of you; it was all your own
doing, replied Markham. -- I did not intend he should have taken me at my word.
-- Then you should have spoken more cautiously. I have always been governed by
you, like a fool as I am; you play the braggart, and I suffer for it: But they
begin to see through your fine-spun arts and contrivances, and I believe you
will meet with your deserts one day or other. -- What now? do you mean to
affront me, Jack? Know, that some are born to plan, others to execute; I am one
of the former, thou of the latter: Know your friend, or -- Or what? replied
Markham; do you mean to threaten me? If you do! -- What then? said Wenlock. --
Why, then, I will try which of us two is the best man, Sir! Upon this Markham
arose, and put himself into a posture of defense. Wenlock perceiving he was
serious in h^s anger, began to sooth him; he persuaded, he flattered, ^e
pro^^^^ed great things, if he would be composed. Markham was sullen, uneasy
resentful; whenever he spoke, it was to upbraid Wenlock with his treachery and
falsehood. Wenlock tried all his eloquence ^o get him into a good humor, but
in vain; (...) threatened to acquaint his Uncle with all (...) he knew, and to
exculpate himself at the other's expense. Wenlock began to find his choler
rise; they were both almost choked with rage; and at length, they both rose
with a resolution to fight.

As they stood with their fists clenched, on a sudden they were alarmed with a
dismal groan from the room underneath. They stood like statues, petrified by
fear, yet listening with trembling expectation: A second groan increased their
consternation; and, soon after, a third completed it. They staggered to a
^eat, and sunk down upon it, ready to faint; presently, all the doors flew
open, a pale glimmering light appeared at the door, from the staircase, and a
man in complete armor entered the room; he stood with one hand extended,
pointing to the outward door; they took the hint, and crawled away as fast as
^ear would let them; they staggered along the gallery, and from thence to the
Baron's apartment, where Wenlock sunk down in a swoon, and Markham had just
strength enough to knock at the door.

The servant who slept in the outward room, alarmed his Lord; Markham cried out
-- For Heaven's sake, let us in! Upon hearing his voice, the door was opened,
and Markham approached his Uncle in such an attitude of fear, as excited a
degree of it in the Baron. He pointed to Wenlock, who was with some ^^^culty
recovered from the ^it ^e had fallen (...); the servant was terrified, he rung
the alarm bell; the servants came running from all parts to their Lord's
apartment: The young Gentlemen came likewise, and presently all was confusion,
and the terror was universal. Oswald, who guessed the business, was the only
one that could question them; he asked several times. -- What is the matter?
Markham, at last answered him. -- We have seen the ghost! -- All regard to
secrecy was now at an end; the echo ran through the whole family. -- They have
seen the ghost!

The Baron desired Oswald to talk to the young men, and endeavor to quiet the
disturbance. He came forward; he comforted some, he rebuked others; he bade the
servants retire into the outward room: The Baron, with his sons and kinsmen,
remained in the bedchamber. -- It is very unfortunate, said Oswald, that this
affair should be made so public; surely these young men might have related what
they had seen, without alarming the whole family: I am very much concerned upon
my Lord's account. -- I thank you, father, said the Baron; but prudence was
quite overthrown here: Wenlock was half dead, and Markham half distracted; the
family were alarmed without my being able to prevent it: But let us hear what
those poor terrified creatures say. Oswald demanded. -- What have you seen,
Gentlemen -- The ghost! said Markham. -- In wh^ form did it appear? -- A man in
armo^^^ Did it speak to you? -- No. -- What did (...) to terrify you so much?
-- It stood at the farthest door, and pointed to the outward door, as if to
have us leave the room; we did not wait for a second notice, but came away as
fast as we could. -- Did it follow you? -- No. -- Then you need not have raised
such a disturbance. Wenlock lifted up his head, and spoke: -- I believe,
father, if you had been with us, you would not have stood upon ceremonies any
more than we did. I wish my Lord would send you to parley with the ghost; for
without doubt, you are better qualified than we. -- My Lord, said Oswald, I
will go thither, with your permission: I will see that every thing is safe, and
bring the key back to you: Perhaps this may help to dispel the ^ears that have
been raised, at least I will try to do it. -- I thank you, father, for your
good offices; do as you please.

Oswald went into the outward room. I am going, said he, to shut up the
apartment: The young gentlemen have been more frightened than they had occasion
for; I will try to account for it. Which of you will go with me? They all drew
back, except Joseph, who offered to bear him company. They went into the
bed-room in the haunted apartment, and found every thing quiet there. They put
out the fire, extinguished the lights, locked the door, and brought away the
key. As they returned -- I thought how it would be, said Joseph. -- Hush! not a
word, said Oswald; you find we are suspected of something, though (...) know
not what. Wait till you are called upon, and then we will both speak to the
purpose. They carried the key to the Baron.

All is quiet in the apartment, said Oswald, as we can testify. -- Did you ask
Joseph to go with you, said the Baron, or did he offer himself? -- My Lord, I
asked if any body would go with me, and they all declined it but he: I thought
proper to have a witness beside myself, for whatever might be seen or heard. --
Joseph, you was servant of the late Lord Lovel, what kind of a man was he? -- A
very comely man, please your Lordship. Should you know him if you were to see
him? -- I cannot say, my Lord. -- Would you have any objection to sleep a night
in that apartment? -- I beg, -- I hope, -- I beseech your Lordship not to
command me to do it! -- You are then afraid, why did you offer yourself to go
thither? -- Because I was not so much frightened as the rest. -- I wish you
would lie a night there; but I do not insist upon it. -- My Lord, I am a poor
ignorant old man, not fit for such an undertaking: beside, if I should see the
ghost, and if it should be the person of my Master, and if it should tell me
any thing, and bid me ^eep it a secret, I should not dare to disclose it; and
then, what service should I do your Lordship -- That is true, indeed, said the
Baron.

This speech, said Sir Robert, is both a simple and (...) one: you see,
however, that Joseph is not (...) man for us to depend upon* he regards the
Lord Lovel, though dead, more than Lord Fitz-Owen, living; he calls him (...)
Master, and promises to keep his secrets. What say you, father, is the ghost
your master, or your friend? are you under any obligation to keep his secrets?
-- Sir, said Oswald, I answer as Joseph does; I would sooner die than discover
a secret revealed in that manner. -- I thought as much, said Sir Robert; there
is a mystery in father Oswald's behavior, which I cannot comprehend. -- Do not
reflect upon the father, said the Baron, I have no cause to complain of him;
perhaps the mystery may be too soon explained: but let us not anticipate evils.
Oswald and Joseph have spoken like good men; I am satisfied with their answers:
let us, who are innocent, rest in peace; and let us endeavor to restore peace
in the family; and do you, father, assist us. -- With my best services, said
Oswald. He called the servants in: let nothing be mentioned out of doors, said
he, of what has lately passed within, especially in the east apartment; the
young Gentlemen had not so much reason to be frightened as they apprehended; a
piece of furniture fell down in the rooms underneath, which made the noise that
alarmed them so much; but I can certify that all things in the rooms are in
quiet, and there is nothing to fear. All of you attend me in the chapel in an
hour; do your duties, put your trust in God, and obey your Lord, and you will
find every thing go right as it used to do.

They dispersed; the sun rose, the day came on, and every thing went on in the
usual course: but the servants were not so easily satisfied; they whispered
that something was wrong, and expected the time that should set all right. --
The mind of the Baron was employed in meditating upon th^se circumstances, that
seemed to him the forerunners of some great events: he sometimes thought of
Edmund; he sighed for his expulsion, and lamented the uncertainty of his fate:
but, to his family, he appeared easy and satisfied.

From the time of Edmund's departure, the fair Emma had many uneasy hours; she
wished to inquire after him, but feared to show any solicitude concerning him:
The next day, when her brother William came into her apartment, ^he took
courage to ask him a question. -- Pray brother, can you give any guess what is
become of Edmund? -- No, said he (with a sigh;) why do you ask me? -- Because,
my dear William, I should think if any body knew, it must be you; and I thought
he loved you too well to leave you in ignorance; but don't you think he left
the Castle in a very strange manner^ -- I do, my dear; there is a mystery in
every circumstance of his departure; nevertheless (I will trust you with a
secret) he did not leave the Castle without making a distinction in my favor.
-- I thought so, said she; but you might tell me what you know about him. --
Alas! my dear Emma I know nothing: When I saw him last, he seemed a good deal
affected, as if he were taking leave of me; and I had a foreboding that we
parted for a longer time than usual. Ah! so had I, said she, when he parted
from me in the garden. -- What leave did he take of you, Emma? -- She blushed,
and hesitated to tell him all that passed between them; but he begged,
persuaded, insisted, and, at length, under the strongest injunctions of
secrecy, she told him all. He said, that Edmund's behavior on that occasion
was as mysterious as the rest of his conduct, but now you have revealed your
secret, you have a right to know mine. He then gave her the letter he found
upon his pillow; she read it with great emotion. Saint Winefred assist me! said
she, what can I think? The peasant Edmund is no more, but there lives one, --
that is, to my thinking, Edmund lives, but is no peasant. -- Go on, my dear,
said William, I like your explanation. -- Nay, brother, I only guess; but what
think you? I believe we think alike in more than one respect, that he meant to
recommend no other person than himself to your favor; and (...) were indeed of
noble birth, I would prefer him to a prince for a husband to my Emma! -- Bless
me, said she, do you think it possible that he should be of either birth or
fortune? -- It is hard to say what is possible! we have proof the east
apartment is haunted: It was there that Edmund was made acquainted with many
(...). I doubt not; and perhaps, his own fate may be involved with that of
others. I am confident that what he saw and heard there, was the cause of his
departure. We must wait with patience the unravelling this intricate affair: I
believe I need not enjoin your secrecy as to what I have said; your heart will
be my security. -- What mean you, brother? Don't affect ignorance, my dear; you
love Edmund, so do I; it is nothing to be ashamed of: It would have been
strange if a girl of your good sense had not distinguished a swan among a flock
of geese. -- Dear William, don't let a word of this escape you; but you have
taken a weight off my heart. You may depend that I will not dispose of my hand
or heart till I know the end of this affair. William smiled: Keep them for
Edmund's friend: I shall rejoice to see him in a situation to ask them. --
Hush, my brother! not a word more; I hear footsteps. They were her eldest
brother's, who came to ask Mr. William to ride out with him, which finished the
conference,

The fair Emma, from this time, assumed an ^ir of satisfaction: and William
frequently stole away from his companions to talk with his sister upon their
favorite subject.

While these things passed at the Castle of Lovel, Edmund, and his companion,
John Wyatt, proceeded on their journey to Sir Philip Harclay's seat; they
conversed together on the way, and Edmund found him a man o^ understanding,
though not improved by education; he also discovered that John loved his
master, and respected him even to veneration; from him he learned many
particulars concerning that worthy Knight. Wyatt told him that Sir Philip
maintained twelve old soldiers, who had been maimed and disabled in the wars,
and had no provision made for them; also six old officers, who had been
unfortunate, and were grown gray without preferment; he likewise mentioned the
Greek Gentleman, his master's captive and friend, as a man eminent for valor
and piety; but beside these, said Wyatt, there are many others who eat of my
Master's bread, and drink of his cup, and who join in blessings and prayers to
Heaven for their noble benefactor; his ears are ever open to distress, his hand
to relieve it, and he shares in every good man's joys and blessings. -- Oh,
what a glorious character! said Edmund; how my heart throbs with wishes to
imitate such a man! Oh, that I might resemble him, though at ever so great a
distance! Edmund was never weary o^ hearing the actions of this truly great
man, nor Wyatt with relating them; and, during three day: journey, there were
but few pauses in their conversation.

The fourth day, when they came within view of the house, Edmund's heart began
to raise doubts of his reception. -- If, said he, Sir Philip would not receive
me kindly, if he should resent my long neglect, and disown my acquaintance, it
would be no more than justice.

He sent Wyatt before, to notify his arrival to Sir Philip, while he waited at
the gate full of doubts and anxieties concerning his reception. Wyatt was met
and congratulated on his return by most of his fellow servants; he asked, --
Where is my Master? -- In the parlour. -- Are any strangers with him? -- No,
only his own family. -- Then I will show myself to him. He presented himself
before Sir Philip. -- So, John, said he, you are welcome home! I hope you left
your parents and relations well. All well, thank God! and send their humble
duty to your Honor, and they pray for you every day of their lives: I hope
your Honor, is in good health. -- Very well. -- Thank God for that! but, Sir,
I have something further to tell you; I have had a companion all the way home,
a person who comes to wait on your Honor, on business of great consequence, as
he says. -- Who is that, John? -- It is Master Edmund Tyford, from the castle
of Lovel. -- Young Edmund! says Sir Philip, surprised: Where is he? -- At the
gate Sir. -- Why did you leave him there? -- Because he bad me come before, and
acquaint your Honor, that he waits your pleasure. -- Bring him hither, said
Sir Philip: tell him I shall be glad to see him.

John made haste to deliver his message, and Edmund followed him in silence
into Sir Philip's presence: He bowed low, and kept at a distance. Sir Philip
held out his hand, and bade him approach. As he drew near, he was seized with
an universal trembling; he kneeled down, took his hand, kissed it, and pressed
it to his heart in silence.

You are welcome, young man! said Sir Philip; take courage, and speak for
yourself. Edmund sighed deeply; he at length broke silence with difficulty. --
I am come thus far, noble Sir, to throw myself at your feet, and implore your
protection. You are, under God, my only reliance. -- I receive you, said Sir
Philip, with all my heart! Your person is greatly improved since I saw you
last, and I hope your mind is equally so; I have heard a great character of you
from some that knew you in France, I remember the promise I made you long ago,
and am ready now to fulfill it, upon condition that you have done nothing to
disgrace the good opinion I formerly entertained of you; and am ready to serve
you in any thing consistent with my own honor. Edmund kissed the hand that was
extended to raise him. -- I accept your favor, Sir, upon this condition only;
and if ever you find me to impose upon your credulity, or encroach on your
goodness, may you renounce me from that moment! Enough, said Sir Philip; raise,
then, and let me embrace you: You are truly welcome! -- Oh, noble Sir, said
Edmund, I have a strange story to tell you; but it must be by ourselves, with
only Heaven to bear witness to what passes between us. -- Very well, said Sir
Philip; I am ready to hear you; But first, go and get some refreshment after
your journey, and then come to me again: John Wyatt, will attend you. -- I want
no refreshment, said Edmund; and I cannot eat or drink till I have told my
business to your Honor. Well, then, said Sir Philip, come along with me. He
took the youth by the hand, and led him into another parlour, leaving his
friends in great surprise, what this young man's errand could be: John Wyatt
told them all he knew relating to Edmund's birth, character and situation.

When Sir Philip had seated his young friend, he listened in silence to the
surprising tale he had to tell him. Edmund told him briefly the most remarkable
circumstances of his life, from the time when he saw and liked him, till his
return from France: but from that era, he related at large every thing that
happened, recounting every interesting particular, which was imprinted on his
memory in strong and lasting characters. -- Sir Philip grew every moment more
affected by the recital; sometimes he clasped his hands together, he lifted
them up to Heaven, he smote his breast, he sighed, he exclaimed aloud; when
Edmund related his dream, he breathed short, and seemed to devour him with
attention; and when he described the fatal closet, he trembled, sighed, sobbed,
and was almost suffocated with his agitations: But when he related all that
passed between his supposed mother and himself, and finally produced the
jewels, the proofs of his birth, and the death of his unfortunate mother -- he
flew to him, he pressed him to his bosom, he strove to speak, but speech was
for some minutes denied: He wept aloud; and, at length, his words found their
way in broken exclamations -- Son of my dearest friend! dear and precious relic
of a noble house! child of Providence! -- the beloved of Heaven! -- welcome!
thrice welcome to my arms! -- to my heart! I will be thy parent from
henceforward, and thou shall be indeed my child, my heir! My mind told me from
the first moment I beheld thee, that thou were the image of my friend! my heart
then opened itself to receive thee, as his offspring. I had a strange
foreboding that I was to be thy protector. I would then have made thee my own;
but Heaven orders things for the best; it made thee the instrument of this
discovery, and in its own time and manner conducted thee to my arms. Praise be
to God for his wonderful doings toward the children of men! every thing that
has befallen thee is by his direction, and he will not leave his work
unfinished; I trust I shall be his instrument to do justice on the guilty, and
to restore the orphan of my friend to his rights and title. I devote myself to
this service, and will make it the business of my life to effect it.

Edmund gave vent to his emotions, in raptures of joy and gratitude. They spent
several hours in this way, without thinking of the time that passed; the one
inquiring, the other explaining and repeating, every particular of the
interesting story.

At length they were interrupted by the careful John Wyatt, who was anxious to
know if any thing was likely to give trouble to his Master. -- Sir, said John,
it grows dark, do you want a light? -- We want no light but what Heaven gives
us, said Sir Philip; I hope your Honor has heard no bad tidings, -- I -- I --
I hope no offense. -- None at all, said the good Knight; I am obliged to your
solicitude for me: I have heard some things that grieve me, and others that
give me pleasure; but the sorrows are past, and the joys remain. -- Thank God!
said John; I was afraid something was the matter to give your Honor trouble.
-- I thank you, my good servant! You see this young gentleman; I would have
you, John, devote yourself to his service: I give you to him for an attendant
on his person, and would have you show your affection to me by your attachment
to him. -- Oh, Sir! said John, in a melancholy voice, what have I done to be
turned out of your service? -- No such matter, John, said Sir Philip; you will
not leave my service. -- Sir, said John, I would rather die than leave you. --
And, my ^ad, I like you too w^ll to part with you; but in serving my friend you
will serve me: Know that this young man is my son. -- Your son, Sir! said John.
-- Not my natural son. (...) relation; my son by adoption, my heir! -- And will
he live with you, Sir? -- Yes, John; and I hope to die with him. -- Oh, then, I
will serve him with all my heart and soul: and I will do my best to please you
both. -- I thank you, John, and will not forget your honest love and duty: I
have so good an opinion of you, that I will tell you of some things concerning
this gentleman that will entitle him to your respect. -- It Is enough for me,
said John, to know that your honor respects him, to make me pay him as much
duty as yourself. But, John, when you know him better, you will respect him
still more; at present, I shall only tell you what he is not, for you think him
only the son of Andrew Twyford. -- And is he not, said John? -- No, but his
wife nursed him, and he passed for her son. -- And does old Twyford know it,
Sir? -- He does, and will bear witness to it: but he is the son of a near
friend of mine, of quality superior to my own, and as such you must serve and
respect him. -- I shall, to be sure, Sir; but what name shall I call him? --
You shall know that hereafter; in the mean time bring a light, and wait on us
to the other parlour.

When John was withdrawn, Sir Philip said, that is a point to be determined and
considered immediately: It is proper that you should assume a name till you can
take that of your father; for I choose you should drop that of your foster
father; and I would have you be called by one that is respectable. -- In that,
and every other point, I will be wholly governed by you, Sir, said Edmund. --
Well then, I will give you the name of Seagrave: I shall say that you are a
relation of my own; and my mother was really of that family.

John soon returned, and attended them into the other parlour: Sir Philip
entered with Edmund in his hand. -- My friends, said he, this gentleman is Mr.
Edward Seagrave, the son of a dear friend and relation of mine: he was lost in
his infancy, brought up out of pure humanity, and is but lately restored to his
own family: The circumstances shall be known hereafter: In the mean time, I
have taken him under my care and protection, and will use all my power and
interest to see him restored to his fortune, which is enjoyed by the usurper
who was the cause of his expulsion, and the death of his parents. Receive him
as my relation and friend: Zadisky, do you embrace him first. Edmund, you and
this gentleman must love each other for my sake; hereafter you will do it for
your own. They all rose, each embraced and congratulated the young man. Zadisky
said, Sir, whatever griefs and misfortunes you may have endured, you may reckon
them at an and, from the hour you are beloved and protected by Sir Philip
Harclay. -- I firmly believe it, Sir, replied Edmund: and my heart enjoys,
already, more happiness than I ever ye^ felt, and promises me all that I can
wish in future: his friendship is the earnest Heaven gives me of its blessings
hereafter.

They sat down to supper with mutual cheerfulness; and Edmund enjoyed the
repast with more satisfaction than he had felt a long time. Sir Philip saw his
countenance brighten up, and looked on him with heartfelt pleasure. -- Every
time I look on you, said he, reminds me of your father; you are the same person
I loved twenty-three years ago: I rejoice to see you under my roof. Go to your
repose early, and tomorrow we will consult farther. Edmund withdrew, and
enjoyed a night of sweet undisturbed repose.

The next morning, Edmund arose in perfect health and spirits; he waited on his
benefactor. They were soon after joined by Zadisky, who showed great attention
and respect to the youth, and offered him his best services without reserve.
Edmund accepted them with equal respect and modesty? and finding himself at
ease, began to display his amiable qualities. They breakfasted together;
afterward Sir Philip desired Edmund to walk out with him.

As soon as they were out of hearing, Sir Philip said, -- I could not sleep
last night for thinking of your affairs; I laid schemes for you, and rejected
them again. We must lay our plan before we begin to act. What must be done to
this treacherous kinsman! this inhuman monster! this assassin of his nearest
relation? I will risk my life and fortune to bring him to justice. Shall I go
to court and demand justice of the King? or shall I accuse him of the murder,
and make him stand a public trial? If I treat him as a Baron of the realm, he
must be tried by his Peers; if as a commoner, he must be tried at the county
assize: but we must show the reason why he should be degraded from his title.
Have you any thing to propose? -- Nothing, Sir; I have only to wish that it
might be as private as possible, for the sake of my great benefactor, the Lord
Fitz-Owen, upon whom some part of the family disgrace would naturally fall; and
that would be an ill return for his kindness and generosity to me. That is a
generous and grateful consideration on your part; but you owe still more to the
memory of your injured parents. However, there is yet another way suits me
better than any hitherto proposed: I will challenge the traitor to meet me in
the field; and, if he has spirit enough to answer my call, I will there bring
him to justice, if not, I will bring him to a public trial.

No, Sir, said Edmund, that is my province. Should I stand by and see my noble,
gallant friend expose his life for me, I should be unworthy to bear the name of
that friend whom you so much lament. It would become his son to vindicate his
name, and revenge his death. I will be the challenger, and no other. -- And do
you think he will answer the chal^enge of an unknown youth, with nothing but
his pretensions to his name and title? Certainly not. Leave this matter to me;
I Will think of a way that will oblige him to meet me at the house of a third
person, who is known to all the parties concerned, and where we will have
authentic witnesses of all that passes between him and me. I will devise the
time, place, and manner, and satisfy all your scruples. Edmund offered to
reply; but Sir Philip bade him be silent, and let him proceed his own way.

He then led him over his estate, and showed him every thing deserving his
notice: he told him all the particulars of his domestic economy; and they
returned home in time to meet their friends at dinner.

They spent several days in consulting how to bring Sir Walter to account, and
in improving their friendship and confidence in each other. Edmund endeared
himself so much to his friend and patron, t^ (...) declared him his adopted son
and heir before all his friends and servants, and ordered them to respect him
as such. He every day improved their love and regard for him, and he became the
darling of the whole family.

After much consideration, Sir Philip fixed his resolutions, and began to
execute his purposes. He set out for the ^eat of the Lord Clifford, attended by
Edmund, M. Zadisky, and two servants. Lord Clifford received them with kindness
and hospitality.

Sir Philip presented Edmund to Lord Clifford and his family, as his near
relation and presumptive heir: they spent their evening in the pleasures of
convivial mirth and hospitable entertainment. The next day Sir Philip began to
open his mind to Lord Clifford, informing him that both his young friend and
himself had received great injuries from the present Lord Lovel, for which they
were resolved to call him to an account; but that, for many reasons, they were
desirous to have proper witnesses of all that should pass between them, and
begging the favor of his Lordship to be the principal one. Lord Clifford
acknowledged the confidence placed in him; and besought Sir Philip to let him
be the arbitrator between them. Sir Philip assured him, that their wrongs would
not admit of arbitration, as he should hereafter judge; but th^^ he was
unwilling to explain them further, till he knew certainly whether or not the
Lord Lovel would meet him; for, if he refused, he must take another method with
him.

Lord Clifford was desirous to know the grounds of the quarrel; but Sir Philip
declined entering into particulars at present, assuring him of a full
information hereafter. He then ^ent M. Zadisky, attended by John Wyatt, and a
servant of Lord Clifford, with a letter to Lord Lovel; the contents was as
follows:

My Lord Lovel!
Sir Philip Harclay earnestly desires to see you at the house of Lord Clifford,
where he waits to call you to account for the injuries done by you to the late
Arthur Lord Lovel, your kinsman: if you accept his demand, he will make the
Lord Clifford a witness and a judge of the cause; If not, he will expose you
publicly, as a traitor and a coward. Please to answer this letter, and he will
acquaint you with the time, place, and manner of the meeting.

PHILIP HARCLAY.


Zadisky presented the letter to the Lord Lovel, informing him that he was the
friend of Sir Philip Harclay. He seemed surprised and confounded at the
contents; but, putting on an haughty air; I know nothing, said he, of the
business this letter hints at: but wait a few hours, and I will give you an
answer. He gave orders to treat Zadisky like a gentleman, in every respect,
except in avoiding his company: for the Greek had a shrewd and penetrating
aspect, and he observed every turn of his countenance. The next day he came and
apologized for his absence, and gave him the answer, sending his respects to
the Lord Clifford. The messengers returned with all ^peed, and Sir Philip read
the answer before all present.

Lord Lovel knows not of any injuries done by him to the late Arthur Lord
Lovel, whom he succeeded by just right of inheritance; nor of any right Sir
Philip Harclay has, to call to account a man to whom he is barely known, having
seen him only once, many years ago, at the house of his uncle, the old Lord
Lovel: Nevertheless, Lord Lovel will not suffer any man to call his name and
honor into question with impunity; for which reason he will meet Sir Philip
Harclay at any time, place, and in what manner he shall appoint, bringing the
same number of friends and dependents, that justice may be done to all parties.

LOVEL.


It Is well, said Sir Philip: I am glad to find ^e has the spirit to meet me; he
is an enemy worthy of my sword. Lord Clifford then proposed, that all parties
should pass the borders, and obtain leave of the warden of the Scottish marches
to decide the quarrel in his jurisdiction, with a select number of friends on
both sides. Sir Philip agreed to the proposal; and Lord Clifford wrote in his
own name to ask permission of Lord Graham, that his friends might come there;
and obtained it, on condition that neither party, should exceed a limited
number of friends and followers.

Lord Clifford sent chosen messengers to Lord Lovel, acquainting him with the
conditions, and appointing the time place, and manner of their meeting, and
that he had been desired to accept the office of judge of the field. Lord Lovel
accepted the conditions, and promised to be there without fail. Lord Clifford
notified the same to Lord Graham, warden of the marches, who caused a piece of
ground to be enclosed for the lists, and made preparations against the day
appointed.

In the interim, Sir Philip Harclay thought proper to settle his worldly
affairs: he made Zadisky acquainted with every circumstance of Edmund's
history, and the obligation that lay upon him to revenge the death of his
friend, and see justice done to his heir. Zadisky entered in the cause with an
ardour that spoke the affection he bore to his friend. Why, said he, would you
not suffer me to engage this traitor? -- Your life is of too much consequence
to be staked against his: but though I trust that the justice of your cause
must succeed, yet, if it should happen otherwise, I vow to revenge you; he
shall never go back from us both: However, my hope and trust is to see your arm
the minister of justice. Sir Philip then sent for a lawyer, and made his will,
by which he appointed Edmund his chief heir, by the name of Lovel, alias
Seagrave, alias Twyford; he ordered that all his old friends, soldiers, and
servants, should be maintained in the same manner during their lives; he left
to Zadisky an annuity of an hundred a year, and (...) legacy of two hundred
pounds; one hundred pounds to a certain monastry; the same to be distributed
among disbanded soldiers, and the ^ame to the poor and needy in his
neighborhood.

He appointed Lord Clifford joint executor with Edmund, and gave his will into
that nobleman's care, recommending Edmund to his favor and protection. If I
live, said he, I will make him appear to be worthy of it; if I die, he will
want a friend. I am desirous your Lord^hip, as a judge of the field, should be
unprejudiced on either side, that you may judge impartially. If I die, Edmund's
pretensions die with me; but my friend Zadisky will acquaint you with the
foundation of them. I take these precautions, because I ought to be prepared
for every thing: but my heart is (...) with better hopes, and I trust I shall
live to (...) my own cause, as well as that of my friend, who is a person of
m^re consequence than he appears to be. Lord Clifford accepted the trust, and
expressed the greatest reliance upon Sir Philip's honor and v^racity.

While these preparations were ^^aking for the great event that was to decide
the pretensions of Edmund, his enemies, at the Castle of Lovel, were brought to
shame for their behavior to him.

The disagreement between Wenlock and Markham had by degrees broug^^ on an
explanation of some part^ of their conduct. Father Oswald had often hinted to
the Baron, Wenlock's envy of Edmund's superior qualities, and the artifices by
which he had obtained such an influence with Sir Robert, as to make him take
his part upon all occasions. Oswald now took advantage of the breach between
these two incendiaries, to persuade Markham to justify himself at Wenlock's
expense, and to tell all he knew of his wickedness: at length he promised to
declare all he knew of Wenlock's conduct, as well in France as since their
return, when he should be called upon: and, by him, Oswald was enabled to
unravel the whole of his contrivances against the honor, interest, and even
life of Edmund.

He prevailed on Hewson, and Kemp, his associate, to add their testimony to the
others. Hewson confessed that he was touched in his conscience, when he
reflected on the cruelty and injustice of his behavior to Edmund, whose
behavior toward him, after he had laid a snare for his life, was so noble and
generous, that he was cut to the heart by it, and had suffered so much pain and
remorse, that he longed for nothing so much as an opportunity to unburthen his
mind; but the dread of Mr. Wenlock's anger, and the effects of his resentment,
had hitherto kept him silent, always hoping there would come a time, when he
might have leave to declare the whole truth.

Oswald conveyed this information to the Baron's ear, who waited for an
opportunity to make the proper use of it. Not long after, (...) two principal
incendiaries came to an (...) rupture, and Markham threatened Wenlock that he
would show his uncle what a serpent he had harbored in his bosom. The Baron
arrested his words, and insisted upon his telling all he knew; adding, if you
speak the truth, I will support you; but if you prove false, I will punish you
severely: As to Mr. Wenlock, he shall have a fair trial; and if all the
accusations I have heard are made good, it is high time I should put him out of
my family. The Baron with a stern aspect, bade them follow him into the great
hall; and sent for all the rest of the family together.

He then, with great solemnity, told them he was ready to hear all sides of the
question. He declared the whole substance of his informations, and called upon
the accusers to support the charge. Hewson and Kemp gave the same account they
had done to Oswald, offering to swear to the truth of their testimony; several
of the other servants related such circumstances as had come to their
knowledge. Markham th^n spoke of every thing, and gave a particular account of
all that had passed on the night they spent in the east apartment; he accused
himself of being privy to Wenlock's villainy, called himself fool and
blockhead, for being the instrument of (...) malignant disposition, and asked
pardon of (...) uncle for concealing (...).

The Baron called upon Wenlock to (...) to the charge; wh^ (...) answer^^^
(...) into a passion, raged, swore, (...) finally denied every thing. The (...)
^^sisted in their assertions. Markham desired leave to make known the reason
why they were all afraid of him; he gives it out, said he, that he is to be my
Lord's son-in-law; and they, supposing him to stand first in his favor, are
afraid of his displeasure. -- I hope, said the Baron, I shall not be at such a
loss for a son-in-law, as to make choice of such a one as him; he never but
once hinted such a thing, and then I gave him no encouragement. I have long
seen there was something very wrong in him, but I did not believe he was of ^o
wicked a disposition: It is no wonder that princes should be so frequently
deceived, when I, a private man, could be so much imposed upon within the
circle of my own family. What think you, son Robert? -- I, Sir, have been much
more imposed upon; and I take ^ame to myself on the occasion. -- Enough, my
son, said the Baron; a generous confession is only a proof of growing wisdom;
You are now sensible, that the best of us are liable to imposition. The
artifices of this unworthy kinsman have set us at variance with each other, and
driven away an excellent youth from this house, to go I know not whith^^* But
he shall no longer triumph in his wickedness; he shall feel what it is to be
(...) from the house of his protector. He shall set (...) for his mother's this
day; I will write to ^er (...) ^uch a manner as shall inform her that he (...)
me, without particularising the (...) his faults: I will give him an
opportunity of recovering his credit with his own family, and this shall be my
security against his doing further mischief. May he repent and be forgiven.

Markham deserves punishment, but not in the same degree. -- I confess it, said
he, and will submit to whatever your Lordship shall enjoin. -- You shall only
be banished for a time, but he for ever. I will send you abroad, on a business
that shall put you in a way to do credit to yourself, and service to me. Son
Robert, have you any objection to my sentence? -- My Lord, said he, I have
great reason to distrust myself; I am sensible of my own weakness, and your
superior wisdom, as well as goodness; and I will henceforward submit to you in
all things.

The Baron ordered two of his servants to pack up Wenlock's clothes and
necessaries, and to set out with him that very day; he bade some others keep an
eye upon him least he should escape: As soon as they were ready, my Lord wished
him a good journey, and gave him a letter for his mother. He departed, without
saying a word, in a sullen kind of resentment; but his countenance showed the
inward agitations of his mind.

As soon as he was gone, every mouth was opened against him; a thousand stories
came out that they ^ever heard before: The Baron and (...) were astonished that
he (...) go (...) long without detection. My (...) sighed deeply at the
thoughts of Edmund's ^^^pulsion, and ardently wished to know what was become of
him.

Sir Robert took the opportunity of coming to an explanation with his brother
William; he took shame to himself for some part of his past behavior. Mr.
William owned his affection to Edmund, and justified it by his merit and
attachment to him, which were such, that he was certain no time or distance
could after them. He accepted his brother's acknowledgement, as a full amends
for all that had passed, and begged that henceforward an entire love and
confidence might subsist between them. These new regulations restored peace,
confidence, and harmony, in the Castle of Lovel.

At length, the day arrived for the combatants to meet. The Lord Graham, with
twelve followers, gentlemen, and twelve servants, was ready at the dawn of day
to receive them.

The first that entered the field was Sir Philip Harclay, Knight, armed
completely, excepting his headpiece; Hugh Rugby, his Esquire, bearing his
lance; John Bernard, his page, carrying his helmet and spurs; and two servants
in his proper livery. The next came Edmund, the heir of Lovel, followed by his
servant, John Wyatt; Zadisky followed by his servant.

At a short distance came the Lord Clifford, as judge of the field, with his
Esquire, two pages, and two livery servants; followed by his eldest son, his
nephew, and a gentleman his friend, each attended by one servant: He also
brought a surgeon of note, to take care of the wounded.

The Lord Graham saluted them; and, by his order, they took their places
without the lists, and the trumpet sounded for the challenger. It was answered
by the defendant, who soon after appeared, attended by three gentlemen, his
friends, with each one his servant, beside his own proper attendants.

A place was erected for Lord Clifford, as judge of the field; he desired Lord
Graham would share the office, who accepted it, on condition that the
combatants should make no objection; and they agreed to it with the greatest
courtesy and respect. They consulted together on many points of honor and
ceremony between the two combatants.

They appointed a marshal of the field, and other inferior officers, usually
employed on these occasions. The Lord Graham sent the marshal for the
challenger, desiring him to declare the cause of his quarrel before his enemy.
Sir Philip Harclay then advanced, and thus spoke:

I, Philip Harclay, Knight, challenge Walter, commonly called Lord Lovel, as a
base, treacherous, and bloody man, who, by his wicked arts and devices, did
kill, or cause ^o be killed, his kinsman, Arthur Lord Lovel, my dear and noble
friend. I am called upon, in an extraordinary manner, to revenge his death; and
I will prove the truth of what I have affirmed at the peril of my life.

Lord Graham then bade the defendant answer to the charge. Lord Lovel stood
forth before his followers, and thus replied:

I, Walter, Baron of Lovel, do deny the charge against me, and affirm it to be
a base, false, and malicious accusation of this Sir Philip Harclay, which I
believe to be invented of himself, or else framed by some enemy, and told to
him for wicked ends; but, be that as it may, I will maintain my own honor, and
prove him to be a false traitor, at the hazard of my own life, and to the
punishment of his presumption

Then said the Lord Graham, -- Will not this quarrel admit of arbitration? No,
replied Sir Philip; when I have justified this charge, I have more to bring
against him. I trust in God and the justice of my cause, and defy that traitor
to then death! Lord Clifford then spoke a few words to Lord Graham, who
immediately called to the marshal, and bade him open the lists, and deliver
their weapons to the combatants.

While the marshal was arranging the combatants and their followers, Edmund
approached his friend and patron; he put one knee to the ground, he embraced
his knees, with the strongest emotions of grief and anxiety. He was dressed in
complete armor, with his visor down; his device was a hawthorn, with a graft
of the rose upon it, the motto -- THIS IS NOT MY TRUE PARENT; but Sir Philip
bade him take these words -- E FRUCTU ARBOR COGNOSCITUR.

Sir Philip embraced the youth with strong marks of affection: Be composed, my
child! said he: I have neither guilt, fear, nor doubt in me; I am so certain of
success, that I bid you be prepared for the consequence. Zadisky embraced his
friend, he comforted Edmund, he suggested every thing that could confirm his
hopes of success.

The marshal waited to deliver the spear to Sir Philip; he now presented it
with the usual form. -- Sir, receive your lance, and God defend the right! --
Sir Philip answered, Amen! in a voice that was heard by all present.

He next presented his weapon to Lord Lovel, with the same sentence, who
likewise answered, Amen! with a good courage. Immediately the lists were
cleared, and the combatants began the fight.

They contended a long time, with equal skill and courage; at length, Sir
Philip unhorsed his antagonist. The judges ordered, that either he should
alight, or suffer his enemy to re-mount; he chose the former, and a short
combat on foot ensued. The sweat ran off their bodies with the violence of the
exercise. Sir Philip watched every motion of his enemy, and strove to weary him
out, intending to wound but not to kill him, unless obliged for his own safety.

He thrust his sword through his left arm, and demanded, whether he would
confess the fact? Lord Lovel enraged, answered, he would die sooner. Sir Philip
then passed the sword through his body twice, and Lord Lovel fell, crying out
that he was slain.

I hope not, said Sir Philip, for I have a great deal of business for you to do
before you die. Confess your sins, and endeavor to atone for them, as the only
ground to hope for pardon. -- Lord Lovel replied, You are the victor, use your
good fortune generously!

Sir Philip took his sword, and then waved it over his head, and beckoned for
assistance. The judges sent to beg Sir Philip to spare the life of his enemy.
-- I will, said he, upon condition that he will make an honest confession.

Lord Lovel desired a surgeon and a confessor. -- You shall have both, said Sir
Philip; But you must first answer me a question or two. Did you kill your
kinsman or not? -- It was not my hand that killed him, answered the wounded
man. -- It was done by your own order, however? You shall have no assistance
till you answer this point. -- It was, said he, and Heaven is just! -- Bear
witness all present, said Sir Philip: he confesses the fact!

He then beckoned Edmund, who approached. -- Take off your helmet, said he:
look on that youth, he is the son of your injured kinsman. -- It is himself!
said the Lord Lovel, and sainted away.

Sir Philip then called for a surgeon and a priest, both of which Lord Graham
had provided: the former began to bind up his wounds, and his assistants poured
a cordial into his mouth. -- Preserve his life, if it be possible, said Sir
Philip; for much depends upon it.

He then took Edmund by the hand, and presented him to all the company. -- In
this young man, said he, you see the true heir of the house of Lovel! Heaven
has in its own way made him the instrument to discover the death of his
parents. His father was assassinated by order of that wicked man, who now
receives his punishment; his mother was, by his cruel treatment, compelled to
leave her own house; she was delivered in the fields, and perished herself in
seeking a shelter for her infant. I have sufficient proof of every thing I say,
which I am ready to communicate to every person who desires to know the
particulars; Heaven, by my hand, has chastised him: he has confessed the fact I
accuse him of, and it remains that he make restitution of the fortune and
honor he has usurped so long.

Edmund kneeled, and with uplifted (...) returned thanks to heaven, that his
noble friend and champion was crowned with (...) -- The Lords and gentlemen
gathered round them, they congratulated them both; while Lord Lovel's friends
and followers were employed in taking care of him. Lord Clifford took Sir
Philip's hand. -- You have acted with so much honor and prudence, that it is
presumptuous to offer you advice; but what mean you to do with the wounded man?
-- I have not determined, said he; I thank you for the hint, and bog your
advice how to proceed. -- Let us consult Lord Graham, replied he. -- Lord
Graham insisted upon their going all to his castle; there, said he, you will
have impartial witnesses of all that passes. Sir Philip was unwilling to give
so much trouble. The Lord Graham protested he should be proud to do any service
to so noble a gentleman. Lord Clifford enforced his request, saying, it was
better upon all accounts to keep their prisoner on this side the borders till
they saw what turn his health would take, and to keep him safely till he
settled his worldly affairs.

This resolution being taken, Lord Graham invited the wounded man and his
friends to his castle, as being the nearest place where he could be lodged and
taken proper care of, it being dangerous to carry him any further. They
accepted the proposal with many acknowledgments; having made a kind of litter
of boughs, they all proceeded to Lord Graham's castle, where they put Lord
Lovel to ^ed, and the surgeon dressed his wounds and (...) he might be kept
quiet, not knowing at present whether they were dangerous or not.

About an hour after, the wounded man complained of thirst; he asked for the
surgeon, and inquired if his life was in danger? The surgeon answered him
doubtfully. He asked -- Where is Sir Philip Harclay? -- In the castle -- Where
is that young man whom he calls the heir of Lovel? -- He is here, too. -- Then
I am surrounded with my enemies. I want to speak to one of my own servants,
without witnesses; let one be sent to me.

The surgeon withdrew, and acquainted the gentlemen below. -- He shall not
speak to any man, said Sir Philip, but in my presence. He went with him into
the sick man's room. Upon the sight of Sir Philip, he seemed in great
agitation. -- Am I not allowed to speak with my own servant, said he? -- Yes,
Sir, you may; but not without witnesses. -- Then I am a prisoner it seems. --
No, not so, Sir; but some caution is necessary at present: But compose
yourself, I do not wish for your death. -- Then why did you seek it? I never
injured you. -- Yes, you have, in the person of my friend, and I am only the
instrument of justice in the hand of Heaven; endeavor to make atonement while
life is spared to you. -- Shall I send the priest to you? perhaps he may
convince you of the necessity of restitution, in order to obtain forgiveness of
your sins.

Sir Philip sent for the priest and the surgeon, and obliged the servant to
retire with him. I leave you, Sir, to the care of these gentlemen; and whenever
a third person is admitted, I will be his attendant: I will visit you again
within an hour. He then retired, and consulted his friends below: they were of
opinion that no time should be lost. -- You will then, said he, accompany me
into the sick man's apartment in an hour's time.

Within the hour, Sir Philip, attended by Lord Clifford and Lord Graham,
entered the chamber. Lord Lovel was in great emotion; the priest stood on one
side of the bed, the the surgeon on the other; the former exhorted him to
confess his sins, the other desired he might be left to his repose. Lord Lovel
seemed in great anguish of mind; he trembled and was in the utmost confusion.
Sir Philip entreated him with the Piety of a confessor, to consider his soul's
health before that of his body. He then asked Sir Philip, by what means he knew
that he was concerned in the death of his kinsman? -- Sir, replied he, it was
not merely by human means this fact was discovered. There is a certain
apartment in the Castle of Lovel, that has been shut up these one-and-twenty
years, but has lately been opened and examined into.

Oh Heaven! exclaimed he, then Geoffry must have betrayed me! -- No, Sir, he
has not, it was revealed in a very extraordinary manner to that youth whom it
most concerns. -- How can he be the heir of Lovel? -- By being the son of that
unfortunate woman, whom you cruelly obliged to leave her own house, to avoid
being compelled to wed the murderer of her husband: we are not ignorant,
moreover, of the fictitious funeral you made for her. All is discovered, and
you will not tell us any more than we know already; but we desire to have it
confirmed by your confession. The judgments of Heaven are fallen upon me! said
Lord Lovel. I am childless, and one is arisen from the grave to claim my
inheritance. -- Nothing, then, hinders you to do justice and make restitution;
it is for the ease of your conscience; and you have no other way of making
atonement for all the mischief you have done. -- You know too much, said the
criminal, and I will relate what you do not know.

You may remember, proceeded he, that I saw you once at my uncle's house? -- I
well remember. -- At that time my mind was disturbed by the baleful passion of
envy; it was from that root all my bad actions sprung. -- Praise be to God!
said the good priest, he has touched your heart with true contrition, and you
show the good effect of his mercies; you will do justice, and you will be
rewarded by the gift of repentance unto salvation. -- Sir Philip desired the
penitent to proceed.

My kinsman excelled me in every kind of merit, in the graces of person and
mind, in all his exercises, and in every accomplishment. I was totally eclipsed
by him, and I hated to be in his company; but what finished my aversion, was
his addressing the lady upon whom I had fixed my affections: I strove to rival
him there, but she gave him the preference, that indeed, was only his due; but
I could not bear to see, or acknowledge it.

The most bitter hatred took possession of my breast, and I avowed to revenge
the supposed injury, as soon as opportunity should offer. I buried my
resentment deep in my heart, and outwardly appeared to rejoice at his success;
I made a merit of resigning my pretensions to him, but I could not bear to be
present at his nuptials; I returned to my father's seat, and brooded over my
revenge in secret. My father died this year, and soon after my uncle followed
him; within another year my kinsman was summoned to attend the King on his
Welsh expedition.

As soon as I heard he was gone from home, I resolved to prevent his return,
exulting in the prospect of possessing his title, fortune, and his Lady. I
hired messengers, who were constantly going and coming, to give me intelligence
of all that passed at the castle; I went there soon after, under pretense of
visiting my kinsman. My spies brought me an account of all that happened; one
informed me of the event of the battle, but could not tell whether my rival was
living or dead; I hoped the latter, that I might avoid the crime I meditated; I
reported his death to his Lady, who took it (...) heavily.

Soon after a messenger arrived with tidings ^at he was alive and well, and had
obtained ^ave to return home immediately.

I instantly dispatched my two emissaries, to intercept him on the way. He made
so much haste to return, that he was met within a mile of his own castle: he
had out rode his servants, and was alone: They killed him, and drew him aside
out of the highway. They then came to me with all speed, and desired my orders;
it was then about sunset: I sent them back to fetch the dead body, which they
brought privately into the castle: They tied it neck and heels, and put it into
a trunk, which they buried under the floor in the closet you mentioned. The
sight of the body stung me to the heart; I then felt the pangs of remorse, but
it was too late: I took every precaution that prudence suggested, to prevent
the discovery; but nothing can be concealed from the eye of Heaven.

From that fatal hour, I have never known peace, always in fear of something
impending to discover my guilt, and to bring me to shame: at length I am
overtaken by justice. I am brought to a severe reckoning here, and I dread to
meet one more severe hereafter.

Enough, said the priest; you have done a good work, my son! trust in the Lord;
and now this burden is off your mind, the rest will be made easy to you.

Lord Lovel took a minute's repose, and then went on. -- I hope by the hint you
gave, Sir Philip, the poor Lady is yet alive? -- No, Sir, she is not: but she
died not till after she brought forth a son, whom Heaven made its instrument to
discover and avenge the death of both his parents. -- They are well avenged!
said he. I have no children to lament for me; all mine have been taken from me
in the bloom of youth; only one daughter lived to be twelve years old; I
intended her for a wise for one of my nephews, but within three months I have
buried her. He sighed, wept; and was silent.

The gentlemen present, lifted up their hands and eyes to heaven in silence.
The will of Heaven be obeyed! said the priest. My penitent has confessed all:
what more would you require? -- That he make atonement, said Sir Philip; that
he surrender the title and estate to the right heir, and dispose of his own
proper fortune to his nearest relations, and resign himself to penitence and
preparation for a future state. For this time I leave him with you, father, and
will join my prayers with yours for his repentance.

So, saying, he left the room, and was followed by the Barons and surgeon; the
priest alone remaining with him. As soon as they were out of hearing, Sir
Philip questioned the surgeon concerning his patient's situation; who answered,
that at present, he saw no sings of immediate danger, but he could not yet
pronounce that there was none: If he were mortally wounded, said he, he could
not be so well, nor speak so long without faintness; and, it is my opinion,
that he will soon recover, if nothing happens to retard the cure. Then, said
Sir Philip, keep this opinion from him; for I would suffer the fear of death to
operate on him, until he has performed some necessary acts of justice: Let it
only be known to these noblemen, upon whose honor I can rely, and I trust they
will approve my request to you, Sir. -- I join in it, said Lord Clifford, from
the same motives. -- I insist upon it, said Lord Graham; and I can answer for
my surgeon's discretion. -- My Lords, said the surgeon, you may de^end on my
fidelity; and, after what I have just heard, my conscience is engaged in this
noble gentleman's behalf, and I will do every thing in my power to second your
intentions. -- I thank you, Sir, said Sir Philip, and you may depend on my
gratitude in return. I presume you will sit up with him tonight: if any danger
should arise, I desire to be called immediately; but, otherwise, I would suffer
him to rest quietly, that (...) may be prepared for the business of the
following day. -- I shall obey your directions, Sir, my necessary attendance
will give me a pretense not to leave him, and thus I shall hear all that passes
between him and all that visit him. -- You will oblige me highly, said Sir
Philip, and I shall go to rest with confidence in your care.

The surgeon returned to the sick man's chamber, Sir Philip and the Baron^ to
the company below: they supped in the great hall with all the gentlemen that
were present at the combat. Sir Philip and his Edmund retired to their repose,
being heartily fatigued; and the company stayed to a late hour, commenting upon
the action of the day, praising the courage and generosity of the noble Knight,
and wishing a good event to his undertaking.

Most of Lord Lovel's friends went away as soon as they saw him safely lodged,
being ashamed of him, and of their appearance in his behalf; and the few that
stayed were induced by their desire of a further information of the base action
he had committed, and to justify their own characters and conduct.

The next morning, Sir Philip entered into consultation with the two Barons, on
the methods he should take to get Edmund received and acknowledged as heir of
the house of Lovel. They were all of opinion, that the criminal should be kept
in fear till he had settled his worldly affairs, and they had resolved how to
dispose of him. With this determination, they entered his room, and inquired of
the surgeon how he had passed the night? He shook his head, and said but little.

Lord Lovel desired that he might be removed to his own house. Lord Graham
said, he could not consent to that, as there was evident danger in removing
him; and appealed to the surgeon, who confirmed his opinion. Lord Graham
desired he would make himself easy, and that he should have every kind of
assistance there.

Sir Philip then proposed to send for the Lord Fitz-Owen, who would see that
all possible care was taken of his brother-in-law, and would assist him in
settling his affairs. Lord Lovel was against it; he was peevish and uneasy, and
desired to be left with only his own servants to attend him. Sir Philip quitted
the room with a significant look: and the two Lords endeavored to reconcile
him to his situation. He interrupted them. -- It is easy for men in your
situation to advise, but it is difficult for one in mine to practice; wounded
in body and mind, it is natural that I should strive to avoid the extremes of
shame and punishment: I thank you for your kind offices, and beg I may be left
with my own servants -- With them, and the surgeon, you shall, said Lord
Graham; and they both retired.

Sir Philip met them below. -- My Lords, said he, I am desirous that my Lord
Fitz-Owen should be sent for, and that he may hear his brother's confession;
for I suspect that he may hereafter deny, what only the fear of death has
extorted from him: with your permission, I am determinined to send messengers
to day. They both expressed their approbation, and Lord Clifford proposed to
write to him, saying, a letter from an impartial person will have the more
weight: I will send one of my principal domestics with your own. This measure
being resolved upon, Lord Clifford retired to write, and Sir Philip to prepare
his servants for instant departure. Edmund desired leave to write to father
Oswald, and John Wyatt was ordered to be the bearer of his letter. When the
Lord Clifford had finished his letter, he read it to Sir Philip and his chosen
friends, as follows:

Right Hon. my good Lord,
I have taken upon me to acquaint your Lordship, that there has been a solemn
combat at arms between your brother-in-law, the Lord Lovel, and Sir Philip
Harclay, Knt. of Yorkshire. It was fought in the jurisdiction of the Lord
Graham, who, with myself, was appointed judge of the field; it was fairly won,
and Sir Philip is the conqueror. After he had gained the victory, he declared
at large the cause of the quarrel, and that he had revenged the death of Arthur
Lord Lovel, his friend, whom the present Lord Lovel had assassinated, that he
might enjoy his title and estate. The wounded man confessed the fact: and Sir
Philip gave him his life, and only carried off his sword as a trophy of his
victory. Both the victor and the vanquished were conveyed to Lord Graham's
castle, where the Lord Lovel now lies in great danger. He is desirous to settle
his worldly affairs, and to make his peace with God and man. Sir Philip Harclay
says, there is a male heir of the house of Lovel, for whom he claims the title
and estate: but he is very desirous that your Lordship should be present at the
disposal of your brother's property, that of right belongs to him, of which
your children are the undoubted heirs: He also wants to consult you in many
other points of honor and equity. Let me entreat you, on the receipt of this
letter, to set out immediately for Lord Graham's castle, where you will be
received with the utmost respect and hospitality. You will hear things that
will surprise you as much as they do me; you will judge of them with that
justice and honor that speaks your character; and you will unite with us in
wondering at the ways of Providence, and submitting to its decrees, in
punishing the guilty, and doing justice to the innocent and oppressed. My best
wishes and prayers attend you and your hopeful family. My Lord, I remain your
humble servant,

CLIFFORD.


Every one present expressed the highest approbation of this letter. Sir Philip
gave orders to John Wyatt to be very circumspect in his behavior, to give
Edmund's letter privately to father Oswald, and to make no mention of him, or
his pretensions to Lovel's Castle.

Lord Clifford gave his servant the requisite precautions. Lord Graham added a
(...) of invitation, and sent it by a servant of (...). -- As soon as all
things were ready, (...) messengers (...) with all speed for the Castle of
Lovel.

They stayed no longer by the way than to take some refreshment, but rode night
and day till they arrived there.

Lord Fitz-Owen was in the parlour with his children. Father Oswald was walking
in the avenue before the house, when he saw three messengers, whose horses
seemed jaded and the riders fatigued, like men come a long journey. He came up,
just as the first had delivered his message to the porter. John Wyatt knew him,
he dismounted ^and made signs that he had something to say to him; he retired
back a few steps, and John, with great dexterity, slipped a letter into his
hand. The father gave him his blessing, (...) a welcome. -- Who do you come
from (...) he aloud. -- From the Lords Graham and Clifford, to the Lord
Fitz-Owen; and we bring letters of consequence to the Baron.

Oswald followed the messengers into the hall, a servant announced their
arrival. Lord Fitz-Owen received them in the p^^lour* Lord Clifford's servant
delivered his master's letter, Lord Graham's his, and they said they would
retire, and wait his Lordship's answer. The Baron ordered them some
refreshment. They retired, and he opened his letters; He read them with great
agitations, he struck his (...) upon his heart, he exclaimed (...) fears are
all verified! the blow is struck, and it ha^ (...) upon the guilty!

Oswald came in a minute (...). -- You are come in good time, said the Baron.
Read that letter, that my children may know the contents. He read it with
faultering voice, and trembling limbs. They were all in great surprise. William
looked down, and kept a studied silence. Sir Robert exclaimed -- Is it
possible? can my uncle be guilty of such an action? -- You hear, said the
Baron, he has confessed it! -- But to whom? said Sir Robert. -- His father
replied, Lord Clifford's honor is unquestionable, and I cannot doubt what he
affirms.

Sir Robert leaned his head upon his hand, as one lost in thought: at length he
seemed to awake -- My Lord, I have no doubt that Edmund is at the ^^ttom of
this business. Do you ^^t remember (...) Sir Philip Harclay long ago promised
him his friendship? Edmund disappears; and, soon after, this man challenges my
Uncle. You know what passed here before his departure: he has suggested this
affair to Sir Philip, and instigated him to this action. This is the return he
has made for the favors he has received from our family, to which he owes
every thing. -- Softly, my son! said the Baron; let us be cautious of
reflecting upon Edmund: there is a greater hand in this business. My conjecture
was too true: it was in that fatal apartment that he was made acquainted with
the circumstances of Lord Lovel's death; he was, perhaps enjoined to reveal
them to Sir Philip Harclay* the bosom friend of the deceased. The mystery of
that apartment is disclosed, the woe to the guilty is accomplished; there is no
reflection upon any one; Heaven effects its purposes in its own time and
manner. I and mine are innocent; let us worship, and be silent!

But what do you propose to do? said Sir Robert. -- To return with the
messengers, answered the Baron. I think it highly proper that I should see your
Uncle, and hear what he has to say: My children are his heirs; in justice to
them, I ought to be acquainted with every thing that concerns the disposal of
his fortune. -- Your Lordship is in the right, answered Sir Robert, it concerns
us all. I have only to ask your permission to bear you company. -- With all my
heart, said the Baron: I have only to ask of you in return, that you will
command yourself, and not speak your mind hastily; wait for the proofs before
you give judgment, and take advice of your reason before you decide upon any
thing: If you reflect upon the past, you will have reason to distrust yourself.
Leave all to me, and be assured I will protect your honor and my own. I will
obey you in all things, my Lord; and will make immediate preparation for our
departure. So saying, he left the room.

As soon as he was gone, Mr. William broke silence. -- My Lord, said he, if you
have no great objection, I beg leave also to accompany you both. -- You shall,
my son, if you desire it; I think I can see your motives, and your brother's
also: your coolness will be a good balance to his warmth: you shall go with us.
My son Walter shall be his sister's protector in our absence, and he shall be
master here till we return. -- I hope, my dear father, that will not be long; I
shall not be happy till you come home, said the fair Emma -- It shall be no
longer, my dearest, than till this untoward affair is settled. The Baron
desired to know when the messengers were expected to return. Oswald took this
opportunity to retire; he went to his own apartment, and read the letter as
follows:

The Heir of Lovel, to his dear and reverend, friend father Oswald.

Let my friends at the castle of Lovel know that I live in hopes one day to see
them there. If you could by any means return with the messengers, your
testimony would add weight to mine; perhaps you might obtain permission to
attend the Baron, I leave it to you to manage this. John Wyatt will inform you
of all that has passed here, and that hitherto my success has outrun my
expectation, and, almost, my wishes. I am in the high road to my inheritance;
and trust that the Power who has conducted me thus far will not leave his work
unfinished. Tell my beloved William, that I live, and hope to embrace him
before long. I recommend myself to your holy prayers and blessing, and remain
your son and servant,

EDMUND.


Oswald then went to the messengers; he drew John Wyatt to a distance from the
rest, and got the information he wanted: he stayed with him till he was sent
for by the Baron, to whom he went directly and prevented his questions, by
saying, -- I have been talking with the messengers; I find they have traveled
night and day to bring the letters with all speed; they only require one
night's rest, and will be ready to set out with you tomorrow. -- It Is well,
said the Baron; we will set out as soon as they are ready. -- My Lord, said
Oswald, I have a favor to beg of you; it is that I may attend you: I have seen
the progress of this wonderful discovery, and I have a great desire to see the
conclusion of it; perhaps my presence may be of service in the course of your
business. -- Perhaps it may, said the Baron; I have no objection, if you desire
to go. -- They then separated, and went to prepare for their journey.

Oswald had a private interview with Joseph, whom he informed of all that he
(...) and his resolution to attend the Baron in (...) journey to the north. --
I go, said he, to bear witness in behalf of injured innocence: if it be
needful, I shall call upon you; therefore hold yourself in readiness in case
you should be sent for. -- That I will, said Joseph, and spend my last remains
of life and strength, to help my young Lord to his right and title; but do they
not begin to suspect who is the heir of Lovel? -- Not in the least, said
Oswald; they think him concerned in the discovery, but have no idea of his
being interested in the event. -- Oh, father! said Joseph, I shall think every
day a week till you return; but I will no longer keep you from your repose. --
Good night, said Oswald; but I have another visit to pay before I go to rest.

He left Joseph, and went on tip-toe to Mr. William's room, and tapped at his
door: he came and opened it. -- What news, father? -- Not much; I have only
orders to tell you that Edmund is well, and as much your friend as ever. -- I
guessed, said William, that we should hear something of him: I have still
another guess. -- What is that my child? That we shall see or hear of him where
we are going. -- It is very likely, said Oswald; and I would have you be
prepared for it: I am confident we shall hear nothing to his discredit. -- I am
certain of that, said William, and I rejoice to see him: I conclude that he is
under the protection of Sir Philip Harclay. -- He is so, said Oswald; I had my
information from Sir Philip's servant, who is one of the messengers, and was
guide to the others in their way hither -- After some further conversation they
separated, and each went to his repose.

The next morning the whole party set out on their journey; they traveled by
easy stages on account of the Baron's health, which began to be impaired, and
arrived in health and spirits at the castle of Lord Graham, where they were
received with the utmost respect and kindness by the noble Master.

The Lord Lovel had recovered his health and strength as much as possible in
the time, and was impatient to be gone from thence to his own house. He was
surprised to hear of the arrival of his brother and nephews, and expressed no
pleasure at the thoughts of seeing them. When Sir Philip Harclay came to pay
his respects to Baron Fitz-Owen, the latter received him with civility, but
with a coldness that was apparent. Sir Robert left the room, doubting his
resolution. Sir Philip advanced, and took the Baron by the (...) -- My Lord,
said he, I rejoice to see you (...) I cannot be satisfied with the bare
civilities of such a man as you. I aspire to your esteem, to your friendship,
and I shall not be happy till I obtain them. I will make you the judge of every
part of my conduct, and where you shall condemn me, I will condemn myself.

The Baron was softened, his noble heart felt its alliance with its
counterpart, but he thought the situation of his brother demanded some reserve
toward the man who (...) his life; but, in spite of himself, it wore (...)
every moment. Lord Clifford related all that had passed, with a due regard to
Sir Philip's honor; he remarked how nobly he concealed the cause of his
resentment against the Lord Lovel till the day of combat, that he might not
prepossess the judges against him. He enlarged on his humanity to the
vanquished, on the desire he expressed to have justice done to his heirs:
finally, he mentioned his great respect for the Lord Fitz-Owen, and the
solicitude he showed to have him come to settle the estate of the sick man in
favor of his children. Lord Clifford also employed his sons to soften Sir
Robert, and to explain to him every doubtful part of Sir Philip's behavior.

After the travelers had taken some rest, the Lord Graham proposed that they
should make a visit to the sick man's chamber. The Lords sent to acquaint him
they were coming (...) ^^sit him, and they followed the messenger. The Lord
Fitz-Owen went up to the bedside; he embraced his brother with strong emotions
of concern; Sir Robert followed him: then Mr. William. Lord Lovel embraced
them, but said nothing; his countenance showed his inward agitations. -- Lord
Fitz-Owen first broke silence. -- I hope, said he, I see my brother better than
I expected. -- Lord Lovel bit his fingers, he pulled the bed-clothes, (...)
seemed almost distracted; at length he ^^oke out -- I owe no thanks to those
who sent for my relations! Sir Philip Harclay, you have used ungenerously the
advantage you have gained over me! you spared my life, only to take away my
reputation. You have exposed me to strangers; and what is worse, to my dearest
friends; when I lay in a state of danger, you obliged me to say any thing, and
now you take advantage of it, to ruin me in my friends affection: But, if I
recover, you may repent it.

Sir Philip then came forward. -- My Lords, I shall take no notice of what this
unhappy man has just now said; I shall appeal to you, as to the honorable
witnesses of all that has passed: You see it was no more than necessary. I
appeal to you for the motives of my treatment of him, before, at, and after our
meeting. I did not take his life, as I might have done; I wished him to repent
of his sins, and to make restitution of what he unjustly possesses. I was
called out to do an act of justice; I ^ad taken the heir of Lovel under my
protection, my chief view was to see justice done to him; what regarded this
man was but a secondary motive. This was my end, and I will never, never lose
sight of it.

Lord Lovel seemed almost choked with passion, to see every one giving some
mark of approbation and respect to Sir Philip. He called out, -- I demand to
know who is this pretended heir, whom he brings out to cla^^^ my title and
fortune? -- My noble auditors, said Sir Philip, I shall appeal to your
judgment, in regard to the proofs of my ward's birth and family; every
circumstance shall be laid before you, and you shall decide upon them.

Here is a young man, supposed the son of a peasant, who, by a train of
circumstances that could not have happened by human contrivance, discovers not
only who were his real parents, but that they came to untimely deaths. He even
discovers the different places where their bones are buried, both out of
consecrated ground, and appeals to their ashes for the truth of his
pretensions. He has also living proofs to offer, that will convince the most
incredulous. I have deferred entering into particulars, till the arrival of
Baron Fitz-Owen: I know his noble heart and honorable character, from one that
has long been an eyewitness of his goodness; such is the opinion I have of his
justice, that I will accept him as one of the judges in his brother's cause. I
and my ward will bring our proofs before him, and the company here present; in
the course of them, it will appear that he is the best qualified of any to
judge of them, because he can ascertain many of the facts we shall have
occasion to mention: I will rest our cause upon their decision.

Lord Graham applauded Sir Philip's appeal, affirming his own impartiality, and
calling upon Lord Clifford and his sons, and also his own nephew who were
present. Lord Clifford said, Sir Philip offers fairly, and like himself; there
can be no place nor persons more impartial than the present, and I presume the
Lord Lovel can have no objection. -- No objection! answered he; what, to be
tried like a criminal, to have judges appointed over me, to decide upon my
right to my own estate and title? I will not submit to such a jurisdiction! --
Then, said Sir Philip, you had rather be tried by the laws of the land, and
have them pronounce sentence upon you? Take your choice, Sir; if you refuse the
one, you shall be certain of the other. Lord Clifford then said, -- You will
allow Lord Lovel to consider of the proposal; he will consult his friends, and
be determined by their advice. Lord Fitz-Owen said -- I am very much surprised
at what I have heard. I should be glad to know all that Sir Philip Harclay has
to say for his ward, that I may judge what my brother has to hope or fear; I
will then give my best advice, or offer my mediation, as he may stand in need
of them. -- You say well, replied Lord Graham; and pray let us come directly to
the point: Sir Philip, you will introduce your ward to this company, and enter
upon your proofs.

Sir Philip bowed to the company; he went out and brought in Edmund,
encouraging him by the way; he presented him to Baron Fitz-Owen, who looked
very serious -- Edmund Twyford, said he, are you the heir of the house of
Lovel? -- I am, my Lord, said Edmund, bowing to the ground; the proofs will
appear; but I am at the same time, the most humble and grateful of all your
servants, and the servant of your ^^^tues. Sir Robert rose (...), and was going
to leave the room. -- Son Robert, stay, said the Baron: If there is any fraud,
you will be pleased to detect it, and if all that is affirmed be true, you will
not shut your eyes against the light: you are concerned in this business: hear
it in silence, and let reason be arbiter in your cause. He bowed to his father,
bit his lip, and retired to the window. William nodded to Edmund, and was
silent. All the company had their eyes fixed on the young man, who stood in the
midst, casting down his eyes with modest respect to the audience: while Sir
Philip related all the material circumstances of his life, the wonderful
gradation by which he came to the knowledge of his birth, the adventures of the
haunted apartment, the discovery of the fatal closet, and the presumptive
proofs that Lord Lovel was buried there. At this part of his narration, Lord
Fitz-Owen interrupted him -- Where is this closet you talk of? for I and my
sons went over the apartment since Edmund's departure, and found no such place
as you describe. -- My Lord, said Edmund, I can account for it; the door is
covered with tapestry, the same as the room, and you might easily overlook it;
but I have a witness here, said he, and putting his hand into his bosom, he
drew out the key. If this is not the key of that closet, let me be deemed an
impostor, and all I say a falsehood; I will risk my pretensions upon this ^^^of.

And for what purpose did you take it away! said the Baron. -- To prevent any
person from going into it, replied Edmund; I have vowed to keep it till I shall
open the closet before witnesses appointed for that purpose. -- Proceed, Sir,
said the Baron Fitz-Owen. -- Sir Philip then related the conversation between
Edmund and Margery Twyford, his supposed mother. -- Lord Fitz-Owen seemed in
the utmost surprise: He exclaimed, -- Can this be true? strange discovery!
unfortunate child -- Edmund's tears bore witness to his veracity; he was
obliged to hide his face, he lifted up his clasped hands to heaven, and was in
great emotions during all this part of the relation; while Lord Lovel groaned,
and seemed in great agitation.

Sir Philip then addressed himself to Lord Fitz-Owen. My Lord, there was
another person present at the conversation between Edmund and his
foster-mother, who can witness to all that passed; perhaps your Lordship can
tell who that was? -- It was father Oswald, replied the Baron; I well remember
that he went with him at his request; let him be called in. He was sent for,
and came immediately. The Baron desired him to relate all that passed between
Edmund and his mother.

Oswald then began. Since I am now properly called upon to testify what I know
concerning this young man, I will speak the truth, without fear or ^^^our of
any one; and I will swear by the rules of my holy order, to the truth of what I
shall relate. He then gave a particular account of all that passed on that
occasion, and mentioned the tokens found on both the infant and his mother. --
Where are these tokens to be seen? said the Lord Clifford. -- I have them here,
my Lord, said Edmund, and I keep them as my greatest treasures. He then
produced them before all the company. -- There is no appearance of any fraud or
collusion, said Lord Graham: if any man thinks he sees any, let him speak. --
Pray, my Lord, suffer me to speak a word, said Sir Robert. Do you remember that
I hinted my suspicions concerning father Oswald, the night our kinsman lay in
the east apartment? -- I do, said the Baron. -- Well, Sir, it now appears that
he did know more than he would tell us; you find he is very deep in all
Edmund's secrets, and you may judge what were his motives for undertaking this
journey. -- I observe what you say, answered his father, but let us hear all
that Oswald has to say: I will be as impartial as possible. -- My Lord,
returned Oswald, I beg you also to recollect what I said, on the night your son
speaks of, concerning secrecy in certain matters. -- I remember that also, said
the Baron; but proceed. -- My Lord, continued Oswald, I knew more than I
thought myself at liberty to disclose at that time, but I will now tell you
every thing. I saw there was something more than common in the accidents that
^efel this young man, and in his being called out to sleep in the east
apartment; I earnestly desired him to let me be with him on the second night,
to which he consented reluctantly; we heard a great noise in the rooms
underneath, we went down stairs together, I saw him open the fatal closet, I
heard groans that pierced me to the heart, I kneeled down and prayed for the
repose of the spirit departed; I found a seal, with the arms of Lovel engraven
upon it, which I gave to Edmund, and he now has it in his possession: He
enjoined me to keep secret what I had seen and heard, till the time should come
to declare it. I conceived that I was called to be a witness of these things;
besides, my curiosity was excited to know the event; I, therefore, desired to
be present at the interview between him and his mother, which was affecting
beyond expression; I heard what I have now declared as nearly as my memory
permits me. I hope no impartial person will blame me for any part of my
conduct; but if they should, I do not repent it: If I should forfeit the favor
of the rich and great, I shall have acquitted myself to God and my conscience.
I have no worldly ends to answer; I plead the cause of the injured orphan; and
I think, also, that I second the designs of Providence. -- You have well
spoken, father, said the Lord Clifford: your testimony is indeed of consequence.

It is amazing and convincing, said Lord Graham; and the whole story is so well
connected, that I can see nothing to make us doubt the truth of it: But let us
examine the proofs. Edmund gave into their hands the necklace and earrings; he
showed them the locket with the cipher of Lovel, and the seal with the arms; he
told them the cloak in which he was wrapped was in the custody of his
foster-mother, who would produce it on demand. He begged that some proper
persons might be commissioned to go with him to examine whether or no the
bodies of his parents were buried where he affirmed; adding, that he put his
pretensions into their hands with pleasure, relying entirely upon their honor
and justice.

During this interesting scene, the criminal covered his face, and was silent,
but he sent forth bitter sighs and groans that denoted the anguish of his
heart. At length, Lord Graham, in compassion to him, proposed that they should
retire and consider of the proofs; adding, Lord Lovel must needs be fatigued;
we will resume the subject in his presence, when he is disposed to receive us.
Sir, said he, I now leave you in the hands of your own relations; they are men
of strict honor, and I confide in them to take care of you, and of your
concerns. They then went out of the room, leaving only the Lord Fitz-Owen and
his sons with the criminal. They discoursed of the wonderful story of Edmund's
birth, and the principal events of his life.

After dinner, Sir Philip requested another conference with the Lords, and
their principal friends. There were present also, father Oswald, and Lord
Graham's confessor, who had taken the Lord Lovel's confession, Edmund, and
Zadisky. Now, gentlemen, said Sir Philip, I desire to know your opinion of our
proofs, and your advice upon them.

Lord Graham replied, I am desired to speak for the rest: We think there are
strong presumptive proofs that this young man is the true heir of Lovel; but
they ought to be confirmed and authenticated. Of the murder of the late Lord
there is no doubt; the criminal has confessed it, and the circumstances
confirm it; the proofs of his crime are so connected with those of the young
man's birth, that one cannot be public without the other. We are desirous to do
justice; and yet are unwilling for the Lord Fitz-Owen's sake, to bring the
criminal to public shame and punishment. We wish to find out a medium; we
therefore desire Sir Philip to make proposals for his ward, and let Lord
Fitz-Owen answer for himself and his brother, and we will be moderators between
them. Here every one expressed approbation, and called upon Sir Philip to make
his demands.

If, said he, I were to demand strict justice, I should not be satisfied with
any thing less than the life of the criminal; but I am a Christian soldier, the
disciple of him who came into the world to save sinners; for his sake,
continued he (crossing himself) I forego my ^evenge, I spare the guilty: If
Heaven gives him time of repentance, man should not deny it. It is my ward's
particular request, that I will not bring shame upon the house of his
benefactor, the Lord Fitz-Owen, for whom he has a filial affection and
profound veneration. My proposals are these: First, that the criminal make
restitution of the title and estate, obtained with so much injustice and
cruelty, to the lawful heir, whom he shall ackonwledge such before witnesses,
Secondly, that he shall surrender his own lawful inheritance and personal
estate into the hands of Lord Fitz-Owen, in trust for his sons, who are his
heirs of blood. Thirdly, that he shall retire into a religious house, or else
quit the kingdom, in three months time; and, in either case, those who enjoy
his fortune shall allow him a decent annuity, that he may not want the comforts
of life. By the last, I disable him from the means of doing further mischief,
and enable him to devote the remainder of his days to penitence. These are my
proposals, and I give him four-and-twenty hours to consider of them; if he
refuses to comply with them, I shall be obliged to proceed to severer measures,
and to a public prosecution: But the goodness of the Lord Fitz-Owen bids me
expect, from his influence with his brother, a compliance with proposals made
out of respect to his honorable character.

Lord Graham applauded the humanity, p^^dence, and piety of Sir Philip's
proposals. (...) enforced them with all his influence and ^^^quence. Lord
Clifford seconded him; (...) the rest gave tokens of approbation. Sir Robert
Fitz-Owen then rose up -- I beg leave to observe to the company, who are going
to dispose so generously of another man's property, that my father purchased
the castle and estate of the house of Lovel: Who is to repay him the money for
it?

Sir Philip then said, I have also a question to ask. Who is to pay the arrears
of my ward's estate, which he has unjustly been kept out of these
one-and-twenty years? Let Lord Clifford answer to both points, for he is not
interested in either. -- Lord Clifford smiled -- I think, returned he, the
first question is answered by the second, and that the parties concerned should
set one against the other, especially as Lord Fitz-Owen's children will inherit
the fortune, which includes the purchase-money. Lord Graham said, This
determination is both equitable and generous, and I hope will answer the
expectations on all sides. -- I have another proposal to make to my Lord
Fitz-Owen, said Sir Philip; but I first wait for the acceptance of those
already made. -- Lord Fitz-Owen replied, I shall report them to my brother, and
acquaint the company with his resolution tomorrow.

They then separated; and the Baron, with his sons, returned to the sick man's
cham^^^* there he exhorted his brother, with the (...) of a confessor, to
repent of his sins, and (...) atonement for them. He made known Sir Philip's
proposals, and observed on the wonderful discovery of his crime and the
punishment that followed it. Your repentance, continued he, may be accepted,
and your crime may yet be pardoned: If you continue refractory, and refuse to
make atonement, you will draw down upon you a severe punishment. The criminal
would not confess, and yet could not deny the truth and justice of his
observations. The Baron spent several hours in his brother's chamber; he sent
for a priest, who took his confession; and they both sat up with him all night,
advising, persuading, and exhorting him to do justice, and to comply with the
proposals. He was unwilling to give up the world, and yet more so to become the
object of public shame, disgrace, and punishment.

The next day Lord Fitz-Owen summoned she company into his brother's chamber,
and there declared, in his name, that he accepted Sir Philip Harclay's
proposals; that, if the young man could, as he promised, direct them to the
places where his parents were buried, and if his birth should be authenticated
by his foster-parents, he should be acknowledged the heir of the house of
Lovel. That to be certified of these things, they must commission proper
persons to go with him for this purpose; and, in case the truth should be made
plain, they should immediately (...) in possession of the castle and estate,
(...) state it was. He desired Lord Graham (...) Lord Clifford to choose the
commissioners, and gave Sir Philip and Edmund a right to add to them, -- each,
another person.

Lord Graham named the eldest son of Lord Clifford, and the other, in return,
named his nephew; they also chose the priest, Lord Graham's confessor, and the
eldest son of Baron Fitz-Owen, to his great mortification. Sir Philip appointed
Mr. William Fitz-Owen, and Edmund named father Oswald; they chose out servants
to attend them, who were also to be witnesses of all that should pass. Lord
Clifford proposed to Baron Fitz-Owen, that, as soon as the commissioners were
set out, the remainder of the company should adjourn to his seat in Cumberland,
whither Lord Graham should be invited to accompany them, and to stay till this
affair was decided. After some debate, this was agreed to; and, at the same
time, that the criminal should be kept with them till every thing was properly
settled.

Lord Fitz-Owen gave his son William the charge to receive and entertain the
commissioners at the castle: But, before they set out, Sir Philip had a
conference with Lord Fitz-Owen, concerning the surrender of the Castle; in
which he insisted on the furniture and stock of the farm, in consideration of
the arrears. Lord Fitz-Owen slightly mentioned the young man's education and
expenses. Sir Philip answered, you are right, my Lord, I had not thought of
this point; we owe you, in this respect, more than we can ever repay: But you
know not half the respect and affection Edmund bears for you. When restitution
of his title and fortune are fully made, his happiness will still depend on
you. How on me? said the Baron. -- Why, he will not be happy unless you honor
him with your notice and esteem; but this is not all, I must hope that you will
still do more for him. -- Indeed, said the Baron, he has put my regard for him
to a severe proof; what further can be expected from me? -- My dear Lord, be
not offended, I have only one more proposal to make to you; if you refuse it, I
can allow for you; and I confess it requires a greatness of mind, but not more
than you possess to grant it. -- Well, Sir, speak your demand. -- Say rather my
request; it is this case: Cease to look upon Edmund as the enemy of your house;
look upon him as a son, and make him so indeed. -- How say you, Sir Philip? my
son! -- Yes, my Lord, give him your daughter: He is already your son in filial
affection; your son William and he are sworn brothers; what remains but to make
him yours? He deserves such a parent, you such a son; and you will, by this
means, ingraft into your family, the name, title, and estate of Lovel, which
will be entailed on your posterity for ever. This offer requires much
consideration, returned the Baron. -- Suffer me to suggest some hints to you,
said Sir Philip. This match is, I think, verily pointed out by Providence,
which has conducted the dear boy through so many dangers, and brought him
within view of his happiness; look on him as the precious relic of a noble
house, the son of my dearest friend! or look on him as my son and heir, let me,
as his father, implore you to consent to his marriage with your daughter. The
Baron's heart was touched, he turned away his face. -- Oh, Sir Philip Harclay,
what a friend are you! why should such a man be our enemy? -- My Lord, said Sir
Philip, we are not, cannot be enemies; our hearts are already allied; and I am
certain we shall one day be dear friends. The Baron suppressed his emotions,
but Sir Philip saw into his heart. I must consult my eldest son, returned he.
-- Then replied Sir Philip, I foresee much difficulty; he is prejudiced against
Edmund, and thinks the restitution of his inheritance an injury to your family:
Hereafter he will see this alliance in a different light, and will rejoice that
such a brother is added to the family; but, at present, he will set his face
against it. However, we will not despair: virtue and resolution will surmount
all obstacles. Let me call in young Lovel.

He brought Edmund to the Baron, and acquainted him with the proposal he had
been making in his name, my Lord's answers, and the objections he feared on the
part of Sir Robert. Edmund kneeled to the Baron; he ^ook, his hand and pressed
it to his lips. Best of men! of parents! of patrons! said he, I will ever be
your son in filial affection, whether I have the honor to be legally so or
not; not one of your own children can feel a stronger sense of love and duty.
-- Tell me said the Baron, do you love my daughter? -- I do, my Lord, with the
most ardent affection; I never loved any woman but her: and, if I am so
unfortunate as to be refused her, I will not marry at all. Oh, my Lord, reject
not my honest suit! Your alliance will give me consequence with myself, it will
excite me to act worthy of the station to which I am exalted: if you refuse me,
I shall seem an abject wretch, disdained by those whom my heart claims relation
to: Your family are the whole world to me. Give me your lovely daughter! give
me also your son, my beloved William; and let me share with them the fortune
Providence bestows on me: but what is the title of fortune, if I am deprived of
the society of those I love?

Edmund, said the Baron, you have a noble friend; but you have a stronger in my
heart, which I think was implanted there by Heaven to aid its own purposes. I
feel a variety of emotions of different kinds, and am afraid to trust my own
heart with you. But answer me a question; Are you assured of my daughter's
consent? Have you solicited her favor? have you gained her affections? --
Never, my Lord! I am incapable of so base an action: I have loved her at an
humble distance; but, in my situation, I should have thought it a violation of
the laws of gratitude and hospitality to have presumed to speak the sentiments
of my heart. -- Then you have acted with unquestionable honor on this, and I
must say, on all other occasions. -- Your approbation, my Lord, is the first
wish of my life; it is the seal of my honor and happiness.

Sir Philip smiled: My Lord Fitz-Owen, I am jealous of Edmund's preferable
regard for you: it is just the same now as formerly Edmund came to Sir Philip,
he threw himself into his arms, he wept, he was overpowered with the feelings
of his heart: he prayed to Heaven to strengthen his mind to support his
inexpressible sensations. I am overwhelmed with obligation! said he: oh, best
of friends, teach me, like you, to make my actions speak for me! -- Enough,
Edmund, I know your heart, and that is my security. My Lord, speak to him, and
bring him to himself; by behaving coldly to him, if you can. The Baron said, I
must not trust myself with you, you make a child of me! I will only add, Gain
my son Robert's favor, and be assured of mine: I owe some respect to the heir
of my family; he is brave, honest, and sincere; your enemies are separated from
him, you have William's influence in your (...); make one effort, and let me
know the result. Edmund kissed his hand in transports of joy and gratitude. --
I will not los^ a moment, said he; I fly to obey your commands.

Edmund went immediately to his friend William and related all that had passed
between the Baron, Sir Philip, and himself. William promised him his interest
in the warmest manner: he recapitulated all that had passed in the Castle since
his departure; but he guarded his sister's delicacy, till it should be resolved
to give way to his address. They both consulted young Clifford, who had
conceived an affection to Edmund for his amiable qualities, and to William for
his generous friendship for him. He promised them his assistance, as Sir Robert
seemed desirous to cultivate his friendship. Accordingly, they both attacked
him with the whole artillery of friendship and persuasion. Clifford urged the
merits of Edmund, and the advantages of his alliance; William enforced his
arguments by a retrospect of Edmund's past life; and observed that every
obstacle thrown in his way had brought his enemies to shame, and increase of
honor to himself. -- I say nothing, continued he, of his noble qualities and
affectionate heart: those who have been so many years his companions, can want
no proofs of it. -- We know your attachment to him, Sir, said Robert; and in
consequence, your partiality. -- Nay, replied William, you are sensible of the
truth of my assertions; and, I am confident, would have loved him yourself, but
for the insinuation of his enemies: but if he should make good his assertions,
even you must be convinced of his veracity. -- And you would have my father
give him your sister upon this uncertainty? -- No, Sir, but upon these
conditions. -- But suppose he does not make them good? -- Then I will be of
your party, and give up his interest. -- Very well, Sir; my father may do as he
pleases; but I cannot agree to give my sister to one who has always stood in
the way of our family, and now turns us out of our own house.

I am sorry, brother, you see his pretensions in so wrong a light; but if you
think there is any imposture in the case, go with us, and be a witness of all
that passes. -- No, not I; if Edmund is to be master of the castle, I will
never set my foot in it. -- This matter, said Mr. Clifford, must be left to
time, which has brought stranger things to pass. Sir Robert's honor and good
sense will enable him to subdue his prejudices, and to judge impartially. They
took leave, and went to make preparations for their journey.

Edmund made his report of Sir Robert's inflexibility to his father, in
presence of Sir Philip; who, again, ventured to urge the Baron on his favorite
subject. -- It becomes me to wait for the further proofs, said he; but, if they
are as clear as I expect, I will not be inexorable to your wishes: say nothing
more on this subject till the return of the commissioners. They were profuse in
their acknowledgments of his goodness.

Edmund took a tender leave of his two paternal friends: -- When, said he, I
take possession of my inheritance, I must hope for the company of you both to
complete my happiness. -- Of me, said Sir Philip, you may be certain; and, as
far as my influence reaches, of the Baron. -- He was silent, Edmund assured
them of his constant prayers for their happiness.

Soon after, the commissioners, with Edmund, set out for Lovel Castle: and the
following day the Lord Clifford set out for his own house, with Baron Fitz-Owen
and his son. The nominal Baron was carried with them, very much against his
will. Sir Philip Harclay was invited to go with them by Lord Clifford, who
declared his presence necessary to bring things to a conclusion. They all
joined in acknowledging their obligations to Lord Graham's generous
hospitality, and besought him to accompany them; he consented, on condition
they would allow him to go to and fro, as his duty should call him (...).

Lord Clifford received them with the greatest hospitality, and presented them
to his Lady, and three daughters, who are in the bloom of youth and beauty.
They (...) their time very pleasantly, excepting the criminal, who continued
gloomy and reserved, (...) declined company.

In the mean time, the commissioners proceeded on their journey. When they were
within a day's distance from the castle, Mr. William and his servant put
forward, and arrived several hours before the rest, to make preparations for
their reception. His sister and brother received them with open arms, and
inquired eagerly after the event of the journey to the North. He gave them a
brief account of every thing that had happened to their uncle; adding, but this
is not all: Sir Philip has brought a young man who he pretends is the son of
the late Lord Lovel, and claims his estate and title. This person is on his
journey hither, with several others who are commissioned to inquire into
certain particulars, to confirm his pretensions: -- If he make good his claim
my father will surrender the Castle and estate into his hands. -- Sir Philip
and my Lord have many points to settle; he has proposed a compromise, that you,
my sister, ought to know, because it nearly concerns you. -- Me! brother
William; pray explain yourself. -- Why, he proposes that, in lieu of arrears
and, other expectations, my father shall give his dear Emma to the heir of
Lovel, in full of all demands. -- She changed color. -- Holy Mary! said she;
and does my father agree to this proposal? He is not very (...) to it; but Sir
Robert refuses his consent: However, I have given him my interest with you. --
Have you indeed? What! a stranger, perhaps an impostor, who comes to turn us
out of our dwelling? -- Have patience, my Emma! see this young man without
prejudice, and perhaps you will like him as well as I do. -- I am surprised at
you, William! -- Dear Emma, I cannot bear to see you uneasy. Think of the man
who of all others you would wish to see in a situation to ask you of your
father, and expect to see your wishes realized. -- Impossible! said she! --
Nothing is impossible, my dear: let us be prudent and all will end happily. You
must help me to receive and entertain these commissioners. I expect a very
solemn scene; but when that is once got over, happier hours than the past will
succeed. We shall first visit the haunted apartment; you, my sister, will keep
in your own till I shall send for you. I go now to give orders to the servants.
He went and ordered them to be in waiting; and himself and his youngest
brother, stood in readiness to receive them.

The sound of the horn announced the arrival of the commissioners; at the same
instant a sudden gust of wind arose, and the outward gates flew open. They
entered the courtyard, and the great folding-doors into the hall were opened
without any assistance. The moment Edmund entered the hall, every door in the
house flew open; the servants all rushed into the hall, and fear was written on
their countenances; Joseph only was undaunted. -- These doors, said he, open of
their own accord to receive their master! this is (...) indeed! Edmund was soon
apprised of what had happened. -- I accept the omen! said he. Gentlemen, let us
go forward to the apartment^ let us finish the work of fate! I will lead the
way. He went on to the apartment, followed by all present. -- Open the
shutters, said he, the daylight shall no longer be excluded here; the deeds of
darkness shall now be brought to light.

They descended the staircase; every door was open, till they came to the
fatal closet. Edmund called to Mr. William: -- Approach, my friend, and behold
the door your family overlooked! They came forward; he drew the key out of his
bosom, and unlocked the door; he made them observe that the boards were all
loose; he then called to his servants, and bid them remove every thing out of
the closet. While they were doing this, Edmund showed them the breast plate all
stained with blood; he then called to Joseph: -- Do you know whose was this
suit of armor? -- It was my Lord's, said Joseph; the late Lord Lovel; I have
seen him wear it.

Edmund bade them bring shovels and remove the earth. While they were gone, he
desired Oswald to repeat all that had passed the night they sat up together in
that apartment, which he did till the servants returned. They threw out the
earth, while the by standers in solemn silence waited the event. After some
time and labor they struck against something. They proceeded till they
discovered a large trunk, which with some difficulty they drew out. It had been
corded round, but the cords were rotted to dust. They opened it, and found a
skeleton, which appeared to have been tied neck and heels together, and forced
into the trunk. -- Behold, said Edmund, the bones of him to whom I owe my
birth! The priest from Lord Graham's advanced. -- This is undoubtedly the body
of Lord Lovel; I heard his kinsman confess the manner in which he was interred.
Let this awful spectacle be a lesson to all present, that though wickedness may
triumph for a season, a day of retribution will come! Oswald exclaimed, --
Behold the day of retribution! of triumph to the innocent, of shame and
confusion to the wicked.

The young gentlemen declared that Edmund had made good his assertions; what
then, said they, remains? I propose, said Lord Graham's priest, that an account
be written of this discovery, and signed by all the witnesses present; that an
attested copy be lest in the hands of this gentleman, and the original be sent
to the Barons and Sir Philip Harclay, to convince them of the truth of it.

Mr. Clifford then desired Edmund to proceed in his own way. -- The first thing
I proprose to do, said he, is to have a coffin made for these honored remains;
I trust to find the bones of my other p^^ent, and to inter them all together in
consecrated ground. Unfortunate pair! you shall at last rest together! your son
shall pay the last duties to your ashes! He stopped to shed tears, and none
present but paid this tribute to their misfortunes. Edmund recovered his voice
and proceeded -- My next request is, that Father Oswald and this reverend
father, with whoever else the gentlemen shall appoint, will send for Andrew and
Margery Twyford, and examine them concerning the circumstances of my birth, and
the death and burial of my unfortunate mother. -- It shall be done, said Mr.
William; but first let me entreat you to come with me and take some refreshment
after your journey, for you must be fatigued: after dinner we will proceed in
the inquiry.

They all followed him into the great hall, where they were entertained with
great hospitality, and Mr. William did the honors in his father's name.
Edmund's heart was deeply affected, and the solemnity of his deportment bore
witness to his sincerity; but it was a manly sorrow, that did not make him
neglect his duty to his friends or himself. He inquired after the health of the
Lady Emma. -- She is well, said William; and as much your friend as ever.
Edmund bowed in silence.

After dinner the commissioners sent for Andrew and his wife, and examined them
separately, and found their accounts agreed together and were in substance the
same as Oswald and Edmund had before related, separately also. The
commissioners observed, that there could be no collusion between them, and that
the proofs were indisputable. They kept the foster parents all night; and the
next day Andrew directed them to the place where the Lady Lovel was buried,
between two trees which he had marked for a memorial. They collected the bones
and carried them to the Castle, where Edmund caused a stately coffin to be made
for the remains of the unfortunate pair. The two priests obtained leave to look
in the coffin buried in the church, and found nothing but stones and earth in
it. The commissioners then declared they were fully satisfied of the reality of
Edmund's pretensions.

The two priests were employed in drawing up a circumstantial account of these
discoveries, in order to make their report to the Barons at their return. In
the mean time Mr. William took an opportunity to introduce Edmund to his
sister. -- My Emma, said he, the heir of Lovel is desirous to pay his respects
to you. They were both in apparent confusion; but Edmund's wore off, and Emma's
increased. -- I have been long desirous, said he, to pay my respects to the
Lady whom I most honor, but unavoidable duties have detained me; when these
are fully paid, it is my wish to devote the remainder of my life to Lady Emma!
-- Are you, then, the heir of Lovel? -- I am, Madam; and am also the man in
whose behalf I once presumed to speak. -- It Is very strange indeed! -- It is
so, Madam, to myself; but time, that reconciles us to all things, will I hope,
render this change in my situation familiar to you. William said, -- You are
both well acquainted with the wishes of my heart; but my advice is, that you do
not encourage a farther intimacy till my Lord's determination be fully known.
-- You may dispose of me as you please, said Edmund; but I cannot help
declaring my wishes; yet I will submit to my Lord's sentence, though he should
doom me to despair.

From this period, the young pair behaved with solemn respect to each other,
but with apparent reserve. The young Lady sometimes appeared in company, but
oftener chose to be in her own apartment, where she began to believe and hope
for the completion of her wishes. The uncertainty of the Baron's determination,
threw an air of anxiety over Edmund's face: his friend William, by the most
tender care and attention, strove to dispel his fears, and encourage his hopes;
but he waited with impatience for the return of the commissioners, and the
decision of his fate.

While these things passed at the Castle of Lovel, the nominal Baron recovered
his health and strength at the house of Lord Clifford: In the same proportion
he grew more shy and reserved, avoided the company of his brother and nephew,
and was frequently shut up with his two servants. Sir Robert Fitz-Owen made
several attempts to gain his confidence, but in vain; he was equally shy to him
as the rest. M. Zadisky observed his motions with the penetration for which his
countrymen have been distinguished in all ages: He communicated his suspicions
to Sir Philip and the Barons, giving it as his opinion, that the criminal was
meditating an escape. They asked, what he thought was to be done? Zadisky
offered to watch him in turn with another person, and to lie in wait for him:
he also proposed, that horses should be kept in readiness, and men to mount
them, without knowledge of the service they were to be employed in. The Barons
agreed to leave the whole management of this affair to Zadisky. He took his
measures so well, that he intercepted the three fugitives in the fields
adjoining to the house, and brought them all prisoners. They confined them
separately, while the Lords and gentlemen consulted how to dispose of them.

Sir Philip applied to Lord Fitz-Owen, who begged leave to be silent: I have
nothing, said he, to offer in favor of this bad man; and I cannot propose
harsher measures with so near a relation. Zadisky then begged to be heard. You
can no longer have any reliance upon the word of a man who has forfeited all
pretensions to honor and sincerity. I have long wished to revisit once more my
native country, and to inquire after some very dear friends I left there: I
will undertake to convey this man to a very distant part of the world, where it
will be out of his power to do further mischief, and free his relations from an
ungrateful charge, unless you should rather choose to bring him to punishment
here. Lord Clifford approved of the proposal; Lord Fitz-Owen remained silent,
but showed no marks of disapprobation.

Sir Philip objected to parting with his friend; but Zadisky assured him he had
particular reasons for returning to the Holy Land, of which he should be judge
hereafter. Sir Philip desired the Lord Fitz-Owen to give him his company to the
criminal's apartment, saying, we will have one more conversation with him, and
that shall decide his fate. They found him silent and sullen, and he refused to
answer their questions. -- Sir Philip then bespoke him -- After the proofs you
have given of your falsehood and insincerity, we can no longer have any
reliance upon you, nor faith in your fulfilling the conditions of our
agreement; I will therefore, once more make you a proposal that shall still
leave you indebted to our clemency. You shall banish yourself from England for
ever, and go in pilgrimage to the Holy Land, with such companions as we shall
appoint; or secondly, you shall enter directly into a monastery, and there be
shut up for life; or, thirdly if you refuse both these offers, I will go
directly to Court, and throw myself at the feet of my Sovereign, relate the
whole story of your wicked life and actions, and demand vengeance upon your
head. The King is too good and pious to let such villainy go unpunished; he
will bring you to public shame and punishment: And be you assured, if I begin
this prosecution, I will pursue it to the utmost. I appeal to your worthy
brother for the justice of my proceeding. I reason no more with you, I only
declare my resolution. I wait your answer one hour, and the next I put in
execution whatever you shall oblige me to determine. So saying, they retired,
and left him to reflect and to resolve. At the expiration of the hour they sent
Zadisky to receive his answer; he insinuated to him the generosity and charity
of Sir Philip and the Lords, and the certainty of their resolutions, and begged
him to take care what answer he returned, for that his fate depended on it. He
kept silent several minutes, resentment and despair were painted on his visage;
at length ^e spoke:

Tell my proud enemies that I prefer banishment to death, infamy, or a life of
solitude. You have chosen well, said Zadisky. To a wise man all countries are
alike; it shall be my care to make mine agreeable to you. -- Are you then the
person chosen for my companion? -- I am, Sir; and you may judge by that
circumstance, that those whom you call your enemies, are not so in effect.
Farewell, Sir; I go to prepare for our departure.

Zadisky went and made his report, and then set immediately about his
preparations. He chose two active young men for his attendants; and gave them
directions to keep a strict eye upon their charge, for that they should be
accountable if he should escape them.

In the mean time the Baron Fitz-Owen had several conferences with his brother:
he endeavored to make him sensible of his crimes, and of the justice and
clemency of his conqueror; but he was moody and reserved to him as to the rest.
Sir Philip Harclay obliged him to surrender his worldly estates into the hands
of Lord Fitz-Owen: A writing was drawn up for that purpose, and executed in the
presence of them all. Lord Fitz-Owen engaged to allow him an annual sum, and to
advance money for the expenses of his voyage. He spoke to him in the most
affectionate manner, but he refused his embrace: -- You will have nothing to
regret, said he, haughtily; for the gain is yours. Sir Philip conjured Zadisky
to return to him again; who answered, -- I will either return, or give such
reasons for my stay, as you shall approve. I will-send a messenger to acquaint
you with my arrival in Syria, and with such other particulars as I shall judge
interesting to you and yours. In the mean time remember me in your prayers, and
preserve for me those sentiments of friendship and esteem, that I have always
deemed one of the chief honors and blessings of my life. -- Commend my love
and duty to your adopted son; he will more than supply my absence, and be the
comfort of your old age. Adieu, best and noblest of friends! -- They took a
tender leave of each other, not without tears on both sides.

The travelers set out directly for a distant seaport, where they heard of a
ship bound for the Levant, in which they embarked and proceeded on their voyage.

The commissioners arrived at Lord Clifford's a few days after the departure of
the adventurers. They gave a minute account of their commission, and expressed
themselves entirely satisfied of the justice of Edmund's pretensions; they gave
an account in writing of all that they had been eyewitnesses to, and ventured
to urge the Baron Fitz-Owen on the subject of Edmund's wishes. The Baron was
already disposed in his favor; his mind was employed in the future
establishment of his family. During their residence at Lord Clifford's, his
eldest son Sir Robert had cast his eye upon the eldest daughter of that
nobleman, and he besought his father to ask her in marriage for him. The Baron
was pleased with the alliance, and took the first opportunity to mention it to
Lord Clifford; who answered him pleasantly, -- I will give my daughter to your
son, upon condition that you will give yours to the heir of Lovel. The Baron
looked serious: Lord Clifford went on -- I like that young man so well, that I
would accept him for a son-in-law, if he asked me for my daughter: and if I
have any influence with you, I will use it in his behalf. -- A powerful
solicitor indeed! said the Baron; but you know my eldest son (...) reluctance
to it; if he consents, so will I. -- He shall consent, said Lord Clifford, or
he shall have no daughter of mine. Let him subdue his prejudices, and then I
will lay aside my scruples. -- But, my Lord, replied the Baron, if I can obtain
his free consent, it will be the best for all: I will try once more, and if he
will not, I will leave it wholly to your management.

When the noble company were all assembled, Sir Philip Harclay revived the
subject, and besought the Lord Fitz-Owen to put an end to the work he had
begun, by confirming Edmund's happiness. The Baron rose up and thus spoke: --
The proofs of Edmund's noble birth, the still stronger ones of his excellent
endowments and qualities, the solicitations of so many noble friends in his
behalf, have altogether determined me in his favor; and I hope to do justice
to his merit, without detriment to my other children: I am resolved to make
them all as happy as my power will allow me to do. Lord Clifford has been so
gracious to promise his fair daughter to my son Robert, upon certain
conditions, that I will take upon me to ratify, and which will render my son
worthy of the happiness that awaits him. My children are the undoubted heirs of
my unhappy brother, Lovel; you, my son, shall therefore immediately take
possession of your Uncle's house and estate, only obliging you to pay to each
of your younger brothers the sum of one thousand pounds; on this condition, I
will secure that estate to you and your heirs for ever. I will, by my own act
and deed, surrender the Castle and estate of Lovel to the right owner, and at
the same time marry him to my daughter. I will settle a proper allowance upon
my two younger sons, and dispose of what remains by a will and testament; and
then I shall have done all my business in this world, and shall have nothing to
do but prepare for the next.

Oh, my father! said Sir Robert, I cannot bear your generosity; you would give
away all to others, and reserve nothing for yourself. -- Not so, my son, said
the Baron: I will repair my old castle in Wales, and reside there. I will visit
my children, and be visited by them: I will enjoy their happiness, and by that
means increase my own; whether I look backwards or forwards, I shall have
nothing to do but rejoice, and be thankful to Heaven that has given me so many
blessings; I shall have the comfortable reflection of having discharged my
duties as a citizen, a husband, a father, a friend; and whenever I am summoned
away from this world, I shall die content.

Sir Robert came forward with tears on his cheeks; he kneeled to his father --
Best of parents, and of men! said he; you have subdued a heart that has been
too refractory to your will: you have this day made me sensible how much I owe
to your goodness and forbearance with me. Forgive me what is past, and from
henceforward dispose of me; I will have no will but yours, no ambition but to
be worthy of the name of your son. -- And this day, said the Baron, do I enjoy
the true happiness of a father! Rise, my son, and take possession of the first
place in my affection without reserve. They embraced with tears on both sides:
The company rose, and congratulated both father and son. The Baron presented
his son to Lord Clifford, who embraced him, and said, -- You shall have my
daughter, for I see that you deserve her.

Sir Philip Harclay approached; the Baron gave his son's hand to the knight:
Love and respect that good man, said he; deserve his friendship, and you will
obtain it. Nothing but congratulations were heard on all sides.

When the joy was in some degree reduced to composure, Sir Philip proposed that
they should begin to execute the schemes of happiness they had planned. He
proposed that my Lord Fitz-Owen should go with him to the Castle of Lovel, and
settle the family there. The Baron consented; and both together invited such of
the company, as liked it, to (...) company them thither. It was agreed that a
nephew of Lord Graham's, another of Lord Clifford's, two gentlemen, friends of
Sir Philip Harclay, and father Oswald, should be of the party; together with
several of Sir Philip's dependants and domestics, and the attendants on the
rest. Lord Fitz-Owen gave orders for their speedy departure. Lord Graham and
his friends took leave of them, in order to return to his own home; but, before
he went he engaged his eldest nephew and heir to the second daughter of the
Lord Clifford: Sir Robert offered himself to the eldest, who modestly received
his address, and made no objection to his proposal. The fathers confirmed their
engagement.

Lord Fitz-Owen promised to return to the celebration of the marriage; in the
mean time he ordered his son to go and take possession of his Uncle's house,
and to settle his household: He invited young Clifford and some other
gentlemen, to go with him. The company separated with regret, and with many
promises of friendship on all sides; and the gentlemen of the North were to
cultivate the good neighborhood on both sides of the borders.

Sir Philip Harclay and the Baron Fitz Owen with their friends and attendants,
set forwards for the Castle of Lovel; a servant went before at full speed, to
acquaint the family of their approach. Edmund was in great anxiety of mind, now
the crisis of his fate was near at ^and: He inquired of the messenger, who were
of the party? and finding that Sir Philip Harclay was there, and that Sir
Robert Fitz-Owen staid in the North, his hopes rose above his ^ears. Mr.
William, attended by a servant, rode forward to meet them; he desired Edmund to
stay and receive them. Edmund was under some difficulty with regard to his
behavior to the lovely Emma: a thousand times his heart rose to his lips, as
often he suppressed his emotions; they both sighed frequently, said little,
thought much, and wished for the event. Master Walter was too young to partake
of their anxieties, but he wished for the arrival of his father to end them.

Mr. William's impatience spurred him on to meet his father; as soon as he saw
him he rode up directly to him: My dear father, you are welcome home! said he.
-- I think not, Sir, said the Baron, and looked serious. -- Why so, My Lord?
said William. -- Because it is no longer mine but another man's home, answered
he, and I must receive my welcome from him. -- Meaning Edmund? said William. --
Whom else can it be? -- Ah, my Lord! he is your creature, your servant; he puts
his fate in your hands, and will submit to your pleasure in all things! -- Why
comes he not to meet us? said the Baron. -- His fears prevent him, said
William; but speak the word and I will fetch him. -- No, said the Baron, we
will wait on him. -- William looked confused: Is Edmund so unfortunate, said
he, as to have incurred your displeasure? Sir Philip Harclay advanced and laid
his hand on William's saddle. -- Generous impatience! noble youth! said he;
look round you, and see if you can discover in this company one enemy of your
friend! Leave to your excellent father the time and manner of explaining
himself; he only can do justice to his own sentiments. The Baron smiled on Sir
Philip: William's countenance cleared up; they went forward and soon arrived at
the castle of Lovel.

Edmund was walking to and fro in the hall, when he heard the horn that
announced their arrival; his emotions were so great that he could hardly
support them. The Baron and Sir Philip entered the hall hand in hand; Edmund
threw himself at their feet, and embraced their knees, but could not utter a
word. They raised him between them, and strove to encourage him: but he threw
himself into the arms of Sir Philip Harclay, deprived of strength and almost of
life. They supported him to a seat, where he recovered by degrees, but had no
power to speak his feelings; he looked up to his benefactors in the most
affecting manner, he laid his hand upon his bosom, but was still silent.
Compose yourself, my dear son, said Sir Philip; you are in the arms of your
best friends. Look up to the happiness that awaits you; enjoy the blessings
that Heaven sends you; lift up your heart in gratitude to the Creator, and
think less of what you owe to the creature! You will have time enough to pay us
your acknowledgments hereafter.

The company came round them, the servants flocked into the hall, shouts of joy
were heard on all sides; the Baron came and took Edmund's hand: Rise, Sir, said
he, and do the honors of your house! it is yours from this day: We are your
guests, and expect from you our welcome! Edmund kneeled to the Baron, he spoke
with a faultering voice -- My Lord, I am yours! all that I have is at your
devotion! dispose of me as it pleases you best. The Baron embraced him with the
greatest affection: Look round you, said he, and salute your friends; these
gentlemen came hither to do you honor. Edmund revived, he embraced and
welcomed the gentlemen, Father Oswald received his embrace with peculiar
affection, and gave him his benediction in a most affecting manner. Edmund
exclaimed -- Pray for me, father! that I may bear all these blessings with
gratitude and moderation! He then saluted and shook hands with all the
servants, not omitting the meanest; he distinguished Joseph by a cordial
embrace, he called him his dear friend: Now, said he, I can return your
friendship, and I am proud to acknowledge it! The old man with a faultering
voice, cried out -- Now I have lived long enough! I have seen my master's son
acknowledged for the heir of Lovel! the hall echoed with his words: Long live
the heir of Lovel!

The Baron took Edmund's hands in his own: Let us retire from this crowd, said
he; we have business of a more private nature to transact. He led to the
parlour, followed by Sir Philip and the other gentlemen. Where are my other
children? said he. William retired, and presently returned with his brother,
and sister. They kneeled to their father, who raised and embraced them. -- He
then called out, William! -- Edmund! -- come and receive my blessing also: They
approached hand in hand, they kneeled, and he gave them a solemn benediction --
Your friendship deserves our praise, my children; love each other always! and
may heaven pour down its choicest blessings upon your heads! They rose and
embraced in silent raptures of joy. Edmund presented his friend to Sir Philip:
I understand you, said he; this Gentleman was my first acquaintance of this
family, he has a title to the second place in my heart: I shall tell him, at
more leisure, how much I love and honor him for his own sake as well as yours.
He embraced the youth, and desired his friendship.

Come hither, my Emma! said the Baron. She approached, with tears on her
cheeks, sweetly blushing, like the damask rose, wet ^^th the dew of the
morning. I must ask you a serious question, my child; answer me with the same
sincerity you would to Heaven. You see this young man, the heir of Lovel! You
have known him long; consult your own heart, and tell me whether you have any
objection to receive him for a husband. I have promised to all this company to
give you to him; but upon condition that you approve him: I think him worthy of
you; and, whether you accept him or not, he shall ever be to me a son; but
Heaven forbid that I should compel my child to give her hand where she cannot
bestow her heart! Speak freely, and decide this point for me and for yourself.
The (...) Emma blushed, and was under some confusion; her virgin modesty
prevented her speaking for some moments. Edmund trembled; he leaned upon
William's shoulder to support himself. Emma cast her eye upon him, she saw his
emotion, and hastened to relieve him; she thus spoke, in a soft voice which
gathered strength as she proceeded -- My Lord and father's goodness has always
prevented my wishes; I am the happiest of all children, in being able to obey
his commands, without offering violence to my own inclinations: As I am called
upon in this public manner, it is but justice to this gentleman's merit to
declare, that, were I at liberty to choose a husband from all the world, he
only should be my choice, who, I can say, with joy, is my father's also. Edmund
bowed low, he advanced toward her; the Baron took his daughter's hand, and
presented it to him; he kneeled upon one knee, he took her hand, kissed it, and
pressed it to his bosom: the Baron embraced and blessed them; he presented them
to Sir Philip Harclay -- Receive and acknowledge your children! said he. -- I
do receive them as the gift of heaven! said the noble knight; they are as much
mine as if I had begotten them: All that I have is theirs, and shall descend to
their children for ever. A fresh scene of congratulation ensued; and the hearts
of all the auditors were too much engaged to be able soon to return to the case
and tranquillity of common life.

After they had refreshed themselves, and recovered from the emotions they had
sustained on this interesting occasion, Edmund thus addressed the Baron: -- On
the brink of happiness I must claim your attention to a melancholy subject. The
bones of both my parents lie unburied in this house; permit me, my honored
Lord, to perform my last duties to them, and the remainder of my life shall be
devoted to you and yours. -- Certainly, said the Baron? why have you not
interred them? -- My Lord, I waited for your arrival, that you might be
certified of the reality, and that no doubts might remain. -- I have no doubts,
said the Baron: Alas! both the crime and punishment of the offender leave no
room for them! -- He sighed. -- Let us now put an end to this affair; and, if
possible, forget them for ever.

If it will not be too painful to you, my Lord, I would entreat you, with these
gentlemen our friends, to follow me into the east apartment, the scene of my
parents woes, and yet the dawning of my better hopes.

They rose to attend him; he committed the Lady Emma to the ca^e of her
youngest brother, observing that the scene was too solemn for a Lady to be
present at it. They proceeded to the apartment; he showed the Baron the fatal
closet, and the place where the bones were found, also the trunk that contained
them; he recapitulated all that passed before their arrival; he showed them the
coffin where the bones of the unfortunate pair were deposited; He then desired
the Baron to give orders for their interment. No, replied he, it belongs to you
to order, and every one here is ready to perform it. Edmund then desired father
Oswald to give notice to the Friars of the Monastery of St. Augustine, that with
their permission, the funeral should be solemnized there, and the bones
interred in the church. He also gave orders that the closet should be floored,
and the apartment repaired, and put in order. He then returned to the other
side of the castle.

Preparations being made for the funeral, it was performed a few days after.
Edmund attended in person as chief mourner, Sir Philip Harclay as the second;
Joseph desired he might assist as servant to the deceased: They were followed
by most of the people of the village. The story was now become public, and
every one blessed Edmund for the piety and devotion with which he performed the
last duties to his parents. -- Edmund appeared in deep mourning: the week
after, he assisted at a mass for the repose of the deceased.

Sir Philip Harclay ordered a monument to be erected to the memory of his
friends, with the following inscription:

Pray for the souls of Arthur Lord Lovele and Marie his wife, who were cut
off in the flowere of their youth, by the trecherye and cruelty of their
near kinnesmanne. Edmunde their only son, one and twenty years after
their death, by the direction of Heavenne, made the discoverye of the mannere
of their death, and at the same time proved his own ^^the. He collected
their bones together, and interred them in this place: -- A warning and proof
to late posterity, of the justice of Providence, and the certainty of
Retribution.

The Sunday after the funeral, Edmund threw off his mourning, and appeared in a
dress suitable to his condition. He received the compliments of his friends
with ease and cheerfulness, and began to enjoy his happiness. He asked an
audience of his fair mistress, and was permitted to declare the passion he had
so long stifled in his own bosom. She gave him a favorable hearing, and in a
short time confessed that she had suffered equally in that suspense that was so
grievous to him. They engaged themselves by mutual vows to each other, and only
waited the Baron's pleasure to complete their happiness; every cloud was
vanished from their brows, and sweet tranquillity took possession of their
bosoms. Their friends shared their happiness; William and Edmund renewed their
vows of everlasting friendship, and promised to be as much together as
William's other duties would permit.

The Baron once more summoned all his company together; he told Edmund all that
had passed relating to his brother-in-law, his exile, and the pilgrimage of
Zadisky; he then related the circumstances of Sir Robert's engagement to Lord
Clifford's daughter, his establishment in his Uncle's seat, and his own
obligations to return time enough to be present at the marriage: But before I
go, said he, I will give my daughter to the heir of Lovel, and then I shall
have discharged my duty to him and my promise to Sir Philip Harclay.

You have nobly performed both, said Sir Philip, and whenever you depart I
shall be your companion. -- What, said Edmund, am I to be deprived of both my
fathers at once? My honored Lord, you have given away two houses, where do you
intend to reside? -- No matter, said the Baron; I know I shall be welcome to
both. -- My dear lord, said Edmund, stay here and be still the Master; I shall
be proud to be under your command, and to be your servant as well as your son!
-- No, Edmund, said the Baron, that would not now be proper; this is your
castle, you are its Lord and Master, and it is incumbent on you to show
yourself worthy of the great things Providence has done for you. -- How shall
I, a young man, acquit myself of so many duties as will be upon me, without the
advice and assistance of my two paternal friends? Oh, Sir Philip, will you too
leave me? once you gave me hopes -- he stopped, greatly affected. Sir Philip
said, tell me truly, Edmund, do you realy desire that I should live with you?
-- As truly, Sir, as I desire life and happiness! -- Then, my dear child, I
will live and die with you! They embraced with tears of affection, and Edmund
was all joy and gratitude. My good Lord, said Sir Philip, you have disposed of
two houses, and have none ready to receive you; will you accept of mine? it is
much at your service, and its being in the same county with your eldest son,
will be an inducement to you to reside there. The Baron caught Sir Philip's
hand -- Noble Sir, I thank you, and I will embrace your kind offer; I will be
your tenant for the present; my castle in Wales shall be put in repair, in the
mean time; if I do not reside there, it will be an establishment for one of my
younger sons: But what will you do with your old soldiers and dependants? -- My
Lord, I will never cast them off. There is another house on my estate that has
been shut up many years; I will have it repaired and furnished properly for the
reception of my old men: I will endow it with a certain sum to be paid
annually, and will appoint a steward to manage their revenue; I will continue
it during the lives of the first inhabitants, and after that I shall leave it
to my son here, to do as he pleases. -- Your son, said Edmund, will make it the
business of his life to act worthy of such a father. -- Enough, said Sir
Philip, I am satisfied that you will. I purpose to reside myself in that very
apartment which my dear friend your father inhabited; I will tread in his
footsteps, and think he sees me acting his part in his son's family. I will be
attended by my own servants; and, whenever you desire it, I will give you my
company; your joys, your griefs shall be mine, I shall hold your children in my
arms, and their prattle shall amuse my old age: And, as my last earthly wish,
your hands shall close my eyes. -- Long, very long, said Edmund (with eyes and
hands lifted up) may it be ere I perform so sad a duty! -- Long and happy may
you live together, said the Baron! I will hope to see you sometimes, and to
claim a share in your blessings. But let us give no more tears to sorrow, the
rest shall be joy and transport. The first step we shall take shall be to marry
our Edmund; I will give orders for the celebration, and they shall be the last
orders I shall give in this house. They then separated, and went to prepare for
the approaching solemnity.

Sir Philip and the Baron had a private conference concerning Edmund's assuming
the name and title of Lovel. I am resolved, said Sir Philip, to go to the King;
to acquaint him briefly with Edmund's history; I will request that he may be
called up to parliament by a writ, for there is no need of a new patent, he
being the true inheritor; in the mean time he shall assume the name, arms, and
title, and I will answer any one that shall dispute his right to them. Sir
Philip then declared his resolution to set out with the Baron at his departure,
and to settle all his other affairs before he returned to take up his residence
at the Castle.

A few days after, the marriage was celebrated, to the entire satisfaction of
all parties. The Baron ordered the doors to be thrown open, and the house free
for all comers; with every token of joy and festivity. Edmund appeared full of
joy without levity, and of mirth without extravagance; he received the
congratulations of his friends, with ease, freedom, and vivacity. He sent for
his foster father and mother, who began to think themselves neglected, as he
had been so deeply engaged in affairs of more consequence, that he had not been
particularly attentive to them; he made them come into the great hall, and
presented them to his Lady.

These, said he, are the good people to whom I am, under God, indebted for my
present happiness; they were my first benefactors; I was obliged to them for
food and sustenance in my childhood, and this good woman nourished my infancy
at her own breast. The Lady received them graciously, and saluted Margery.
Andrew kneeled down, and, with great humility, begged Edmund's pardon for his
treatment of him in his childhood. I heartily forgive you, said he, and I will
excuse you to yourself; it was natural for you to look upon me as an intruder,
that was eating your children's bread; you saved my life, and afterward you
sustained it by your food and raiment: I ought to have maintained myself, and
to have contributed to your maintenance. But, besides this, your treatment of
me was the first of my preferment; it recommended me to the notice of this
noble family: Every thing th^^ happened to me since, has been a step to my
present state of honor and happiness. Never man had so many benefactors as
myself; but both they, and myself, have been only instruments in the hands of
Providence, to bring about its own purposes: Let us praise God for all! I
shared your poverty and you shall share my riches; I will give you the cottage
where you dwell, and the ground about it; I will also pay you the annual sum of
ten pounds for the lives of you both; I will put out your children to manual
trades, and assist you to provide for them in their own station; and you are to
look upon this as paying a debt and not bestowing a gift: I owe you more than I
can ever pay: and, if there be any thing further in my power that will
contribute to your happiness, you can ask nothing in reason that I will deny
you.

Andrew hid his face: I cannot bear it! said he: Oh what a brute was I, to such
a child as this! I shall never forgive myself! -- You must indeed, my friend,
for I forgive and thank you. Andrew retired back, but Margery came forward; she
looked earnestly on Edmund, she then threw her arms about his neck, and wept
aloud -- My precious child! my lovely babe! thank God, I have lived to see this
day! I will rejoice in your good fortune, and your bounty to us, but, I must
ask one more ^avour yet; that I may sometimes come hither and behold that
gracious countenance, and thank God that I was honored so far as to give thee
food from my own breast, and to bring thee up to be a blessing to me, and to
all that know thee! Edmund was affected, he returned her embrace; he bade her
come to the Castle as often as she pleased, and she should always be received
as his mother; the bride saluted her, and told her the oftener she came, the
more welcome she should be. Margery and her husband retired, full of blessings
and prayers for their happiness; she gave vent to her joy, by relating to the
servants and neighbors every circumstance of Edmund's birth, infancy, and
childhood: Many a tear was dropped by the auditors, and many a prayer wafted to
Heaven for his happiness. Joseph took up the story where she left it; he told
the rising dawn of youth and virtue, darting its rays through the clouds of
obscurity, and how every stroke of envy and malignity brushed away some part of
the darkness that veiled its luster: He told the story of the haunted
apartment, and all the consequences of it; how he and Oswald conveyed the youth
away from the castle, no more to return till he came as master of it: he closed
the tale with praise to heaven for the happy discovery, that gave such an heir
to the house of Lovel; to his dependants such a Lord and Master; to mankind a
friend and benefactor. There was truly a house of joy; not that false kind, in
the midst of which there is heaviness, but that of rational creatures, grateful
to the supreme benefactor, raising their minds, by a due enjoyment of earthly
blessings, to a preparation for a more perfect state hereafter.

A few days after the wedding, the Lord Fitz-Owen began to prepare for his
journey to the north. He gave to Edmund the plate, linen, and furniture of the
Castle, the farming stock and utensils: he would have added a sum of money, but
Sir Philip stopped his hand: -- We do not forget, said he, that you have other
children, we will not suffer you to injure them; give us your blessing and
paternal affection, and we have nothing more to ask: -- I told you, my Lord,
that you and I should one day be sincere friends. -- We must be so, answered
the Baron; it is impossible to be long your enemy: We are brothers, and shall
be to our lives end.

They regulated the young man's household; the Baron gave leave to the servants
to choose their master; the elder ones followed him (except Joseph, who desired
to live with Edmund, as the chief happiness of his life;) most of the younger
ones chose the service of the youthful pair. There was a tender and
affectionate parting on all sides. Edmund besought his beloved William not to
leave him. The Baron said, he must insist on his being at his brother's
wedding, as a due attention to him; but after that he should return to the
Castle for some time.

The Baron and Sir Philip Harclay, with their train set forward. Sir Philip
went to London and obtained all he desired for his Edmund; from thence he went
into Yorkshire, and settled his affairs there, removing his pensioners to his
other house, and putting Lord Fitz-Owen in possession of his own. They had a
generous contention about the terms; but Sir Philip insisted on the Baron's
accepting the use of every thing there: You hold it in trust for a future
grandchild, said he, whom I hope to live to endow with it.

During Sir Philip's absence, the young Lord Lovel caused the haunted apartment
to be repaired and furnished for the reception of his father by adoption. He
placed his friend Joseph over all his men servants, and ordered him to forbear
his attendance; but the old man would always stand at the side-board, and feast
his eyes with the countenance of his own master's son, surrounded with honor
and happiness. John Wyatt waited upon the person of his Lord, and enjoyed his
favor without abatement. Mr. William Fitz-Owen accompanied Sir Philip Harclay
from the north country, when he returned to take up his residence at the Castle
of Lovel.

Edmund, in the arms of love and friendship, enjoyed with true relish the
blessings that surrounded him, with an heart overflowing with benevolence to
his fellow creatures, and raptures of gratitude to his creator. His Lady and
himself were examples of conjugal affection and happiness. Within a year from
his marriage she brought him forth a son and heir, whose birth renewed the joy
and congratulations of all his friends: The Baron Fitz-Owen came to the
baptism, and partook of his children's blessings. The child was called Arthur,
after the name of its grandfather.

The year following was born a second son who was called Philip Harclay; upon
him the noble Knight of that name settled his estate in Yorkshire; and by the
King's permission, he took the name and arms of that family.

The third son was called William; he inherited the fortune of his uncle of
that name, who adopted him, and made the Castle of Lovel his residence, and
died a bachelor.

The fourth son was called Edmund; the fifth Owen; and there was also one
daughter called Emma.

When time had worn out the prejudices of Sir Robert Fitz-Owen, the good old
Baron of that name proposed a marriage between his eldest son and heir, and the
daughter of Edmund Lord Lovel, which was happily concluded. The nuptials were
honored with the presence of both families; and the Old Baron was so elevated
with this happy union of his descendants, that he cried out -- Now I am ready
to die! I have lived long enough! this is the band of love that unites all my
children to me, and each other! he did not long survive this happy event; he
died full of years and honors, and his name was never mentioned but with the
deepest marks of gratitude, love and veneration. Sweet is the remembrance of
the virtuous, and happy are the descendants of such a father! they will think
on him, and emulate his virtues; they will remember him, and be ashamed to
degenerate from their ancestor.

Many years after Sir Philip Harclay settled at the Castle he received tidings
from his friend Zadisky, by one of the two servants who attended him to the
Holy Land. From him he learned that his friend had discovered, by private
advices, that he had a son living in Palestine, which was the chief motive of
his leaving England; that he had met with various adventures in pursuit of him;
that at length he found him, converted him to the Christian religion, and then
persuaded him to retire from the world into a monastery by the side of mount
Libanus; where he intended to end his days.

That Walter, commonly called Lord Lovel, had entered into the service of the
Greek Emperor, John Paleologus, not bearing to undergo a life of solitude and
retirement; that he made up a story of his being compelled to leave his native
country by his relations, for having accidentally killed one of them, and that
he was treated with great cruelty and injustice; that he had accepted a post in
the emperor's army, and was soon after married to the daughter of one of the
chief officers of it.

Zadisky foresaw, and lamented the downfall of that empire, and withdrew from
the storm he saw approaching. Finally, he bade the messenger tell Sir Philip
Harclay and his adopted son, that he should not cease to pray for them, and
desire their prayers in return.

Sir Philip desired Lord Lovel to entertain this messenger in his servive. That
good Knight lived to extreme old age in honor and happiness, and died in the
arms of his beloved Edmund: who also performed the last duties to his faithful
Joseph.

Father Oswald lived many years in the family as chaplain; he retired from
thence at length, and died in his own monastery.

Edmund Lord Lovel lived to old age, in peace, honor, and happiness, and died
in the arms of his children.

Sir Philip Harclay caused the papers relating to his son's history to be
collected together; the first part was written under his own eye in Yorkshire,
the subsequent parts by father Oswald at the Castle of Lovel. All these, when
together, furnish a striking lesson to posterity, of the overruling hand of
Providence, and the certainty of RETRIBUTION.

FINIS.
Books for Sale by Stewart and Cochran.
BIBLES with psalms and apocrypha. ditto without apocrypha. ditto school, with
psalms. ditto pocket ditto, plain and gilt. Brown's christian journal. -- on
the shorter catechism. Berrige's christian world unmasked. Brook's on the
covenant of grace. Boston's fourfold state of man -- large and small. -- 's
crook in the lot; or the sovereignty and wisdom of God in the afflictions of
men, displayed. Bunyan's pilgrims progress, with notes and plates. Same book,
small. Bunyan's holy war. -- 's Solomon's temple spiritualized. -- 's water of
life. Baxter's call to the unconverted. Blair's sermons, 3 vols. Catechism for
youth, by William Marshall, A. M. minister of the associate church, Phila.
Craghead on the sacrament of the Lord's supper. Christian remembrancer. Christ,
a christian's life. Cloud of witnesses. Carr's sermons. 2 vols. Christopher
Love's sermons. Coles' practical discourse of God's sovereignty, with other
material points derived thence, viz. of the righteousness of God, of election,
of redemption, of effectual calling, and (...) perseverance. Christ's famous
titles, and the believer's golden chain. Doddridge's rise and progress of
religion in the soul. Doddridge's hymns. David's psalms, with Henry's notes --
large and small. Davies's sermons, 2 vols. Dutton on justification.
Drillingcourt on death. Edwards on redemption. -- on the affections. Fordyce's
sermons, 2 vols. gilt. Same book, 1 vol. Family instructor. Fisher's
explanation of the shorter catechism. Guthrie's trial of a saving interest in
Christ. Hervey's meditations. Life of Col. James Gardener. -- 's hymns Owen on
the Holy Spirit, 2 vols. -- on communion with God. Pilgrim's progress. Paradise
lost, with plates. Parental duty, and early piety: by the Rev. George Jerment,
minister of the gospel, London. Religious courtship. Rowe's devout exercises.
Rural christian. Sherlock on death. Toplady on predestination. Whitefield's
sermons. Watts' lyric poems. Watts' psalms. -- hymns. Westminster confession of
faith. Willison's afflicted man's companion. -- 's explanation of the shorter
catechism. -- 's sacramental catechism. -- 's ditto meditations.
Small Chap Books.
History of the Duchess of C --. History of Cecilia. Adventures of Robinson
Crusoe. Death of Abel. History of St. Andre. Death of Cain. French Convert.
Economy of human life. Solomon's temple spiritualized. Children's friend.
Bunyan's water of life. Pelew islands. An essay on death. The adventures of
Alphonso. The history of Julia, etc. etc.

