INFIDELITY, OR THE VICTIMS OF SENTIMENT. A NOVEL, IN A SERIES OF LETTERS.

" -- IT IS NOT A SIN TO LOVE."
YOUNG. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY W. W. WOODWARD, No. 17, CHESNUT-STREET. 1797.

[ENTERED ACCORDING TO LAW.]

TO Miss Ann Louisa Bingham, THE FOLLOWING YOUTHFUL EFFUSION, IS HUMBLY
INSCRIBED,
AS AN ACKNOWLEDGMENT FOR THE DISTINGUISHED CANDOR WITH WHICH IT WAS PERUSED,
AND THE POLITENESS WITH WHICH SHE CONDESCENDED TO SANCTION ITS APPEARANCE IN
THE WORLD,

BY HER MOST DEVOTED, AND VERY HUMBLE SERVANT, SAMUEL RELF.

SUBSCRIBERS' NAMES.
A.
MR. ASHTON ALEXANDER, M. D. Baltimore, 2 copies. William Allston, South
Carolina. Mrs. Charlotte Allcorn. Mary Adgate. Mr. Samuel Anderson, jun. Hector
Aitken. -- Allen.
B.
Miss ANN LOUISA BINGHAM. Maria M. Bingham. Mrs. A. Butler. Maria Bennet. Miss
Mary S. Barclay, jun. Rebecca Bridge. Mr. Robert Bines. George Beaven. Robert
Barber. Mr. John Brannan. Joseph Boswell, Kentuckey. Reuben Burgin, Esquire.
Sheriff of Cumberland county, N. J. James Buchanan, Allegany county. Edward
Bridges.
C.
Mrs. MARGARET CLAYPOOLE. Miss T. Claypoole. R. Claypoole. Eliza Charlton.
Margaret Cox. Mr. John Claypoole, John Claiborne, 2 copies. John Chalk,
Circulating Library. William Clark, Abraham Cohen. John Carpenter. Richard
Carpenter. Thomas Cunningham. William Cobbett, 2 copies. Benjamin Champneys, M.
D. Bridgetown.
D.
Mr. ABNER DUNCAN. Isaac Davis, I. H. Dobelbower. Silas Dinsmore. Henry Donnel.
J. Duane.
E.
Mr. EBENEZER ELMER, Speaker to the Assembly of New Jersey. Mr. Eli Elmer, Esquire.
Member of the Legislature of New Jersey. John Ely, Esquire. John Ewing, Maryland.
Isaac Edwards.
F.
Mrs. F. W. FRANCIS. F. L'Faures. Mr. Samuel Fulton. William Felch. A Friend to
the Publication.
G.
Miss MARIA GRANT. General James Giles, Esquire. Bridgetown. Mr. Benjamin S. Gibbs.
Thomas Gordon. James Grant, State of Tenessee. Miss Jane Grant.
H.
Mrs. A. HENDERSON. Miss Ann Hawkins. Mrs. -- Heart, Easton. Mr. Thomas Hayward.
Silby Hickman. J. Edmund Harwood. Jacob Harman. Robert Hardwicke. Washington
Hannumat. Isaac Harris, N. J. Miss Ann Hazelwood.
J.
Mr. WILLIAM JOHNSON. William Johnston. Mr. William Jones. Micah Johnston.
Walter Jones, Maryland. Marshall Jones.
K.
Miss REBECCA KELSEY. Catherine Keppele. Mrs. R. Kemp, 2 copies. Mr. William
Kenner. Hazen Kimball. Henry L. Kean. Robert Kennedy.
L.
Miss ANN LILLIBRIDGE. Mr. Aaron Levy, 2 copies. Robert Lewis.
M.
Mrs. ANN MILLER. Anna Martin. Miss Sally M'Kean. Sarah Medford, Maryland.
Abigail Musgrave. Mr. Ephraim Morton. John Maclean, Professor of Chemistry and
Natural History in the College of Princeton. James Milnor, Esquire. John Malcolm.
Thomas C. Mease. Alexander M'Kenzie, Bridgetown. Thomas Meridith. John Murdoch.
N.
Mr. JAMES A. NEAL, Preceptor of a young Ladies' Academy. Mr. JOHN OTTO, M. D.
John Ormrod, 12 copies. Mrs. Sarah Ormrod.
P.
Mr. JOHN POOR, A. M. Principal of the Young Ladies' Accademy of Philadelphia.
George Padmore. Rowland Parry. Nathaniel Potter, M. D. David Potter,
Bridgetown. F. Pasquier. Richard Perrie, member of the Medical Society of
Philadelphia, Prince George's county, Maryland. Humphrey Peake, Alexandria.
R.
Captain JOSIAH RICH. Mr. Richard Rundle. Richard Relf, merchant, New-Orleans.
Timothy Ryan. Thomas A. Richards.
S.
Miss B. SWIFT. Mr. William Sergeant, Esquire. Thomas Stephens, 6 copies. Thomas
Smith. Robert Sewall. George Savage. B. T. Storrs.
T.
Miss MARIA THOMPSON. Major Richard B. Thompson. Mrs. Mary Thomas. Mr. James
Thackara. Joseph Tailor. William Thom. Christopher S. Thom.
V.
Captain JAMES VANNEMAN. Mr. A. Vancleve. Eli Vallette.
W.
Mrs. MARY WHARTON, Prospect Hill, near Wilmington, Delaware. Hannah Wright. --
Wright. Mr. John Woodward, jun. William W. Woodward, 12 copies. Matthew Watson.
Samuel Wakeling. Joseph Wilkinson. Samuel Wood, Bridgetown. James D. Westcott,
Alexandria. Thomas Wignell, Esquire. Jacob Waln.
Y.
Mr. JOHN YOUNG, Maryland. A Young Lady.
ADVERTISEMENT.
IN order to rescue the following Production from the imputation of arrogance
or presumption the Author begs leave to inform his Readers, the generality of
whom, he anticipates, will be of "the mild, the soft and gentle formed of
soul," that it was originally undertaken, not with the view of forming a
condensed volume for publication, but merely to fill occasionally a column in
some miscellaneous paper. The subject, however, becoming more diffusive as the
story was prosecuted, the idea of publishing was conceived, and finally
confirmed by the opinions of some flattering friends, to whose judgment the
manuscript was submitted.

IF, from the perusal of these juvenile sentiments, one remiss husband be
reclaimed to the due exercise of social virtue; -- if it pluck from the bosom
of one neglected wife a single pang; -- or if, happily, it shall draw a sordid
parent to reflection, or excite an oppressed child to the defense of nature,
the ambition of the Author will be accomplished; whatever may be the fate of
his work at the awful bar of criticism.

THE VICTIMS OF SENTIMENT.
LETTER I. TO MRS. MARIA HEARTILY.
WHITEHALL FARM.
YOUR last, containing an account of your perfect recovery, met a cordial
reception. Upon this happy occasion, dearest Maria, accept the sincere
congratulations of my affectionate heart. -- I am tempted almost to envy you
the dear object of your sublime rapture: -- the rapture of a young mother in
gazing on the offspring of her early love. From your own pleasing emotions you
may now partly conceive the comparative agony of mine, on the premature loss of
my only darling child! That heavenly babe, whose infant smiles even now live in
my memory; whose little heart seemed already to beat and glow with sentiments
of virtue and honor; whose lisping accents soothed the censure of its father's
tongue, and gave a comfort to maternal woe, was, in a very flash of thought,
snatched from my doting eyes; his lips for ever sealed; his soul transported
to the shades of innocence and bliss; leaving me a solitary monument of his
worth, by the bitter consciousness of his loss! Oh! how severely trying was
this tremendous conflict of tender, weeping nature, with stern philosophic
reason and calm religion! Oh Maria, prepare your heart for trials even as
dreadful as mine! Life itself, all its enjoyments, hang on the flying winds;
and the gentlest gale may, by Almighty dispensation, become the dreadful
messenger of destruction! Even that smiling infant, now opening to your
sanguine expectation, must one day yield the precious life it breathes; and we
ourselves experience an ageless interval of love and friendship! -- Forgive
these calamitous anticipations: May heaven continue supremely good and
bountiful; for ever withholding from your experience the miseries of which your
unhappy sister complains.

WE have but just recovered from the labor and fatigue of removing to our
newly-purchased country-seat. The description of it given by Mr. Franks, did
not in reality exceed the rural beauty and magnificence of the scene to which
we have retired for the approaching season. The dwelling house is
advantageously situated on a delightful green hill, which, besides looking over
an extensive and beautiful country, adds a peculiar grandeur and variety to the
approximate scenery. The rooms and balcony in the front are entirely shaded by
a row of willows, whose drooping bows, moved by the gentle breeze, seem to wave
in zephyrous music to the victim of solitude and grief. In such a seclusion,
blessed with the society of some feeling friend, or the livelier conversation
of you, Maria, what a period of divine luxury would be the ensuing summer! But
alas! this rural elegance, this mild "fancy of nature's handmaid," only
imparts bitterness to the reflection of my being deprived of such a companion
to participate in this expenceless grandeur.

THE surrounding country is considerably inhabited by industrious indigence.
Within a few acres of us there is a mansion, in appearance the perfect twin of
ours, the property of a merchant of eminence in Philadelphia, named Alfred,
whose family has retired thither from the noise and tumult of the city, to
spend the approaching summer. It consists only of Mrs. Alfred, a polite old
lady, an amiable daughter (Miss Fanny,) and a son, whom I have not yet seen:
From the mother and daughter I have already received several flattering marks
of complaisance, and have occasion to wish for a speedy intimacy. Miss Alfred,
now about her twenty second year, has a romantic attachment, and principally
delights to ramble, just as the sun dives into the west, among the silent
rocks, listening to the mingled noise of wooing birds, and the echoes which
ascend from the adjacent vales. She declares it is an intellectual repast
exceeding description; and at her particular request, I am soon to be a partner
in one of her evening rambles.

ON the other side of us stands an ancient and mouldering edifice, in which, I
understand, three maiden sisters reside during the sultriness of the year. I
received a notice from them this morning of their intention to spend the
afternoon with us: In my next, therefore, you shall have a particular account
of these antiquated virgins.

FROM this you will perceive that all my expectations of society, while absent
from the city, are on the Alfred family; and although this limitation at
present proves unwelcome, I anticipate a variety of pleasures from the frequent
visits of the intelligent Miss Alfred.

MY best respects to your husband: Caress your darling for me, and be assured I
remain

Your affectionate sister, CAROLINE FRANKS.

LETTER II. TO THE SAME.
WHITEHALL FARM.
I CONFESS, dear Maria, the truth of many of the remarks communicated in your
last; though some of them, permit me to say, savoured too strongly of the
turgid stiffness of conscientious sanctity. No one, however, more truly chorded
with my sentiments and feelings than that "the endearing caresses of a fond
husband ought to fill up every wish and desire of an affectionate wife, even
immured in a wilderness, far from the fantastic pleasures of a tinselled
world." Than this, what more delightful fruition could a virtuous woman desire?
But, oh, my sister, have you already forgotten the sad necessity of my union
with Mr. Franks? -- You, to whom fortune has invariably proved so munificent,
should, if not forgive the aberrances of the more unfortunate, at least lament
the unconscious origin of them. There is a supernatural satiety existing in the
female soul; -- the consummation of ineffable love, without which the most
ardent feelings of the heart, the most resplendent faculties of the mind, are
left unexercised and torpid. You, my lovely Maria, feel your bosom hourly
swelling with the celestial glow of a pure and ceaseless passion; how then can
you competently judge of the secret emotions of a sister, chained by tyrant
custom to a man who never avowed more than a motive of expediency for his
addresses, who has ever neglected the offices of a husband, and for whom, even
now I declare, I never felt more than esteem? The silent ashes of that deluded
father whose power coerced me to the deed, sleep over the endless torments
which his rashness has produced! -- And must I, in meek submission to a
hardened, senseless world, oppose the instinctive impulse of my soul? Must I,
to gratify the caprice of a world whose censure or applause is alike
despicable, dam up the current of my thoughts, or cut short the thread of
mental reflection? Can I restrain or limit the involuntary aspirations of my
heart? In short, is it possible for me to affect a placidity of mind, when the
humblest insect I behold vaunts of its superior blessedness? For heaven's sake
then, Maria, suppress your cruel reprehensions.

I SHOULD not have replied so passionately to this part of your letter, had I
not fancied there was too much gaul and acrimony in the ink with which you
penned it. A heavy frown seemed to hang on every line, and each ambiguous word
to my ears and eyes conveyed horror and appresion.

THE expected visit from my ancient neighbors was suddenly and strangely
interposed. About noon a heavy cloud emerging from the west, occasioned a smart
shower of rain, accompanied with most tremendous peals of thunder. The valley
beneath us seemed to retain the hoarse explosion; and every clap from heaven
was answered by the sharp echo of the trembling earth, making the convulsed air
the theater of an horrific conflict! At about three in the afternoon it
entirely subsided; and the bright sunbeams, breaking through the scattered
clouds, displayed to the admiring world the arched scenery of the rainbow in
all its resplendent glory. -- I expected this circumstance, so salubrious in
its influence on the air, would have created a new inducement for my expected
visitants to perform their engagement; but at near four, I was officially
informed, "that the Miss Haywords, apprehensive that the air was dangerously
impregnated with sulphurous and other offensive matter, begged to defer their
visit until a more favorable evening. I readily accepted the apology; not,
however, without smiling at the absurd caution which had produced it.

I MUST briefly bid farewell, as I overhear the obliging Miss Alfred in the
parlour below. Heaven take you in its care!

Adieu, CAROLINE FRANKS.

LETTER III. TO THE SAME.
WHITEHALL FARM.
DEAR MARIA,
DO not, I beseech you, wilfully misconceive me: -- what I expressed in my last
were the matured effusions of my oppressed bosom, and they have lost no
strength by the subsequent retrospection. But oh, how unintentionally kind is
my fair Miss Alfred, in intermitting the utterance of my grief, by the
exhilirating emotions of friendship. She increases hourly in my esteem, and has
already flattered me with a great portion of her confidence. On concluding my
last epistle, I met her in the lower parlour, impatient, as she said, to take a
round of discovery through the adjacent wilderness in my company. I slipped on
my shawl and cheerfully complied with her requisition. We walked for two hours,
indulging in a variety of flippant pleasures; while our astonishment and
admiration paced with each other, on discovering so many objects of beauty and
grandeur, cloistered from the world's eye by almost impenetrable shrubbery and
immense hosts of oak and hickory. We traversed through thorns, briars,
brambles, etc. ascended steep and craggy rocks, forded pellucid streams and
crystal rivulets, with a labor that lost its fatigue in the thoughts and
enjoyment of each other's company. At times we varied our amusement by a
frolicksome race down some verdant hill, and then, at the foot, where a cooling
stream gurgled to our panting breasts, we refreshed ourselves by catching the
fragrant zephyrs that issued from the adjacent plains.

As we returned, now said my mirthful companion, I will lead you to the Cavern
of Meditation; with which, taking my hand, she conducted me through a shady
valley, which appeared to be formed by the familiar junction of two large
rocks, both fancifully carpetted with a green surface. Having passed this, we
entered an apparently spacious hall, paved by a stone which had acquired a
moderate smoothness from the flow of a stream, which had lately been impeded.
-- "That, said Miss Alfred, pointing to an opening in the opposite rock, is the
entrance to my solemn retreat, where, unheard but by the callous stone, which
returns a sympathising echo, I soothe the rigorous edge of reflection." -- I
expressed an apprehension of danger from venturing into a mansion formed so
delicately by the adventitious cluster of innumerable rocks. She instantly led
me to this gloomy avenue, in the middle of which, we were nominally benighted;
but my fair guide, groping, at length brought me to her favorite spot, where I
beheld a natural sopha excavated from the rocks, beautifully lined with a green
turf. It is of a semi-circular form, and at each side of the sopha, a purling
stream which runs from the precipice and buries itself in an unseen basin
below, creates a prattling music congenial to the solemn aspect of the scene,
and to a mind tempered for melancholic meditation -- "Here, exclaimed my
companion, with a vehemence before unobserved, here, dearest madam, it is that
I review the short season of life I have yet passed, and enumerate the
comparative million of my disasters! Here I ease my swelling heart, by mingling
with these streams, the bitter tears of my affliction. -- Oh, she continued,
when men, and even my fellow fair have denied a tear of commiseration, this
breathless, dumb rock has shed showers of pity." -- I stood awhile almost
petrified; and beholding the fair Miss Alfred's eyes deluged in tears of
anguish, and the sympathetic currents from the rock, which at this time seemed
to flow more rapidly, I involuntarily joined in the distressful concert.
Recovering from this powerful sympathy, I entreated my companion to make me
acquainted with the disastrous circumstances revived in her memory by the
silent language of the surrounding scene. She replied, "Dear madam, excuse me
from complying with your request at this time. Come, let us leave the spot, and
at some hour when I can more control the influence of feeling, you shall know
the occasion of this inordinate sorrow." -- I did all in my power to allay the
sensible anguish of her heart; and after recovering from our fatigue, by a few
moments repose on the sopha, and more minutely inspecting the rude magnificence
of the dwelling, we retired in the same manner as we had entered. On again
coming, I may say to the face of the earth, we discovered the sun had laid deep
in the West, and left only a silver tint on the opposite forests. Urged by the
advance of darkness, we tripped over a direct path to our mansion, at which we
arrived, just as the gloominess of night mantled the earth in sable shade.
After our joint solicitations, Miss Alfred consented to remain with us till the
next morning. Her strength and spirits being apparently exhausted; I endeavored
to revive the latter by skipping over some gay airs on my piano, which she
extolled with many polite encomiums. Finding that she understood the
instrument, we prevailed with her to give us a tune. Oh Maria, what celestial
melody floated through the expansive hall! -- The docile key, as they kissed
her nimble fingers, acknowledged the superior influence of their new mistress,
and seemed to emulate each other in the placid harmony of their notes.

THE affectionate society of this charming girl, is a treasure unexpected in
this rude and uncultivated wilderness. Oh it is a heavenly, rapturous fruition,
of which only souls susceptible of the lasting impressions of friendship can
conceive or partake.

Adieu, CAROLINE FRANKS.

LETTER IV. TO THE SAME.
WHITEHALL FARM.
I WAS near being deprived of the agreeable society of my dear Miss Alfred.
Having breakfasted with us next morning, and spent a considerable time in an
entertaining conversation, Mr. Franks, with a politeness not peculiar to him,
offered to conduct her home. As soon as they had departed, I was imperceptibly
led to reflect on the singular and affecting circumstance of the cavern, in the
recollection of which all my original sympathy was excited. "Is it possible,"
exclaimed I, traversing the hall, "that one so young and fair, so mildly
innocent and endearing, should already wear in her heart, the corroding cause
of this pathetic conduct! -- But ah, why do I wonder this, when youth, beauty,
and innocence are the choicest victims of artifice and guilt! -- Oh, what a
benevolent curiosity have I to know the history of her tears! To soothe their
torture by administering sympathy!" -- Thus I employed upwards of an hour, when
Mr. Franks returning, assured me that the fair Miss Alfred became much
indisposed in the course of their walk; and that on leaving her, she had
repaired to her bed. Think, my sister, how this intelligence startled me,
conscious as I felt, that the sad circumstance must be attributed to some
imprudence of yesterday. I was instantly hurrying to pay her a visit; but, on
Mr. Franks repeating her having gone to rest, and the confusion of the family,
I deferred this act of friendship till the afternoon.

As soon as we had dined, my girl Hannah, (Mr. Franks declining to accompany
me) and I, crossed the fields and woodland which divide our plantation from the
Alfred's, and soon arrived at the front of their mansion house. The surly house
dog, hoarsely announced the arrival of strangers, which brought to the door,
the tender mother of my friend, who received me with a cordial welcome. -- I
impatiently inquired after the health of her daughter. "Oh, sweet madam," said
she with a cheerful smile, "our alarm is all over. A trifling bleeding and some
repose has considerably abated her fever, and your company I am certain, will
complete the cure." I was rejoiced at this answer; and following Mrs. Alfred
through a spacious hall, I was conducted to a back parlour, which, like our
own, is delightfully shaded by a row of large trees. -- Here, after the
courteous and busy politeness of the old lady had seated me, I waited but a few
minutes, when overhearing a footstep, I arose, and advancing to the door, met
my sweet friend, whose eyes shone even in the midst of sickly meekness! -- Oh,
sister, what a divine picture was here displayed of oppressed innocence
struggling with contumely! -- The blooming rose had sunk in the general
whiteness of her face, leaving only a glimmering tint on her lips; and her
eyes, retaining all their sprightliness, seemed to exult in the surrounding
langour of her countenance! -- Taking her by the hand, I said, Dear Miss Alfred
I hope you are perfectly recovered from your alarm? -- "Law, dear Madam,"
replied she, "the care and solicitude of my tender parent, has made my
indisposition appear too serious. The long, though extremely agreeable ramble
of yesterday, added to the subsequent agitation of my mind, had occasioned a
debility, which, succeeded by a fever, gave very unfavorable symptoms. However
I am at present entirely relieved, and your company was only wanting to restore
my spirits" -- After receiving every mark of politeness from this small family,
and viewing the variety of objects of taste and grandeur to which Miss Fanny
conducted me, I took my leave, sensible that my engaging friend was not so
completely restored, as she wished to convince me.

IN returning home, partly to gratify Hannah, we took a circuitous walk through
the forest, which extends for many acres back of the two farms; and in the
bosom of which, a variety of unimproved beauties, striking the eye in their
rough state, occasion a succession of pleasing emotions. Resting on the summit
of a lofty rock, which overlooks a vast prospect, our ears were suddenly
enchanted by the soft music of some artful piper, who was concealed in the
clustering shrubbery beneath. It began in a mild harmonious strain, and
gradually swelling, the valley beneath us rung with the sublime melody. I gazed
on every side to discover this Apollo of the woods; while the amazed girl at my
side cried out, "Oh what a sweet bird! Would that we had it in our new cage!"
-- We were obliged to depart without a discovery; while the shrill pipe, as if
conscious of our admiration, loudly warbled to our footsteps, till its dying
sweetness was lost in the intervening space. -- Who knows, my sister, but that
this secluded musician, remote from the scenes of anguish and disappointed
love, here and thus seeks to drown the recollection of woe, in the united music
of his pipe and the responsive echo of the vale! -- While he played, nature was
hushed to listen to his lamentatation; and even the stubborn oak moved not a
leaf to interrupt the sacred sadness of the song.

Adieu, my Sister, CAROLINE FRANKS.

LETTER V. TO MR. WILLIAM COURTNEY.
DEAR FRIEND,
YOU will no doubt be astonished at the acknowledgement, that your last,
containing a panegyric on the fair, met a cordial acquiescence in my heart.
Considering my past apathy, and, I might almost add, disgust for the sex, is it
not miraculous, that at the mere glance of a female, my calloused nature has
been melted into unbounded adoration? -- Yes, Bill, I have but just discovered
that the finer faculties of my soul have heretofore been obscured by scholastic
precepts and false reasoning; and that, instead of opposing the mild influence
and dominion of beauty and innocence, nature designed the heart to love, and
formed it for intellectual fruition: In fine, that "nature is the god of love."

THUS you perceive, in fidelity to our juvenile engagement, (made in our
chamber, when, perhaps, we should have been hammering at the problems of
Euclid,) I have made an immediate disclosure of the first operations of Cupid
on my heart: -- perhaps it is premature; but when I compare my sensations and
desires with those of which I have read in the examples of renowned lovers, I
am struck with the apparent parallel, and already foresee a thousand obstacles
to the consummation of my hopes; a thousand difficulties to surmount, and as
many dangers to encounter. Nay, I sometimes fancy myself the Don Quixotte of my
mistress; and in my imaginary perils, fall an heroic victim to the queen of
pleasures!

MY father's farm is possessed of all that ruralic beauty of which are led to
conceive by perusing the history of the loves of enamoured swains and
shepherdesses. Nature has adorned it with a variety of exquisite groves,
grottos, etc. whose unseen retirement seems peculiarly destined for a
reciprocal interchange of hearts. From those I have selected one, suited most
to my temper of mind and conception of wild elegance, to which I have been
accustomed to withdraw in the evening of each day, and with my haut-boy play to
the gradual fall of the sun. It was in the last exercise of this diurnal
amusement that I was interrupted by the appearance of a female, standing on an
eminence exactly opposite, whose serene and heavenly countenance broke through
the interwoven leaves and mollified my unwary heart. She appeared engaged in a
careless review of the surrounding prospect. I seized my neglected instrument;
and by playing a soft and melancholy air, had the supreme gratification of
observing her both pleased and surprised with the music. Gods! Methinks, at
that moment I could have rendered the powers of Orpheus, had I possessed them,
the servants of a chivalrous purpose! -- Her eyes wandered to discover the
concealed musician; but the thick cluster of the trees, added to the false echo
of the distant rocks, deluded her eagerest scrutiny; till at length, finding it
impracticable, she moved -- and by my soul, I had not the sense or the power to
follow her; but, changing the tune, kept music to the majesty of her steps,
till the view of her beauty was buried in the distant forest. Yet even now her
graces live in the memory of my eyes; and I mentally gaze on her bewitching
charms! But, alas! this is all -- all I dare expect! Who she is, from whence,
or to where, is a profound mystery, which keeps my imagination on the rack! She
cannot be of this part of the country, or surely my cars would have heard the
"rumor of her beauty," before my eyes were called to witness it is power, and
my heart to avow its dominion. Neither have I ventured to make enquiry at home;
although I highly suspect my sister could give me considerable satisfaction.
You know the character which my principles concerning the influence of women on
our sex has obtained: it has prevailed in our family; and a disclosure of this
kind to them, would only produce vexation and ridicule.

I ALMOST anticipate your reply. Perhaps my jocose friend will discredit this
miracle, and denominate what I esteem an intrinsic, boundless passion, a mere
temporary transport of feeling. However, to your experienced philosophy I refer
it, and expect, by the return of the post, to receive the sage counsels of your
friendship.

I am, with respect, Your Sincere Friend, CHARLES ALFRED.

LETTER VI. To MR. CHARLES ALFRED.
BALTIMORE. DEAR CHARLES,
I SHOULD have been extremely suspicious of the validity of your last had it
not been accompanied with so many serious affirmations and as the case you
describe yourself to be in, is as serious as it is unprecedented, permit me, by
what you courteously term philosophic experience, either to eradicate a
hopeless passion, or give to it the impulse of virtue and substantial affection.

FROM the extraordinary description you have drawn of this unknown female, I
was at first prompted to conclude, that, instead of loving an handsome woman,
you are no more than paying a dutiful adoration to some celestial being; who,
in the peculiar humor of the sex, had made a trip to this sublunary world to
ambush your affections; and, having accomplished your conquest, has returned to
her elysium, leaving you the victim of a passion hopeless as the grave. Should
your inquiries after the goddess terminate in disappointment or chagrene, this
idea, mavelous as it is, will be partly confirmed: and then, my amorous lad,
let your affections mount the pinions of the lark, and ascend, like fragrant
incense, to salute the "olfactory nerves" of your deified mistress!

BUT, to reverse my conjecture, should your inquisitive labor fortunately
issue in an auspicious discovery, and her fair heart be open to exquisite
impressions, let me advise you, to exercise with skill and judgment, those fine
qualities of merit with which your mind and person are so happily adorned. To
besiege a heart already exempt from impressions, with a hope of success, you
ought previously to engage its partiality by a thousand trifling offices of
politeness and attention; and thus effectually surround it by a presentiment in
your favor, against which it will be a pain to act, when you more
unequivocally attack the fortress. -- It is, however, useless to dictate rules
of subordination to lovers; as the passion which they experience spurns at the
livery of art, and acts solely from its own simple and present emotions. In
other words, it is a passion imcompatible with the caution of artifice; and, as
you say, being the modest child of nature, its demeanor abounds in all the
simplicity of its birth.

BUT, my friend, are you indeed so suddenly and singularly overcome by this
sublime passion? Have you already an universality of feeling which drives from
your thoughts, all but the object of your adoration? Is the present interval of
doubtfulness a season of exile and despair? And does hope, the child of love,
even now cherish your palpitating heart? -- If these be your feelings, the
passion is not a counterfeit; your disease is violent, and the source of it is
also the only remedy.

-- " For naught but love can answer love,
" And render bliss secure."
UNTIL I hear more of your situation I am incapable of advising. Perhaps before
this will reach you, the frenzy of love may have dissipated, or some other
circumstance made as great a transition in your heart. Till I know this, excuse
my silence, and believe me to be

Yours sincerely, WILLIAM COURTNEY.

LETTER VII To MRS. MARIA HEARTILY.
WHITEHALL FARM DEAR MARIA,
WHILE my eyes are yet moist, and my heart is loaded with sympathy, let me
transmit to my dearest sister, the sad tale of persecuted innocence; at which,
I am sure her tender bosom will sigh in unison with my own. -- Alas! how many
of our sex live a life of joy, and die a death of forgetfulness; while others,
fair and virtuous in the eye of heaven, incur the complicated cruelty of the
world; and are finally entombed by the weapons of malice! While some,
practicing on the other sex the devices by which they destroy us, enjoy the
tasteless pleasures of vanity and pride, others are the devoted offerings to
artifice and sin! Innocence is no shelter from the intrigues of vice; and
virtue proves a bait for the efforts of deceit! -- Oh, my Maria, how
thrice-blessed are you, early withdrawn from the theater of folly and
dissimulation, into the cordial embraces of an affectionate husband! Even I may
exclaim myself happy; -- happy, as yet safe from the machinations of art! --
Happy, in being at the same time robbed of the enjoyment of love, and shielded
from the ruins of treachery!

YOU will remember the tears shed by the sweet Miss Alfred in her profound
seclusion; nay, you will not have forgot your own sympathetic emotions excited
by my letter on that distressful occasion. -- Alas, how little did I suspect
that her serene and heavenly smiles concealed a tender heart, furrowed with
unheard of disasters! How little did I imagine, that the sprightly friend in
whose society all my distresses were buried, could not for a moment bury her
own! Yes, my Maria, young, fair, and captivating as is Miss Alfred, the world,
-- that world whom you would have me reverence, -- the unjust, the selfish,
cruel world, even in her infancy, dashed her hopes of human felicity! -- Oh,
that I could equal, in the style of narration, the exquisite anguish of my
friend's life, as it streamed from her melting tongue; that my sister might
weep over the history in all the luxury of wounded sensibility!

I HAVE already mentioned the endearing character of Miss Alfred's mother: Her
father, whose business requires his constant attention in the city, is not less
affectionate. His greatest comfort is in accumulating happiness for his two
precious children; and principally his daughter, whose early calamity has given
her a peculiar interest in the whole family. From her infancy, these fond
parents anticipated the most unbounded joy for their decline of life, from
beholding and promoting the felicity of their daughter; and, in the abominable
practice of the world, but with this fond hope impressed, they had, before she
attained her ninth year, nominally united her to a neighbor's son, then about
twelve years of age. Full of the bright view of their distant bliss, to arise
from this parental predestination, she was sent to a celebrated seminanary, to
receive every possible accomplishment and ornament of education. Here, my Fanny
confesses, she enjoyed the undefinable happiness of youthful innocence
unfettered by rigid morality or superstitious prejudice. "Here", as she
exclaimed in her narration, "here were all my tranquil days enjoyed; the
remainder are filled with sighs, and tears, and agony!" --

HAVING received an education highly adapted to her station, she left this
abode of peace and virtue; and returned to the affectionate care of her fond
parents. There she was early introduced into the society of both the sexes; and
from the natural sweetness of her disposition, and acquired elegance of mind,
early engaged the admiration and esteem of the one, while the same qualities
excited the envy and malice of her own. Forgetful of the rigid customs of the
world, -- of the preordination of her parents; and impelled by her own innate
sentiments of virtue and propriety, her susceptible heart was gradually devoted
to the love of a youth, who, though inferior in fortune, possessed the superior
endowments of an amiable mind, and a heart unconscious to every impulse but
that of truth and honor. This circumstance gave an asperity to the conduct of
her father; who, in the common fatal error of mankind, endeavored to give a
different direction to the affections of his child. "Nay," she exclaimed, "my
dearest father, forgetful of his nature, was on this occasion even cruel!" --
In the first vehemence of his paternal concern, he succeeded in separating this
lovely pair, by prevailing with the father of Mr. Wellsford, (the youth before
mentioned) to dispatch him as supercargo to the East Indies; where he has been
almost five years, without communicating the least intelligence to his family,
or to the more unhappy Fanny. "Oh," she sighed, "I am sure he is no more! His
spirit was too noble to bend long to the baseness and perfidy of mankind! It
has fled to its nativity; from whence it shall hover round my mind, till both
are reunited in perfect bliss!"

SEVERELY as my Fanny must have experienced this odious tyranny, its effects
were not so baneful or lasting, as those of the disaster which succeeded.
Already had her insidious female enemies forged a thousand calumnies; and the
foul breath of slander had been as busy in propagating the defamation. Her
former associates suddenly withdrew themselves from her intimacy; and the
number of her male admirers as suddenly increased, drawn by the rumor of her
wantonness. Thus foully traduced and contemned, while her unsuspecting heart was
devoted to love and constancy; her dearest and only comforter arbitrarily
exiled; and with feelings ever alive to acute impressions, a violent malady, of
both mind and body, succeeded; and but for the timely revival of her father's
affection, and the tender solicitude of her mother, would have assuredly proved
fatal: but by their joint efforts the trembling thread of life was
strengthened, and her passion, disdaining the constructions of a treacherous
world, retired to this seat of innocence, dedicating tears of pity to the
frailty of mankind, and invoking on her banished Henry the collected blessings
of an approving God! -- Her father has perceived, by the sad experience of his
child, the repugnance to true happiness of coercion or restraint in the
concerns of the heart; and endeavors, by a course of fondness and attention,
to erase from the annals of her mind the painful recollection of her sufferings.

THUS, dearest Maria, did Miss Alfred, in the plenitude of her confidence,
unfold to my attentive heart, the short volume of her life, replete with
peculiar anguish and mortification. Yet even in the sadness of her present
apprehensions she enjoys intervals of consolation, when the beams of hope break
on her mind, and elevate it to the expectation of one day beholding her
adorable youth.

Excuse the length of this, and esteem me as

Your affectionate sister, CAROLINE FRANKS.

LETTER VIII. To MR. WILLIAM COURTNEY.
DEAREST FRIEND,
I ACKNOWLEDGE the receipt of your obliging favor of the -- inst. on which day,
perhaps even while your generous pen was freely flowing to my relief, my
sanguine hopes experienced the most poignant mortification. -- Yes, my worthy
friend, my early passion has already opened on itself the sluices of distress,
and at present I am so overwhelmed with the agony of reflection, that I am
conscious of my inability to relate the surprising occasion of it.

ON concluding my last to you, which was written early on the morning
subsequent to my entanglement, I had recourse to my gun, expecting by an hour
of exercise to banish the melancholy pensiveness which insidiously gained on my
mind. I traversed the extensive woodlands without having occasion once to
discharge my gun; and was returning home, when the sudden report of a musket
from a thicket at my side, so startled me, that my finger, then on the tryger,
by the quick emotion of my fright, instantly let sly the whole contents of the
piece into the bosom of the ambush from which the former had issued. These
successive frights kept me silently amazed for some time; till, thinking of the
probable danger of my random shot, I entered into the thicket, and my
astonishment was increased by there beholding a gentleman insensibly extended
on the ground, with a musket carelessly fallen at his side. Certain that this
was the effect of the last accident, I raised him from his laying posture, and
was relieved by observing that the shot had but slightly grazed his left
shoulder and cheek; and that his senses were partly restored. After a short
silence, he looked me in the face and enquired if I was hurt, to which having
replied in the negative, I also accounted for the accident by which he had been
reduced to his present condition. -- He begged that I would not apologize: He
had been out the whole morning, he said, without meeting any game, till passing
through this cluster of shrubbery, a squirrel starting, he carelessly let fly
at him, not thinking of the danger. He then directed me to his dwelling, a few
acres from my father's, and pressed me to pay him a visit that afternoon.
Promising to oblige him, I returned home and found the family at breakfast; for
which, alas, thought had robbed me of an appetite!

THE remainder of the morning I employed in a moral contemplation of the
sapient Seneca; and, after a tolerable dinner, departed to fulfill my early
engagement -- But oh, my friend, how little did my forebodings predict the
event! -- I was insensible to every external object around me, till entering a
shady covert in the wood, how I came there I know not, my amazed eyes beheld
the fair object of my meditation reposing on a green turf, beautifully shaded
by several young walnut trees, and partly surrounded by a circle of sweet
briers! I stood for a moment absolutely petrified, undetermined whether to
enjoy a stolen glance or retreat from the holy seclusion. Love and hope
impelled me to the first; and on advancing I perceived an open book just
slipping from her tender hold, which having secured, think, my friend, in all
the imagery of your glowing fancy, of the transported attitude in which I gazed
on this sleeping goddess, as unconscious then of my passion as I am of the
present emotions of her soul! -- Now with my eyes eagerly revitted to the mild
beauties of her face; nay, even glancing on the white innocence of her heaving
bosom, and then, raised in silent extacy to heaven! -- I almost forget myself
in this mute rhapsody, and but for the fear of offending, would surely have
continued in this exercise till she awoke; but prudence and respect drove me
from her presence; and with a heart highly elated, I arrived at the dwelling of
my new acquaintance, who received me into a spacious parlour with all the
cordiality of politeness; assuring me that he was recovered from the fright as
well as the injury of the morning. He is a gentleman considerably advanced in
years, and in the cursory conversation of an hour displayed a great
intelligence in historical facts, and a knowledge of reigning politics, which
he made the theme of our discourse. I had just given a new turn to the subject
-- My mind, teeming with the thought of the enchanting wood nymph; had just
began to enquire of my companion, the society of the country; whether there
were accomplished females; and even, if he knew a lady answering the
description of the fair slumberer? "She is," said I, "dressed in all the
majestic gracefulness of exterior beauty; and from the mild language of her
eyes" -- at which, turning my attention to a door which opened, the model of my
description appeared, and silenced the voice of praise! -- But oh, my friend,
how shall I proceed? -- How dare I think of the trembling horror of that
moment, when my soul was convulsed by a vast association of passions? -- Her
person had more dignity than ever, her eyes sparkled with pleasure, and, with
feelings I cannot describe, I arose, and making a bow, was thunderstruck on
being introduced to the wife of my new acquaintance! How I appeared I know not,
but till the period of departing I was sensible of nothing but the misery of my
condition. This interview, however, disclosed to my knowledge the fair object
of my anxiety. -- She is well acquainted with my sister, and I may expect
either a cure to my passion, or a justification in her frequent society.

THUS, my friend, has every faculty of my mind been staggered by this
unpropitious discovery, the distressing effects of which are conspicuous in all
my actions -- Alas, how shall I act? -- Dare I persist in loving and adoring
the consecrated partner of my friendly neighbor; or must I -- (but it is vain
to inquire) I cannot, -- never can cease from admiration. No, my friend, though
the bleak censure of the united world, and the stern precepts of religion are
opposed to the principle, reason and nature will advocate a passion pure and
undesigning as is that which I experience. Before I knew the obligations of her
heart to another, I admired, esteemed, and loved her; if there be heinousness
in this, my least defense will be, that "I could not help it."

I ENTREAT you lend me your serious advice, and believe me to be

Yours' sincerely, CHARLES ALFRED.

LETTER IX. To MR. CHARLES ALFRED.
BALTIMORE. DEAR CHARLES,
ALREADY, as I at first predicted, your life commences with eccentric
incidents; and I seriously apprehend, that, like your brethren of the loving
fraternity, you are also destined to experience the irrevocable alternations of
bliss and misery.

THE fortuitous discovery you have recently made is so important, that a
stranger would suppose your love as well as your hope would expire at the
knowledge you have obtained of the impossibility of success: Yet at the same
time, your passion, in surviving this tremendous shock, evinces its nature to
be genuine and sincere; and consequently, in my humble opinion, can be
denominated no other than virtuous. Love can never be vicious. Taking the term
in its literal definition, it is an emotion of the soul which ever is the
spring and motive of action toward the beloved object. Being in its nature a
sentiment of good will, and a secondary principle of self-love, its generous
streams retain their original sanctity; and therefore, even in its most
unbounded inundations (if the expression may be used) guilt is not justly
attached: though fashionable and general institutions dogmatically limit its
operation; fix the boundary of its influence, and say, "Thus far, and no
farther shall thou go."

SURELY your own feelings will corroborate the opinion, that it is a passion
too omniscient, too arbitrary, to submit to the control of human laws, which
often are the offspring of avarice and pride: -- That, notwithstanding the
customs of the world, a beautiful and amiable wife will as effectually entrap
the affections of an unguarded bosom, as the same attractions would in the
person of an unplighted maid.

FROM the preceding, my friend, you will perceive, how exactly parallel with
your present circumstances, my speculations on this subject have always been.
Moreover, I affirm, that, reasoning from human nature, it is as impossible to
prevent a refined and susceptible heart from admiring an amiable and beautiful
woman, either married or single, as it would be to annihilate any natural
appetite of the body.

HAVING so explicitly avowed this sentiment, which, by many, will be deemed
that of a libertine, I cannot refrain suggesting the necessity and expediency
of reining your passion with the utmost circumspection; as we are in our
actions more subordinate to the laws of the world, than to the decisions of our
own individual minds. Hence, at the same time to conform to the practice of the
world, and yet to indulge in repugnant propensities, should be the incessant
study of a man, hurried, as you are, into the perils of an illegal amor. The
consciousness you experience of the purity of your passion, would, no doubt,
unbiassed by fear, induce you to disclose it to the object; -- but, Charles,
this will not do; we are not living in a state of nature; and I will add, that
even should your wishes meet a reciprocity of affection, that sacred boon must
be illicit, and all its consequent raptures devoted to lence and retirement.

-- YOUR predicament is indeed extremely singular and momentous! -- It Is
impossible, you say, to extirpate your affection: I believe it, from my soul.
Love, having once engrafted itself, can only be exterminated by the total
extinction of its source; that is, the heart. -- Yet alas! Look at the big
horror which swells the eye of anticipation! What sophistry can assuage the
painful certainty of her being the monopolized property of another? What vain
conception can delude you to expect, that your superior qualities can alienate
her heart from its lawful master? What desperation can impell you to encounter
the "waked wrath" of her enraged husband? -- Can your love conquer these
suggestions, and retain its vehemence? If so, pray make your talents
subservient to the wishes of your heart; in which perilous adventure, that you
may arrive at the consummation of perfect felicity, is the prayer of

Your friend and old school-mate, WILLIAM COURTNEY.

LETTER X. To MISS FANNY ALFRED.
DEAREST GIRL,
IT is now full two days since I was blessed with your enlivening society. Ah, my
Fanny, did you but know how sincerely blissful to me are the precious moments
of your chat, you would not thus long deprive me of this last and dearest
comfort. Mr. Franks has intimated that my neighbors, the maiden Miss Haywords,
intend spending the afternoon with us -- will my dear friend favor me with her
presence, without which, the absurdities of these antiquated oddities will be
intolerable?

BY accident yesterday I became acquainted with your brother: -- Why has my
friend withheld from me, the society of one, who, partaking of all her amiable
qualities, would also add to the moiety of my felicity?

GIVE my affection to your dear mother, and believe me

Sincerely Yours CAROLINE FRANKS.

LETTER XI. To MRS. FRANKS.
DEAR MADAM,
HOW cheerfully would I ever fly to the dear converse of my friend! To you
whose bounteous sympathy has already nearly soothed the rancour of my soul! --
For these two days past the weather has been so sultry as to deter me from
walking; besides which, my constant attendance has been required at home, on
account of a short visit from my tender father. I intended however to have been
with you the greater part of today, but an accident has unfortunately deprived
me of that pleasure.

THE morning being extremely inviting, Charles prevailed on me to take a short
ride up the country. On our return, the creature which I rode, being a young
skittish horse, suddenly took fright and started, leaving my brother at a
distance behind. Without attempting to curb his spirit I held to the saddle,
till overtaking some foot passengers who officiously obstructed his course, I
was suddenly thrown from my seat by the quick halt. Overpowered by the fall, I
had just fainted as my brother rode up, by whose assistance I soon recovered,
and exchanging horses, proceeded home in a slow pace. I have since had symptoms
of a fever, and at present feel so discomposed as to be unable to accept your
polite invitation. Believe me, my dearest friend, it is painful thus to be
deprived of your sweet society.

My brother saw the servant deliver your billet and was mightily in the fidgets
to see its contents. I was on the point of giving it to him, when I came to the
conclusion, where you mentioned him so respectfully, which, though indeed my
brother possesses many amiable qualities and a good mind, coming from you, whom
he highly esteems, would be too flattering to his sexual vanity. Pardon this
remark: It proceeds from my knowledge of the sex: -- alas, from my own fatal
experience! that the slightest courtesy from us, is by them, imputed to their
merit, and the impression it has made on our minds.

GIVE my respects to your husband -- Charles desires me to present his to you,
and believe me to be

Yours Sincerely, FRAUNCES ALFRED.

LETTER XII. TO MR. WILLIAM COURTNEY.
FRIEND WILL,
MY last was shaded with the gloominess of despair: Let the present annul the
reflections of the former, as time has rendered my prospects more auspicious.
Oh my friend, "trifles light as air," are mighty comforts to the hopeless bosom
of despairing love! From an abyss of desperation I have been elevated to the
pinnacle of hope by mere phantoms, and even retain the wisdom to behold and
acknowledge their nothingness; yet, as it is a characteristic of the passion to
live on idea, I willingly second the efforts of imagination.

I YESTERDAY prevailed with my sister to take a ride, for the mere purpose of
deriving some particulars of the condition of my Charlotte, for such permit me
to call her. Her history I assure you has blown the buds of hope. -- Like many
of the unfortunate of her sex, in infancy she was compelled by a fordid parent
to accept her present husband, for whom I understand, she even now feels no
more than a languid esteem. Oh my friend, love is ever the attractive of love,
as apathy is of disgust! -- Will not the pure effusions of my ardent soul draw
from her oppressed bosom, at least a correspondent wish. Her heart is
unengaged, and may I not hope to impress it with pity?

"And pity soon is melted into love."
MY sister spoke of her in the most exalted terms; estimating her friendship as
the greatest blessing of her life. My ears caught the delicious founds, and my
vain heart exulted in the idea that such an one, so supremely excellent, was
well worthy the ambition of my love. Returning home, my sister's horse being
frighted, put an end to this season of enthusiastic rapture.

ON the same morning, a note was delivered by a servant, directed to my sister.
I instinctively conceived it to be from the fair hand of this enchantress; and
entreated my sister to disclose the contents. At first, she half consented, but
on perusing it, she refused, by saying it contained something concerning me,
which it was not prudent to expose. Heavens, think of my emotions at this! -- I
was ready almost to seize the perplexing girl, and tear the sacred treasure
from her pocket! -- I begged, persuaded, and kneeled; but all was ineffectual,
and I was left to conjecture what were the ideas of my first awkward appearance
-- I prevailed however with Fanny, to enclose my respects in her answer.

AT the approach of dusk, I repaired to the forest, idly hoping there to meet
this sylvan goddess; but ah, thought I, after rambling till dark, she now
avoids my haunts, and leaves me to my own misery. -- I returned home, and was
half murdered on being told, that she had paid a short visit to my sister in my
absence, and had been obliged to walk home unattended but by a servant! -- By
heavens, I was on the very eve of fury; and dreading the suspicion of those who
beheld me, I retired to my chamber, where in regretful anguish, I spent the
remainder of the night.

THUS shall I continue to communicate the incidents of my passion, till they
wear out your friendship. Have I not an equal claim on your confidence? -- Or
as yet, is your heart impregnable to the attacks of this tormenting urchin?

Adieu, CHARLES ALFRED.

LETTER XIII. TO MRS. MARIA HEARTILY.
WHITEHALL FARM. DEAR MARIA,
YOU know it is impossible for me to conceal a single thought from your
generosity. It is your kindness which unlooses the bandages of my bosom, and
your pity which allays the uproar of my grief! In you I have always found a
friend to flatter my virtues, and a sister happy in correcting my vices; the
last, I trust, have been the unavoidable effects of my first and early
misfortune. -- Yet why need I endeavor to alleviate my own anguish, by
diffusing its influence, and embittering, by a poignant sympathy, the pure and
tranquil joys of which my amiable Maria partakes, and to which her splendid
goodness entitles her! Oh, my sister, but for the certainty that your affection
delights in the work of mercy, my woe-worn heart should be the limits of its
own distress: Yea, burst with plenitude of grief, ere by disclosing it, impart
one unwelcome sigh or move a repugnant throb in the tranquil bosom of my
sister! Melancholy's disease and "sadness dire" should devour my frame; till
gliding into an immense eternity, my sad memory, and my woes shall sleep
together in a breathless grave!

OH, Maria, how keen, how exquisitely distressing are my present sensations! My
husband -- (alas, the revered name allied to him is profanation!) has just left
me in a paroxism of frenzy! As I write I tremble at the recollection of his
words! My heart heaves the oppressive sigh, and all my faculties are stupefied
by the dominion of terror; yet believe me, it is a mild forgetfulness of grief,
an intermission of woe, thus in friendship to avow my secret reflections.

A FEW days past, having no reason to expect the society of Miss Alfred, I left
the house early in the afternoon, to loiter away the tedious time; and, if
possible, forget the wretchedness of my situation, by devoting my mind to a
pious admiration of the beauties and blessings of nature. -- The air was
attuned to pensiveness; the boundless canopy of heaven's etherial blue was
varied only by a few scattered fleecy-clouds; the sun shone in its mildest
splendor, from whose influence the branches of innumerable trees concealed a
meandering foot-path; the concert of birds, fearlessly frisking on the ground,
completed the scene of magnificence and peace through which I wandered. At
length, after a tedious circuit, I arrived at the grotto, to which, with a
book, I have usually repaired in the moments of mental affliction. Here,
reclining on the soft bosom of the earth, I retraced the pathetic epistles of
Eloisa, till I became entranced in a gentle slumber. Oh, Maria, in this short
interval of life, (for such it may be called, as in it I forgot my relation to
the world) a benignant ray of bliss flashed through my perturbed bosom; and
even when returned to this "vale of tears," the recollection of fancied joy
dissused a momentary happiness. -- The volume, which for once had been my
opiate, had disappeared, by what supernatural means I was unable to discover.
Alarmed at this circumstance, I precipitately left the place and hurried home;
where, entering abruptly, I found Mr. Franks in conversation with a young
gentleman, a stranger, till he was announced to me as Mr. Alfred, brother to my
invaluable friend. On his introduction he exhibited a peculiar degree of
youthful modesty and embarassment; which was, no doubt, heightened by the
abrupt manner of my entrance, and the consequent incoherence of my manners. It
was not long, however, before he arose to depart; when, desiring to be
remembered to his sister, we both accompanied him through the hall to the door,
at which, as he crossed the platform, I remarked to Mr. Franks, with no other
design than to please him by an innocent compliment on his young acquaintance,
that nature appeared partial to this happy family, in lavishing on its
children, the accomplishments of mind and person. Oh, luckless (...)! It sprung
involuntary from my heart: It was but an harmless spark of that general
affection which had been conceived for the whole family, by a knowledge of the
merits of Miss Alfred! -- But the cruelty of my husband replied with this
uncouth censure: -- " Curse on the vanity of your heart! Because that child
blushes at your presence, you would sacrifice him to coquetry!" At which he
left the house, and was absent till late in the evening.

ALAS, Maria, is it not always thus where affection does not control, that
caprice, petulance, and pride assume command? -- To you, from whose pen I need
not dread the severity of unjust censure, I will heartily declare, (and tell
me, wherein is the guilt?) that young Alfred in his person is not less graceful
than his charming sister; to which is added an accomplishment as amiable as it
is extraordinary in his sex; that is, a blushing modesty and politeness, the
general inmates of true merit. His eyes are of the blackest hue, constantly
sparkling with feeling; and his countenance, tout ensemble, is the picture of
sentiment. -- Pardon me, sister, if in thus breathing praise on the brother of
my second best comforter, I overleap in expression the restraints of custom and
the world. Your own liberal mind will provide a sufficient apology; -- nay,
does not virtue itself sanctify the deed? Is merit estimable; -- and shall it
not be extolled? Is beauty admirable; -- and shall it not be praised? Is virtue
amiable; -- shall it not be esteemed? Or does a state of matrimony interdict
the utterance of praise? Does it change the quality of beauty, or subtract from
the excellence of merit; making a mighty husband the concentration of all
estimable endowments?

Can Hymen by the magic of his skill,
The judgment alter, or pervert the will?
You, my Maria, are not so world-ridden as to affect a frown at the foregoing
suggestions; although indeed, your experience in matrimony might incline you to
answer in the affirmative: Yet I am sure, you think it no crime to applaud the
merits of others, and even to esteem, nay, love their virtues; not is there, in
the eye of reason and nature, the least repugnance in the act to the fidelity
of the party.

GIVE me your soothing advice; and believe me to be

With unabated affection, Your distressed Sister, CAROLINE FRANKS.

LETTER XIV. TO CHARLES ALFRED.
BALTIMORE. DEAR FRIEND,
I REJOICE heart'ly with you on the pleasant variation of your feelings; and
must first felicitate you on the circumstance of the letter, and the perplexing
girl, whose prudent secrecy so worried your curiosity. Indeed, your sister
having first partly consented to disclose the contents, and afterward, on
examining it, withholding the favor through a motive of decorum, is a
transaction highly calculated to swell your heart with hopeful confidence.

" Love calls for love. Not all the pride of beauty;
" Those eyes that tell us what the sun is made of;
" Those lips, whose touch is cheaply bought with life;
" Those hills of driven snow, which seen are felt;
" All the possessed are naught, but as they are
" The proof, the substance of an inward passion,
" And the rich plunder of a taken heart."
I HAVE somewhere before observed, that first impressions invariably stamp the
future character of a man; particularly in the estimation of the ladies. A
disgust produced by improper conduct at a first interview, is immutable; and
the presence of the offender is ever after avoided: On the other hand, a
certain lucky deportment, which some men inherit from nature, is sure to win
the partiality of the fair; -- a partiality which, by subsequent address, is
easily convertible into love. In short, I believe, the fly urchin always
approaches the female heart in the similitude of esteem; and only after
obtaining admission, unmasks himself.

So far from discountenancing your passion, it is my sincere wish that, by a
perseverance in the pursuit, you will evince to the object the sincerity of
your motives. Nay, my friend, it would be meritorious, to soothe the aching
bosom of this beautiful wife, whom you mention as having been forced into the
"rude embrace" of her preson husband; and, by a conduct marked with care and
affection, rob the selfish wretch of that which he never possessed.

To conceive of crime, we must previously admit an idea of guilt concealed in
the heart. Motives being the only true criterion by which to estimate the
relative quality of action, it is not just to cull precipitant opinions from
superficial outlines of conduct; but must probe and anatomize the heart and its
propelling principles. Hence, if you have heartily avowed the reality of your
feelings on this occasion, your passion, being the spontaneous effect of a
conviction of extraordinary merit in the object, is virtuous and laudable. It
is true, the world, the terrible world, will frown on your advances: -- Your
beloved too, will start with affrighted virtue at the dangerous proposition: --
but it is for your love, your art, your reason, your address, to harmonize to
her principles a conduct, viewed by mankind as the lowest extremity of female
debasement: -- it is for your fortitude to endure the censure of an undivided
world.

I am, etc. WILLIAM COURTNEY.
P. S. I have to subjoin a request the purport of which I wonder you have not
already obviated: -- It is, what is the name and family of this all-fascinating
woman?

W. C.



LETTER XV. TO MRS. MARIA HEARTILY.
WHITEHALL FARM. DEAR MARIA,
WHAT an intolerable afternoon has my last been; wasted in the company of three
slanderous and antiquated women, as well as exiled from the enlivening society
of Miss Alfred! -- Even this misfortune, however, has not been unprofitable:
No; it has at least taught me, that our internal faculties, disunited from
external relations, and joined to a malignity of spirit, can render us
individually more miserable, than the influence of foreign objects on a mind
duly tempered with patience and virtue. While I listened to the decayed victims
of envy carping at successful virtue and innocence, I was feelingly admonished
to detest and avoid beings, who, by a pestilential banefulness, alike destroy
their own and their neighbor's peace of mind! Of such a character are the
ancient Miss Haywords, whom, in a former letter, I mentioned as comprizing a
family in this neighborhood. Their long-engaged visit at length has been
performed; not, however, without several circumstances which gave new occasion
for astonishment.

YESTERDAY morning, after an absence of some hours, which is his custom, Mr.
Franks returning, informed me in a very courteous manner, that I might expect
an early visit that afternoon from the maiden ladies, our neighbors; adding,
in a tone and emphasis which betrayed a particular solicitude to please, that
every readiness must be made to receive such respectable and valuable visitors
with marked politeness and respect. After personally arranging a variety of
articles, and appointing the servants to their respective duties; nay, even
entering the kitchen to enjoin on the girls a grave and decorous deportment, he
again hastily left the house without dining! This extraordinary conduct in a
man who, believe me, never evinced a desire to please a soul but himself, gave
me an uncommon alarm; and for a considerable time afterward I was totally
incapable of directing my mind to any rational object; until reverting to the
friendship of my worthy Fanny Alfred, I scribbled an incoherent note,
requesting her company in the afternoon: But alas, misfortune deprived me of
her soothing society! An alarming accident had that morning produced an
indisposition, by which my lovely girl was confined to her room! Thus was I
doomed to a torture, the approach of which I awaited with a trembling agitation
not inferior to that of a criminal at the awful moments preceding the hour of
execution.

AT about three o'clock, an ancient and superb' carriage drove up to the gate;
where, Mr. Franks first nimbly alighting, with industrious politeness assisted
three old ladies (more the resemblance of Macbeth's witches) to descend. A
description of their persons, each of which differed in some particular from
the other, would require the pencil of Hogarth. Suffice it, they were an
humourous triumvirate of living oddities, rendered frightful either by the
ravages of time, or by the more deforming influence of their acrid tempers. The
youngest, about fifty, Miss Harriot, was fantastically dressed in a crimson
satin, ancient as herself, with a large blue sloth on her head. Miss
Charlotte, somewhat more advanced in years, with a head bounteously "sprinkled
with the frost of time," was not less ridiculous in her apparel; adding to a
blue silk chemise, the appendant foppery of brocade ruffles, crape, and a
firmament of spangles. Miss Maria, not quite seventy, in her appearance,
approached most to the resemblance of human nature; although at certain
moments, the violent distortions of her face, occasioned by the twitch of some
acute pain, rendered her a being as truly hideous as were her sisters ludicrous!

THIS groupe I ushered into the hall; where, after a number of laughable
perplexities, arising from their awkward decrepitude, they succeeded in seating
themselves. "Mercy," cried Miss Harriot, how intolerably warm this place is!"
-- "Heaven!" added Miss Charlotte, "warm, sister! I am sure it is very
pleasant," -- " Pleasant!; exclaimed Marian, "I fear I shall imbibe my death of
cold; the current of air that passes this avenue is so highly saturate I with
moisture and cold." While thus, in successional exclamations, they discovered
their constitutional climes of temperature, their active gallant was busy in
providing refreshments, and I silently gazing at the ridiculousness of their
grimace and discourse. A desultory conversation ensued; from which I learnt,
that these ladies, from certain incidents in early life, had imbibed a
misanthrophic principle, the venom of which they infused to all their actions
and words. They murder the sanctity of character with delightful enthusiasm;
and exult while wallowing in the guiltless blood of injured reputation. Yes,
Maria, they are the worst of assassins; for they murder indiscriminately the
hopes of the children of virtue, and strangle the just same of successful
innocence!

AMONG the number of victims to their malice, I was sentenced to hear included
my dear and innocent friend, Miss Alfred. Miss Harriot, the apparent favorite
of Mr. Franks, concluded a rapid harangue with a vile and calumniating
insinuation against the character of my absent Fanny. Without any knowledge of
her family or connexions, she maliciously attributed her present retirement to
some disgraceful amor in the city; to which her envious sisters, and, shame on
him, even Franks, tacitly acceded! -- Oh, Maria, at that moment, how did my
blood boil with indignation and rage! My already scattered reason had almost
forsook me; and I was on the point of replying to their calumnies in a voice of
reproach and contempt, when a gentler spirit took possession of my soul, and
suppressed its ardor by a general sarcasm at their suspicions, and a continued
harshness of expression for the remainder of the visit; to which they seemed as
indifferent, (...) are their minds callous to the impressions of benevolence.
At an early hour, however, the fear of "imbibing cold" hurried these wretches
from my house, escorted by their former chevalier. I instantly flew across the
woodland to enquire of the health of my angelic friend, and had the unutterable
happiness of finding her cheerful and composed. On my return home, which was
not before dusk, my husband was still absent, and did not appear until very
late in the evening.

IT is then in the baneful society of these venomous wasps, that Franks employs
his many hours of absence; while I, in solitary rambles through these desert
woods, counting the miseries of my life, have intercourse only with melancholy
and despair! --

"Black melancholy sits, and round her throws,
"A death-like silence, and a dread repose;
"Her gloomy presence saddens all the scene,
"Shades every flower, and darkens every green;
"Deepens the murmur of the falling floods,
"And breathes a browner horror on the woods.
OH, my sister, what sterner curse is there reserved by destiny to complete my
wretchedness? My husband, -- he who ought to be the first to comfort the rising
torment of my heart -- files from my presence with contempt and derision! Nay,
the more to aggravate my feelings, he behaves to others with affected courtesy!
Oh, that I were cased against sensibility, that thereby I might endure without
a sigh these meditated marks of indifference, or retaliate with more palpable
neglect!

THIS ignoble treatment, Maria, you will believe me, is the effect of no
impropriety on my part. From the Amen of our nuptial ceremony, his demeanor
has partook more of lordly and affected superiority, (viewing me as a necessary
menial in his household) than of the tender care and solicitude of an indulgent
husband. Oh, how it wrings my soul with agony and remorse, to think of the
blissful transports of a loving pair!

"Oh happy state! where souls each other draw,
"Where love is liberty, and nature law!"
I OFTEN endeavor to abate the vehemence of this comparative misery by
recurring to the amusement of books: But ah, too often this looked-for
consolation proves as sharp an aggravation, by unfolding to my admiration
bright scenes of bliss, which, contrasted, reflects a sable shade on my own!
Late on the same evening, during the absence of Franks, I opened a celebrated
author on the pleasures of Solitude, not doubting but that there I should meet
with a temporary alleviation of mind; -- but alas, a few pages delineated the
following picture of associated felicity: -- " Does the tear of sorrow steal
down the cheek of one? The other with affection wipes it tenderly away. The
deepest sorrows of the one are felt with equal poignancy by the other: but what
sorrow can resist the consolation which flows from an intercourse of hearts so
tenderly, so intimately, so closely united! Time flies before them on its
swiftest pinions. The car is never tired of the gratification of listening to
each other's conversation. The only misfortune of which they have any fear, is
the greatest they can poslibly experience, the misfortune, of absence,
separation and death." -- Alas, where is that tender hand to wipe away the
bitter tears I hourly shed? Where that benevolent heart to share in my
perpetual sorrow? Where shall I look for a community of souls, which, by
equally distributing the portion of pain, diminishes its individual influence?
-- To you, Maria, I will resort for consolation. Your pity shall infuse comfort
to my reeking soul; and, added to the converse of the friends I enjoy here,
shall make me happy in spite of destiny and myself!

ADIEU, and believe me ever to be Your affectionate sister, CAROLINE FRANKS.
P. S. Inform me in your next of the prosperity of my almost-forgotten brother:
I have not heard from him or of him, since his last establishment, which is
upwards of twelve months past.



LETTER XVI. TO MR. WILLIAM COURTNEY.
DEAR FRIEND,
SINCE the date of your last, which, permit me to observe, was superabundant in
flattery, I have enjoyed an unremitted succession of happiness, proceeding from
the gradual advances and brightening prospect of my love. -- At least, I may
say, this newborn passion of my mind, which a few days ago crucified my
sensibility, is no longer painful; but controuls my heart with an hopeful and
benign authority. Yet even in this actual enjoyment, I am not forgetful of the
poet's intimation; From hope's keen hand the cup of joy may slip,
And fall, untasted, though it reach the lip.
and am, therefore, resolved never to suffer present prosperity to dazzle a
just apprehension of future adversity.

SINCE my last, I have at three different times, beheld and conversed with the
dear empress of my soul. Oh, my friend, I have found that not only her person,
but her intellects are the nicest products of natural beauty and art! -- To an
heavenly complacency of temper, derived from the favoring hand of creation,
she adds a brilliancy of fancy, and a grandeur of conception, superior to the
generality of her sex, and which suffuses the mildness of her countenance, with
the dignity and intelligence of an angel. In fine, my worthy friend, she is
what you would call amiable; what you, were you present, could not refrain from
loving and adoring -- Yet, alas, this fair and accomplished wife, is unhappy!
-- An early forced marriage, (a palliating term for prostitution) has robbed
her bosom of its native tranquillity; and like an heroic captive, she deplores
in smiles and graces, the cursed chains that fetter her peace and beauty. Each
recollective moment crowds her holy bosom with a host of sighs; and the
trembling tears that glisten in her eye, pathetically reveal the secret sorrows
of their source! -- Such is the situation of her, whose anguish I would
alleviate by my sympathetic love. Even arrayed in the majesty of her tears I
will address her in the eloquence of my passion; by ardent entreaty, seduce her
memory from retrospective glances, to the full expectation of bliss and
unmingled rapture!

Two evenings ago, as I fondly meditated on this endearing theme, sitting in
the alcove behind our house, my silent reverie was interrupted by the
appearance of my Charlotte, (for Charlotte I must call her, though I should be
unwilling to be thought a Werter) crossing the opposite field, in all the
majesty of graceful beauty. An universal perturbation prevailed my mind. My
eyes were rivetted on her until she approached; when, assuming confidence, I
cordially saluted her, and offered my hand with a familiarity, for which I
conceived my youth an apology. -- Thus, my friend, I had the transport of
conducting her through a long hall to the apartment of my sister, who
pleasantly remarked on the cordiality of our appearance. Here I enjoyed a most
blessed and unrestrained intercourse with the arbitress of my hopes. With an
enthusiasm, which I feared often betrayed its design and tendency, I spoke of
the sublime rapture of lovers; and by indirect insinuations, strove to impress
her tender mind with a favorable conception of my esteem. I paused and
reflected; -- nay, I began already to regret the impatience of my love.
Methought, the dear idol of my heart, was affected, and became serious and
reserved. My sister too, who had often admired the uncommon fervency of my
style, appeared amazed and concerned! Under these apprehensions I remained
tormented until the moment of her departure, when she cheerfully accepted my
company. Again my resistless passion broke the bounds of prudence, and
thundered in all the fire of zeal; to which, she listened with an eagerness,
that seemed to indicate a growing approbation of the warm wishes laboring at my
heart; but when I disclosed the circumstance of the grotto, the manner of
stealing her volume, and my silent extacy in admiring her sleeping beauty, her
eyes sparkled with emotion, and a crimson diffidence suffused her face, with
undistinguishable blushes. She continued remarkably pensive the remainder of
the walk. -- On arriving home her husband was absent -- she invited me to walk
in: -- but alas, I could not! Declining the courtesy, therefore, with a
compliment, I bid her farewell, with a gentle pressure of her hand. she
continued at the door, methought looking after me, till I entered the wood that
separate the two farms. In this silent obscurity I remained, reflecting on the
past adventure, till the approach of dusk, and arrived home after dark.

SINCE then I have visited her in company with my sister, and on the same day,
fortunately met her in the bottom of the wood. In both these interviews I found
her cheerful and conversable; but always left her serious and reserved. She
would sometimes look at me, as though affected by my condition, with an eye of
tenderness: at other times inverting her countenance, she seemed displeased. --
But I will not credit the evidence of my senses, while they intercept the hopes
of my soul.

" My giddy fancy pictures joys unknown,
" Joys that disclaim the glitter of a throne."
Adieu hastily, CHARLES ALFRED.
P. S. PARDON me for not complying with the request contained in your
postscript. While my fate is nicely balancing on doubt, it would be rash, to
publish her name even to you. Besides a punctilious sentiment, in this respect,
prevents my present compliance.



LETTER XVII. TO CHARLES ALFRED.
BALTIMORE. DEAR FRIEND,
I AGAIN rejoice with you, on the unexpected prosperity of your love and shall
never cease from invoking its progression. Yet my dear fellow, I am convinced,
that you can, with sympathetic pleasure, turn from the delightful theme, to
hear of the misfortunes of another.

The noble nobly pity and relieve.

I HAVE recently met with a character, whose hidden history engages all my
interest and attention. Going to the coffee-house a few days past, I was
introduced by the proprietor to a young man, who, he said, wished for
employment in a counting house. His appearance immediately prepossessed my
favor, and offering my benefaction, he entered my service with a polite and
amiable modesty. He has since convinced me by his attention and talents, that
he was not unworthy this generosity. -- Yet my friend, deeprooted sorrow hangs
heavily on his brow -- oppressive sighs and alternate tears, swell his
laboring bosom or glisten in his eyes. Perceiving these emotions, I ventured
to make inquiry of his distress, and offer the aid of my friendship to allay
its pungency. "Ah, my worthy benefactor," he replied, "what would not
generosity like yours do in common. It soothes but cannot cure the anguish of
my soul. I once was happy, but the sordid world destroyed my peace, and my
futurity is filled only with woe and desperation." With this his grief became
more vehement, and my anxiety increased; but his agony resisted the efforts of
friendship; and, as if selfish of tears, he refused to excite mine by his
narrative. Worldly misfortunes ha^ made him poor; beside which, love's poison
rankles at his heart. -- He speaks of Philadelphia with emotions of anguish.
"There I was born," he said, "and there enjoyed unmingled bliss. Banished from
thence I lost all peace." -- He arrived here in great necessity from Bermuda,
where he had been carried and robbed of his little all, by the infamous
violaters of our commerce and independence. His countenance is extremely
interesting, and has once been handsome; his manners are courteous and polite;
his conversation intelligent, and his minutest actions are evidences of a
superior education. -- He calls himself Tallman, and has been bred to the
mercantile profession; but this is all of his life and family that he will
disclose, saying, "'It Is better to live unpitied, than to die lamented,"

THERE is one circumstance remarkable in the case of this youth. His
application to business seems to intermit his grief. As, when he reflects on
his misfortunes, his faculties are all absorbed in agony, so when he turns his
mind to other employments, his misfortunes are forgotten. This fact has led me
to create a variety of objects for his attention, in hopes of weening him from
grief. Should I prosper in the endeavor, believe me, I would not barter
feelings with a monarch.

THUS it is, my worthy friend, that captious fortune, plays with the brave and
noble! Thus the impressive bosom of youthful innocence is early strewed with
the thorns of adversity! -- While you are engaged in the fond rapture of love's
pursuit, and quaffing the nectar of the gods, I will enjoy the first of human
blessings, that of "removing a brother's woe." While you are endeavoring to
conquer an amiable woman, I will strive to restore to society, a worthy and
useful citizen.

Adieu in friendship, WILLIAM COURTNEY.

LETTER XVIII. TO MRS. HARTLEY.
DEAR SISTER,
SHALL I never tell you that I am happy? Or am I of that pitiable class of
beings, who are ever pursuing their own misery, and making others wretched by
intemperate lamentation? -- Yet, alas, why need I upbraid myself? -- The genius
of calamity has made me her own, the force of sentiment gives a fang to the
minutia of accident. -- Heavens! -- how baneful a creature am I, making even my
friends miserable! -- First you, my ever dear sister, were doomed alone to
receive the ebullitions of my grief: -- next my complaint wounded the peace of
my amiable friend; and now, (alas, dare I reveal it even to your sacred
confidence?) the young brother of my friend ascribes his agony to me! -- Even
my virtues those qualities which the world calls good, are destined to make the
good and virtuous languish!

OH my sister, had I that sternness of reason with which you are so happily
endowed, I could either avoid those distresses, or meet them with fortitude.
But ah, I am weak of mind, and even criminally susceptible! -- Sentiment will
finally destroy me! The oppression of affliction sinks me into stupid
wretchedness, and as I write, even to you, thou gentle angel of consolation, my
heart bleeds with reiterated woes. -- The engaging Charles Alfred, who first
appeared to me under the auspices of friendship, being the affectionate brother
of her, whom next to you I esteem, has addressed me in the plain language of
affection. Alas, he said every thing but that he loved, and that his eyes and
conduct unequivocally declared. I have listened to his eloquence at two
particular periods, at which his behavior obtained all my pity; but in a
third, Maria, his sad seriousness alarmed my duty. He met me in the bosom of an
immense wood, where often I rambled in fearless solitude. There he unchecked
the stream of eloquence and love, which he said, had long been the source of
rapture and of anguish! -- His words affected my soul; and methought, while he
argued against the selfish barriers of the world opposed to mutual love, their
former sacredness tumbled into insignificance. But I restrained the impulse of
ardent sentiment, and being about to return home, insisted on his not
accompanying me; to which he complied, but with obvious reluctance, which
increased the keenness of my feelings; and also slipped into my hands, the
following poetic effusion:

"Deluded casuist! -- can the raging fire
"Of love, impassioned and neglected die!
"Can reason calm impetuous desire,
"Or counteract the unavailing sigh?
"When twined around the feeling heart is clings,
"Can inert caution melt its ardent wings?
"Ah no! -- the urchin perched, sublimely smiles
"At opposition and sophistic wiles!
"Unerring shafts inflict the wound severe,
"The never-ending sigh, the pearly-dropping tear.
"Hope, cherub-ey'd, illicit flies;
"Sharp agonizing phantoms rise;
"Stern visionary forms invade;
"And sceptres fleet in fancy's shade!
"Sleep too, the balm of minds oppressed,
"Precludes the wished for hours of rest:
"Sleep round the laboring soul new torture brings
And rends the heart with worse than scorpion stings." The author is indebted
for these lines, to the common place-book of a young literary gentleman in this
city, from which, by permission, it was extracted.

N. OH, my dearest Maria, now, when as it were, I am abstracted from all the
world but you, how ought I to act in this disastrous circumstance? -- After
this guilty interview, how dare my eyes meet the fond salutations of my
endeared Fanny? -- Alas, how shall I receive even the apathetic attention of my
husband, whose honor I have infringed by this slight transgression? -- Yet, my
sister, conscious as I am of the motives of my conduct the last, though odious
and condemnable in the eyes of the world, has the full sanction of my heart,
and the advocation of my sentiments. Yes, I feel myself knitted to this
disguiseless youth, by every silken tie which proceeds from a knowledge of his
worth and merit. The innate feeling is resistless; (...) you alone shall be the
witness to its avowal. I (...) war against feeling and check the advances of
this ^^nerous lad. Though I could listen for ages (...) his delightful
eloquence, I will repel its utterance. For this purpose, I have written a short
note to him, for believe me, I could never otherwise practice this virtuous
duplicity, this sanctified lie, without betraying its vileness. This timely
precaution, I hope, will extinguish his youthful ardour, and make me at least,
less amiable in his estimation.

ALTHOUGH I do not generally await regular returns to my numerous letters, yet
believe me, the present requires a speedy and consolatory answer.

Adieu, CAROLINE FRANKS.

LETTER XIX. TO MRS. FRANKS.
NEW YORK. DEAREST CAROLINE,
YOU may easily conceive the alarm which your last unhappy letter occasioned in
the bosom of her whose supremest happiness is to hear of your prosperity. Oh,
my sister, how have I ever deplored in silent apprehension the horrid nature of
your nuptials, and awaited with dread the almost inevitable consequences of so
unnatural a coercion! Already the horizon blackens; and events begin to unfold
the calamities of my early predictions! -- Does our mistaken father breathe
immortal life in the regions of bliss, and not regret the embittered scenes to
which his spirit is witness, and which have sprung from his earthly error? Does
not our dear mother, whose sudden flight to perfection deprived us of the
blessings of her care, sympathize with her daughter, even surrounded with joy
in the shades of elysium?

PARDON the boldness of my solicitude if I entreat you to avoid the presence of
young Alfred. I know how this request will embarrass your tender feelings; but
consider, my Caroline, the awful importance of your situation; and let the idea
of the shameful consequences of an illicit attachment; of the obloquy of the
world; and the stings of a relenting conscience, strike your soul with horror
and aversion! His love, my child, though of the purest and most disinterested
nature, is incompatible with your sacred station in life. Call to your
assistance the united energies of your mind: Avoid the deep stratagems of this
siren; and thereby save yourself and family from shame and disgrace!

"The woman that deliberates is lost."
I APPROVE of your method for declaring to him the determination of your
prudence; and hope you have adopted a style and temper which will effectually
blast his daring purposes, and restore your wonted tranquillity.

You requested me to write concerning our brother. -- I have not heard from
him, by letter, since his settlement at Baltimore -- all I know is, that he
prospers in business, and is as gay as ever.

Adieu, MARIA HEARTILY.

LETTER XX. TO MR. CHARLES ALFRED.
SIR,
YOU cannot imagine me unsuspicious of the tendency of your vehement language
in our unfortunate interview of yesterday; nor could my agitation at the time,
have escaped your observation. Pardon me then, sir, in preferring this method
to request you hereafter to restrain the utterance of those sentiments as
unworthy your approbation, as to encourage them would be derogatory to me.
Never, never must we meet again until you solemnly denounce their influence;
and, painful as it proves to me, in whose bosom so pure a friendship glows for
the family, thus to treat you, it is the unbiassed result of duty and
deliberation, and must be obeyed.

PERMIT me to add, (and I know you will excuse it) that notwithstanding the
above, I aspire to your generous friendship; and repeat, it is with sincere
regret I am constrained to six the conditions of our future intercourse, on the
suppression of those wild and indecorous sentiments of yesterday.

With respect, I am etc. C. FRANKS.
P. S. I must further request, sir, that on perusing the above scrawl, you will
so much regard my peace of mind, and your own honor, as immediately to return
it.



LETTER XXI. TO MRS. C. FRANKS.
MADAM,
IS it for loving and adoring the most perfect female, that I am doomed, even
by my idol, to suppress the innate tumult of my soul; and, whilst riving with
the force of sentiment, to affect the aspect of joy and serenity? -- Alas,
madam, had you for a moment reflected on the nature of the sad task you were
about to enjoin; -- had you (not for the first time I trust) thwarted the
prejudices of the world in your own mind, and considered the purity and
holiness of my intentions; -- had you, worthy lady, only reverted to that
sublime and disinterested passion for a married woman, which filled the
sentimental bosom of Yorick, the model of my ambition; -- you would, nay, could
not have proved so ungenerous as to dash in my face, an offering so pure, and
so devoutly proffered! -- Yet, madam, a charge thus seriously alleged, -- a
request fervently made by her whose service is my religion, shall command
unrelenting duty, though in the attempt I should fall a victim to my obedience.

I CANNOT conclude this indulgence without blessing the heart which suggested,
and the hand that performed, your generous offer of friendship to the unworthy
Alfred. But pardon me, madam, in declaring, that I look with indiscriminate
judgment on your behest, and the lucid passion which already vivifies my soul.
Friendship! Alas, madam, what it more than a nominal refuge for love? Or
rather, is not love a more ardent, diffusive, godlike emotion of the human
soul? The first is the counterfeit appellation of religious fanatacism: The
other, the immutable language of nature impressed by the hand of Deity. -- Yes,
madam, I thankfully accept your heavenly boon under this modest disguise of
words. Your friendship is enough; and while my bosom glows with friendship and
esteem; while every faculty is employed to felicitate your days, I will regard,
not the name, but the intrinsic quality of my passion. Human language may
analize its dress; but the elocution of the soul is understood only by those
who experience true and virtuous love.

With sincere friendship and esteem, I am, Madam, Your most devoted servant,
CHARLES ALFRED, Junr.
P. S. PARDON my presumption, madam, in answering, without returning your
billet. This duty I have reserved for a personal interview; in which, I trust,
I will be better able to thank you for your cruelty; -- cruelty, not in your
tender heart, but the forced effect of false duty and custom.

Adieu. C. F.



LETTER XXII. TO CHARLES ALFRED, JUNR.
PHILADELPHIA. DEAR CHARLES,
THE unexpected arrival of several of our vessels from India, obliges the
partnership to call you from your happy retirement. We, however, anticipate
your ready and cheerful compliance; more especially when you are informed, the
present urgency of business will detain you no longer than a week or ten days;
by which short interval from pleasure your return to the delights of the
country will be rendered more agreeable.

INFORM my Fanny that by these vessels I have obtained intelligence of her
young favorite, Harry Wellsford. After arriving at Canton, and discharging his
duty to his owners, he accepted a lucrative appointment in the principal
manufactory of that place. Here he served with reputation and fortune, until
June in last year; when, converting his money into valuable merchandise, he
chartered an American ship, and sailed for Bourdeaux in France; after which my
informant heard nothing further. It is probable, he has prospered in this
adventure; and being engaged in extensive and profitable trade, has forgot his
connexions and juvenile attachments.

GIVE my love to your mother, and believe me to be

Your affectionate father, CHARLES ALFRED.

LETTER XXIII. TO MRS. HARTLEY.
WHITEHALL FARM. DEAR SISTER,
YOUR last was indeed a welcome cordial to my agitated bosom. Its tender
contents suspended the rigor of reflection; and for a time my mind was
tranquillized in the oblivious enjoyment of your love and sympathy. But ah,
these kind intervals of joy seem reserved only to embitter some succeeding
disaster! These transient flashes of delight are the unerring preludes to the
thunder of distress! -- I had just dispatched the trusty Hannah with my
important note to young Alfred, who I beheld crossing the opposite held, when a
servant delivered your epistle. Already had a momentary regret for this step
seized my mind; but your timely approbation dissipated its influence, and
confirmed me in approving the measure as indispensibly necessary, as well to
avert my own misery as the destruction of the principles of this amiable youth.
(...) Maria, it was too (...) of my address to the undesigning lad. Alas,
thought I, as I wrote it, I have already wounded his tranquillity! How
ungenerous then, will it be, -- how cruel, to add to his present unhappiness,
the poignancy of censure or the severity of anger! My words therefore, were of
the gentlest kind, selected by tenderness and respect. He answered it
immediately; and oh, my sister, his expressions, more unequivocal than ever,
convinced me he had penetrated through the incautious veil of my words. At one
moment, my wicked heart was mortified at the seeming indifference he expressed
with regard to my request; at the next, my understanding was astonished by the
cogency of his reason; and finally, I was overwhelmed by a silent agony, from
the circumstance of his persisting in avowing the influence of a feeling,
which, although abstractedly harmless, in our situation, would prove imminently
dangerous.

OH, Maria, teach me the stubborn principles of matrimonial duty: Learn me the
art, for it is not nature, of looking on merit and demerit, on virtue and vice,
with indiscriminate eyes, and an unmoved heart; for, to be happy, I must be
insensible to either.

HE has detained my billet as an hostage for another interview. Alas, dare I
tempt the edge of that resistless vortex whose gulf is horror and remorse? Yet
why do I ask? It Is vain in my heart to attempt to allay its anguish by avoiding
the society of him whose presence is rapture, and whose absence already saddens
my joy! -- I overhear somebody entering below! It is my Fanny no doubt.
Farewell, for the present.

-- OH hide me, hide me, from the censuring world! Hide me, if possible, from
myself! Maria, even deny me your pity; nor suffer thy hallowed tears to flow in
sympathy for a wretch whose misfortunes are the effects of her crimes! --
Crimes! did I say? -- Oh heavens! Gracious God, wherein am I guilty? Is the
purity of my soul contaminated by the exercise of principles which thou have
planted in my nature? Can nature's milk-white innocence become demoniac, by
indulging her greatest, first prerogative? Is virtue a certain divine attribute
of the mind, infused at creation, or is it but a visionary creature of the
world's invention? I feel it to be a principle immutable and eternal. The proud
efforts of men to modify or counterfeit its characters, are the schemes of
impiety, or the machinations of fiends.

ADIEU, until I compose my mind.

THE foregoing reflections have tended gradually to subside my despair, and my
reason after a tempestuous tumult, is calm enough to relate the circumstance
which took place on first leaving my pen. Alas, instead of meeting my endeared
Fanny, I rushed into the parlour, and there was astonished with the person of
her brother! He was standing in the middle of the room, his hat in his hand,
and dressed in a riding-suit. My emotion was obvious: -- He blushed; and after
an expressive bow, begged me to forgive the freedom he assumed: -- "If, madam,"
said he, "I encroach on the decorum of the world by this unlooked-for visit,
impute it not to design; but to the innocence of my years and the fervency of
my esteem." Oh, Maria, I looked forgiveness! For the impatient youth, darting
his love-fraught eyes upon my countenance, without my being able to reply, so
dumb was my confusion, added: -- "Alas, madam, I am soon to be torn from your
dear society, by the urgency of my father's affairs in the city! Oh, at a
juncture, which, of all my life, I should prefer to devote to retirement and
friendship, I am dragged to the labor of a counting house and the more
loathsome noise of the city! But esteemed madam, no motives could induce me to
depart without performing my obligation to return this distressful paper, and
with it thus humbly implore from your lips a pardon for my recent temerity."
Oh, sister, can you possibly conceive of the agitated tumult of my mind, on
hearing this tender address, proceeding from one I so highly esteemed, and
kneeling at my feet, with tears glistening through the fire of his eyes, and
persuasive eloquence glowing on his lips! I continued insensibly silent, until
the load at my heart bursting from my eyes, afforded an alleviation by a
torrent of tears; after which I succeeded in making a fau'tering and, I fear,
unintelligible reply. -- Oh, Maria, yet do I fear, that in the frenzy of my
softened soul, my unguided tongue betrayed those unholy feelings at my heart,
to conceal which I had inwardly sworn! He left me, sister, with joy dancing in
his face: His eyes, brim-full of sentiment, fixed upon me; one hand on his
breast, the other raised in exclamation, as he retired saying: "Adieu, dearest
madam: Your heavenly tears interpret my happiness: -- I will be obedient: --
Farewell!" -- Oh, my angel of peace, to your friendship I fly for pity and
forgiveness! Can I deserve pity, and not hope forgiveness? Is my soul vitally
tainted by a vicious attachment; or are my present feelings only the temporary
effects of an impressive sensibility? Oh write to me of the attributes of
virtue! Illustrate to my immature judgment that metaphysical nicety by which
love is discriminated from friendship!

Adieu, in distress, CAROLINE FRANKS.

LETTER XXIV. TO CHARLES ALFRED, Junr.
DEAR BROTHER,
YOUR absence from the country has dispensed a gloominess over all our
features. Even my amiable friend, Mrs. Franks, languishes for the period of
your return. Indeed, Charles, you are highly esteemed by this worthy lady; and
I am sure your generosity will induce you to pursue every polite means of
meriting her friendship. She is of all the sex the most tender, feeling, and
affectionate. If she has any foible it consists in an exuberant susceptibility,
which might be rendered a dangerous part of her nature, by a villainous
influence from the other sex. Sometimes, when she bursts forth in the fervor of
sentiment, I fear she leaps the bounds of delicacy and religion. But she has
never acquired the fashionable art of disguise; and although the tyranny of
custom has been exercised to trammel the body, her mind retains its natural
liberty, and soars undaunted to the regions of love and friendship. I assure
you, she appears peculiarly anxious for your return, and says, with a smile,
that from the manner of your farewell, she thought it your final exit from this
romantic theater of nature. She delights in lively society, which the
surprising and unmanly remissness of her husband renders almost necessary for a
tolerable existence.

BE sure and purchase the articles I requested; particularly the collection of
books, intended for the joint amusement of Mrs. Franks and

Your affectionate sister, F. ALFRED.

LETTER XXV. TO MRS. FRANKS.
NEW YORK. DEAREST SISTER,
YOUR last, so fraught with genuine distress, arrived at a moment when my whole
soul was agitated by a pathetic fact, which has recently occurred in this city.
-- Alas, my dear girl, it is not you alone whom calamity visits: -- the sons
and daughters of affliction are as numerous as the votaries of humanity: --
Sympathy need never be idle; and the tear of pity may unceasingly trickle from
the eye of tenderness, while bigotry, avarice, and vanity violate the
susceptive bosom of innocence and love.

SINCE our establishment in this city, among the acquaintances we have formed,
a family of the name of Williams, consisting of a respectable father and
mother, and three dutiful sons, has not been the least flattering and
agreeable. My earliest observation in it, was the sincere passion which the
eldest son constantly avowed for a neighboring female, whose parents, though
not in the habit of intimacy with his, were ever cordial and polite to his
addresses. A mutual and and unvaried affection had subsisted between them from
their infancy, and, "growing with their growth," the time had now arrived in
which they anticipated the unbounded fruition of their juvenile hopes. Their
parents, having heretofore tacitly acquiesced in their union, beheld with
unutterable pleasure the ceaseless constancy of their children, which could be
productive of nothing but the most unmingled happiness to all. The day of
festive gladness was appointed, and Mr. Williams, in order to equalize his
son's estate with the expected affluence of his daughter-in-law, purchased an
elegant house, and furnished it with every article of grandeur and convenience;
besides a handsome donation in cash, which he reserved for the day of
celebration. The blissful and expectant hour opened to the warm feelings of the
young lovers a thousand scenes of untasted joy -- a thousand sources of
ineffable delight. Louisa already looked upon Henry as the plighted husband of
her soul, and poured into his bosom her unrestrained confidence; while he, with
feelings equally elated, made her the supreme mistress of his thoughts! -- Thus
did the rapturous scene glow in their vivid imaginations, and tantalize
expectation, when the sordid parents of Louisa, taking her to their closet,
thus addressed her: -- "Dear Louisa, your happiness and future comfort being
the only hope and object of our lives, we have with pleasure beheld, and
cherished with parental indulgence, the virtuous passion you have long felt for
Henry Williams. In three days more our period of duty and authority will
expire; and before this we earnestly wish by one dictate of prudence, well to
conclude the work ever nighest our hearts." -- The astonished Louisa, unable to
discern the tendency of this ambiguous exordium, remained pensively silent; and
her father continued; -- "You know the disparity of young Williams' fortune,
and the thoughtlessness of men of his profession and years -- Let us then
beseech you, as you regard your future welfare and our solemn request, the last
perhaps, we shall ever end join, previous to your marriage, to call for an
attorney and confirm on your children, the fortune left you by your uncle: what
we are able to bestow will equal, if not exceed the fortune of your husband."
-- Louisa was all comprehension, and looking with an eye of affection first at
her attentive mother, and then her father, she exclaimed, "Is it possible,
father, that he, to whose honor and fidelity I am to commit my person and
precious happiness, is deemed unworthy to be trusted with a trifling sum of
paltry gold!" -- and turning, with a sigh acceded to the proposition of her
parents, as the only means of reconciling them to participate in their
approaching bliss. An attorney was obtained, and her fortune of five thousand
pounds secured to the offspring of her legal marriage, and forever wrested from
the touch of her husband. Their exulting parents beheld the nigh approach of
their children's happiness, with accumulated transport! The enraptured Henry
forsook the world; and devoted his time to the retired society of his amiable
Louisa: -- Louisa disclosed the ungenerous deed she had been obliged to
perform. -- Its suspicious aspect, and concealed process, enraged the pride of
his soul! -- He flew to his father, related the insiduous act, and with
aggravated frenzy cursed the foul and penurious machination! -- His father,
naturally of a high and independent spirit, heard his son with mortified
ambition, and in flames of vindictive manliness hastened to the presence of the
parents of Louisa -- They received him with cordiality; but their demeanor was
soon changed into coldness and reproach, by his unbridled vehemence; and after
a clamorous altercation, in which the agonized Louisa mingled her tears, he
left them with a solemn denunciation of the match, and an imprecation on their
iniquitous penury. All intercourse between the parties was interdicted; the
house, furniture, etc. purchased by Mr. Williams, re-sold, and the intended
solemnization annihilated.

-- Here, Caroline, pause, and enquire of your soul, if this horrid tale could
thus conclude? Say, my sister, is it possible to your conception, that the
divine and unadulterated fervor of this young pair, could, by this
interposition of avarice, be resolved into apathy and indifference? -- Could
that celestial passion, whose weakest votary has survived the shocks of fate,
become extinct by a mere artifice of parental covetousness? -- No, Caroline, it
is inconsistent with nature and nature's God.

LOUISA'S anguish at this disastrous event is not to be described! -- After
uttering her grief in the agony of tears and lamentation, she drooped into a
settled melancholy. Immured in her chamber, and refusing the comfort of the
world, her lonely reflections aggravated the deletery influence of her
misfortune: She gradually declined; and in a few months, her relentless parents
beheld the awful advances of their child's dissolution; which she viewed with a
placid benignity of soul. "Death, like a friend" indeed, seemed to succor her
affliction: and by a gradual and mild operation, terminated the bitter pangs of
her heart. Yet even at the solemn period of her decline, her mind dwelt on the
constancy and love of Henry with delightful extacy; and in departing from her
sorrowing friends, forever closed her quivering lips in pronouncing his beloved
name! Her fate reached the ears of the frantic Henry, who, until this time, had
been kept ignorant even of her indisposition! He flew to the house, -- but at
first was denied this last sad pleasure of beholding his lifeless Louisa! -- He
was, however, admitted for a few minutes, on cruel conditions. Leaning on the
arm of his younger brother as he crossed the aisle which conducted to the
solemn apartment, his weakened senses started at the melancholy idea, and for a
time an universal agony rendered him unconscious of his real situation. -- He
entered the darkened room, and approaching the coffin, beheld his lately
blooming love beautiful even in the frozen arms of death! -- "Oh!" he
exclaimed; but his surcharged heart gushing from his eyes, obstructed the
farther utterance of his grief. He gazed on the cold eloquence of her face;
touched with his hand her palsied cheek; and with a kiss whose ardor seemed to
breathe his soul to the object, was dragged from the tragic spectacle!

HE attended the funeral rites; and since has been continually absorbed in
silent sorrow! His soul, at times, seems abstracted from his body, and in
relapsing from his reveries, he often fervently exclaims, "I have seen my
Louisa! She is with her kindred spirits in bliss; and I shall soon be happy!"
-- While he thus paces in pursuit of the same grave which encloses his hopes of
life and felicity, his loving parents, oppressed with age and affliction, are
hourly progressing toward their end. Sorrow has raised her banner in the
family; while the parents of Louisa, in performing the pageantry of mourning,
forget the cause and object of their grief.

FROM this interesting narrative, my love, you will perceive, that, although
others of your sex endure not the same distresses to which you are destined,
they are not wholly exempt from the asperities of fate. Alas, be not covetous
of distress: but learn from this reflection, that all are either the Victims of
Sentiment or the dupes of passion, how desirable it is to acquire a mind
patient in suffering, and a soul indignant of complaint. The Author thinks it
here proper to acknowledge, that the outlines of the history contained in
Letter XXV. were sketched from an incident in real life, which occurred, not in
New York, as is mentioned, but in Philadelphia.


EXCUSE the length of the present, and believe me to be

Your affectionate sister, MARIA HARTLEY.

LETTER XXVI. TO MR. WILLIAM COURTNEY.
PHILADELPHIA. DEAR FRIEND,
FROM the date of this you will observe I have suddenly removed from the mild
scenes of love and innocence to the busy metropolis of the American world. --
Yes, friend, at a moment when the crisis of my love was tottering on the
balance of thought; while I was tormented with the heavy censure of my
Charlotte, a dispatch from my father demanded my immediate presence in this
city! -- My relunctant soul fluttered between duty and love; until at length,
the former prevailing, I hurried to the city, after a pathetic farewell;
abandoning the joys of love and retirement, for the pursuits and labor of a
counting house! But even in the midst of this perplexity, my astounded hopes
were revived by the flattering emotions of her I love, on the visit I made to
bid her adieu!

"Yet still I love; with rapture I admire;
"And mounds opposing raise the glowing fire!"
KNOW first, my friend, that the rapturous interview of the grove, which I
mentioned in my last, and in which I partly gave vent to the fervor of my soul,
had nigh been the finalle of our intercourse! The watchful prudence of my
lovely friend, though apparently pleased with the language of my passion while
I expressed it, on returning home became highly incensed, and the day following
honored me with a short epistle, written with the ease and elegance of Row, in
which the idea of my love was reprobated as incompatible with her duty and my
own honor; adding a solemn injunction in perpetual silence on my lips. --
Think, my friend, with what a trembling anxiety I received the important
letter! -- My eager eyes flew quickly over her tender admonition: while my
heart leaped with alternate hopes and fears! -- The female servant who
delivered the note, returning without an answer of any kind, I was left to
indulge in the admiration of her, who even in assumed harshness, proved her
heart soft and compassionate! Yes, Bill, it was plain, that while her pen
obeyed the impulse of necessity, in censuring my love, the wound intended for
me was felt more severely by herself! She relied tenderly on my friendship; and
hoped, (oh, think of my transport at these words!) that her denial of love
would not also exclude the calmer pleasures of esteem.

I AFTERWARD returned a studied answer to her communication; in which I
endeavored, by a complication of feelings, at least to convince her of the
purity of my attachment, and the fidelity of my heart, if not to produce in her
mind a sentiment congenial with my own. In this eventful posture stood affairs,
when the requisition of my father's partnership arrived, whereby I was
constrained to part without knowing the issue of our altercation!

Mr Charlotte was the last sweet object of my eyes on leaving the country. --
The beauty of her face shone through the brilliancy of the tears in which it
was dressed, supported by the arm of a sopha, as I withdrew from her presence!
Tears, -- alas, not of sorrow for my departure; but, more probably, the bitter
alleviation of a struggling virtue in her breast! -- A letter from my sister
has considerably tranquillized the uproar of my feelings; inasmuch as it kindly
intimates, that my absence has produced a general regret. This information
spurs my anxiety to return; which I expect in the course of a few days, until
when farewell,

In friendship, CHARLES ALFRED.
P. S. I have just looked over this letter, and am indeed ashamed of the
composition. But it will serve to prove to my friend how sincere I am in my
attachment to this admirable woman, the apprehension of whose displeasure so
universally irritates me.



LETTER XXVII. TO CHARLES ALFRED.
-- YOUR passion, it is evident, has passed the rubicon! The die is cast!
Charlotte's wounded heart throbs only as your influence directs; and by a
judicious artfulness, you may soon ascend to voluptuous bliss, and be the
acknowledged Nabob of her charms!

I AM aware, this salutation will almost disgust the tenacious chastity of your
love; because, even enamoured as you are with your mistress, your innocent,
boyish heart conceives of no rapture but that which flows from virtuous love!
-- Yet, believe me, what I have heretofore observed in extenuation of the
principles of your amor, is emphatically applicable to the full consummation
of it. The same pure and guiltless sentiments which at first glow in the
breasts of a loving pair, are strengthened and diffused by this confirming
testimonial of mutual confidence: -- Nay, the trembling flame, which before was
liable to expire at the first blast of coolness or indifference, by this
undying touch of extacy, is converted into an everlasting blaze in each, which
reciprocally warms, vivifies, and enlightens both. The joy of souls thus
reciprocally exchanged is sublimely ineffable.

BUT in thus reasoning in your behalf, I wish not to implicate a defense of
those females, who, not from a desire to evince the sincere ardency of their
love, but from wild infatuation, prostitute their virtue and charms, by falling
into the disgraceful embraces of a treacherous seducer. A young female, who, in
all her affections, should ever have a fixed eye on matrimony, in so yielding
to the persuasions of a villainous lover, exhibits a weakness of virtue equal
to her shallowness of mind; whereas, a forced wife, circumstanced as is your
heroine, and feeling for another that celestial glow which she never felt for
her husband, affords a doubtless proof of the earnestness of her attachment, by
a surrender of her person; and in that act she is less guilty than those who
before dragged her to the bed of one, the embraces of whom, though sanctioned
by human laws, were a violation of natural virtue and of justice.

THE interesting melancholy of my young acquaintance resists all the
consolatory efforts of friendship. -- I prevailed on him last evening to
accompany me to the theater, at the performance of Shakespeare's Hamlet. For a
time, the brilliancy of the house, the "ornaments of the boxes," and the spirit
of the ochestra, so far engaged his admiration, as to shoot transient sparkles
of joy in his face, the first I have ever observed: -- But the progress of the
tragedy restored his usual look of melancholy. At times, he would eye the
charming Mrs. Marshall, in Ophelia, with emotions of amazement, and inquire,
"Who is she? What Is her name?" Being answered, he exclaimed with a sigh,
"Heavens, (...) frantic am I!"

NEXT I observed his emotions increasing, by the character of the hero; whose
peculiar interest and sentiment was admirably expressed in the appearance and
action of my theatrical friend, young Moreton. When he pronounced the soliloquy
in Act III. Scene First, Tallman became so violently indisposed as to be
obliged to be conducted home; where he has been since confined to his bed by a
violent fever, with intervals of delirium! Today, however, I am happy to find
his illness has considerably abated. He is incessantly begging me to pardon,
what he calls, his unthankful inconvenience, saying, "It will not be long thus!
By your leave, my friend, as soon as my health may permit, I will repair to
Philadelphia, where I have friends; and oh, where even friendless, I may die
with joy!" Do, Charles, for virtue's sake, make some inquiries of your friends
in the city, concerning the family and connexions of one Henry Tallman, a youth
about twenty years of age, or upwards. He is a victim of that tyrant who at
present controuls your varying hopes!

Adieu, WILLIAM COURTNEY.

LETTER XXVIII. TO MISS HARRIOT HAYWORD.
THINK not, esteemed Harriot, that the friendly hint suggested in our last
conversation, has depreciated your amiable qualities in my estimation. My
recent absence from your delightful society, is indeed, the consequence of your
benevolent insinuations; yet by no means produced by a disgust for the motive,
but a sincere reverence of the generous principles of your heart, the innocence
of your mind, and the lamentable sanctity of your disclosure.

YES, my worthy friend, the faithless partner of my bed, is, if not criminally
attached to, irrevocably concentred in the affections of, young Alfred! -- She
forgets or neglects the avocations of domestic life, and even avoids him to
whom she is solemnly allianced by both religion and law! -- Oh could I describe
the mixed and agonized reflections of my mind on this cursed discovery! -- But
it is impossible for human language competently to express the complicated
feelings of a husband, who, after a disgusting series of indifference to his
wife -- after looking on her, and treating her, only as a necessary utensil --
beholds the same sentiments and the same practices retorted on himself! -- It
is not the vivid fire of jealousy that awakens my torpid soul: -- no, jealousy
is the sister of genuine love; and we can only be selfishly watchful, or
jealously careful of that which is to us intrinsically dear and estimable. --
But alas, have I ever felt, (oh infamy!) have I ever avowed, a fond or tender
sentiment for my treacherous wife? Notwithstanding this pungent consciousness,
after leaving your instructive company, and met her with a soul enraged with
latent vindictiveness! -- She appeared remarkably depressed in spirits, and
seemingly replied to my fearful interrogatories with a conscious timidity;
which I was about ascribing to a predictive omen of my descovery, when the
appearance of Miss Alfred and a subsequent discourse between the two, disclosed
the momentous cause of her sadness! -- Her petit maitre, Harriot, is on a visit
to the city! -- and she (impressive creature!) pines in silence at his
distressing absence!

FROM the observation of this circumstance, I am induced to believe, that my
unthinking and gay wife indulges a reprehensible partiality for the
accomplishments of young Alfred; but philosophy explodes the possibility of its
ever swelling into a criminal intercourse -- Oh, were I to apprehend the
occurrence of this dreaded event, the tormenting foresight would convulse my
imagination to death! -- But my pitying friend, as you from motives of
generosity, first suggested to my fears the danger of my honor, so also do you
from motives of mercy, assist me to repel the existence of jealousy, that
accursed fiend to matrimony. Rather blind my perception to confirming evidence,
and so keep me in tranquil insecurity, than by sharpening the acuteness of my
conjectures, open on my soul the resistless sluices of unutterable anguish! --
Do this, my Harriot, and you will evince yourself the friend of the unhappy,

FRANKS.

LETTER XXIX. TO MRS. HARTLEY.
WHITEHALL FARM.
WHAT apology dare I offer for my thankless silence? -- What words can repay
the generous friendship and alleviating sympathy of my adorable sister? -- Will
you forgive my remissness if I tell you, I could write of nothing but the sad
story of my own shame -- that the conscious pen refused to record the infamy of
its mistress? -- Will you, dearest Maria, in gratitude for your watchful cares
of me, accept the poor returns of a heart wounded with conflicting agony, and a
bosom bleeding with illicit love? -- Can that heart, the seat of perjury,
treachery, and in, fidelity, at the same time inherit the divine prerogative of
gratitude? -- I fear my virtuous sister will discard the frantic idea, as
incongruous and repugnant to natural and inherent principles -- then indeed
will her wretched Caroline, realize the horrors of despair.

OH Maria, as you have often predicted, I am now the impotent victim of
sentiment! -- Alfred, the young and bewitching Alfred, has been absent a week!
-- Oh what a week of varied emotions has it been to me! -- But ah his eyes, his
lovebeaming eyes, his voice of music and delight, have remained unalienated to
my heart! -- Last evening, making the seventh day of his exile, as the sweet
Fanny and I sat in our parlour, fondly conversing of his accomplishments -- nay
even rivaling each other in encomium, -- we were surprised by the sound of
footsteps at the door, and more astonished afterward, on the appearance of the
beautiful theme of our discourse! -- It was himself! -- Just as he appeared
when he had recently left me overwhelmed in tears! -- His sister's surprise and
joy abounded in congratulatory caresses -- while mine, not less cordial,
expressed itself as welcomely in silent delight! -- He seized my hand: --
saluted me with affection's kiss -- "His eyes told tender tales of love." --
But hold! Oh, how weak, how censurable in my sister's judgment will this
confession render me! -- Excuse me then, in abruptly subscribing myself,

Your loving, Though distressed sister, CAROLINE FRANKS.

LETTER XXX. TO MR. WILLIAM COURTNEY.
DEAR FRIEND,
RETURNING to this theater of bliss, my heart prancing more nimbly than the
horse, I met with an incident which not only detained me several hours from the
object of my love, but also excited much sympathetic sorrow!

I LEFT the city about three o'clock in the afternoon, and having slowly rode a
few miles, halted at a small hut, situated at the foot of a hill, covered with
lofty oaks, to repay an obligation formerly conferred on me by the rustic
inhabitants. Abruptly entering the humble roof, I was startled at the
appearance of distress evident in the melancholy countenances of the mother and
her three sobbing children! She sitting on a rush chair, pressing a screaming
infant to her breast, mingling with its milk the tears of her affliction; while
the two eider children, leaning on each side, catched the bitter sighs of their
mother with tender hearts which seemed to float in the water of their eyes! --
I impatiently inquired for the father of the family, and the occasion of their
distressful condition; to which the distracted wife replied by exclaiming, "Oh,
heaven only knows where or how Philip is!" -- This heightened the first
impressions of wonder. The wretched woman being unable, from the vehemence of
her tears, to afford the necessary satisfaction, I had recourse to the eldest
daughter, though a child, who was equally affected with the family distress,
yet less violent than her frantic mother. -- "Oh, sir," said she, wiping with a
homespun apron the big tears which "rolled her blooming cheeks adown," "my
dear, poor father is lost in town! Yesterday, our rent being due, his landlord
told him to quit the house or pay the money before tonight. He therefore,
gathered all his fruit, and so on, and went to market, expecting to return at
night with enough to satisfy our cruel landlord; but oh, he has never come; and
tonight mamma, I, sister, and dear little Philip must all lay in the wood!" --
This sorrowful tale unravelled the mystery of the affecting scene before me. I
comforted the children with small presents; and delivering to their mother the
amount of the rent due, left them in a state more tranquil than that in which I
had found them.

ON returning to the door, my horse, whom I had left hitched to a sense,
becoming impatient of my stay, had slipped his bridle and absconded, leaving me
to follow on foot. This circumstance was extremely unwelcome, it being a
considerable distance home, and the sun, throwing his farewell glances on the
tops of the forests, announced the approach of darkness. As I advanced to the
familiar scenes of my recent pleasures, my heart bounded with rapture and
delight! Every specimen of rural elegance, and every economical adjustment of
natural beauty, afforded so many (...) of the presence and taste of my
Charlotte! As I passed opposite her magnificent dwelling, which derived an
appearance of additional grandeur from the mild shade that enveloped it, I
vainly hoped to discover her, in the resemblance of melancholy, under the
drooping willows, chanting hymns of sadness for my absence! -- At our gate I
was first cordially welcomed by the affectionate farm dog, who, frisking with
joy, escorted me into the parlour, where I found my mother reading the
production of a celebrated Bishop in answer to the blasphemy of Pain. My
unexpected appearance, and the manner, astonished the old lady; which was
answered by equal amazement on my part, when I was informed that my truant
horse had not arrived before me. -- But, my friend, think of the transports of
my wearied heart, on being desired to step across to our neighbor, and conduct
home my sister, who was on a friendly visit there! My fond impatience was
worldless! I slew into the presence of my all; saluted her with ardor; and
received the utterance of her affection from the gladdened langour of her eyes
Oh, my friend, she appeared more beautiful and enchanting than ever! A fanciful
dishabille, and a general looseness of apparel, seemed to ameliorate the
natural softness of her features; while the moderate effulgence of her eyes,
completed an object interesting and admirable!

WHILE in town I made several inquiries for the relations of your friend; but
met no person who knew him or had ever heard of such a family. This makes his
history and situation the more surprising, as my acquaintance in the city is
almost universal.

EXCUSE the inaccuracies of the foregoing, by ascribing them to the
perturbation of the mind of

Your sincere friend, CHARLES ALFRED.

LETTER XXXI. TO MISS HARRIOT HAYWORD.
OH God! -- Oh God! -- how in me has the Poet's emphatic admonition been
verified!

"Seize wisdom ever it seizes thee; that is,
"Be wise ever it be torment to be wise."
Now indeed it is an innate hell to my soul to "know myself," and what a wretch
I am! -- Ignorance, blindness, and insensibility were highly preferable to this
cruel and excruciating wisdom! -- Like our first forefather, I have been blind
to one blessing in my temporal Eden; on the knowledge of which the flaming
sword of the angel of remorse persecutes; -- yea, murders me! -- Where or what
am I! -- A being endowed with intellects? -- A man of human passions; -- and do
I tremble at the execution of retribution? -- Oh, it is guilty self that keeps
me from doing vengeance to myself! -- The wretch who hurries destruction on
himself by plunging into the bosom of a fierce volcano, is not more guilty of
his fate, than am I the cause and author of my present agony of soul. Yet hold!
-- Can the wretch, who has murdered my honor, who has cankered my hopes of
peace, plead extenuation of his crime in the proof of my own guiltiness? --
Will my offense against one woman, (and oh, confusion to my soul!) against my
marriage oath, palliate his more aggravated insult against me, and his outrage
on the holy institution of heaven? -- Say, my sympathetic friend, will the
acknowledgment on my part, of the want of love and tenderness for her whom I
espoused as my wife, be a defense, or a coloring for the adulterous and
sacrilegious passion of young Alfred? -- Oh that my heart were steeled to these
tormenting inquiries! -- But they rush like torrents in excruciating conviction
on my soul! -- They soon must waste their violence, or it very soon fall a
victim to their unremitted pungency! --

-- RETIRED from worldly objects, I have endeavored to allay my soul-rending
suspicions; nay, my sensible convictions of the baseness of my wife, by
studying the philosophy of the human heart, and its innate propensities to good
and evil. Alas, these philosophic contemplations too generally terminate in a
bitter consciousness of self-blame! --

"Who breathes must suffer, and who thinks must mourn;
"And he alone is blessed, who never was born."
REASON, nature, religion, and philosophy, though each opposed to lawless love,
are all conjoined to reproach the remiss conduct of my nuptial life, and point
to it as the creative cause of my present dilemma, and ever-lasting ignominy!
-- Burdened with these contemning sensations I dare not, cannot assume the
tone of uprightness, to vindicate the honor of my bed -- Hah! what do I say!
-- Alas, let me not die with false conjecture! -- Hymeneal chastity is yet, I
know, uncontaminated: -- sensual debasement is not yet perpetrated: -- but that
their mental faculties have long engaged in illicit affection; -- that their
souls even now revel in the voluptuousness of lascivious sentiment, is
undemonstrably evident in the amorous language of their love-fraught eyes!

I FIND myself in a condition so mentally distracted, that I must beg you will
break down the obstacles of custom, and favor me with a few lines of
consolation. Though I lose the melody of thy tongue in the manner of
communication, yet will thy words retain their original balsam! -- Yes, what
one ungenerous, thoughtless woman has destroyed, thy virtues and superior
accomplishments shall doubly replenish.

Adieu, The Unhappy FRANKS.

LETTER XXXII. TO MR. T. FRANKS.
ESTEEMED SIR,
TO refined minds the pleasures of sympathy afford an exhaustless fruition; but
to those whose repelling bosoms are alike callous to the impressions of
benevolence, and deaf to the feeble voice of distressed virtue, the inlets of
this sublime intellectual enjoyment are effectually choked by unnatural
principles of sensuality. The former are made happy, in a manner, by the
calamities of their fellow creatures; because, their distresses produce an
opportunity for the indulgence of every god-like prerogative. The latter,
radically dead to sensibility, can partake neither of their prosperity nor of
their adversity; but contract within the narrow and wretched limits of self,
every human power of intellectual enjoyment. So forcibly have these ideas been
confirmed on my mind, by observation and the increase of experience, I am often
prompted to believe, that on this universality of feeling, which as it
increases its objects, assimulates to the benign spirit of philanthrophy, hang
all the social comforts of life; and that without a fellow-feeling for
another's woe, we would be comparatively insensible to the rigor of our own.
-- It is but a melancholy pleasure, however, to know and commiserate another's
sufferings, without possessing the power to remove or alleviate the occasion.
Our really feeling, does not actually lighten his grievances; but the idea of
social distress, or a partnership in misery, renders its endurance more
tolerable, than when we find ourselves unfortunate, unfriended, and abandoned.

To your mind, my worthy friend, now convulsed with the agony of injured
honor, mingled with a portion of self-condemnation, this species of
alleviation will afford but little comfort; unless indeed you can balance
against the alienation of one woman's affections, the acquisition of the esteem
and friendship of another. -- But this circumstance, even were it possible,
would not effectuate the restoration of your wonted tranquillity. Could you, by
a wonderful stretch of philosophy, once conceive that a kind of reprisal on
your wife's unfaithfulness, would equalize the irritation of both; could you
even be persuaded to retaliate on her perfidy by equal perfidy, I doubt not,
but that intervals of uneasiness and remorse would occur, to falsify your
experiment. Nothing then, but the rivival of her love and duty as a wife, or
the extinction of that title and its endearing relationships, can make you even
tranquil. While she retains the sacred appellation of wife; while as such, she
claims your attention as husband, it is irrevocable that every aberration from
propriety in her conduct, will convulse and torment your soul; but could that
affinity be totally extinguished, and her claims on your affection withdrawn,
her future demeanor, however culpable, would, of course, cease to agitate your
feelings. But why need I thus presume to argue to a man endowed with all the
energies of reason, and a permanent standard of resolution! -- Innate
consciousness, joined to a manly and upright vindictiveness, will guide you to
the best eligible means of remedy, in the pursuit of which you are ever
accompanied with my most sanguine wishes.

I CANNOT conclude this attempt to be of service, without adding a suggestion
which I trust, will intermit the violence of your grief; -- it is, my friend,
that notwithstanding the almost palpable indecency of Mrs. Franks toward this
young coxcomb, there is but little proof apparent to convict her of actual
criminality. -- Forgive me, Sir, for this boldness! -- I declare it has cost me
numberless blushes; -- but my sincere interest for your happiness exceeds the
restrictions of verbal decorum, and must be the only excuse for the
unreservedness of this epistle.

Yours, sincerely, H. HAYWORD.

LETTER XXXIII. TO MRS. FRANKS.
NEW YORK DEAREST CAROLINE,
IN the name of heaven whither will this frenzy of passion impel you? Alas, has
it not already whirled you to the borders of fathomless destruction; on which
even now your frantic mind is undecided between a sentiment of duty and the
wild impulse of a guilty passion? Oh, Caroline, my heart bleeds afresh at every
renewed instance of your weakness; for I will not call it vice. At the arrival
of every mail, a sudden horror seizes my mind, apprehensive of the approach of
some grievous intelligence! As I perused your last, my fears swelled in
proportion to the increasing interest of its contents; and at the conclusion,
every mental faculty was alternately convulsed! The whole, for a while devoured
my affection; and I felt for you only those emotions of pity which our sex
generally experience on beholding the gloomy records of female degradation!

BELIEVE me, Caroline, my affection is not merely the warmth and partiality of
a sister. -- No; the solicitude of a fond mother, the abate less ardour of a
friend, added to our natural alliance, render my attachment superlatively
genuine. Every peril of your life creates in me the apprehensions, the prayers,
and the hopes of a parent whose chiefest felicity consists in the prosperity
and happiness of her child. Every error of thought, the slightest deviation
from real virture, is with tears recorded in my memory. Nay, sister, the fibers
of your soul are so entwined with those of mine, that the smallest touch on the
first reverberates with redoubled asperity on the latter. Your present
consciousness of distress is a negative pain, to that actual torment which I
experience in the apprehension of your danger! Your judgment is inveigled by
the slashing sophistications of his logic; your partial eyes, fascinated by
superficial endowments, neglect to investigate his internal merits your mind,
perverted by an unthinking intercourse with his (...), is disabled from
scrutinizing into the villainy, of his purpose: But, sister, my advice to shun
and detest his passion, is unbiassed by the splendor of his graces, and the
result of a pure solicitude for your happiness, against which so many dangerous
wiles coalesce!

BEFORE prediction touched the threshold of events, I secretly regretted your
constitutional propensity to unhappiness! In infancy, the loss of a toy, or the
want of a favorite ribbon, would swell your heart with unutterable anguish, and
produce a season of pining distress! As you proceeded in life and encountered
the sterner difficulties of human nature, this want of fortitude followed your
footsteps, and beset every trifling accident with unreal terrors. -- How often,
and alas, how ineffectually, have I drawn your attention and opening ambition
to the beauties of the Poem Hayley's Triumphs of Temper.
which inculcates a certain happy subordination of temper? How frequently,
after imbibing the mild spirit of the (...) have you poured into my gladdened
bosom (...) fervent promises to emulate the conduct of the heroine? But ah, as
soon did the glimmerings of embarrassment unfix these phantoms of resolution!

FORGIVE me, Caroline, in the boldness of my anxiety for your welfare. I
beseech you to be yourself; and, by a magnanimity in resisting the influence of
fictitious woe on your spirits, be happy under all the allottments of
Providence.

I SHALL close this sheet by transcribing two verses from the pen of a young
gentleman in this city, addressed to his friend on the subject of misplacing
his affections; on account of which they may be equally applicable to your
situation.

" Deception often info'ds the fairest face,
" And deeply veils the love-impassion'd eye!
" Illusion reigns in captivating grace!
" Deceit belies the sweetly-rolling eye!
" Appearance vain! professions insecure!
" False oaths and sighs, and silver-shedding tears!
" Deceptive arts! the lover's wily lure,
" To banish reason, and beguile the (...)
Adieu, MARIA HEARTILY.

LETTER XXXIV. TO CHARLES ALFRED, JUNR.
BALTIMORE. DEAR CHARLES,
THE receipt of your last, as is usual, was succeeded by a variety of
entertaining reflections. My admiration was geometrically divided between the
instance given of your benevolence to the distressed peasants, and the
stupendous growth of your passion for her whose eyes make slave the mind! Love,
I imagine, has a tendency to render the heart universally charitable; because,
by it the whole system is so wonderfully ameliorated, as to be easily
susceptible of the finer impressions of pity. A person under the influence of
this passion, melts into compassion by the first ray of another's distress;
while those who are repulsive to its gentle operations' are also callous to the
effects of sympathy. So likewise, it may be observed of those who naturally are
possessed of (...), that they are more liable to the (...) love, and more
fervent, once captivated.

I AM not a little anxious to receive the conclusion of that pathetic tale
which your feelings so happily indicted. Give me in your next the facts which
have since transpired. I have no doubt that the honest family will fully repay,
in gratitude the munificence of their youthful benefactor. -- What a glorious
subject would it be for an humane painter, to display the modest figure of
Youth, in the humble cottage of persecuted Indigence, dispensing gratuitous
blessings soothing the anguish of a bereaved wife, and comforting the noisy
sorrows of unfriended little ones! By heavens, Charles, were I the slave of
Hymen, and my own wife your cicesbo, this proof of the nobility of thy mind
should extenuate the offense, and continue thee in my friendship!

MY young acquaintance, the unknown Tallman, left me last week to proceed for
Philadelphia; where, as he exclaimed, his only hopes of happiness were
concentred. His health, spirits, and appearance were surprisingly improved. --
On my leaving him at the stage-office, he gave me a look of inexpressible
feeling, and grasping eagerly my hand, squeezed it with both of his, saying --
"Oh, (...) if my hopes are indeed prospered (...), it is your goodness shall
receive the second blessings of my heart; but if, (alas, the apprehension
chills me!) -- if heaven protracts my wretched existence only in order to
inflict heavier misfortunes, I shall die regretting your charity as the unhappy
instrument of my torture." -- The tears started in his eyes at the utterance of
these words; and his heart panted as if endeavoring to extricate itself from
the confinement of his bosom! -- But enough of this: -- You will probably
construe this into self praise; a practice of which you have often impeached my
tongue, and which I have as often disavowed.

I must abruptly conclude, as I am called off to join a party for the Theater.

Farewell, WILLIAM COURTNEY.

LETTER XXXV. To Mr. WILLIAM COURTNEY.
-- PLAGUE on your flattery, Bill! The lucid praise you have so showered on the
vain Alfred, has indeed made him a huge hill of vanity? I will, however,
endeavor, by always emulating your commendation, to derive benefit from the
very source which inundates others with ridicule and contempt.

BUT, my friend, I have a stronger, dearer motive added to your encomium, to
urge me to the practice of benevolence: -- My Charlotte, the hallowed deposit
of every virtue, rewarded my benesicence with a torrent of blessings -- with a
full hour of endearing caresses! I was with her seated on the balcony which
fronts her mansion, dilating on sentiments of love and friendship, when we
perceived coming from my father's plantation, an homely countryman, whom
afterward I found to be the father of the distressed family to whose relief my
timely assistance had been afforded. As he advanced with his hat in his hand,
his eyes sparkling with an honest joy, and his tongue loaded with the whole
weight of his gratitude, he could but scarcely articulate, "Heaven bless you
for preserving my dear wife and children!" After confusing me with the lavish
expression of his gratitude, he proceeded, at the request of my sympathetic
Charlotte, to relate the occasion of his unhappy absence; which he did in
nearly the following terms:

"SWEET madam, (even his vulgar eyes, saw something sweet in the person of my
fair companion) "and you, good sir, when I arrived in the city and had disposed
of my little all, returning to take possession of my horse and cart, I could
find neither it nor the man with whom I had left it. Zoons! says I, this will
never do! So at length I traced the fellow -- "Where Is my cart?" says I; -- "
Your cart!" says he, "at the d -- l; get your horse, and look for it." -- Oh
ho, is that the tune! So making no more ado about it, I yokes the scoundrel by
the gills, and toated him into a shop where they told me justice might be
bought; but the magistrate being out, my business could not be done. There I
waited till near night, hearing the thief curse me like Satan, before the
appearance of the judge, who, it seemed, had a better job in hand; and, giving
the villain into the care of one of his journeymen, ordered me to appear the
next morning. Ah, sir, you may guess how I spent the night, in grieving for the
certain distress of my poor family! -- Early in the morning I attended at the
office, when after answering some questions and swearing an oath, was told
nothing could be done for me until Mayor's court! Oh, zookers, how my heart was
then gauled! I should surely have done something wicked, had not neighbor
Jones met me, and told where I could find my property. It was in a dirty alley
I found my poor half-starved creature, hitched to a stump. She, poor soul, was
as rejoiced as myself; and home we trudged, leaving the justice and his man to
handle the rogue who had tried to defraud me. -- After crossing the ferry I
found your horse, which I instantly knew, grazing on the side of the road.
Hitching him to my cart, I have brought him home, and left him in your stable."

HERE he paused, as if to recover breath, of which his fervent narrative had
nearly deprived him. -- " Ah, dear sir," continued he, "think of my
astonishment on coming to my dear home, to find neither wife nor children to
welcome me! I was half distracted! Guessing the occasion, I slew to my
landlord, and was there told, that my innocent family were in custody on the
susspicion of their having dishonestly got the very money which your charity
bestowed, and with which they had offered to pay the rent! Crookers! but for
his wealth, I would have hided the scoundrel! When I mentioned your name and
goodness, he restored us to our homely hut; where, if it will be any joy to
you, heaven shall hear the prayers of a whole family for your prosperity!" --
Concluding thus, the aged clown, with a coarse bow, left us to resume the pure
pleasures of love. Oh, with what unbounded confidence did the unhappy Charlotte
flatter my passion, by relating the history of her griefs; during which the
revival in her mind of certain affecting incidents, produced a poignant flow of
tears, in which she pathetically indulged leaning on my bosom! -- As if invited
to it by the example of my love, the heavens convened their water and commenced
a sympathetic shower; by which I was obliged to "adieu," and hasten home.

I remain, with sincerity, Your friend, etc. CHARLES ALFRED.

LETTER XXXVI. TO MRS. FRANKS.
DEAREST MADAM,
MY distracted mind has but just survived a tremendous agitation! -- A thousand
conflicting thoughts, a thousand fears and hopes have suddenly been excited, by
an adventitious circumstance of this morning, over which I have ever since
silently pondered in sad and mysterious wonder.

AN instinctive sadness gradually stole on my mind. The acuteness of reflection
often produced tears on my cheek, without the least consciousness of their
origin. In vain I used every effort to remove its influence: -- Read, sung,
danced, and played, but each contrivance was alike ineffectual, and my
distended heart involuntarily heaved sighs of predictive distress. At length,
finding every other means unavailing, I resolved to shorten its duration, by
withholding my weak restraint; that is, by giving it a general and unresisted
control, let its violence be its own destruction. For this purpose, I repaired
to my sympathizing grotto. Here indeed, alleviation seemed to be produced, by
the increase of lamentation. -- Here, as I had before often done, I emptied my
surcharged heart of its latent sorrows, by complaining to the rocks, and
fancying' that in their sonorous responses, I heard the replication of
another's anguish. -- Indeed, my friend, there is a specific in the society of
these aged rocks, which seldom fails of relieving the poignancy of my
retrospective reflection. I left them wonderfully revived. A placid serenity,
congenial with the softness which hung on the surrounding scenes of nature,
accompanied me home. -- But here; -- alas, how can I proceed in this short tale
of wonder! -- here was reserved for me, the ambiguous occasion of my present
consternation. I had just seated myself in the library, and was beginning to
peruse the delightful leaves of scientific poetry by Thompson, when the
enclosed letter was delivered to me, by a strange and very polite servant. His
introduction, which was formal and solemn, and his errand,(which was, to
deliver a confidential letter) were both calculated to swell the first emotions
of amazement! -- They did -- I received the messenger and his letter with
trembling surprise, which was increased to horrid wonder, on reading the
enclosed address to me, without a genuine signature! Its serious, polite, and
studied disguise, seem to conceal some circumstance of importance to my
welfare; in conjecturing which, I have almost wrecked my understanding. To you,
my worthy friend, in whose bosom, my dearest secrets have already found a grand
lodge, I fly for counsel and advice. -- Oh, for heaven's sake, tell me
heartily, if you do not think this circumstance is real; and that my Henry, my
exiled Henry returned, is at the bottom of it? -- This dear, this delightful
thought, this enlivening hope, inhabits my heart, and rings with transport
through my strained fancy. Its impression on my mind, has prevented me from
disclosing the affair to any of my family; preferring the firmness and candor
of your friendship, to the interested love of any earthly relation. Return the
letter speedily, together with your advice. Tell me if it is safe or prudent to
accept the assignation; -- and tell me also, if you will accompany me thither.

EXCUSE me for not calling on you: -- my mind is actually disjointed, and
incapable of enjoying society.

Adieu, With sincere love, FANNY ALFRED.
[The following was enclosed in the preceding letter.]



LETTER XXXVII. TO MISS FANNY ALFRED.
Near WHITEHALL FARM. ESTEEMED MISS,
NOTHING but a permanent conviction of your generous disposition, could give
boldness to a stranger to address you in this free and doubtful manner. -- But
relying on your benign gentleness of temper, and the honorable motives by
which I am impelled, thus to demolish the mounds of respect and decorum, I
firmly trust, the subsequent interest you will perceive in the following
disclosure, will amply apologize for my present impropriety.

THERE is certainly a deep-planted sentiment in your heart, which for many year
past, has painted on your conduct the conspicuous lineaments of sorrow and
distress. There are those too, besides yourself, and approved friends, who are
conscious of this circumstance; but no one more sincerely anxious for the
restoration of your tranquillity and the permanence of your bliss, than the
unknown friend who now addresses you. -- Pure as thy holy self are my designs:
-- nay, I swear by every attribute of heaven, that to renovate your decaying
health and spirits, I would cheerfully sacrifice my own earthly, I was almost
ready to say, eternal happiness. -- Yes, thou amiable and lamented lady, all
thy unrecorded sighs and ceaseless tears, so piously devoted to the
consecration of infantile love, shall be liquidated to thee with ineffable
bliss, if your reliance on my honor and truth, can lend you fortitude
sufficient, to enable you to meet me tomorrow at noon, at the southern
extremity of your father's farm.

I AM well aware of the apprehensions, which will be excited in your delicate
bosom, by this strange and suspicious demand: I even feel unhappy, that
circumstances render it indispensible, to purchase future permanent bliss, by a
temporary convulsion of mind; but the interest I presume to have in your
conduct, and the conviction I bear of being instrumental to your happiness,
impels me to hope that the assignation, though so apparently perilious, will be
effected.

SHOULD you be inclined to acquiesee in this request, I have only further to
wish, that it will be performed, unattended by any of your father's family, at
that might frustrate my genuine intention. -- Any female friend, in whose
integrity you may confide, will be admissible to our interview.

With the sincerest regard, For your accomplishments, I am, Respected Lady,
Your humble servant and friend, EUGENIUS.

LETTER XXXVIII. TO MISS FANNY ALFRED.
DEAREST FANNY,
ALTHOUGH I labor under an acute melancholy, I hasten to communicate my first
ideas on the subject of your letter of this morning, in doing which I am not
more guided by a spirit of adventure and curiosity, attached to our sex, than
by a pure and disinterested regard for your happiness.

BELIEVE me then, my friend, I think there is observable in the hurried
diction, and apparently restrained affection of the epistle, a sincere design
to be of service to you. The features of honesty are perceptible through every
assumed garb; and as villainy is infallibly detected by the conviction of its
own countenance, so it may also be said, the simple physiognomy of honesty
invariably recommends itself to confidence. The former cannot counterfeit even
the language or exterior of the latter: -- in its most artful attempts, it
always retains its native brogue of criminality. -- This being the case, and we
are to judge of the integrity of the design, by the complexion of the letter,
and other collateral circumstances, I am convinced, if you will re-peruse it
with attention, you will join with me in believing, that an acquiescence in the
required interview, will by no means endanger your safety; but probably
accelerate the progress of that happiness, which is reserved for you in the
skies.

As to the fond hope of your exiled Henry being the basis of it, I must beseech
you, not to rely on the idea as probable. No, Fanny, though possibly it may
relate to the amiable Wellsford, be assured, that the language of his love, on
such an occasion, would not for a moment be suppressed, for the perpetration of
a scheme of ridiculous chivalry. No, child, his long constrained passion, when
it shall meet thy endearing presence, will burst in sublime ardour at thy feet.
It could not tranquilly await the issue of a plot, so uncertain as that
suggested in your letter.

ALTHOUGH I have thus unequivocally advised you to comply with the assignation
of your unknown correspondent, I cannot omit suggesting the prudence of your
communicating the affair to the confidence of your brother, requesting him to
attend near the spot, to interpose in case our credulity should entangle us in
difficulty. -- This you may decide on, as expediency may suggest; in the mean
time, be assured, I will punctually attend at the hour appointed, to accompany
you on this singular expedition.

With sincere affection, Yours, CAROLINE FRANKS.

LETTER XXXIX. TO MR: WILLIAM COURTNEY.
PHILADELPHIA. DEAR FRIEND,
THE first moments of retirement after arriving in this city, I thus thankfully
dedicate to your disinterested sympathy. Alas, sir, my feelings resemble those
of a wretch, who, when on the edge of immediate ruin, has been rescued, and
then devoted to a more slow and afflicting destruction! Oh, when will
misfortune have exhausted her miseries on my devoted head! In every vicissitude
of life, every change of circumstance, her vengeance pursues me, inflicting on
my guiltless soul, the condensed anguish of her power! A successive climax of
woes has marked my infant career in life; while benevolence like yours has been
interposed merely to variegate its appearance, or to sharpen the pangs that
were to succeed! While I was enjoying the sweet repast of charity at your
hands, destiny was recruiting her wasted strength and forging new and peculiar
calamities!

My mind being wholly engaged in the anticipation of love and constancy, it was
not until the familiar scenes of nativity and infancy appeared, that I reverted
to the connexions of my blood. Alas, five years absence and fifty of
misfortune, had partly erased from my memory the fond idea of father, mother,
and my other kindred! Heavens! those reverend titles exist no more, but in the
faint annals of my recollection! The dreadful fever of 1793, swept into
eternity a father, mother, sister, and two brothers! -- Oh, my worthy friend,
can your humanity conceive of the effects of this horrid intelligence; which
was the first salute I received in this city? It for a while prevented me from
an enquiry which seemed paramount even to this melancholy circumstance. I had
left in this city, arrayed in tears of sorrow at my departure, the celestial
object who had received and answered with equal ardor, the first affections of
my heart; and from the hopes of whose constancy, even in the bitterness of my
woe, I derived a cheering emotion of joy. Fear and hope rushed into my
trembling bosom; and under the influence of both, I have so far explored the
region of bliss, as to discover the place of her residence, and the more
welcome circumstance of her heart being undedicated to any other.

THE affairs of my father at his death were extremely flourishing; whereby I
become heir to a large estate; the only branch of my family, spared either to
encounter new distresses, or to enjoy my portion of temporal felicity. Oh, my
friend, if it be the latter, shall one transport rise in my bosom, in which you
will not partake? Shall one joy glisten in my eye unanswered by equal rapture
in yours?

I am, with sincere gratitude, Your friend and Humble Servant, HENRY TALLMAN.
P. S. I would request you to honor me with a letter, but am unable to inform
you where to direct, until my residence is more permanent.

Adieu.



LETTER XL. To Mr. WILLIAM COURTNEY.
MY WORTHY FRIEND,
MY time and devotions are so completely absorbed in felicity, that I conceive
the present as nothing less than a voluntary stealth from the sweet course of
my pleasures. Oh, Bill participate in my joys! -- I am constantly revelling in
the presence of her I adore! -- Her feelings, her love, is as sanguine as my
own! -- Her expressions, glowing in living flames upon her dear lips, in
sublimity and elegance exceed all my feeble attempts at rhapsody! In fact, our
interviews are a commerce of souls, in the fervent indulgence of which every
faculty of mind and body is rendered the medium of some particular bliss! She,
loving, tender and amorous, receives my ardent caresses with a total
prostration of reluctance; while I, inflated with divine intellectual fruition,
respond to her bewitching endearments in the "silent elocution of the eye."
Sometimes our panting bosoms, loaded with delicious joy, lose their present
consciousness, and, pressed in each other's warm embrace, imperceptibly melt
into a sea of pleasures! -- Oh, this is indeed the joyous suspension of life,
the blissful trance of the senses, wherein is that extreme of pleasure
described by ancient and modern poets! These are the superlative delights
which, as it were, destroy the body and convert the senses into so many souls
or vehicles of joy!

SUBLIME as are my present sensations, methinks there is still a more extatic
gust of bliss to be enjoyed! Like an insatiable glutton, I crave more than the
present fond and rational extacy! Yes, my rapacious soul swells with mingled
raptures in the anticipation of that delectable moment, when, saturated with
the flames of Venus, she shall yield the honors of her beauty to encircle the
victorious brow of love!

-- "Expectation whirls me round.
"The imaginary relish is so sweet
"That it enchants my sense; what will it be
"When that the watery palate tastes indeed
"Love's thrice-reputed nectar? death, I fear me;
"Swooning destruction; or some joy too fine,
"Too subtle potent, tuned too sharp in sweetness,
"For the capacity of my ruder powers!"
INDEED, it would defy an army of Apollos, all inspired with the powers of
Shakespeare, competently to describe the peculiar emotions of my soul. --
Believe me, I am next door to elysium!

Your friend, etc. CHARLES ALFRED.

LETTER XLI. TO MISS HARRIOT HAYWORD.
WORTHY MISS,
AFTER leaving your soothing society last evening, taking a circuitous path in
my way homeward, I was profoundly startled on perceiving, in the field
adjoining the property of Alfred, two men and two women engaged in a reciprocal
exchange of courtesy and affection. In my course coming nearer to the scene, I
was effectually shuddered by distinguishing in this happy club, my truant wife,
her petit maitre, the prudish Miss Fanny, with her gallant also! This singular
groupe, had it consisted of indifferent characters, would have drawn my
admiration; but think of my thrilling horror on making the discovery! The
impulse of the instant would have driven me furious into their presence; but my
heart, bearing fresh in remembrance the prudent counsels of your wisdom,
retired from the guilty spectacle, with a fervent apostrophe to the just, and I
trust, vindictive heaven.

THE subsequent reflections preyed on my tranquillity as I meditated at home.
-- Oh, how "stale, flat, and unprofitable" appeared to me the pleasures,
vanities, and hopes of this world! Methought, existence was an immense load,
and, if it had been possible, I would have evaded its oppression!

-- OH, my generous, tender friend, I have certain ireful thoughts brooding in
my distracted soul! -- Thoughts, which I tremble to reveal even to your sacred
confidence! -- Thoughts, which, as I pore over them, become odious to myself!
Have you, joined to an experience in life, a practical firmness to counsel with
desperation? Does your mind, though of the texture of a woman, possess inherent
principles of valor? Can you, Harriot, unsex yourself, and be the friendly
accomplice of my voluntary destruction? -- Start not at this! -- Life has
proved only a successional train of torments -- my soul looks for repose to
death and eternity. -- Those gifts which heaven as blessings, have been
intercepted by demons, and, ere they reached me, converted into curses! I will,
therefore, thwart the efforts of hell, by plunging blindly into immortality;
confiding my soul into the care of that power who created it.

I KNOW this awful determination will affright you: -- Yes, it will doubtless
pierce the soul of a woman who feels universally in the cause of humanity. --
You will urge me to cling to the transient horrors of this world, in preference
to the doubt and peril of an adventurous passage to another. Speak not of
resignation. Heaven did not create the soul, endow it with a consciousness of
its future dignity, and expand it with noble sentiments of deity, for the
purpose of drudging under an immense load of miseries in this idle world. Why
is it invested with the power, if not to exercise the right of annihilating
this fleshy cumbrance, and re-ascending to omnipotency? Is it not nobler to end
life by one act of the will, than, by awaiting the slow and excruciating course
of misery, fall a groaning sacrifice to pusillanimity?

IF no damning crime has marked the progress of my life, what motive is there
(...) keep me back from heaven? If I have been but negatively virtuous;
abstaining from the vicious propensities of my nature, and suppressing improper
impulses, where is the man who dare arraign my soul at the bar of heaven? Where
the justice of that God in whom we all confide, if, without the conviction of
positive crime, I am to be sentenced to irrevocable perdition? -- If there is a
God, "that God delights in virtue;" -- is it vice to spurn at the fascinations
of earth, and rush into the embraces of deity?

"Loose then from earth the grasp of fond-desire,
"Weigh anchor, and some happier clime explore."
I HAVE seriously revolved in my mind the heavy charges of infidelity, alleged
to be the partners in an act of suicide. -- What are they, Harriot, to the
understanding of a man alternately under the influence of despair and of
religion? Believe me, the latter affords the more cogent reasons for an
immediate perpetration. The former acts without principle, or a view of
hereafter; whereas, the latter justifies the deed; and, by divinely opening the
portals of bliss for my departing soul, illumines the prospect of an eternity.

"Oh death! all eloquent" -- so sung
The bard, uprais'd on wings divine --
"Death" echoes trembling from my tongue,
And flits along the vaulted shrine!
From agonizing torture death can only save,
And requiems chaunt upon the hallowed grave!
Fell jealousy inflicts the venomed smart,
And pangs of mad'ning torture rend my soul;
Encrimson'd drops burst from my aching heart,
And passions dire in horrid tumult roll!
The brain on fire; the fever's raging heat,
Conspire to form indeed a wretch complete!
The cup overflows! The nerveless system shakes!
The blood in rapid motion quick retires;
The gloom which erst impervious, breaks
And kindly quenches the destructive files!
The voice of deity commands,
And nerves with steel my palsied hands!
He knows full well, a wretch's doom
Is solac'd in the friendly tomb;
Is bliss, contrasted with the smart
Which rives my agonizing heart!
His mandate cheerful I obey;
And wing my passage to the realms of day!
N. METHINKS, when I shall arm my hand against myself, I shall fight for my
God, and triumph over the treachery of the world!

FAREWELL, my Harriot: -- Even on the brink of eternity, I retain that fervent
admiration of your virtues and accomplishments which first excited my esteem,
and which, to the period of my utter destruction, shall be the source of
consolation and joy to

The Unhappy FRANKS.

LETTER XLII. TO MR. FRANKS.
SIR,
I folded down a leaf in the rich volume of Zimmermann on Solitude, in order to
read and answer your letter of this morning. My mind was suffused with a
rapturous admiration of the solemn pleasures of retirement, the living ideas of
which I had just caught from the energetic style of the author. -- I opened the
letter, while mentally calculating on the comparative happiness of a hermit and
a courtier or statesman: -- the course of my contemplations was not interrupted
until the horrid word "destruction" seizing my eye, created a shivering winter
in my veins! -- Alas, how has unguided madness trammelled the vigor of your
intellects! -- What unhappy influence has thus stripped thee of the prerogative
of reason? -- Surely the acuteness of your judgment, cannot be lost in the
apparent propriety of your reasoning, in palliation of the horrors of
self-murder? Surely that mind which lately was all energy, that heart which is
all piety, cannot so suddenly be the dupe of weakness, or the perpetrator of
guilt?

"Is resignation's duty hard? --
"Examine, you shall find,
"That duty gives up little more
"Than anguish of the mind."
MY feelings are so violently agitated by this unhappy circumstance, that I am
incapable almost of collecting reason sufficient, to outweigh the
sophistication of your essay to vindicate the impious assumption of Heaven's
prerogative. Because life is considered as a loan, those deluded mortals who
have rushed unprepared into the presence of their Maker, conceive it to be
solely at their disposal, and that whether they improve or abuse it, no
authority dare call them to account. Life is not only a loan; -- it is a sacred
deposit from the hands of creation, and if we thoughtlessly misapply or pervert
it, the united voice of reason, nature, and religion is loud in censure; -- how
much more worthy, then, of censure and punishment is that infatuated wretch,
who, wildly warring on religion, nature and reason, not only abuses the
blessings of existence, but with a bloody hand consigns it to destruction? --
How foul in nature's eye is the wretch who attacks the life of another? And is
not his own life a more holy, sacred trust? He who molded our bodies; who
infused the animation of souls; who appointed our abode in this earth for wise
and good purposes; and who, at his pleasure can convert afflictions into
mercies; -- he only is the just arbiter of the period at which his servants
shall be reunited to Divinity. -- Alas, it is only when mankind lose their
belief in the supremacy of this power, that they perform an act, which at once
violates the principles of obedience, and alienates the guilty from the care
and protection of the Deity!

IT may be true, my friend, that in this world your only portion has been pain
and misery. -- But is this a motive to suicide? -- The act supposes that you
either remedy the actual torments under which you labor, or that by
extinguishing life, you destroy its sensibility both for the present and the
future. You must undoubtedly expect either to succeed to an existence of more
perfect bliss, or to a state in which, by the extinction of the principles of
animation, your mind will be unsusceptive of either the emotions of pleasure,
or the throbs of pain. -- Surely, my friend, you cannot acknowledge the
attributes of God, particularly his justice, if after the commission of so
horrid a deed, your soul conceives the hopes of his favor! -- Alas, Franks,
our religion tells us, that the gates of heaven are doubly barred against the
entrance of him, whose hands are stained with his own blood! -- Let religion
then unnerve your dreadful purpose!

THE other plea is, the general attendant of those who are hardy enough to
execute this dire design. -- Finding that religion affords no extenuation for
their guilt, and impatient of misery, they die, not with the luminous
anticipation of a blessed hereafter, but with the dreary expectation of a state
of apathy; preferring nonentity to an existence of trials and distress. -- This
idea, I trust, has no influence on the belief of my philosophic friend: -- No;
have I not heard him with a transport of joy, describe those scenes of pure and
unmingled fruition, to which the virtuous and good shall be elevated hereafter!
-- Alas, are those blissful prospects, the foresight of which surpasses every
other earthly comfort, so lamentably clouded by the impious belief, that death
is but "an eternal sleep?" -- Oh, my friend, come to my presence! -- It is
impossible for me to write calmly or rationally, while my mind is so
universally affrighted: -- I start, and fancy the "bloody business" is
performing! -- Then scream, and in my solitary sympathy seem to mingle blood
with blood, and die the death of Franks. --

Adieu, HARRIOT HAYWORD.

LETTER XLIII. TO WILLIAM COURTNEY.
DEAR BILL,
I WAS never more confident of writing interesting matter to you than on the
present occasion; because, knowing that general vein of philanthrophy which
distills through your soul, no circumstance which is pleasing to humanity, can
be uninteresting to you.

NEARLY five years ago, my sister conceived an ardent and generous passion, for
a young inhabitant of Philadelphia, who, though not born to splendor and
affluence, had considerable expectations from the growing circumstances of his
father, who at that time was but a commissioned merchant. Abstracted from these
selfish views, in his mind and person he possessed all those amiable and
endearing qualities, which ought ever to be the objects of female adoration. By
a frequent intercourse, the parties became inviolably attached. It soon came to
the ears of my father, who having already almost stipulated a match, (though at
that time my sister was extremely young) with an immense fortune, immediately
adopted severe measures to destroy their affection; in which he succeeded so
far, as to prevail on the father of the youth, to dispatch him as supercargo to
the Indies. -- Alas, I well remember the affecting scene of their farewell! --
It occurred in the time of our vacation holidays, by which, being on a visit at
home, I was made a witness to the cruel effects of parental authority, in
interdicting the impulse of nature, innocence, and love. -- My sister, in tears
of speechless agony, hung around the dear neck of her departing friend; while
he with a calmness of sorrow, which disdained the aid of tears, pressed her to
his swelling bosom, and uttered a thousand blessings on her head! -- Thus were
they for several moments locked in each others arms, sigh answering sigh, when
the wind being favorable, he was hurried to the vessel which was to convey him
from the scene of his infantile joys. My sister was conducted to her room,
where for several months she continued in a state of mind and body, extremely
doubtful as to the issue.

MY own experience of the sublime passion, enables me now to judge of the
distressful feelings of this pair, at the eventful juncture of their
separation; -- of the unavailing tears and sighs, which must have filled up the
bitter period of absence! -- Until a few days past, my sister, ignorant of his
fortune, devoted her tears and prayers in silence for his safety. A few days
indeed have unwound to her enraptured mind, the constancy and fidelity of her
exiled Henry! -- Read, my friend, and let not your wonder subside until you
have acknowledged, that the fate of lovers is the peculiar care of ruling
Providence.

ON Wednesday last, my sister received from the hand of an unknown servant, an
anonymous letter; which, it seems, after expressing the most sanguine esteem
for her character, and protesting honorable intentions, solicited her to favor
the writer with an interview the next day; appointing the hour and place. In
her earliest emotions, she communicated the incident to my female friend; who,
judging with more experience of life, advised her to accede to the proposal;
she to be her second, and I, left any danger should result, was to be placed in
a private situation adjacent to the important spot. -- Affairs being thus
ordered by the inquisitive and timorous women, I repaired to the place, and
fixing myself within the cloister of some young trees, commanded a general view
of the theater in which this singular interview was to be performed. -- I
impatiently waited for the appearance of the parties: -- neither was punctual
to the assignation. -- At length, however, I perceived at a distance crossing
the field in a direction for the proposed scene, a strange young gentleman;
who, as he advanced, exhibited strong marks of concern, by frequent shows of
ejaculation, sudden halts, and a certain timidity or backwardness of conduct
which generally accompanies doubtful adventures of every kind. -- Suddenly I
observed the embarrassment of his manners increase; which, on turning my eyes,
I discovered to be occasioned by the appearance of my sister, who slowly
advanced, gently leaning on her companion, both with emotions not less obvious
than those of the gentleman, who now stood fixed in a thoughtful posture, his
eyes cast on the ground, and both hands closely pressed to his bosom! --
Believe me, friend, this was an interesting crisis to my agitated feelings. My
outstretched expectation, joined to a portion of anxiety for the safety of my
trembling sister, nearly suspended the operation of my reason; -- when my
astonishment was completed by perceiving her, with eyes fixed upon the object,
forsake the support of her friend and fly into the opened arms of the silent
stranger! -- This circumstance, I conceived, warranted me in issuing from my
concealment; and coming up to the spot, found Fanny in a swoon, still in the
arms of the gentleman; whom I instantly recognized as the exiled arbiter of her
heart; -- the worthy WELLSFORD!

THE overpowered girl soon reviving by the assistance of her friend, a scene of
love ensued, farbeyond my humble powers of description. The rapture of the
delighted lovers was mutual and unbounded; during which my Charlotte seemed
tranced in the enjoyment of the felicity which flushed on her mind from the
welcome circumstance of her friend's happiness; which I, serious as was the
nature of the occasion, converted into an opportunity for the vindication of my
love, by extolling as worthy the patronage of the most chaste and modest, a
passion, which, by its divine influence on the actions, surrenders the parties
to the indiscriminate enjoyment of each, without fear or repugnance.

IT was not until after considerable joint solicitations that the overjoyed
Wellsford was prevailed to encounter, what he called, "the censure of my
Fanny's parents:" But being informed of the inclination of my father to indulge
his daughter in any virtuous attachment which would conduce to her
tranquillity, (early destroyed by his cruel effort to correct nature) he seized
her hand with delighted enthusiasm; and, proceeding onward, indulged in the
warm transports of reciprocal love: While my Charlotte and her swain, with a
fervor not less sincere, followed, conversing on the miracles of Cupid, who
could preserve unfaded, in two youthful bosoms torn asunder by tyranny and
prejudice, the unquenchable blaze of his torch!

HAVING thus far partly forgot the first principle of my nature, (that is,
love) you must excuse me if, in order to fill up the remainder of the sheet, I
add a few sentences on the present momentous aspect of my amor. By heavens,
Bill, it is fraught with "dangers dire!" -- The husband of my charmer has at
length become jealous! -- His eyes glare in his ugly head with terrific horror;
and his treatment to his wife daily increases in brutality! His only society
consists of three infamous hags, whose profession and amusements are scandal
and detraction. With them he employs the chief of his time; seldom at home, and
when, irritating the delicacy of my Charlotte, by indecent suggestions, and
unmanly insinuations. I feel on this occasion all the wrath of a lover insulted
by a rival; and would, were it safe or prudent, chastise his unmannerly
baseness. -- But it is enough: -- The disconsolate, abused wife flies to my
society for comfort and alleviation: It is a species of the noblest charity,
then, to wipe tenderly away her bitter tears, and gladden her dejected
countenance by the offers of love? -- Is she culpable, after finding the bed of
Hymen barren of its intended joys, in flying to the lap of Venus for rapture
and delight?

I remain, Your sincere Friend, CHARLES ALFRED.

LETTER XLIV. TO CHARLES ALFRED.
BALTIMORE. DEAR CHARLES,
AS you expected, the contents of your last produced in my mind, a series of
entertaining and moral reflections, resulting in a sincere admiration of that
wonderful passion which can, by a peculiar magic, entwine two hearts at the
distance of innumerable miles! -- It is an instance by no means uncommon in the
history of love, that notwithstanding the efforts of pride, prejudice, or
superstition, to suppress its earliest dawning, the cause of nature and
innocence will be finally matured by the hand of destiny. -- The votaries of
love, that unconquerable passion, are daily seen to survive the wrecks of
malice and persecution; and although for a period their fate is apparently lost
in the mysterious evolutions of fortune, a watchful and approving power is
ultimately certain of collecting their scattered hopes into a point of
enjoyment.

IT is the trial of love, under which my worthy friend Tallman is now
laboring. -- Since he has left me, I have received a letter, dated
Philadelphia, in which he communicates a melancholy account of the loss of his
parents and family, by the dreadful contagion which spread death and terror in
that city, during the year 1793. -- This afflicting incident, I observe,
appears considerably alleviated, by the glimmerings of hope with which he has
met, in the pursuit of his love. -- Should he finally be prospered in his
passion, which is interwoven with his existence, he will assuredly be the
happiest and best of men! --

YOU speak in your last of certain perils, which appear in the way of your
love, with a timidity which seems to indicate a desire to relinquish your
pursuit! Ah, Charles, is this your proof of gallantry? Are you not aware, that
in every noble enterprise, the value of the acquisition is proportionably
enhanced, by the magnitude of the difficulties surmounted? It is but an
inglorious conquest which is obtained without the effusion of blood. The hero,
who in victory retires from the field of battle, clothed in scars and bloody
gashes, is doubly applauded to him, who returns unhonoured with one reeking
evidence of danger: -- much more ignoble is he, who from the mere foresight of
danger, from the smell of powder I may say, basely shrinks from the encounter,
avoiding a battle the issue of which, depends solely on his own individual
prowess? -- Of such a description I shall conceive my friend Charles Alfred, if
the prowling aspect of a jealous husband is suffered to retard his purpose of
conquering the affections of his alienated wife.

I remain Your sincere friend, WILLIAM COURTNEY.

LETTER XLV. TO Mr. WILLIAM COURTNEY.
Near WHITEHALL FARM. DEAREST FRIEND,
I HAVE but this moment discovered a circumstance which has confirmed me in my
intention of communicating to you an apology for, the guilty, although prudent
dissimulation which I practiced on your goodness -- Oh sir, the late unhappy
Tallman, the creature, of your charity, whose concealed sorrow excited in your
breast such sublime sympathy, is now the joyous and affluent Wellsford; -- the
accepted, favored lover of the adorable sister of your friend Charles Alfred!
This intelligence, my worthy friend, I am sure will delight your generosity; to
which I am indebted to afford a circumstantial account of this happy
vicissitude in my life, are which I hope will effectually atone for the
stratagem by which I kept secret my origin, myself, and my hopes, until such
times as I could declare all with unblushing pleasure.

THE brother of my amiable Fanny, has already acquainted you with the origin of
my attachment, and of the cruel embarrassment in which it was early involved.
-- Alas, I had but one hope, beside the assurance of constancy, to support me
in the dreadful moments of our separation; and that was a fond expectation,
that by a perseverance in industry and honor, I should shortly be enabled to
return in circumstances, which if not acceptable to her parents, would entitle
me to the clandestine attainment of the dear girl's hand! -- This hope, from
the moment of my departure for three successive years, appeared to be rapidly
realizing. In India my talents for business were so liberally rewarded, that in
the course of this period, I had amassed a capital, which compared with the
estates of America, would be immense. -- Inflated by this success with the
ambition of returning to my country and love, in honorable affluence, I
invested the amount in the most valuable Indian articles, and, there being no
immediate conveyance to America, failed with it for Bourdeaux in France. --
Alas, it never reached its destination! -- The world had already proved
trustless to me; but now I almost dared to accuse heaven of leaguing with
treachery against me! -- In the midst of our voyage, which until then had
proved remarkably auspicious, a sudden hurricane consigned my cargo and my
hopes to a bottomless ocean; and the whole crew, after a perilous day spent on
the shattered remnants of the ship, were fortunately rescued from destruction
by the humanity of a French ship of war, by which we were carried into Toulon.
-- Here, by the assistance of several benevolent Americans, I was lucratively
employed for a few months; when meeting with a favorable opportunity of
returning to America, and abandoning the idea of fortune, who had thus jilted
me, I embarked in an American vessel for Philadelphia; my all consisting of a
small wardrobe, and about two hundred dollars in cash, exclusive of my passage.

ALTHOUGH these circumstances by no means justified personal felicitation,
believe me, my friend, I experienced a delightful exultation in the foresight
of parental joy at my return, and the welcoming smiles of my still adored
Fanny. Alas, these hopes were indeed sleeting meteors to perplex my
imagination! -- In the very moments when my fancy was glowing with the
expectation of friendly delight and gratitude; listening, in anticipation, to
the melody of my charmer's joy, -- a new calamity blighted the prospect, and
intercepted the bland approach of bliss! -- The vessel was boarded by an
English privateer, the passengers plundered of their all, the cargo carried
into Bermuda, and condemned without reserve. Here again, I narrowly escaped a
more execrable misfortune: -- for those who were unfriended or unprotected,
were forcibly carried to unite in a war as repugnant to national morality, as
oppressive to humanity.

AFTER much application, I succeeded in obtaining a passage for Baltimore, in
compensation for which I was to preserve the accounts of the vessel, and
occasionally assist in the labors of the crew. Alas, dear sir, the recollection
of my distress at the moment of your benevolence, renews all the sensations of
an immense gratitude! -- I was landed, unknown and unfriended, in a large
mercantile town; where the general pursuit of wealth is often known to eat up
the natural principles of philanthrophic charity. I had now no desire to
proceed to Philadelphia; confident that the wretchedness of my condition would
be distressing to the pity of my friends, and a subject of exultation for those
who had formerly either envied or hated me. -- Alas, what was I to do? What
should I have done, but some act of desperation, had not your generous charity
rescued me from infamy, want, and ruin? Even to that charity my pride proved an
ingrate, by counterfeiting a name! But I trust, my friend, from perceiving the
benefit which has resulted from the artifice, you will forgive the wretch who
exercised it.

MR. ALFRED, who resides in the city during the influx of business, has been
informed of my return, acquiesces in my addresses to his daughter, and has
politely undertaken to arrange the affairs of my father. These circumstances
have flushed me with the hope of soon becoming the happy husband of my Fanny.
-- Oh, my friend, I have lost a parent, and will not you be present at the
extatic moment, to deliver up your son, (for am I not the child of your bounty)
to this heavenly female? Abandon business, relinquish amusements, to partake of
the unbounded rapture of a man, who views and thanks you, next to heaven, as
the cause of his felicity!

SINCE my residence here, I have observed a remarkable attachment in your young
friend Charles for an amiable married lady, of the name of Franks, who is also
a particular associate of my Fanny. She is indeed an accomplished woman; and I
believe the pair innocently indulge in the pleasures of a real Platonic passion.

I am, With sincere gratitude, Your friend, and Very Humble Servant, HENRY
WELLSFORD.

LETTER XLVI. To MRS. M. HEARTILY
Near WHITEHALL FARM. DEAR MADAM,
AT the request of your unhappy sister, with whom I have recently enjoyed an
unbounded confidence, I undertake to communicate the distressful cause of her
late silence, and the event by which she is disabled from corresponding with
you at present.

ALAS, madam, how inscrutable are the mysteries of Providence! How prompt is
human nature to repine at the wise dispensations of heaven; not because they
are really unjust or baneful, but because their infinite wisdom does not grovel
to our frail judgment! Every example of woe; every bloody offering made to vice
or the passions, is a loud lesson of morality to the surviving children of
misfortune. -- Oh, madam, I am unwilling to commence a tale, the horror of
which would impress terror on the hearts of indifferent sensibility; but in
your affectionate bosom, whose sympathy shares with its sister's agony, will
assuredly produce a desperation of grief!

-- A CIRCUMSTANCE of importance in my life having lately occurred, from which
flowed to my friend the most consummate joy, your amiable sister, in order to
augment, if possible, my sum of happiness, kindly joined in the festivity of
the occasion. With a friendship whose ardour was as unceasing as pure, she
seemed to labor to create new topics of joy; devoting her time and presence,
her talents and industry, to the acceleration of a period, in which she
particularly, and my loving relations generally, anticipated the most
transcendant delight. Alas! but two days ago, after spending the greater part
with us in pleasant amusement, though her mirth was always bounded by a certain
melancholic sedateness, she returned home, accompanied by my brother Charles;
who, after a short interval, reappeared with paleness and horror in his face!
For a while his concern choked his utterance; But struggling, he weakly
exclaimed, "FRANKS IS DEAD!" and fainting, fell breathless on the floor! -- Oh,
madam, pardon me, if I have too abruptly developed to your fears the fatal
purport of my letter!

OUR first care was to revive my affected brother; after which, accompanied by
a young gentleman and servant, I hastened to the house of my esteemed friend,
to inquire into the truth of Charles' frightful intelligence. A death-like
silence surrounded the mansion! -- We entered with abruptness; and meeting no
person in the hall, proceeded to the well-known chamber where often my Caroline
and I had indulged in serene and friendly pleasures! -- Oh, madam, here we
discovered the shocking object of woe, which had so agitated the feelings of my
brother! -- The mangled figure of Franks lay weltering in his own gore! At each
side had fallen the dreadful instruments of his infuriate madness! -- The
ghastly spectacle deprived me of my understanding; and leaning on my companion,
I was insensible to every circumstance, until waking from my horrid
stupefaction, I found myself in a room, where lay my distressed and invaluable
friend, your dear sister! Oh, madam, this second shock nearly made frantic my
soul! -- The sweet companion of my late happy hours, the solacer of my sorrows
was in the agonies of convulsion! Her tender arms bound by the fierce grasp of
two male servants; while the heavenly voice whose sound was ever music and
delight, now wildly pierced the air with shrieks of hedious horror! -- I would
have gladly rushed into her frantic arms, and, at the peril of my life,
encountered the terrific madness of my friend! But they tore me from her
presence, leaving her to the cruelty of unfeeling monsters!

EARLY next day, I hastened to the melancholy scene -- Oh, joyous reception! --
My Caroline was calm and reasonable in her distress. -- Her brilliant eyes were
either dimmed, or their fire extinguished, by a night employed in tears and
distracted misery. The lilly had usurped the territory of the rose, spreading
over her heavenly face a deathly and affecting paleness! -- She seized my hand;
and, bathing it in tears, begged me to write to you of the circumstances of her
family. -- I replied, I would, if she thought it proper so grievously to
afflict a tender sister. -- Alas, this remark wrapped her in profound meditation;
-- the big tears of anguish rolled down her cheek in the midst of her reverie:
-- "For heaven's sake," cried I, "my Caroline, why will you be so wretched?" --
She screamed, "Oh, my sister, my sister!" and again her dear frame was
convulsed by the dominion of a horrible madness! -- Thus has she been ever
since; her reason dawning forth at intervals, as the sun after a dreadful
storm! -- In her rational moments she talks frequently of you; then, starting,
cries for her murdered husband; and relapses into a paroxism by screaming for
my brother, who is still confined by the first impression of this transaction.

ALAS, madam, my all of distress heretofore is insignificant compared with that
produced by this disastrous event. Heaven only knows by what infernal motive
the unfortunate man was tempted to the commission of so impious an act;
throwing himself guilty and unprepared into the face of heaven, and staining
the earth with sacrilegious blood. Always have I remarked him to be a man of
selfish principles; fond of contemplation, and adverse to the joys of social
life. He had for a long time maintained a strange intercourse with an unworthy
family in this neighborhood, who, it is presumed, were privy to the
perpetration of this act. Alas, much I fear, that some unhappy influence from
them has impelled him, without regard to religion or morality, to turn a
murderous hand upon himself. He left behind him no appeal to the world; no
written explanation of the occasion of his conduct. The evening after his
catastrophe, the servants buried his mangled corpse in the forest back of the
farm.

AS to your dear sister, much I apprehend, madam, that her tender nature,
unable to bear this tremendous shock, will soon fall a victim to the ravages of
madness. Already her exhausted strength renders her the sad resemblance of
death; besides which, she persists in refusing all offers of nourishment. -- We
have sent to town for Dr. R --, that patron of humanity, whose presence imparts
health to the patient, and comfort to the distressed. -- Be assured, no act of
service shall be omitted by your

Unhappy friend, FRAUNCES ALFRED.

LETTER XLVII. To MR. HENRY WELLSFORD.
PHILADELPHIA. DEAR SIR,
MY appearance in this city, will no doubt, astonish you. It is produced by
your last letter; not, however, as you will at first expect, to participate in
your deserved felicity, but, I rather fear, to rankle it by a new species of
distress.

THE enclosed is for Charles Alfred, to whom I must request you immediately to
deliver it. He is a man, sir, guilty of a system of the most atrocious
duplicity, exercised under the sacred disguise of friendship; -- a man who has
rendered the privileges of confidence, the base means of tarnishing the
character of my family. To resent such villainy is the purpose of my present
visit. -- I shall forbear to relate the particular infamy of his conduct;
trusting that your sense of honor and propriety, disregarding the connection
you expect in his family, will induce you to assist in any measure which may
accelerate the reparation of my honor, and the punishment of his treachery.

I am, Sir, With respect, WILLIAM COURTNEY.

LETTER XLVIII. To CHARLES ALFRED.
SIR,
GUILT like yours cannot long lurk in successful concealment. The agency of
heaven will disclose its infamy, and the hand of justice inflict its
punishment. -- A perfidious friend is the inmate of hell, and the accomplice of
fiends.

I HAVE, sir, inadvertently detected the villainy of your motives, for the
pretended modesty of your withholding the name of the unhappy woman whose
virtue and fidelity you have violated. Under the profession of a holy
friendship, you have murdered the character of my whole family, by insulting
the chastity of my sister! -- Yes, wretch, you knew it: -- While your infernal
lust boiled in your blood, your tongue profaning the name of friend, you knew
that the seduced Caroline Franks, was the sister of Courtney. But this idea,
could not weaken or repel your diabolical design: By a perfidious encroachment
on my understanding, you artfully angled, until you drew me into an approbation
of the infernal deed.

HAVE you the feelings of a man or a brother? -- Or does your guilty heart
adhere only to qualities of vice and cowardice? Though your offense would
justify indiscriminate vengeance, without the preliminaries of honor, I will
permit you the chance of escape, if you dare meet an insulted friend, this
evening, armed and alone, in the wood adjoining your plantation. -- Should your
cowardice decline this interview, be assured I shall speedily adopt a surer
mode of vengeance.

WILLIAM COURTNEY.

THE convulsion which the mind of young Alfred had recently endured from the
shocking catastrophe of Franks, had just began to abate, when the trembling
Wellsford delivered him this letter. The well-known hand of his friend caught
his delighted eyes; and he opened it with elated feelings; but ah, how were
they changed to horror and dismay, when he read the cruel invectives of his
furious friend? -- When he reflected on the mysterious circumstance of his
beloved Charlotte being the sister of his dearest friend? It flashed on his
soul with intolerable poignancy; and, but for the support of conscientious
integrity, he would instantly have fallen an innocent victim to sensibility.
Destroying the letter, he devoted several hours in solitude to his chamber;
and, previous to the fatal hour of his destiny, made a brief visit to his
oppressed Charlotte; whom he found immured in pensive madness. While she was
rational, he bade her adieu, urging her to drive from her imagination the
figure of her dead husband, who, in his lifetime had acted unworthy the name,
and in his death unworthy the character of a man. The affecting discourse,
proceeding from one, who, next to herself, she conceived as the cause of her
husband's ignoble end, naturally produced the agony of reflection, which
resulted in a paroxism of madness! He left her with a heart riving with pity
and torn by remorse; and repairing to the scene nominated in the challenge of
his friend, spent his time in fervent and loud expiation to heaven for his
unconscious guilt. "If, oh heaven," he exclaimed with tears, "I have erred,
impute it not to the vileness of my heart; but to the weakness of my head; --
to the seeds thou have planted in my nature!" when, like a tiger, Courtney
rushed upon him. "Wretch, infernal wretch," he cried, "defend yourself!" and
drawing from his pocket a loaded pistol, repeated the exclamation. Charles,
dissolving from his devotion, begged his friend to be clam till he offered an
explanation; but Courtney, swelling with passion, insisted, as he had cowardly
come unarmed, on his making a choice of pistols. "Alas, my friend," he said, "I
have no wrath for you, and therefore will not raise my hand against your life:
-- your vengeance only is to be appeased -- here, pour it in my bosom."
Courtney, unmoved by the condition of his friend, persisted in the choice;
whereon, taking the instrument, Charles cried to him, "fire," and discharging
it in the air, received that of Courtney full in his breast, and fell!

COURTNEY hastening from the hand of justice, flew into the presence of his
sister, and, while the fury of madness was tearing her soul; called down
accumulated vengeance on her head. He disappeared from the world; and
Charlotte, acquainted of the cause of his fury, with a single groan, followed
her Charles into the regions of eternity!

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN page 81, top line, for "has" read have.

In page 91, 9th line from the bottom, between "what" and "it" insert is.

In page 123, 8th line from the bottom, for "worldless" read wordless.

In page 134, the last line of the verses, for "heart" read fears.


