The Manner of Bastinading


AN HISTORICAL AND GEOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF ALGIERS; COMPREHENDING A NOVEL AND
INTERESTING DETAIL OF EVENTS RELATIVE TO THE AMERICAN CAPTIVES.

BY JAMES WILSON STEVENS.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY HOGAN and M'ELROY, GEORGE-STREET THIRD DOOR BELOW
SOUTH-STREET.

August, 1797.

ENTERED ACCORDING TO ACT OF CONGRESS.

TO JOEL BARLOW, ESQUIRE. AS A TRIBUTE DUE TO HIS BENEVOLENCE, AND A MEMENTO OF HIS
UNREMITTED EXERTIONS IN RESCUING OUR FELLOW-CITIZENS FROM BONDAGE, THE
FOLLOWING WORK IS RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED BY THE AUTHOR.

PREFACE.
AFRICA, though contiguous to the most commercial nations in the world, from
whom one would naturally suppose it might derive some portion of refinement, is
yet involved in a state of the most deplorable barbarism; and its very
atmosphere seems fraught with the most detestable depravity in human nature.
Hence the spirit of discovery will ever be retarded, and travelers will have
but little inducement to explore a region where they must be exposed to such a
constant succession of dangers.

Since the destruction of Carthage, civilization seems not an attribute of the
kingdom of Algiers, or of any of the states of Barbary; and such is the
virulence of Mohammedan antipathy to every thing that bears the name of
Christian, that their contiguous to Europe has perhaps tended to render them
even more ferocious.

In rendering an account of this famous regency who have so long signalised
themselves by their villainy, the author has av^^^ed himself of the most
unexceptionable documents that could be procured, and perspicuity instead of
elegance and the complete developement of TRUTH have been his primary objects
in the compilation of the work.

In its execution he has labored under several disadvantages. The first sheets
were put to press but a few days after the work was commenced, and before half
the materials were collected. Great expedition was therefore indispensibly
requisite, and this circumstance will apologize for inaccuracies or desultory
arrangements.

The work is, however, much more perfect than was originally contemplated. It
exhibits a more circumstantial detail of Algerine affairs of a recent date than
was ever before published, and will we presume afford the American reader a
tolerable idea of this famous piratical regency, to which the United States
have lately had the mortification of becoming tributory.

It comprehends, besides an ample account of the late American negotiation, a
variety of original observations upon the government, fortifications, customs
and manners, punishments, religion, etc. of the Algerines; and for this
original matter the public are under considerable obligations to Mr. ISAAC
BROOKS, a gentleman of veracity and intelligence, who was one of the
unfortunate number who were subjected to the miseries of this unparalleled
servitude. The severity of his afflictions has reduced him nearly to a state of
blindness; a misfortune which afforded him ample leisure for rendering a more
minute account. In all his communications he has conscientiously adhered to the
truth, detected misrepresentations, and related nothing but what will bear the
test of the strictest examination.

The subject is particularly interesting to the American people, and as the
author has recorded events which are recent in the memory of all the captives,
he has been scrupulously circumspect in admitting nothing but matters of
undisputed authenticity.

The last chapter is an abstract or compendium of the adventures of Emanuel
D'Aranda, "a poor soldier" as he was pleased to call himself, probably with a
design to evade the payment of the exorbitant sum demanded for the ransom of
all persons of quality. We find, however, by a Latin eulogium in verse prefixed
to the French edition of his work, that he is called nobili consultissimoque
Emanueli D'Aranda, I. V. L.

These adventures were written above 150 years ago, and are now perhaps unknown
in the literary world. In this work there is every appearance of candor, and
the concurrence of various circumstances corroborate the presumption of its
truth.

CONTENTS.
HISTORY OF ALGIERS.
CHAP. I. THE Phoeniciaus and Carthagenians the original inhabitants.
Destruction of Carthage. Expulsion of the Romans by the Vandals. Irruption of
the Saracens. Arab princes subdued. Zeneti destroyed. Succeeded by the Shariffs
of Hascen. In danger from the Spaniards. Barbarossa invited. His treachery and
cruelty. Is defeated and killed by the Spaniards. 13 CHAP. II. Barbarossa
succeeded by Hayradin. Reduction of the Spanish fortress in front of the city.
He is raised to the dignity of Bashaw of the empire, and Hassan Aga is
appointed in his stead. Charles Vth's expedition against Algiers. The city in
great consternation. Singular prediction of a mad prophet verified. Spanish
fleet destroyed by a storm. Siege of Algiers raised. The mad prophet rewarded.
Hassan reduces Tremesen. Bujeyah taken from the Spaniards. Hassan Corso elected
bashaw. He is put to death, and succeeded by Tekelli. Hayradin's son Hassan
reinstated. The Spaniards defeated. Siege of Marsalquiver. Succeeded by
Mahomet. John Gascon's enterprise and death. The Algerines become formidable to
Europe. Various expeditions. Become independent of the Port. Desperate
undertaking of four brothers. 32 CHAP. III. The Algerines fit out a formidable
fleet, which is totally destroyed by the Venetians. Algiers in great confusion
at the news. The Algerines fit out a new fleet. A Dutch merchantman defeats a
number of their galleys. Lewis XIV. makes preparations against Algiers. The
city bombarded and set on fire by the French. The Algerines commit great
ravages in France. Their city again bombarded, set on fire, and almost
destroyed. They sue for peace. Capt. Beach burns seven of their ships. The
Turkish bashaw expelled. The Spanish expedition of 1775. 51 CHAP. IV. The
Algerines begin their depredations upon the American commerce. Captains
Stephens and O'Brien taken. A truce with Portugal. Eleven sail of American
vessels captured, and their crews made slaves. Their treatment and sufferings.
Col. Humphreys and Mr. Donaldson sent to treat with the Algerines. Mr. Barlow
dispatched to the Barbary states. Mr. Donaldson concludes a treaty with
Algiers. Captain O'Brien sent with 225,000 dollars to the dey. Captured by a
Tripolitan corsair. Released and and arrives at Algiers. Treats with Tripoli.
The Tunisian territories invaded. The American prisoners released. Desperate
engagement between an Algerine corsair and two Neapolitan frigates. Various
occurrences. Report of the Secretary of State. 67. CHAP. V. Algerine and
Tripolitan treaties. 111
DESCRIPTION OF ALGIERS.
CHAP. I. ITS division; rivers, soil, climate, and productions; animals,
antiquities and curiosities; inhabitants, customs and (...), dress, language,
corsairs and commerce; rev^^^es, government, punishments and religion. 129
CHAP. II. A short account of the principal cities. The city of ALGIERS. Its
origin, situation, houses, water, public buildings, bagnios, streets, gates,
walls, mole, castles, and fortifications. 184 CHAP. III. Inhabitants, customs
and manners of the city of Algiers. 205 CHAP. IV. The Slaves of Algiers. 234
CHAP. V. Particular anecdotes, occurrences and occasional remarks, which throw
some additional light upon the history, customs and manners CHAP. VI. Succinct
account of Algiers in the time of Pinchinin. 283 CHAP. VII. A compendium of the
adventures of Emanuel D'Aranda, containing an account of the treatment of the
Algerine slaves in the time of Pinchinin. 290
The plate fronting the title page represents the manner of punishment by
bastinading; for an account of which see page 164.

ERRATA.
Page 222, the 20th line from the top, for bear read ^are.

Page 240, the 18th line, for Turk read Turkish soldier.

Page 243, the 6th line, for confined read consigned.

Page 285, in the note, for about 84 cents read of (...) dollar 3 cents and 7
mills.

Page 276, 18th line, for the read he.

THE HISTORY OF ALGIERS.
CHAP. I.
The Phoenicians and Carthagenians the original inhabitants. Destruction of
Carthage. Expulsion of the Romans by the Vandals. Irruption of the Saracens.
Arab princes subdued. Zeneti destroyed. Succeeded by the Shariffs of H^scen. In
danger from the Spaniards. Barbarossa invited. His treachery and cruelty. I^
defeated and killed by the Spaniards.

THERE is perhaps no problem in history so singular and unaccountable as the
decadence of the power and splendour of the extensive States of Barbary; which,
while Carthage was in the meridian of its glory, were the seat of unrivalled
greatness, and anterior so Rome itself in arts, in science, in magnificence and
refinement.

The original inhabitants of this country, according to the most authentic
historians, were the Phoenecians, and after them the Carthagenians, the
formidable rivals of the Romans, and one of the most warlike nations of
antiquity. The beginning of the Carthagenian history, like that of all other
nations, is extremely obscure and uncertain. In the 7th year of Pygmalion king
of Tire, his sister Eliza, or Dido, is said to have fled, with some of her
companions and vassals, from the cruelty and avarice of her brother Sichaeus.

She first touched at the island of Cyprus, where she met with a priest of
Jupiter, who was desirous of attending her; to which she consented. At that
time it was a custom in the island of Cyprus, for the young women to go, on
certain stated days before marriage, to the seaside, and there to look for
strangers, that might possibly arrive on their coasts, in order to prostitute
themselves for gain, that they might thereby acquire a dowry. Out of these
women, the Tyrians selected eighty, whom they carried along with them, and then
sailed directly for the coast of Africa: and at last safely landed in the
province called Africa Propria, not far from Utica, a Phoenician city of great
antiquity. The common fable is, that the Phoenecians imposed upon the Africans
in the following manner: They desired for their intended settlement, only as
much ground as an ox's hide would encompass. This request the Africans laughed
at; but they were surprised when, upon granting it, they saw Eliza cut the hide
into the smallest shreds, by which means it surrounded a large territory; in
which she built the citadel called Byrsa. The learned, however, explode this
fable; but it is certain that the Carthagenians for many years paid an annual
tribute to the Africans for the ground they possessed.

From this period commences the history of the Carthagenians, one of the most
celebrated nations of antiquity, whose armies under the command of Hannibal,
and other eminent generals, invaded the Roman territory, and threatened the
downfall of Rome itself. But it is not the design of the present work to enter
into a detail of this history, which would form of itself a large and
interesting volume.

The city of Carthage, by order of the Roman Senate, was plundered and
destroyed by the Roman army under AEmilianus. Before he proceeded to execute
their order, he performed those religious ceremonies which were required on
such occasions. He first sacrificed to the gods, and then caused a plough to be
drawn round the walls of the city. After this, the towers, rampa^ts, walls, and
all the works which the Carthagenians had raised in the course of many ages,
were levelled with the ground. The edifices of this proud metropolis were set
on fire, which consumed them all, not a single house escaping the flames. The
sire began in all quarters of the city at the same time, and continued to burn
with incredible fury for the space of seventeen days, at the end of which time
the whole city was reduced to ashes.

Thus sell Carthage, about 146 years before the birth of Christ. The treasure
carried off ^y AEmilianus, even after it was plundered by the soldiers,
according to the computation of Pliny, amounted to 4,470,000 pounds weight of
silver. About twenty-four years after this event C. Gracchus undertook to
rebuild it. Maxentius laid it in ashes about the sixth or seventh year of
Constantine's reign, and Genseric, king of the Vandals, ^ook it in the year 4^0
after Christ; but about a century afterward it was re-annexed to the Roman
empire by the renowned Belisarius. At last the Saracens, under Mahomet's
successors, toward the close of the seventh century, so completely destroyed
it, that there are now scarce any vestiges of it remaining.

After the reduction of the Carthagenian empire, the Romans for a long time
maintained their power in Africa. But in the year 426, Bonifacius supreme
governor of all the Roman dominions in this quarter, being compelled to revolt
by the treachery of another general called Aetius, and finding himself unable
to contend with the whole strength of the Roman empire, invited Genseric king
of the Vandals to his aid; who thereupon abandoned his conquests in Europe, and
passed over into Africa. Bonifacius, however, being soon after reconciled to
his empress Placidia, endeavored in vain to persuade the Vandals to retire.
Hereupon a war ensued, in which the barbarians proved victorious, and quickly
overran all the Roman provinces in Africa. In the year 435, a peace was
concluded; whereby Numidia and some other countries were ceded to the Vandals,
who soon after seized the rest. But these barbarians did not long enjoy their
conquests: for about the year 535, Belisarus, the Greek emperor Justinian's
general, drove them out, and annexed the provinces to the eastern empire.

In the years 647, the Saracens, having conquered Mesopotamia, Egypt,
Phoenicia, Arabia and Palestine, broke like a torrent into Africa, which they
quickly subdued. This last revolution happened about the middle of the seventh
century; and the Arabs continued masters of the country till the year 1051.
This year, one Abubeker-ben-Omar, or as the Spaniards call him, Abu-Texesien,
an Arab of the Zinhagian tribe, being provoked at the tyranny of those despots,
gathered, by the help of his marabouts or saints, a most powerful army of
malcontents, in the southern provinces of Numidia and Lybia. His followers were
nicknamed Marabites or Morabites; by the Spaniards Almoravides; probably from
their being assembled principally by the saints, who were also called
Morabites. The khalif of Keyem's forces were at this time engaged in quelling
other revolts in Syria, Mesopotamia, etc. and the Arabs in Spain entered into
the most bloody wars; so that Texesien having nothing to fear from them, had
all the success ^e could wish against the Arabian cheyks or petty tyrants, whom
he defeated in many battles, and at last drove them not only out of Numidia and
Lybi^, but out of all the western parts, reducing the whole province of
Tingitania under his dominion.

Texesien was succeeded by his son Yusef, or Joseph, who was a warlike prince.
In the beginning of his reign he laid the foundation of the city of Morocco,
which he intended as the capital of his empire During the building of this city
he sent an embassy of marabouts to Tremesen, a province of Algiers, for the
purpose of restoring the Zeneti, a Mohammedan sect, to the true faith, as it was
called. But the Zeneti contemning all overtures of this nature, assembled at
(...), or Amfa their capital, and murdered the ambassadors. Not content with
this act of outrage and insolence, they invaded Joseph's dominions with an army
of 50,000 men.

Joseph justly exasperated at these proceedings, levied an army with all
possible expedition, invaded their territory, and destroyed all before him with
^ire and sword. The Zeneti instead of repelling the invasion, retreated toward
Fez, where they expected assistance. But they were fatally disappointed in this
expectation; for the Fezz^^s marched out against them, and meeting the
miserable Zeneti, encumbered with their families and baggage, and ready to
expire with hunger and fatigue, fell upon them and cut them all to pieces,
except a few who were either drowned in their attempts to swim across a river,
or dashed to pieces from the precipices of rocks to which their enemy had
pursued them.

In the mean time the march of Joseph's army was marked by havoc and
desolation; the territory of the unhappy Zeneti was desolated and reduced to a
heap of smoking ruins. Their country was, however, soon after re-peopled by
numerous immigrations of Fezzans, who formed colonies under the protection of
the reigning princes. According to the most authentic accounts it appears, that
nearly a millon of men, women and children, of the Zeneti, lost their lives in
this murderous campaign.

Joseph, who was a prince of restless ambition, was not long disposed for
peace. He proclaimed war against the Fezzans whom ^e rendered tributory, and
extended his conquests along the coasts of the Mediterranean. His next attack
was upon some Arabian cheyks, whom he pursued through the Lybian deserts with
such fury, that neither the clifts of the most craggy rocks, nor secret
recesses, afforded them shelter from the vengeance of their pursuers. He
reduced all their castles and fortresses, which till then were deemed
impregnable, and the extent of his conquests spread general consternation and
grief through the other nations of Africa.

Thus was the empire of the Morabites founded; but its existance was of short
duration; for they were expelled from their new possessions in the 12th century
by Mohavedin a marabout. This race of priests was subdued by Abdulac, governor
of Fez, who was divested in his turn of his new conquesta, in the 13th century,
by the Shariffs of Hascen, who were the descendants of those Arabian princes
whom Abu-Texe^ien had formerly conquered.

The Shariffs divided their new acquired domions into several petty provinces,
and the kingdom of Algiers was divided into Tremesen, Tenez, Algiers Proper,
and Bujeyah, for their greater security against the invasions of neighboring
princes. The four first monarchs laid so solid a foundation to their empire, by
a judicious balance of power, that they continued in mutual peace and harmony
for several succeeding centuries; but the king of Tremesen having violated some
articles of their compact, Abul-Farez declared war against him, and reduced
Tremesen to a tributory kingdom.

Abul-Farez did not long survive this event. His kingdom was divided among his
three sons, and mutual discord and animosity was the consequence of this
division. Debilitated by these commotions, they became an easy conquest to the
Spanish government, who transported a powerful fleet and army against Barbary,
under the command of the Count of Navarre, in the year 1505. This commander
soon completed the conquest of Oran, Bujeyah, and other important cities; which
spread such an alarm among the Algerines, that they invited the protection of
Selim Eutemi, an Arabian prince renowned for the prowess of his arms. He came
to their assistance with a large army of his most warlike subjects, attended by
Zaphira his queen, and a son about twelve years of age. This force was not,
however, sufficient to repel the incursions of the Spaniards; they effected the
landing of an army the same year near the city of Algiers, and compelled the
metropolis to become tributory to Spain. Nor could all the powers of Eutemi
prevent the establishment of a formidable Spanish garrison of 200 men on the
island, in front of the city, which did immense damage to the corsairs that
attempted to sail either in or out of the harbor.

To this galling yoke the Algerines were obliged to submit, and they continued
tributory till the death of Ferdinand king of Spain, which happened in the year
1516. They were then determined to shake off their Spanish yoke, and in order
to effectuate this design, they sent an embassay to Aruch Barbarossa, to
solicit his assistance against the Spaniards, and promised him an adequate
compensation for his services.

Barbarossa, so called from the red color of his beard, was the son of a
potter in the isle of Lesbos, being prompted by a restless and enterprising
spirit, he and his brother Hayradin forsook their father, and joined a crew of
pirates. In this new profession they soon distinguished themselves by their
activity and prowess; they became masters of a small brigantine, and conducted
their piracies with such success, that they soon assembled a fleet of twelve
galleys, besides many vessels of smaller force. Barbarossa was admiral of this
fleet, and Hayradin second in command. Their names soon became terrible from
the Straits of the Dardanelles to those of Gibraltar. Their ambitious views
extended with their power: being no less dreaded for their valor than their
surprising success, and while acting as corsairs, they assumed the ideas, and
acquired the talents of conquerors. They often carried the prizes they had
taken on the coasts of Spain and Italy, into the ports of Barbary. The
convenient situation of these harbors, lying so near the great commercial
states of Christendom, prompted them to the desire of effecting an
establishment in the country of Barbary. An opportunity of accomplishing this
project soon presented itself, and they did not suffer it to pass unimproved.

Barbarossa received the Algerine embassy at Higir, about 170 miles to the
eastward of Algiers. He promised them every assistance in his power, and
secretly exulted in so favorable an opportunity of rendering himself master of
their city. To carry his designs into execution, he fitted out a fleet of 18
galleys, on board of which was embarked a powerful Turkish army, with a fine
train of artillery, and amply provided with military stores, and dispatched
them to the city of Algiers.

Barbarossa in the mean time advanced toward the city by land, with an army of
800 Turks, 3000 Jigelites, and 2000 Moorish volunteers. But instead of taking
the nearest road to Algiers, he directed his course toward Sharshel, (about 60
miles west of Algiers), where Hassan, another famous corsair under his command,
had settled himself; and dispatched a messenger to his fleet, which by this
time had anchored at Algiers, with orders to repair immediately to Sharshel.
His design by this march was to punish the treachery of Hassan, who had seduced
a considerable part of the fleet stationed there into his service, and was upon
the point of making a descent upon the Spanish coast. But he was much
astonished when he found Barbarossa was so near, and instantly prepared to
oppose the approach of his army; but discovering the inefficiency of the force
he had raised, he deemed it most prudent to adjust all differences by an
amicable compromise, and after he had received a promise of pardon from his
commander, surrendered himself a prisoner. Barbarossa, however, felt little
disposed to pardon the offense, and, by his command, Hassan was executed in the
presence of the Turkish army.

After these events, he compelled the people of Sharshel to acknowledge (...)
their sovereign, and garrisoned a detachment of his army in that place for the
security of his conquest. His army and fleet then directed their course toward
Algiers. On the approach of his army he was met by Selim Eutemi, then regent of
Algiers, attended by an immense concourse of people from the city, who welcomed
this celebrated conqueror, whom they deemed invincible, with every
demonstration (...) joy. He was conducted into the city amidst the acclamations
of the people, and lodged in one of the noblest apartments of Eutemi's palace,
where a most sumptuous banquet was prepared for his entertainment.

Elated beyond measure with the great marks o^ distinction which were conferred
upon him, he conceived the design of becoming king of Algiers. The day after
his arrival he commenced his arrangements for the reduction of the Spaniards,
who had been so long obnoxious to the Algerines. He ordered an entrenchment to
be formed, and a battery raised against a Spanish fortress stationed upon a
small island in the harbor, about 500 yards from the city. Before the
commencement of the intended siege of the island, he dispatched a courier to
the Spanish garrison, to inform them, that upon condition they would surrender
the fortress they should be well ^^^ated and sent to Spain; but if not, they
should all be put to death. The commander of the garrison rejected all
overtures of capitulation, and returned for answer, that he would hold out ^ill
the very la^t extremity.

Incensed at this answer, Barbarossa commenced a brisk cannonade of the island,
which was kept up, with little intermission, for twenty days; but his ordnance,
consisting only of small field pieces, made but little impression upon the
garrison.

In the mean time, the greater part of Barbarossa's army were rioting in every
species of excess, and in their intercourse with the citizens, committed every
act of violence and atrocity. The Algerines were soon roused to a sense of
their danger, and Se im Eutemi, greatly exasperated at the outrages of the
Turks, entreated Barbarossa to withdraw his army from the city. But his sole
view now was the conquest of the city, and the more effectually to accomplish
his project, he resolved to murder Eutemi in a private manner, and to proclaim
himself king of Algiers.

In order to execute his design, he ^^ole into a small apartment where Eutemi
had one day retired for the purpose of bathing, and finding the prince alone,
he suddenly seized him and strangled him to death. When he had perpetrated this
atrocious act, he secretly withdrew, and left the prince floating in the water.
Returning shortly after with his attendants, to the bath, he affected great
astonishment at the death of Eutemi, who, he alleged, had been drowned in a
swoon.

His death was, however, generally imputed to the cruelty of Barbarossa, and
the citizens, who were panic struck at this event, seemed more anxious to
screen themselves from oppression, than to avenge the death of their sovereign.

Barbarossa now caused himself to be publicly proclaimed king; and, as he rode
along the streets, his Turks and Moors exclaimed, "Long live king Aruch
Barbarossa, the invincible king of Algiers, the chosen of God to deliver the
people from the oppression of the Christians; and destruction to al^ that shall
oppose, or refuse to own him as (...) lawful sovereign." These last threatening
words so intimidated the inhabitants, already apprehensive of a general
massacre, that he was immediately acknowledged king; and he summoned all the
wealthiest part of the citizens before him, to whom he promised honors and
promotion if they would acquiesce in his sovereignty. The unhappy princess
Zaphira made an unsuccessful attempt to stab him with a dagger; but not
succeeding, it is said she poisoned herself, to avoid the brutality of her new
sovereign.

Barbarossa was no sooner seated on the throne, ^^an he treated his new
subjects with such cruelty, that they used to shut up their houses, and hide
themselves, when he appeared in public. The Turks finding themselves complete
masters of the town, indulged themselves in every species of violence and
rapacity. Their enormities commenced with insulting language, and the scene
terminated in public plunder, murder, and the violation of women.

In this extremity of insult and misery, the citizens held a secret
correspondence with the governor of the Spanish garrison; in which they
informed him that a plot was laid to massacre the whole Turkish army, solicited
his assistance, and promised, in consequence, to become again tributory to the
king of Spain.

The commander readily acceded to their wishes, and the following plan was
devised. A considerable number of Moors, with daggers concealed under their
clothes, were to enter the city for the purpose of trading; at the same time a
number of galliots without the town were to be set on fire; and while the Turks
were gone to extinguish the flames the gates of the city were to be shut upon
them, and the Spaniards to be instantly landed from the garrison to assist the
citizens. But the vigilance of Barbarossa discovered the conspiracy; in
consequence of which, he strongly fortified the town, augmented his guards both
in the galli^ts and at the city-gates, and thus totally frustrated this deep
laid scheme.

The most tragical events succeeded this discovery. For though Barbarossa had
detected the conspir^^y, yet he pretended he had not discovered the principals;
and one Friday (which is the Mohammedan Sunday) he paid a visit to the grand
Mosque in the city, where the chief part of the conspirators had conver^ed. An
uncommon concourse of people assembled, and among the crowd the tyrant had
ordered a number of his ^urks to be stationed. The moment their religious
ceremonies commenced, Barbarossa ordered the doors of the Mosque to be shut,
and the whole congregation to be mace prisoners: out of whom he selected twenty
of the principal leaders of the faction, whom he conceived to be the most
obnoxious, and by his orders they were instantly led into the stee^s and there
beheaded. After the execution of this atrocious order their bodies were exposed
naked to public view, and their heads rolled about the city for several days,
till at length becoming offensive, they were buried in a dunghill. This event
took place in the year 1517.

While these things where transacting Selim Eutemi's son, apprehensive of
danger, fled to Oran, where he put himself under the protection of the marquis
of Gomarez, general of that place, and laid before that nobleman a plan for
putting the city of Algiers into the hands of the king of Spain. Gomarez
approved of the plan, and sent young Selim Eutemi to Spain, where he laid his
scheme before Cardinal Francisco Ximenes and the councils of Spain, who
likewise approved of it, and sent a fleet with 10,000 land forces, under the
command of young Selim and Don Dieg^ de Vera, to restore the young prince to
his kingdom. But deplorable was the fate of this army; for they were no sooner
come within sight of land, than a tempest arose, which raged with such violence
that the whole fleet was involved in destruction; many vessels ran foul of each
other; some were swallowed up by the ocean, and others dashed to pieces against
the rocks. Young Selim and Ximenes were never heard of again; and th^s was the
greatest part of this army destroyed; those who escaped the violence of the
elements were either murdered by the Turks, or subjected to the most miserable
slavery.

The pride of Barbarossa was greatly elated at this disaster, and though he had
nothing to boast on this occasion, yet his vanity and insolence were now
swelled to such a degree, that he imagined himself invincible, and fancied that
the very elements had conspired to render him so. By this misfortune all hopes
were lost of expelling Barbarossa, and restoring the heirs of Selim to the
regency of Algiers.

Barbarossa's tyranny became at length so insupportable, that the Arabians, who
inhabited the lower parts of the country, implored the assistance of Hamidel
Abdes king of Tenez to drive the Turks out of Algiers. That prince undertook to
grant them all the aid in his power, upon condition that the Arabians would
agree to settle the kingdom on himself and his descendants.

This proposal was readily accepted, and Hamidel Abdes immediately set out at
the head of an army of 10,000 Moors. He began his march in June 1517, and, upon
his entering the Algerine dominions, was joined by all the Arabians in the
country, who openly avowed themselves the enemies of the tyrant. Barbarossa,
gaining intelligence of the approach of Hamidel Abdes, raised an army of 1000
Turkish musketeers, and 500 Granada Moors, and consigning the government of
Algiers to the care of his brother Hayradin, came out with this inconsiderable
force to meet Hamidel Abdes. After a march of about twelve leagues to the
westward of Algiers, Barbarossa came up with him, and a desperate engagement
commenced. Victory was for some time d^bious, and the most horrible carnage
ensued. But the Turks, being disciplined to the use of fire arms, displayed
great superiority, and the enemy having only arrows and javelins, began to give
way. Their numerous army was totally defeated, and Barbarossa pursued them to
the gates of their capital; of which he easily made himself master. Hamidel
Abdes still retreated toward mount Atlas, and the unfortunate city, without
the least resistance, fell a victim to every species of violence and brutality,
and Barbarossa was proclaimed king.

The fame of this decisive victory was soon spread over all Africa, and no
sooner had Barbarossa become master of Tenez, than he received an embassy from
the inhabitants of Tremesen, (about 50 leagues westward), who were dissatisfied
with the administration of their king, principally on account of his having
dethroned his nephew; whom he obliged to fly to Oran; and they offered to
invest Barbarossa even with the sovereignty, in case he accepted their
proposal. An application of this nature, as may well be imagined, was highly
pleasing to him, and he was determined not to lose so favorable an opportunity
of extending his conquests. In consequence of this embassay he wrote to his
brother Hayradin to send him forward some pieces of artillery and military
stores; and upon the receipt of these articles he set out for Tremesen, having
consigned the command of Tenez to his third brother Isaac Benijo^b.

The king of Tremesen, not suspecting the treachery of his subjects, raised an
army of 6000 horse and 3000 foot, and met the tyrant in the plains of Aganel in
advance of the city, where a bloody action took place; in which the king,
unable to stand before Barbarossa's artillery, was totally routed, and fled
with the remains of his army to the capital, where he was taken prisoner and
behe^ded by his subjects. After which they sent ambassadors with his head to
Barbarossa, and ordered. them to deliver the keys of the city into the hands of
the conqueror.

Two days after, he made a triumphal entry (...) Tremesen, amidst the
^cclamations of a multitude of citizens, who met him, and treated him ^ith
every mark of attention. As soon as he was in possession of the city, he began
to tyrannize as usual; but his new subjects soon convinced him they were not so
passive as the citizens of Algiers. Suspicious of opposition to his
administration in the government of Tremesen, and apprehensive of a precarious
reign in consequence of his enormities, he entered into an alliance with Muley
Hamet king of Fez, each stipulating to render each other mutual assistance
against their enemies. After which he took care, for the purpose of greater
security, to garrison Tremesen with troops, as well as the rest of the cities
in his kingdom. some of these, however, soon after revolted; upon which he sent
one of his corsairs, named Escander, no less ferocious than himself, to reduce
them. Isaac Benijoub in particular, the commander of Tenez, became extremely
obnoxious in his administration; which induced a general revolt among the Moors
of the country, and he fell a victim to their fury.

The Tremesenians soon repented sincerely that they had courted the assistance
of such a tyrant; and held consultations on the most effectual means of
expelling him from their city, and restoring Abuchen Men, their lawful prince.
But their cabals were soon discovered, and a great number of the conspirators
were massacred in the most cruel manner.

Abuchen Men, who had fortunately escaped to Oran, was taken under the
protection of the marquis of Gomarez, who sent immediate advice of it to
Charles V. then lately arrived in Spain, with a powerful fleet and army, and
gave him a particular account of the transactions that had taken place in
Africa. Charles immediately ordered an army of 10,000 men to be raised and put
under the command of Gomarez, and the guidance of Abuchen Men; who began their
march toward Tremesen; and in their way were joined by prince Selim with a
great number of Arabs and Moors. Their first resolve was to attack the
important fortress of Cala^, situated between Tremesen and Algiers, and
commanded by the corsair Escander, at the head of about 300 Turks. They
invested it closely on all sides, with a design to decoy Barbarossa from
Tremesen to its relief, and to afford the Tremesenians an opportunity of
shutting their gates against him. But the tyrant kept close lodged in his
capital, embarrassed by the fears of a general revolt, and the dangerous delays
of the king of Fez, who had neglected to send forward the auxiliaries he had
promised. The garrison of Calau in the mean time made a vigorous defense, and
in a forty they made in the night killed 300 Spaniards. This encouraged them
to make a second sally; but they were repulsed with great loss, and Escander
himself was wounded. The garrison unable to hold out any longer, capitulated
upon honorable terms; but they were all massacred by the Arabians except
sixteen, who clung close to the stirrups of the king and the Spanish general.

After the reduction of this fortress they began their march to lay siege to
Tremesen. Barbarossa receiving intelligence of their approach, was determined
to wait no longer for reinforcements from the king of Fez, and came out of his
capital with a troop of 1500 Turks and 5000 Moorish horse, to oppose the
progress of the Spaniards. But gaining intelligence of the superiority of their
force, his councils advised him to return and fortify himself in his capital.
This advice however came too late. The inhabitants of Tremesen had shut their
gates against him, and were resolved to open them only to their lawful
sovereign, when he appeared. In this extremity he deemed it most prudent to
retire to the citadel, and defend himself there till he could find an
opportunity of stealing away with his men and treasure. Here he made a vigorous
defense, but his provisions failing, he effected his escape by night through a
subterraneous passage, which he had caused to be dug for that purpose, and
carried off all his immense treasures with him. But his flight was soon
discovered, and Gomarez ordered an immediate pursuit. Barbarossa finding
himself so closely pursued, caused a considerable quantity of money, plate,
jewels, etc. to be scattered along the rout he had taken, in order to amuse the
enemy, and to retard their pursuit in gathering it up, while he effected the
passage of the river Fluexda, But this stratagem, through the vigilance of the
Spanish commander, did not succeed; for Gomarez, ordered his men to march on,
without waiting to gather up the spoils, and they soon overtook the fugitive on
the banks of the river, about eight leagues from Tremesen. Barbarossa had just
crossed the river with his vanguard; and the Spanish army furiously attacked
his rear on the other side, and cut them all to pieces. Gomarez then crossed
the river, and a bloody engagement ensued, in which his Turks fought with the
greatest fury. But being overpowered by numbers, the tyrant fell, and 1500
Turks were left dead upon the field of battle.

Thus terminated the career of this powerful tyrant, who died in the year 1519,
in the 44th year of his age; four years after he had aspired to the royal title
of ^igel of the adjacent country; two years after he had assumed the
sovereignty of Algiers; a twelvemonth after the reduction of Tremesen; and
after he had infested the seas and spread havoc and desolation through the
country of Barbary for the space of fourteen years.

After this important victory Gomarez returned in triumph to Tremesen, amidst
the shouts of the multitude, who came out to meet him, with the head of
Barbarossa carried upon the point of a spear; and Abuchen Men was proclaimed
king, to the great joy of all the inhabitants.

About fourteen days after the battle, the king of Fez made his appearance at
the head of 20,000 Moorish horse; but hearing of Barbarossa's defeat, he
retired with all possible expedition, to avoid an attack from the enemy.
Gomarez soon after departed from Tremesen, and returned to Oran, leaving
Abechen Men in peaceable possession of his kingdom.

CHAP. II.
Barbarossa succeeded by Hayradin. Reduction of the Spanish fortress in front
of the city. He is raised to the dignity of bashaw of the empire, and Hassan
Aga is appointed in his stead. Charles Vth's expedition against Algiers. The
city in great consternation. Singular prediction of a mad prophet verified.
Spanish fleet destroyed by a storm. Siege of Algiers raised. The mad prophet
rewarded. Hassan reduces Tremesen. Bujeyah taken from the Spaniards. Hassan
Cors^ elected bashaw. He is put to death, and succeeded by Te^elli. Hayradin's
son Hassan rei^stated. The Spaniards defeated. Siege of Marsalquiver. Succeeded
by Mahomet. John Gascon's enterprise and death. The Algerines become formidable
to Europe. Various expeditions. Become independent of the Port. Desperate
undertaking of four brothers.

THE news of Barbarossa's death spread the utmost consternation among the Turks
at Algiers; and his brother Hayradin was immediately proclaimed king. The
Spanish commander very imprudently neglected to follow up his victories at this
auspicious juncture, and sent back the emperor's forces without attempting the
reduction of Algiers. Hayradin in his present critical situation, apprehensive
of a Spanish invasion, and dreading the consequences of his tyrany and that of
his officers, sent an embassy to solicit the protection of the Grand Signior;
which was readily granted. He was appointed Bashaw or Viceroy of Algiers, and
received such considerable reinforcements as completely effected the
subjugation of the unhappy Algerines, who d^^st not make the least resistance
or complaint. In consequence of these reinforcements, his armies were further
augmented by such numbers of Turks that continually resorted to him, that he
was enabled not only to keep the Moors and Arabs in subjection at home, but to
annoy the Christians at sea.

His next step was the reduction of the Spanish fortress in front of the city,
which was a great nuisance to the metropolis, and of which the Spaniards held
possession till the year 1^30. His galleys were, in consequence, always obliged
to anchor near the gate of B^baz^n, out of the reach of their cannon, where
they were continually exposed to the danger of tempests. He was therefore
determined to reduce it, and his first attempt was by stratagem. Having made
choice of two Moo^sh lads, and given them instructions how to act, he sent them
to the fort, where they requested permission to enter, declaring that they were
desirous of embracing the Christian religion, and residing with the Spaniards.
The lads were received and treated with great kindness: and one Easter Sunday,
while Martin de Vargas, the commander, and his men were at church, these lads
ascended a tower that commanded a prospect of the city, from whence they waved
a flag, as a signal, that the Spaniards were off their guard. The flag being
observed by the commander's servant maid, she ran immediately and acquainted
her master with the circumstance. Vargas and his men repaired to the t^w^r
instantly, where they seized the lads, and prepared to oppose the landing of
the enemy. Hayradin finding his plan had miscarried, desisted from his design;
and when the alarm had subsided, the two lads were brought out, and at the
command of Vargas, were both hanged upon an eminence in sight of the city.
Hayradin was greatly exasperated at the sight, and was resolved upon the
immediate reduction of the fort. Whereupon he dispatched a renegado to the fort
to acquaint Vargas, that if he would deliver up the garrison, he and his men
should be well treated, and sent to Spain; but if not, they should all be put
to death. Vargas returned for answer, that he would hold out to the last
extremity. Haraydin upon the receipt of this answer, raised a formidable
battery, and commenced a vigorous cannonade upon the island, which continued
for fifteen days and nights without intermission; at the end of which time
almost all the walls of the garrison were battered down, and the greatest part
of the besieged were killed. Hayradin now ordered a descent to be made upon the
island, which was effected without opposition, and the whole garrison were made
prisoners. Vargas suffered imprisonment for about three months, at the end of
which time he was ordered into the presence of Hayradin, and bastinadoed to
death.

After this event he set about building a strong mole from the island to the
city, for the protection of his ships, and in this he employed 30,000 Christian
slaves, who were engaged in this work for three years without intermission, in
which time the work was completed. He then caused the fort taken from the
Spaniards to be repaired, and placed a strong garrison in it to prevent foreign
vessels from entering the harbor without giving an account of themselves. By
these two important works, Hayradin soon became dreaded not only by the Arabs
and Moors, but also by the maritime Christian powers, especially the Spaniards.
The viceroy failed not to acquaint the Grand Signior with his success, and
obtained from him a fresh supply of money, by which he was enabled to build a
stronger fort, and to erect batteries on all places that might favor the
landing of the enemy. All these have since received greater improvements from
time to time, as often as there was occasion for them.

In the mean time the Sultan, either out of a sense of the great services
Hayradin had done, or perhaps out of jealousy lest he should make himself
independent, raised Hayradin to the dignity of bashaw of the empire, and
appointed Hastan Aga, a Sardinian renegado, an intrepid warrior, and an
experienced officer, to succeed him as bashaw of Algiers. Hassan had no sooner
taken possession of his new government, than he began to pursue his ravages on
the Spanish coast with greater fury than ever; extending them to the
ecclesiastical states, and other parts of Italy. But Pope Paul III. being
alarmed at this, exhorted the emperor Charles V. to send a powerful fleet to
suppress these frequent and cruel piracies; and, that nothing might be wanting
to render the enterprise successful, a bull was published by his holiness,
wherein a plenary absolution of sins, and the crown of martyrdom, were promised
to all those who either fell in battle, or were made slaves. The emperor on his
part needed no spur; and therefore set sail at the head of a powerful fleet,
consisting of 120 ships and 20 galleys, having on board 30,000 chosen troops,
an immense quantity of money, arms, ammunition, etc. In this expedition many
young nobility and gentry attended as volunteers, and among these many knights
of Malta, so remarkable for their valor against the enemies of Christianity.
Even ladies of birth and character attended Charles in his expedition, and the
wives and daughters of the officers and soldiers followed them with a design to
settle in Barbary after the conquest was completed. All these meeting with a
favorable wind, soon appeared before Algiers: every ship displaying the
Spanish colors on the st^rn, and another at the head, with a crucifix to serve
them for a pilot.

By this prodigious armament the Algerines were thrown into the utmost
consternation. The city was surrounded only by a wall with scarce any outworks.
The whole garrison consisted of 800 Turks and 6000 Moors, without firearms,
and poorly disciplined and acco^tred; the rest of their forces being dispersed
in the other provinces of the kingdom to levy the usu^^ tribute on the Arabs
and Moors. The Spaniards landed without opposition, and immediately built a
fort, under the cannon of which they encamped, and diverted the course of a
spring which supplied the city with water. Being now reduced to the utmost
distress, Hassan received a summons to surrender at discretion, on pain of
being put to the sword with all the garrison. The herald was ordered to extol
the vast power of the emperor both by sea and land, and to exhort him to return
to the Christian religion. But to this Hassan only replied, that he must be a
madman that would pretend to advise an enemy, and that the advised must still
act more madly who would take counsel of such an advisor. He was, however, on
the point of surrendering the city, when advice was brought him, that the
forces belonging to the western government were in full march toward the
place; upon which it was resolved to defend it to the utmost. Charles, in the
mean time, resolving upon a general assault, kept a constant firing upon the
town; which, from the weak defense made by the garrison, he looked upon as
already in his hands. But while the divan, or Algerine senate, were
deliberating upon the most proper means of obtaining an honorable capitulation,
a mad prophet, attended by a multitude of people, entered the assembly, and
foretold the speedy destruction of the Spaniards before the end of the moon,
exhorting the inhabitants to hold out till that time. This prediction was soon
verified in a most surprising and unexpected manner: for, on the 28th of
October 1541, a dreadful storm of wind, rain, and hail, arose from the north,
accompanied with violent shocks of earthquakes, and a dismal universal darkness
both by sea and land; so that the sun, moon and elements seemed to combine
together for the destruction of the Spaniards. In one night, some say in less
than half an hour, 86 ships and 15 galleys were destroyed, with all their crews
and military stores; by which the army or shore was deprived of all means of
subsistence. Their camp also, which spread itself along the plain under the
fort, was laid quite under water by the torrents which descended from the
neighboring hills. Many of the troops, by trying to remove into some better
situation, were cut in pieces by the Moors and Arabs; while several galleys,
and other vessels, endeavoring to gain some neighboring creek along the
coasts, were immediately plundered, and their crews massacred by the
inhabitants.

The next morning Charles beheld the sea covered with the fragments of ships,
and the bodies of men, horses and other creatures swimming on the waves; at
which he was so disheartened that he abandoned his tents, artillery, and all
his heavy baggage, to the enemy, and marched at the head of his army, though in
no small disorder, toward cape Malabux, in order to reimbark in those vessels
which had weathered out the storm. But Hassan, who had watched his motions,
allowed him just time enough to get to the shore, wh^^ he sallied out and
attacked the Spaniards in the midst of their hurry and confusion to get into
their ships, killing great numbers, and bringing away a still greater number of
captives; after which he returned in triumph to Algiers, where he celebrated,
with great rejoicings, his happy deliverance from such distress and danger Some
of the old English historians inform us, that this destruction of the Spaniards
was occasioned by witchcraft*
.

Soon after this the prophet Yusef, who had foretold the destruction of the
Spaniards, was not only declared the deliverer of his country, but had a
considerable gratuity decreed him, with the liberty of exercising his prophetic
function unmolested. It was not long, however, before the marabouts, and some
interpreters of the law, made a strong opposition against him; remonstrating to
the bashaw, how ridiculous and scandalous it was to the nation, to ascribe
their deliverance to a poor fortune tellers, which had been obtained by the
fervent prayers of a saint of their own profession. But though the bashaw and
his divan seemed, out of policy, to give into this last notion, yet the
impression which Yusef's predictions, and their late accomplishments, had made
upon the minds of the common people, proved too strong to be eradicated; and
the spirit of divination and conjuring has since got into such credit among
them, that not only their great statesmen, but their priests, marabouts, and
santoons, have applied themselves to that study, and dignified it with the name
of Mahomet's Revelations.

The unhappy Spaniards had scarce reached their ships, when they were attacked
by a fresh storm, in which several more of them perished; one ship in
particular, containing 700 soldiers, besides sailors, sunk in the emperor's
sight, without a possibility of saving a single man. At length, with much
labor, they reached the port of Bujeyah, at that time possessed by the
Spaniards, whither Hassan king of Tunis soon after repaired, with a supply of
provisions for the emperor, who received him graciously, with fresh assurances
of his favor and protection. Here he dismissed the few remains of the Maltese
knights and their forces, who embarked in three shattered galleys, and with
much difficulty and danger reached their own country. Charles himself staid no
longer than till the 16th of November, when he sailed for Carthagena, and
reached it on the 25th of the same month. In this unfortunate expedition
upwards of 120 ships and galleys were lost, above 300 colonels and other land
and sea officers, 8000 soldiers and mariners, besides those destroyed by the
enemy on the reimbarkation, or drowned in the last storm. The number of
prisoners was so great, that the Algerines sold some of them, by way of
contempt, for an onion per head.

Hassan, elated with this victory, in which he had very little share, undertook
an expedition against the king of Tremesen, who, being now deprived of the
assistance of the Spaniards, was forced to procure a peace by paying a vast sum
of money, and becoming tributory to him. The bashaw returned to Algiers, laden
with riches; and soon after died of a fever, in the 66th year of his age.

From this time the Spaniards were never able to annoy the Algerines in any
considerable degree. In 1555, they lost the city of Bujeyah, which was taken by
Salha Raise, Hassan's successor; who next year set out on a new expedition,
which he kept a secret, but was suspected to be intended against Oran: but he
was scarcely got four leagues from Algiers, when the plague, which at that time
raged violently in the city, broke out in his groin, and carried him off in 24
hours.

Immediately after his death the Algerine soldiery chose a Corsican renegado,
Hassan Corso, in his room, till they should receive further orders from the
Port. He did not accept the bashawship without a good deal of difficulty; but
immediately prosecuted the intended expedition to Oran, dispatching a messenger
to acquaint the Port with what had happened. They had hardly begun their
hostilities against the place, when orders came from the Port, expressly
forbidding Hassan Corso to begin the siege, or, if he had begun it, enjoining
him to raise it immediately. This news was received with great grief by the
whole fleet and army, as they thought themselves sure of success, the garrison
being at that time very weak. Nevertheless, as they dared not disobey, the
siege was immediately raised.

Corso had hardly enjoyed the dignity four months, before news came, that eight
galleys were bringing a new bashaw to succeed him; one Tekelli, a principal
Turk of the Grand Signior's court; upon which the Algerines unanimously
resolved not to admit him. By the treachery of the Levantine soldiers, however,
he was admitted at last, and the unfortunate Corso was thrown over a wall, in
which a number of iron hooks were fixed; one of which caught the ribs of his
right side, and he hung three days in the most exquisite torture before he
expired.

Tekelli was no sooner entered upon his new government, than he behaved with
such cruelty, that he was assassinated, even under the dome of a saint, by
Yusef Calabres, the favorite renegado of Hassan Corso; who for this service was
unanimously chosen bashaw, but died of the plague six days after his election.

Yusef was succeeded by Hassan the son of Hayradin, who had been formerly
recalled from his bashawship, when he was succeeded by Se^ha Raise; and now had
got the good fortune to get himself reinstated in his employment. Immediately
on his arrival, he engaged in a war with the Arabs, by whom he was defeated
with great loss. The next year, the Spaniards undertook an expedition against
Mostagan, under the command of the count d'Alcandela; but were utterly
defeated, the commander himself killed, and 12,000 taken prisoners. This
disaster was owing to the inconsiderate rashness, or rather madness, of the
commander; which was so great, that after finding it impossible to rally his
scattered forces, he rushed, sword in hand, into the thickest of the enemy's
ranks, at the head of a small number of men, crying out, "St. Jago! St. Jago!
the victory is ours, the enemy is defeated;" soon after which he was thrown
from his horse, and trampled to death.

Hassan having had the misfortune to displease his subjects, by allowing the
mountaineers of Cuco to buy ammunition at Algiers, was sent in irons to
Constantinople, while the aga of the Janisaries, and general of the land
forces, supplied his place. Hassan easily found means to clear himself; but a
new bashaw was appointed, called Achmet; who was no sooner arrived, than he
sent the two deputy-bashaws to Constantinople, where their heads were struck
off. Achmet was a man of such insatiable avarice, that upon his arrival at
Algiers, all ranks of people came in shoals to make him presents; which he the
more greedily accepted, as he had bought his dignity by the money he had
amassed while head gardener to the Sultan. He enjoyed it, however, only four
months; and after his death, the state was governed other four months by his
lieutenant; when Hassan was a third time sent viceroy to Algiers, where he was
received with the greatest demonstrations of joy.

The first enterprise in which Hassan engaged, was the siege of Marsalquiver,
situated near the city of Oran, which he designed to invest immediately after.
The army employed in this siege consisted of 26,000 foot and 10,000 horse,
besides which he had a fleet consisting of 32 galleys and galliots, together
with three French vessels laden with biscuit, oil, and other provisions. The
city was defended by Don Martin de Cordova, brother of the count d'Alcandela,
who had been taken prisoner in the battle where that nobleman was killed, but
had obtained his liberty from the Algerines with immense sums, and now made a
most gallant defense against the Turks. The city was attacked with the utmost
fury by sea and land, and several breaches were made in the walls. The Turkish
standards were several times planted on the walls, and as often dislodged; but
the place must in the end have submitted, had not Hassan been obliged to raise
the siege in haste, on the news that the famous Genoese admiral Doria was
approaching with considerable succors from Italy. The fleet accordingly
arrived soon after; but missing the Algerine galleys, bore away for Pennon de
Velez, where they were shamefully repulsed by a handful of Turks who garrisoned
that place; which, however, was taken the following year.

In 1567, Hassan was again recalled to Constantinople, where he died three
years after. He was succeeded by Mahomet, who gained the love of the Algerines
by several public spirited actions. He incorporated the ^anisaries and
Levantine Turks together, and by that means put an end to their dissentions,
which laid the foundation of the Algerine independency on the Port. He
likewise added some considerable fortifications to the city and castle, which
he designed to render impregnable.

But while he was thus studying the interest of Algiers, one John Gascon, a
bold Spanish adventurer, formed a design of surprising the whole piratic navy
in the bay, and setting them on fire in the night time, when they lay
defenseless, and in their first sleep. For this he had not only the permission
of king Philip II. but was furnished by him with proper vessels, mariners, and
fireworks, for the execution of his plot. With these he set sail for Algiers
in the beginning of October, the most proper season, when most, if not all the
ships lay at anchor there, and easily sailed near enough, unsuspected, to view
their manner of riding, in order to surprise them at a time when the greater
part of their crews were dispersed in their quarters. He came accordingly,
unperceived by any, to the very mole-gate, and dispersed his men with their
fireworks; but to their great surprise, they found them so ill mixed, that
they could not with all their art make them take fire. In the mean time, Gascon
took it into his head, by way of bravado, to go to the mole-gate, and give
three loud knocks at it with the pommel of his dagger, and to leave it fixed in
the gate by its point, that the Algerines might have cause to remember him.
This he had the good fortune to do without meeting any disturbance or
opposition; but it was not so with his men; for no sooner did they find their
endeavors frustrated, than they made such a bustle as quickly alarmed the
guard posted on the adjacent bastion, from which the uproar quickly spread
itself through the whole garrison. Gascon now finding himself in the utmost
danger, sailed away with all possible haste; but was pursued, overtaken, and
brought back a prisoner to Mahomet; who no sooner got him into his power, than
he immediately caused a gibbet of considerable height to be erected on the spot
where Gascon had landed, ordering him to be hoisted up, and hung by the feet to
a hook, that he might die in extreme torture; and to show his resentment and
contempt of the king his master, he ordered his commission to be tied to his
toes. He had not, however, hung long in that state, when the captain who took
him, accompanied by a number of other corsairs, interceded so strongly in his
behalf, that he was taken down, and put under the care of a Christian surgeon;
but two days after, some Moors reporting that it was the common talk and belief
in Spain, that the Algerines durst not hurt a hair of Gascon's head, the
unfortunate Spaniard was hoisted up by a pully to the top of the
execution-wall, and from thence thrown down upon hooks which were fastened in
it, one of which caught him by the ribs as he fell, and gave him such a wound
that he expired without a groan. -- Thus ended the expedition of John Gascon,
which has procured him a place among the Spanish martyrs; while on the other
hand, the Algerines look upon his disappointment to have been miraculous, and
owing to the efficacious protection of the powerful saint Sidi Outededda, whose
prayers had raised such a terrible storm against the Spanish fleet.

Mahomet being soon after recalled, was succeeded by the famous renegado Ocha^,
who reduced the kingdom of Tunis; which, however, remained subject to the
viceroy of Algiers only till the year 1586, when a bashaw of Tunis was
appointed by the Port.

The kingdom of Algiers continued to be governed till the beginning of the
seventeenth century, by viceroys, or bashaws appointed by the Port; concerning
whom we find nothing very remarkable, further than that their avarice and
tyranny was intolerable both to the Algerines and the Turks themselves. At last
the Turkish Janisaries and militia becoming powerful enough to suppress the
tyrannic sway of these bashaws, and the people being almost exhausted by the
heavy taxes laid upon them, the former resolved to depose these petty tyrants,
and set up some officers of their own at the head of government. The better to
succeed in this attempt, the militia sent a deputation of some of their chief
members to the Port^, to complain of the avarice and oppression of these
bashaws, who sunk both the revenue of the state, and put the money remitted to
it from Constantinople into their own coffers, which should have been employed
in keeping up and paying the soldiery; by which means they were in continual
danger of being overpowered by the Arabians and Moors, who, if ever so little
assisted by any Christian power, would hardly sail of driving all the Turks out
of the kingdom. They represented to the Grand Vizir how much more honorable, as
well as easier and cheaper, it would be for the Grand Signior to permit them to
choose their own dey, or governor, (...) ^^ong themselves, whose interest it
would (...) to see that the revenue of the kingdom was rightly applied, in
keeping up its forces complete, and supplying all other exigencies of the
state, without any farther charge or trouble to the Port than that of allowing
it protection. On their part, they engaged always to acknowledge the Grand
Signiors as their sovereigns, and to pay them their usual allegiance and
tribute, to respect their bashaws, and even to lodge and maintain them and
their retinue, in a manner suitable to their dignity, at their own charge. The
bashaws, however, were for the future, to be excluded from assisting at any but
general divans, unless invited to it; and from having the liberty of voting in
them, unless when their advice was asked, or the interest of the Port was
likely to suffer by their silence. All other concerns, which related to the
government of Algiers, were to be wholly left under the direction of the dey
and his divan.

These proposals having been accepted by the Port, the deputies returned
highly satisfied; and having notified their new privileges, the great divan
immediately proceeded to the election of a dey from among themselves. They
compiled a new code of laws, and made several regulations for the better
support and maintenance of this new form of government, to the observation of
which they obliged all their subjects to swear; and the militia, navy,
commerce, etc. were all settled pretty nearly on the footing upon which they
now stand: though the subsequent altercations that frequently happened between
the bashaws and deys, the one endeavoring to recover their former power, and
the other to curtail it, caused such frequent complaints and discontents at the
Ottoman court, as made them frequently repent their compliance.

In the year 1601, the Spaniards, under the command of Doria the Genoese
admiral, made another attempt upon Algiers, in which they were more fortunate
than usual, their fleet being only driven back by contrary winds, so that they
came off without loss. In 1609, the Moors being expelled from Spain, flocked in
great numbers to Algiers; and as many of them were very able sailors, they
undoubtedly contributed to render the Algerine fleet so formidable as it became
soon after; though it is probable the frequent attempts made on their city
would also induce them to increase their fleet. In 1616 their fleet consisted
of 40 sail of ships between 200 and 400 tons, their admiral 500 tons. It was
divided into two squadrons, one of 18 sail, before the port of Malaga; and the
other at the Cape of Santa Maria, between Lisbon and Seville; both of which
fell foul of all Christian ships, both French and English, with whom they
pretended to be in friendship, as well as Spaniards and Portuguese, with whom
they were at war.

The Algerines now became very formidable to the European powers. The
Spaniards, who were most in danger, and least able to cope with them, solicited
the assistance of England, the pope, and other states. The French, however,
were the first who dared to show their resentment of the perfidious behavior
of these miscreants; and in 1617, M. Beaulieu was sent against them with a
fleet of 50 men of war, who defeated their fleet, took two of their vessels,
while their admiral sunk his own ship and crew, rather than fall into his
enemies hands.

In 1620, a squadron of English men of war was sent against Algiers, under the
command of Sir Robert Mansel; but of this expedition we have no other account,
than that it returned without doing any thing; and the Algerines becoming more
and more insolent, openly defied all the European powers, the Dutch only
accepted; to whom in 1625, they sent a proposal, directed to the prince of
Orange, that in case they would fit out 20 sail of ships the following year,
upon any good service against the Spaniards, they would join them with 60 sail
of their own.

The next year, the Coulolies, or Cologlies, (the children of such Turks as had
been permitted to marry at Algiers), who were enrolled in the militia, having
seized on the citadel, had well nigh made themselves masters of the city; but
were attacked by the Turks and renegadoes, who defeated them with terrible
slaughter. Many scores of them were executed, and their heads thrown in heaps
upon the city walls, without the eastern gate. Part of the citadel was blown
up; and the remaining Coulolies were dismissed from the militia, to which they
were not again admitted till long after.

In 1623, the Algerines and other states of Barbary threw off their dependence
on the Port altogether, and set up for themselves. What gave occasion to this
was the 25 years truce which Sultan Amurath IV. was obliged to make with the
emperor Ferdinand II. to prevent his being overmatched by carrying on a war
against him and the Sophi of Persia at the same time. As this put a stop to the
piratical trade of the Algerines, they proceeded as above mentioned; and
resolved that whoever desired to be at peace with them, must, distinctly and
separately, apply to their government. No sooner was this resolution adopted,
than the Algerines began to make prizes of several merchant ships belonging to
powers at peace with the Port. Nay, having seized a Dutch ship and poleacre at
Scanderoon, they ventured on shore; and finding the town abandoned by the
Turkish aga and inhabitants, they plundered all the magazines and warehouse and
set them on fire.

About this time Lewis XIII. undertook to build a fort on their coasts, instead
of one formerly built by the Marsilians, and which they had demolished. This,
after some difficulty, he accomplished; and it was called the Bastion of
France: but the situation being afterward found inconvenient, the French
purchased the port of La Call, and obtained liberty to trade with the Arabians
and Moors. The Ottoman court, in the mean time, was so much embarrassed with
the Persian war, that there was no leisure to check the Algerine piracies. This
gave an opportunity to the vizir and other courtiers to compound matters with
the Algerines, and to get a share of their prizes, which were very
considerable. However, for form's sake, a severe reprimand, accompanied with
threats, was sent them; to which they replied, that "these depredations
deserved to be indulged to them, seeing they were the only bulwark against the
Christian powers, especially against the Spaniards, the sworn enemies of the
Moslem name. Adding, "that if they should pay a punctilious regard to all that
would purchase peace, or liberty to trade with the Ottoman empire, they would
have nothing to do but set fire to all their shipping, and turn camel-drivers
for a livelihood."

In the year 1635, four young brothers of a good family in France, entered into
an undertaking so desperate, that perhaps the annals of knight-errantry can
scarcely furnish a parallel. -- This was no less than to retort the piracies of
the Algerines upon themselves; and as they indiscriminately took the ships of
all nations, so were these heroes indiscriminately to take the ships belonging
to Algiers; and this with a small frigate of ten guns! -- In this ridiculous
undertaking 100 volunteers embarked; a Maltese commission was procured,
together with an able master and 36 mariners. They had the good fortune, on
their first setting out, to take a ship laden with wine, on the Spanish coast:
with which they were so much elated, that three days after they madly
encountered two large Algerine corsairs, one of 20 and the other of 24 guns,
both well manned, and commanded by able officers. These two large vessels
having got the small frigate between them, racked her so furiously with
broadsides, that they soon carried away her mainmast: notwithstanding which,
the French made so desperate a resistance, that the pirates were not able to
take them, till the noise of their firing brought up five more Algerines; when
the French vessel, being almost torn to pieces, was boarded and taken. The
young knight-errants were punished for their temerity by a dreadful captivity,
from which they redeemed themselves in 1642, at the price of 6000 dollars.

CHAP. III.
The Algerines fit out a formidable fleet, which is totally destroyed by the
Venetians. Algiers in great confusion at the news. The Algerines fit out a new
fleet. A Dutch merchantman defeats a number of their galleys. Lewis XIV. makes
preparations against Algiers. The city bombarded and set on fire by the French.
The Algerines commit great ravages in France. Their city again bombarded, set
on fire, and almost destroyed. They sue for peace. Capt. Beach burns seven of
their ships. The Turkish bashaw expelled. The Spanish expedition of 1775.

THE Algerines continued to prosecute their piracies with impunity, to the
terror and disgrace of the European powers, till the year 1652; when a French
fleet being accidently driven into Algiers, the admiral took it into his head
to demand a release of all the captives of his nation, without exception. This
being refused, the Frenchman, without ceremony, carried off the Turkish
viceroy, and his cadi or judge, who were just arrived from the Port, with all
their equipage and retinue. The Algerines, by way of reprisal, surprised the
Bastion of France already mentioned, and carried off the inhabitants to the
number of 600, with all their effects; which so provoked the admiral, that he
sent them word that he would pay them another visit the next year with his
whole fleet.

The Algerines, undismayed by the threats of the French admiral, fitted out a
fleet of 16 galleys and galliots, excellently manned and equipped, under the
command of admiral Ha^i Pinchinin. The chief design of this armament was
against the treasure of Loretto; which, however, they were prevented by
contrary winds from obtaining. Upon this they made a descent of Puglia, in the
kingdom of Naples; where they ravaged the whole territory of Necotra, carrying
off a vast number of captives, and among them some nuns. From thence steering
toward Dalmatia, they scoured the Adriatic; and loading themselves with
immense plunder, left those coasts in the utmost consternation.

At last the Venetians, alarmed at such terrible depredations, equipped a fleet
of 28 sail, under the command of admiral Capello, with express orders to burn,
sink and take all the Barbary corsairs he met with, either on the open sea, or
even in the Grand Signior's harbors, pursuant to a late treaty of peace with
the Port. On the other hand, the captain bashaw, who had been sent out with
the Turkish fleet to chase the Florentine and Maltese cruisers out of the
Archipelago, understanding that the Algerine squadron was so near, sent express
orders to the admiral to come to his assistance. Pinchinin readily agreed; but
having first resolved on a descent upon the island of Lissa, or Lisina,
belonging to the Venetians, he was overtaken by Capello, from whom he retired
to Valona, a sea port belonging to the Grand Signior, whither the Venetian
admiral pursued him, but the Turkish governor refusing to eject the pirates
according to the articles of the peace between the Ottoman court and Venice,
Capello was obliged to content himself with watching them for some time.
Pinchinin was soon weary of restraint, and ventured out; when an engagement
immediately ensued, in which the Algerines were defeated, and five of their
vessels disabled; with the loss of 1500 men, Turks and Christian slaves;
besides 1600 galley-slaves who regained their liberty. Pinchinin, after this
defeat, returned to Valona, where he was again watched by Capello; but the
latter had not lain long at his old anchorage before he received a letter from
the senate, desiring him to make no farther attempt on the pirates at that
time, for fear of a rupture with the Port. This was followed by a letter from
the governor of Valona, desiring him to take care lest he incurred the Sultan's
displeasure by such insults. The brave Venetian was forced to comply; but
resolving to take such a leave of the Algerines as he thought they deserved,
observed how they had reared their tents, and drawn their booty and equipage
along the shore. He then kept firing among the tents, while some well-manned
galliots and brigantines were ordered among their shipping, who attacked them
with such bravery, that, without any great loss, they towed out their 16
galleys, with all their cannon, stores etc. In this last engagement, a ball
from one of the Venetian galleys, happening to strike a Turkish mosque, the
whole action was considered as an insult upon the Grand Signior. To conceal
this, Capello was ordered to sink all the Algerine ships he had taken, except
the admiral; which was to be conducted to Venice, and laid up as a trophy.
Capello came off with a severe reprimand; but the Venetians were obliged to
buy, with 500,000 ducats, a peace from the Port. The Grand Signior offered to
repair the loss of the Algerines, by building ten galleys for them, upon
condition that they should continue in his service till the end of the ensuing
summer; but ^inchi^^^, who knew how little the Algerines chose to lie under
obligations to him, civilly declined the offer.

In the mean time, the news of this defeat and loss filled Algiers with the
utmost grief and confusion. The whole city was on the point of a general
insurrection, when the bashaw and divan issued a proclamation, forbidding not
only complaints and outcries, under the severest penalties; but all persons
whatever to take their thumbs from within their girdles, while they were
deliberating on this important point. In the mean time, they applied to the
Port for an order that the Venetians settled in the Levant should make up
their loss. But with this the Grand Signior refused to comply, and left them to
repair their losses, as well as build new ships, in the best manner they could.
It was not long, however, before they had the satisfaction to see one of their
corsairs land, with a fresh supply of 600 slaves, whom he had brought from the
coast of Iceland, whither he had been directed by a miscreant native on board a
Danish ship.

Our pirates did not long continue in their weak and defenseless state; being
able, at the end of two years, to appear at sea with a fleet of 65 sail. The
admiral Pinchinin equipped four galliots at his own expense; with which, in
conjunction with the chiayah, or secretary of the bashaw of Tripoli, he made a
second excursion. This small squadron, consisting of five galleys and two
brigantines, and manned with their most able seaman, fell in with an English
ship of 40 guns; which, however, Pinchinin's captains refused to engage; but
being afterward reproached by him for their cowardice, they swore they would
attack the next Christian ship that came in their way. This happened to be a
Dutch merchantman, of 28 guns and 40 men, deeply laden, and unable to use her
sails by reason of a calm. Pinchinin immediately summoned her to surrender; but
receiving an ironical answer, drew up his squadron, by means of oars, in the
form of a half moon, that they might pour their shot all at once into their
adversary. But the moment they were preparing to discharge a tremendous
broadside into her, a breeze of wind fortunately sprung up, and enabled him to
change his position; which threw the Algerine squadron into such confusion that
they ran foul of each othe^^ during which Pinchinin ran his own galley alo^^
side of the merchantman, and 70 Algerines boarded him with cutlasses in their
hands; some cutting away the rigging, and others plying the hatches with
hand-grenadoes; but the Dutchmen, having well secured themselves in their close
quarters, began to fire upon the Algerines on board their vessel from two
pieces of cannon loaded with small shot, which made such slaughter among them,
that they were all either killed or forced to submit. Pinchinin, in the mean
time, made several unsuccessful attempts to relieve his men, as well as to
surround the Dutchman with his other galleys: but that ship lay so deep in the
water, that every shot did terrible execution among the pirates. Every effort
to recover from their confusion was vain, and the Dutchman continued to pour
into them such vollies of grape-shot and bars of iron, that in less than ten
minutes above 200 of them were killed, and a much greater number wounded; among
whom was the chiayah himself, who received a wound in the belly, of which he
died shortly after. The squadron now retired with the utmost expedition, and
returned to Algiers in the most dismal plight.

But though Pinchinin thus returned in disgrace, the rest of the fleet captured
vast numbers of slaves, and an immense quantity of rich spoils; insomuch that
the English, French and Dutch, were obliged to cringe to the Algerines, who
sometimes vouchsafed to be at peace with them; but swore eternal war against
Spain, Portugal, and Italy, whom they looked upon as the greatest enemies to
the Mohammedan name. At last Lewis XIV. provoked by the grievous outrages
committed by the Algerines on the coasts of Provence and Languedoc, ordered, in
1681, a considerable fleet to be fitted out against them, under the Marquis du
Quesne, vice admiral of France. His first expedition was against a number of
Tripolitan corsairs; who had the good fortune to outrow him, and shelter
themselves in the island of Scio belonging to the Turks. This did not, however,
prevent him from pursuing them thither, and making such terrible fire upon them
as quickly destroyed 14 of their vessels, besides battering the walls of the
castle.

This severity seemed only to be designed as a check to the piracies of the
Algerines; but, finding they still continued their outrages on the French
coast, he sailed to Algiers in August 1682, connonading and bombarding it so
furiously, that the whole town was in flames in a very little time. The great
Mosque was battered down, and most of the houses laid in ruins; insomuch that
the inhabitants were on the point of abandoning the place; when on a sudden the
wind turned about, and obliged Du Quesne to return to Toulon. The Algerines
immediately made reprisals, by sending a number of galleys and galliots to the
coasts of Provence, where they committed the most dreadful outrages, and
brought away a vast number of captives: upon which a new armament was ordered
to be got ready at Toulon and Marseilles, against the next year; and the
Algerines, having received timely notice, put themselves into as a good state
of defense as the time would allow.

In May 1683, Du Quesne with his squadron cast anchor before Algiers; when
being joined by the Marquis d'Affranville, at the head of five stout vessels,
it was resolved to bombard the town next day. Accordingly 100 bombs were thrown
into it the first day, which did terrible execution; while the besieged made
some hundred discharges of their cannon against them, without doing any
considerable damage. The following night the bombs were again thrown into the
city in such numbers, that the dey's palace and other great edifices were
almost destroyed; some of their batteries were dismounted, and several vessels
sunk in the port. The dey and Turkish bashaw, as well as the whole soldiery,
alarmed at this dreadful havoc immediately sued for peace. As a preliminary,
the immediate surrender was insisted on, of all Christian captives who had been
taken fighting under the French flag; which being granted, 142 of them were
immediately delivered up, with a promise of sending him the remainder as soon
as they could be got from the different parts of the country. Accordingly, Du
Quesne sent his commissary-general and one of his engineers into the town; but
with express orders to insist upon the delivery of all the French captives
without exception, together with the effects they had taken from the French;
and that Mezomorto their then admiral, and Hali Raise one of their captains,
should be given as hostages.

This last demand having embarrassed the dey, he assembled the Divan, and
acquainted them with it; upon which Mezomorto fell, into a violent passion, and
told the assembly, that the cowardice of those who sat at the helm, had
occasioned the ruin of ^^^giers; but that, for his part, he would never consent
to deliver up any thing that had been taken from the French.

He immediately acquainted the soldiery with what had passed; which so
exasperated them, that they murdered the dey that very night, and on the morrow
chose Mezomorto in his place. This was no sooner done, than he cancelled all
the articles of peace which had been made, and hostilities were renewed with
greater fury than ever.

The French admiral now kept pouring in such vollies of bombs, that in less
than three days, the greatest part of the city was reduced to ashes, and the
fire burnt with such vehemence, that the sea was enlightened with it for more
than six miles round. Mezomorto, unmoved at all these disasters, and the vast
number of the slain, whose blood ran in rivulets along the streets; or rather
grown furirious and desperate, sought only how to wreak his vengeance on the
enemy; and not content with causing all the French in the city to be cruelly
murdered, ordered their consul to be tied hand and foot, and fastened alive to
the mouth of a mortar, from whence he was shot away against their navy. By this
piece of inhumanity Du Ques^e was so exasperated, that he did not leave Algiers
till he had utterly destroyed all their fortifications, shipping, almost all
the lower part, and above two thirds of the upper part of the city; by which
means it became little else than a heap of ruins.

The haughty Algerines were now thoroughly convinced that they were not
invincible; and, therefore immediately sent an embassy into France, begging in
the most humble terms, for peace; which Lewis immediately granted, to their
inexpressible joy. They now began to pay some regard to other nations, and to
be a little more cautious how they wantonly incurred their displeasure. The
first bombardment by the French had so far humbled the Algerines, that they
condescended to enter into a treaty with England; which was renewed, upon terms
very advantageous to the latter, in 1686. It is not to be supposed, however,
that the natural perfidy of the Algerines would disappear on a sudden:
notwithstanding this treaty, therefore, they lost no opportunity of making
prizes of the English ships when they could conveniently come at them. Upon
some infringement of this kind, captain Beach drove them ashore and burnt seven
of their frigates in 1695; which produced a renewal of the treaty five years
after: but it was not till the taking of Gibraltar and port Mahon, that Britain
could have a sufficient check upon them to enforce the observation of treaties;
and these have since proved such restraints upon Algiers, that they still
continue to pay a greater deference to the English than to any other European
power.

The present century furnishes but few very remarkable events with regard to
Algiers. The famous city of Oran was, however, taken from the Spaniards in
1708, which they recovered in 1737. In 1710 the Turkish bashaw was expelled,
and his office united to that of the dey. This introduced the form of
government which still continues in Algiers.

In 1775 the Spaniards made another descent upon Algiers. They fitted out this
year a very formidable fleet consisting of six ships of the line, twelve
frigates, nine xebeques, and twenty-four other armed vessels, commanded by Don
Pedro de Castijon; on board of which was embarked a body of 24,447 men,
including infantry, cavalry, dragoons, artillery-men, mariners, and 600
deserters to serve as workmen, all under the command of Lieutenant general
Conde de O'Reilly, a personal favorite of the late king of Spain. They had
likewise (...) service 176 pieces of artillery, mortars, and ^^vitzers, with a
suitable quantity of military stores. The Spaniards entertained the most
sanguine expectations of success in this expedition, and a grand ceremonial was
performed by the principal officers at the church of St. Francisco, in honor of
La Purissima Concepcion, patroness of all Spain, imploring her protection, and
success to the king's arms, after which O'Reilly delivered a pompous oration.

On the 23d of June the fleet set sail from the port of Carthagena in Spain,
and on the 1st of July anchored in the bay of Algiers. They observed a large
encampment, placed behind a battery, east of the little river Xarach, which
lies to the eastward of the city, and several Moors on horseback about the
beach. On the second of July a council of the principal officers was held, and
orders were given that the troops should hold themselves in readiness to
disembark the next morning at daybreak. But as the succeeding night was windy,
and a swell had set in from the shore, these orders were countermanded. From
this day until the 6th was an interval of inactivity; frequent councils were
held, in which violent contests arose, and a quarrel ensued between O'Reilly,
and major general Romana, a Spaniard of an impetuous temper, who appearing to
thwart the measures of the commander in chief, received from him some severe
reproaches.

On the 6th, all the principal officers were again assembled to receive their
ultimate instructions, when the orders of the 2d of July were strongly
recommended; which, however, offended the officers in general, by allotting
severe punishments for trivial neglects. In these orders the commander in chief
enjoined the troops not to break their order; as nothing but united force and
discipline could ensure them success against an enemy so active and skilful in
desultory war. He particularly warned them of the practice of the Moors, who
always feign a most violent attack, and upon the least resistance fly with
precipitation, in order to draw their enemy into an ambuscade. But he pointed
out to them the very error which they afterward committed, and the snare into
which they were betrayed. On landing, he commanded each brigade to form a
column of a company in front, six deep; and the guards of half a company in
front: and directed them to gain some heights which were supposed requisite to
ensure success against the city. The disposition of the march was ordered to be
in four columns, with the light infantry in advance, and on the flanks; each
column was to have four field pieces in front, to be increased as exigencies
might require: two redoubts were to be formed at the place of disembarkation,
and a communication to be kept up between the army, those fortifications, and
the fleet. In the afternoon of the 6th, some ships of war were ordered to fire
against three batteries to the eastward of Algiers. But they were stationed at
so great a distance, through the fear of being raked by the Algerine batteries,
that their shot did not reach the shore! -- except those of the St. Joseph, of
74 guns, which received some damage from the enemy. At sunset this very
cautious attack ceased.

On the 7th at daybreak, between eight and nine thousand men were put on board
of boats for landing. They advanced very near the shore, about a mile to the
westward of the river Xarach, under the protection of seven galleys, and two
long boats with a twelve pounder each; not a Moor appearing to oppose their
landing. At seven o'clock in the morning they returned on board the transports,
and not a shot was fired on either side the whole day! Orders were then given
for the transport long boats to be manned with Spanish seamen, and to be in
readiness at daybreak the next morning.

On the 8th at daybreak the ships were posted to batter the different forts to
the right and left of the place of disembarkation, and 8000 troops were put on
board of boats, which formed in six columns; at the head of which were the
grenadiers, preceded by the armed xebeques, galliots, etc. that were to cover
their landing. The firing from the ships began, and the troops moved on to the
place of disembarkation, where they effected their landing on the beach, (about
a league to the eastward of the city), between the intervals of firing from the
covering vessels; and immediately above 80,000 Moors appeared in sight,
two-thirds of which were cavalry, under the bey of Constantina; but they did
not attempt to oppose the landing of the Spanish forces. The Turks in the mean
time remained to defend the city, and not one of them appeared to dispute the
ground. It is said that the whole number of Africans collected on this occasion
was not less than 150,000, of which 100,000 were cavalry. As soon as the 8000
Spaniards had made good their landing, they formed six deep, according to
orders; the armed vessels divided to the right and left, to cover their flanks;
and the boats returned to bring the rest of the army on shore with all
expedition. The troops of the first disembarkation had scarcely formed, when a
detachment of the enemy appeared in their front; but upon observing a movement
of the Spaniards toward them, they fled in disorder. The troops then marched
forward, by the beat of drum, with the volunteers of Arragon and Catolonia in
front, until they were engaged in a close country, which the enemy had occupied
in small parties; but posted so advantageously in ditches and fortresses, that
they made great havoc among the Spaniards, without receiving any injury in
return. The Spanish grenadiers, and light infantry, which had been detached in
advance, were repulsed. At this juncture they were reinforced by the troops of
the second disembarkation, and some heavy cannon coming up which protected
their march, they again advanced toward some enclosures, where they directed a
heavy fire; but without being able to dislodge the enemy. Great numbers of the
Spaniards fell without gaining the least advantage; in consequence of which
their whole body fell into confusion. The zeal and intrepidity of the officers
was insufficient to contain the men; some advanced, and others retired, in an
indiscriminate manner, just as they judged it expedient, without any regard to
the command of their officers. While they were in this critical situation, a
drove of camels appeared, extending on their left, conducted by some Moors,
with a design of drawing the fire of the enemy upon them. Great was the
slaughter of the Spaniards, and in this extremity a cry was spread that they
were cut off by the Moorish horse. The utmost confusion succeeded, and the
whole body fled with the greatest precipitation, leaving on the field of battle
an immense number of wounded, whom they were obliged to abandon to the mercy of
their enemies. By this time the workmen and troops of the third disembarkation
were forming entrenchments, which they had already fortified with three eight
pounders; which did great execution; at the same time the Tuscan commanders
drew their frigates close into shore, and kept up such a well-directed fire,
that the Spaniards were enabled to make good their retreat into their
entrenchments, which were, however, scarcely large enough to contain their
army. In this crowded situation they were much annoyed by a thirty-six pounder
which the enemy brought out of one of their batteries, and an elevated fire
from the fort of Xarach contributed much to the mischief. The Moors attacked
them in their trenches, but they were repulsed with great slaughter, and in
this situation the Spaniards remained till dark, when they began their
re-imbarkation in great tumult and confusion; but what discovered the ignorance
of the Moors, was their neglecting so favorable an opportunity of obtaining
the completest of victories.

The loss sustained by the Spaniards on this occasion, amounted to 27 officers
killed, and 191 wounded; 501 men killed, and 2,088 wounded. The Marquis of
Romana was killed at the head of his brigade in the commencement of the action.
The loss of the Moors it is said, was between five and six thousand killed, and
as many wounded; but this seems improbable The above account is agreeable to
the Spanish court gazettes, (in which truth is seldom expected), and agrees
with Dalrymple's statement, who says it nearly corresponds with a letter from
Algiers. But other writers state the Spanish loss much greater, and it is at
least evident that there cannot be so wide a difference in the loss between the
parties, especially as the Spaniards made so little impression on the Moors in
their ditches, etc.
The government of Algiers had offered a premium of ten sequins for every
Spaniard's head, and consequently the wounded Spaniards, who were left on the
field of battle, were all murdered. The unfortunate invaders left behind them
on their retreat, 15 pieces of cannon, three howitzers, and a great number of
small arms and ammunition.

On the 12th of July, the troops, and the greatest part of the fleet set sail
on their return to Spain, and thus terminated this Quixotic expedition; of
which a Spanish sergeant, in giving an account to his wife, ludicrously says,
Nos mandaron a tierra, como si ibemos a beber cafe con los Moros; "we were
commanded ashore as if we were to drink coffee with the Moors."

When the melancholy intelligence was announced of the failure of this
expedition, from which the Spanish nation had formed such sanguine expectations
of success, the national feelings were indiscribable. O'Reilly was in
consequence so cordially detested, that mobs assembled upon the road to Alicant
with an intent to wreak their vengeance upon him. They stopped many carriages,
and that O'Reilly (who was lame) might not be concealed, they made the people
get out and walk before them. Had the liberty of the press prevailed the world
would have known the sentiments of the Spanish nation upon this occasion. The
king was threatened if his favorite should ever appear at court again, and to
appease the turbulence of the people he was soon after removed from the
governorship of Madrid.

Since the failure of this expedition the Spaniards have attempted nothing
decisive against Algiers. In the years 1783 and 1784, indeed, they renewed
their attacks by sea to destroy the city and galleys; but after spending a
great quantity of ammunition, bombs, etc. they were obliged to retire without
either its capture or extinction.

CHAP. IV.
The Algerines begin their depredations upon the American commerce. Captain
Stephens and O'Brien taken. A truce with Portugal. Eleven sail of American
vessels captured, and their crews made slaves. Their treatment and sufferings.
Col. Humphreys and Mr. Donaldson sent to treat with the Algerines. Mr. Barlow
dispatched to the Barbary States. Mr. Donaldson concludes a treaty with
Algiers. Captain O'Brien sent with 225,000 dollars to the dey. Captured by a
Tripolitan corsair. Released and arrives at Algiers. Treats with Tripoli. The
Tunisian territory invaded. The American prisoners released. Desperate
engagement between an Algerine corsair and two Neopolitan frigates. Various
occurrences. Report of the Secretary of State.

AFTER the establishment of the American independence, when the United States
had relinquished their maritime dependence upon the English nation, it followed
as a natural consequence, that the American commerce must fall a sacrifice to
the ravages of the Algerine corsairs; and no doubt it was through the intrigues
of the British cabinet, who were chagrined at our recent emancipation, that
their hostile disposition was so quickly manifested. Various circumstances
concurred to render them eligible objects of piratical rapacity. America was
situated at the distance of more than three thousand miles from the theater of
their piracies, and as she supported no maritime force they were enabled to
continue their depredations with impunity. Her extensive commerce with Europe
presented a splendid allurement to the pirates, who were well aware that the
prevention of their aggressions would require a naval armament greatly superior
to the substantial benefits that could be derived from an attempt to reduce
them to submission. It is, however, by no means problematical, that the naval
force of the United States, with judicious commanders, would prove fully
competent to reduce their fleet, if not to effect the destruction of their
city. According to the most authentic accounts, their navy is at present
extremely inconsiderable, and many of the American captives concur in the
assertion, that the fleet of this regency only amounted in 1796 to five
frigates, two xebecks, and one half galley! a force by no means to be put in
competition with that which could be raised by the United States. But to bring
all their ships of war to a regular engagement at once, would be totally
impracticable; for whenever an hostile armament scours the Mediterranean they
immediately fly for refuge to the guns of their fortifications.

When we reflect upon the peculiar encouragement they had to commit
depredations on our commerce, it becomes rather a matter of wonder that we
suffered so little, than that we suffered so much. For this security we were
greatly indebted to the wars which existed between the Algerines, the
Portuguese and the Dutch, at the time they commenced their ravages upon our
trade; either of which powers are greatly superior to the corsairs in maritime
strength, and they so narrowly watched the entrance of the Mediterranean for
the protection of their own commerce, that the pirates were seldom able to
cruise out into the Atlantic. Those American vessels that sometimes ventured
into the streights were generally safe; for they derived their security either
from forged or purchased Mediterranean passports.

Notwithstanding the vigilance with which the Portuguese guarded the streights,
the Algerines sometimes stole out into the Atlantic, and in one of these
excursions, which happened while the Portuguese fleet were ordered upon some
secret expedition, the schooner Maria, captain Stephens, belonging to Mr.
Foster of Boston, was captured by a corsair off Cape St. Vincents, on the 25th
of July 1785; and five days afterward, the ship Dolphin, captain O'Brien,
belonging to Messrs. Irvines of Philadelphia, was taken by another about 50
leagues to the westward of Lisbon. These vessels, with their cargoes and crews,
about 21 in number, were carried into Algiers, where they were made slaves.

Toward the latter end of the year 1793, a truce was made between the court of
Lisbon and the regency of Algiers, for the period of twelve months, and in
consequence, nine sail of Algerine cruisers passed out through the Streights of
Gibraltar into the Atlantic ocean. Their cruising station was between Cape St.
Vincents and the western islands, where they continued to cruise the greatest
part of the winter, contrary to their former custom of retiring from the ocean
in November. In consequence of this truce, the courts of Lisbon and Madrid
granted convoys to American vessels homeward bound, to a certain latitude where
they were free from the corsairs.

On the 18th of October 1793, about five leagues from Gibraltar, captain John
M'Shane of the Minerva, was boarded by a xebeck of 20 guns, belonging to
Algiers, who after coming within musket shot, kept a constant firing with
small-arms until the yards of the American vessel were manned from those of the
cruiser. The firing then ceased; they came down sword in hand and made the
American crew prisoners; stripped them of their clothes, and put them on board
the xebeck, which carried them to Algiers, where they arrived the 30th of
October. As soon as they had arrived they were taken before the dey, and after
examination, were ordered to the Bagnio, where the slaves are kept locked up at
night. The next day they were bound with iron chains, each about 40 pounds
weight, which reached from their legs to their hips, and sent to the marine,
where they were kept at hard labor from daylight till dark.

On the 23d of October, captain William Penrose, of the ship President of
Philadelphia, discovered, about 9 o'clock in the morning, a sail to the
windward bearing down upon him, which the ship's company at first imagined to
be a Spanish privateer. But they were soon fatally deceived; for she proved to
be an Algerine corsair. As soon as she discovered the American flag she hoisted
out her boat immediately, and 30 men armed with pistols and drawn cutlasses
furiously boarded his vessel. The first salutation the captain received was a
violent stroke with a cutlass; after which they compelled the whole ship's
company to jump over the rail of the vessel into their boat, without suffering
any one to go below for their clothes, and other necessary articles. The crew
were then carried on board the cruiser, where they were stripped naked, and a
few old rags were given them in return, neither sufficient to conceal their
nakedness, nor protect them from the cold.

In this situation they were obliged to lie on deck, where they suffered great
hardships from the inclemency of the season. Captain Penrose tells us he was
forced to lie on the poop, where he was almost perished by a bitter north-east
wind; till at length an old man, more humane than the rest, furnished him with
a blanket. The provisions given them to eat, were black bread and water, and
sometimes a few rotten olives, which they regarded as a great dainty.

In this forlorn situation they continued eight days, and on the 30th of
October they arrived at Algiers. Here they were subjected to a new series of
misery. They thought themselves cruelly treated on board the cruiser; but their
treatment there was pleasure when contrasted with the miseries they afterward
experienced. They were scarcely on shore when they were loaded with irons, and
immediately put to hard labor like so many criminals.

The number of American prisoners now amounted to about 130, among whom were
captains Stephens and O'Brien, whose crews had been reduced to ten by the
plague, and the severity of their treatment for upwards of eight years. The
small pittance they had received from the United States had been withheld about
three months before; and their only subsistence was a little black bread and
water, and sometimes nothing.

In their October expedition they captured ten sail of American vessels, nine
of which safely entered the harbor of Algiers on the 30th of October where the
vessels anchored, amidst the shouts of the people The names of the American
captains and their places of residence are as follows: -- Captains Wallace,
Virginia; Newman, Boston; Tailor, Rhode Island; Furnace, New Hampshire; Calder,
Gloucester; Burnham, New York; Bailey, Newbury; Moss, ditto; M'Shane and
Penrose, Philadelphia.
.

The Algerine corsairs, greatly animated with the success of this expedition,
immediately set sail to resume their former station; while others were
equipping in the harbor with the utmost speed. But fortunately the miscreants
only captured one American vessel, about a month afterward, belonging to
captain Joseph Ingraham; for the Americans were extremely cautious how they
came within the sphere of their rapacity; and, after these captures, they never
fell in with any American vessels, but those that were protected by convoys.

After these events, the American prisoners were subjected to a series of
misery which humanity blushes to record. As soon as they landed in Algiers,
they were immediately ordered to the dey's palace, where they were drawn up in
files, in a back court, and underwent a strick examination. The dey, attended
by his cook, passed and repassed in front of them, and was extremely pleased
with their appearance. He selected from their number all the boys and younger
men, whom he employed in his palace at different occupations, generally of a
servile nature; some were ordered to sweep the apartments, some to wash
clothes, and others to wait upon the dey and take care of his wardrobe. The
rest of the prisoners were then dismissed, and as they withdrew from the royal
presence, the dey said to them, in the tone of savage triumph, " Go now you
dogs and eat stones." They were then escorted to the Bagnio Baleck, where they
were lodged in different apartments among the old slaves, and each prisoner
furnished with a couple of coarse blankets for his bedding. In this dismal
region of misery and oppression, amidst the clanking of chains and the cries of
suffering humanity, they were left to brood over their misfortunes at leisure.
The gloomy prospect that presented itself (...) ^he heart with the most
poignant emotions of ^^guish and despair.

About midnight they were roused from their meditations by the cry of Sursa,
Sursa, rise up all hands. The Lisbero, or guardian of the Bagnio, then entered
their apartments, and loaded each prisoner with chains of thirty or forty
pounds weight. The next morning about daybreak they were ordered to the
marine, where, after their names were called over, they were employed in
discharging the cargoes of their own vessels, which consisted of wheat, flour,
wine, sugar, and other articles. Their general employment in the marine was the
rigging and fitting out of cruisers, and whenever any foreign vessel lay in the
harbor they were obliged to wear this enormous weight of chains, lest they
should make their escape; but at other times they were freed from their load,
except those who were turbulent, or by any particular misconduct had forfeited
this privilege of the slaves.

The hour of four in the afternoon is called lazar, at which time a white flag
is hoisted upon the tops of all the mosques in the city, as a signal for the
inhabitants to quit their labor, and repair to public worship. At this hour
the labor of the prisoners ceased, and they were permitted to go on shore,
except when any business of importance occurred, and when that was the case
they were generally confined till dark.

As soon as they were ordered on shore they were provided with instruments to
carry stones from the mole to a grand mosque, which the dey was building in the
city adjoining his seraglio. These instruments were formed of cross pieces of
timber, called burrils, to which the ston^^, timber, cannon or whatever else
was necessary to be carried, were suspended beneath by ropes, and borne upon
the shoulders of four men, who were appointed to carry each burril. A
particular load was always assigned them, and the weak and the strong were
indiscriminately compelled to carry these burdens, without any attention being
paid to the comparative bodily strength of the labourer. To persons of robust
constitutions these loaded burrils were tolerable, but to those of weak habits
of body they were entirely insupportable; and hence it happened, that many
persons, by being overstrained, were either blinded, or extremely injured in
their constitutions.

When the procession of loaded burrils was ready to move, the warden bashaw,
who stood at the port of the marine, waved his wand as a signal for the slaves
to advance to the port, where they were examined by the wardens of the marine,
for the purpose of discovering whether they had stolen any particular articles
from the vessels. After this examination they were permitted to pass with their
loads, which they deposited at the new mosque, and then retired with their
instruments to their respective lodgings; some to the Bagnio Baleck, and others
to the Bagnio Gallaro, where their names were called over by the clerks, and
each slave as he passed received a loaf of black bread for his supper.

For some time they were obliged to sleep upon the ground; but they soon
constructed for themselves a kind of wooden frames, which were swung like
hammocks one above another, and upon these they threw their clothes and
blankets when they were about to retire to rest: but to add to their miseries,
their sleep was incessantly disturbed by infinite numbers of vermin with which
these Bagnios swarmed. In the morning they again repaired with their burrils to
the marine, where their names were called over; and in this manner were they
constantly employed whenever the equipment of the Algerine corsairs was
necessary.

Many of the slaves, however, were distributed in different parts; some were
sent into the country, and whenever the sea was calm, and no particular
emergency required their labor in the marine, great numbers of others were
employed in removing stones from a mountain called Babloet, or rather
Bublywhite, about a league from the city, in order to defend the mole from the
impetuosity of the waves. These stones were blown by slaves from the immense
rocks which lie deposited in the mountain, and some of them were twelve or
fifteen feet in diameter. In order to convey them more conveniently to the
water, the slaves were engaged for more than a year, in forming a passage
through a large hill, which they removed and carried into the sea, where they
formed a large mole or wharf to protect their pantoons, or carrying boats, from
the violence of the waves. In forming this passage they dug through a Moorish
burial ground, from whence they removed immense numbers of human bones. These
repositories of the dead are always regarded as sacred by the Moors, and the
whole neighborhood, and particularly the women, were, in consequence, thrown
into the greatest consternation. They resorted to this scene of sacrilege, and
indulged the most immoderate grief over this devastation among the relics of
their friends. But such were the orders of the dey, and they were obliged to
submit patiently to his will.

After this passage was formed, these immense fragments of rocks were dragged
by slaves, with great labor and difficulty, from the mountain, and placed upon
strong carriages about two feet high; upon which they were conveyed to the
wharf, by upwards of two hundred slaves to each carriage, where they were
thrown into pantoons; from thence they were transported by water, and
discharged at the mole before the city.

But when the sea was tempestuous and the pantoons could not be navigated, the
slaves were then employed in carrying smaller stones by land. After having
suspended a load to their burrils, of such a weight as some were scarcely able
to stagger under, they proceeded in gangs of different numbers, attended by a
crew of savage drivers, who goaded them forward whenever they halted or
happened to faulter under the pressure of their burdens. The extremity of their
sufferings in this laborious employment is better conceived than expressed. The
most barbarous punishments were wantonly inflicted, and the violence of a
scorching sun, which poured its fervid rays upon them, seemed to complete the
measure of human wretchedness. With this enormous weight of stones they moved
forward, attended by wardens who preceded them in order to clear the streets of
the city through which they passed, where every person was obliged to give way
at their approach. After having discharged their loads at the mole they
returned, and in this manner were they employed during the summer season, when
no particular emergencies demanded their labor in the marine. This mole, in
consequence of the encroachments of the sea during the winter, requires an
eternal supply of stones, and in this manner is this Sisyphaean labor
conducted by a herd of wretches who are often doomed to this abject servitude
for life. The dey commonly rides out to his country-seat about twice a week,
where his favorite wife resides in the summer season, and in passing and
repassing he would sometimes condescend to distribute some trifling presents
among the slaves.

The overseers in their treatment toward the slaves seemed actuated by a
principle of the most savage cruelty, and inflicted the most rigorous
punishments through mere caprice and wantonness, in order to feast their
malignant souls with the agonies of the trembling wretch who stood ready to
expire beneath their h^nds. Among this troop of furies, a certain cheriff, a
name given to all those who are born on Friday, most eminently distinguished
himself. The inordinate ferocity of this barbarian had proved the death of many
of slave, and the miscreant was most cordially detested wherever he came. One
day as he was pursuing a Genoese slave through the upper apartments of one of
the magazines on the seaside, he fell, by some accident, from a considerable
eminence upon a heap of stones, where he met with so hard a reception that he
instantly expired. This accident produced the most extravagant joy among the
slaves, which was only marred with the apprehension that the savage would
recover: but they soon had the satisfaction of seeing him safely lodged in the
earth.

It would perhaps be improper to descend to particulars here, and we must
therefore refer the reader for particular anecdotes, occurrences, and other
articles which regard our countrymen, to our observations upon the slaves.

In the mean time, the sufferings of our fellow citizens in Algiers were the
universal subject of sympathy and regret; and measures were soon adopted to
effect their deliverance from this region of unparalleled misery. Colonel
Humphreys, who had been appointed American consul for Algiers, left America in
April 1795, in company with Joseph Donaldson, Esquire. of Philadelphia, who had
been appointed consul for Tunis and Tripoli, and whom Colonel Humphreys was
authorized to employ in the negotiation of a treaty of peace and amity with
Algiers, while he proceeded to France for the purpose of obtaining the
cooperation of that government in this negotiation.

They arrived at Gibraltar the 17th of May, where Col. Humphreys concluded that
it would be expedient for Mr. Donaldson to go first to Alicant, to the
northward of Carthagena in Spain, rather than to Algiers, there to reside for
some time, in order that he might be near the scene of negotiation, and take
advantage of any favorable occurrences that might happen. Mr. Donaldson
received his instructions accordingly, and immediately set out for that place;
and in the mean time Col. Humphreys, having also given instructions to Mr.
Simpson, the American consul at Gibraltar, to renew a peace with the emperor of
Morocco, sailed from Gibraltar the 24th of May, and on the 26th of June
following arrived at Havre de-Grace in France; from whence he immediately set
out for Paris, where he soon after communicated the object of his mission to
Col. Monroe, the American minister, and to the Committee of Public Safety of
that Republic.

On the 1st of July Col. Humphreys receive^ a verbal notification that the
French Republic was disposed to exert its influence in forwarding the
negotiation in question; and on the 28th he received the favorable
intelligence, that immediate measures should be adopted for giving particular
instructions to the agents of the Republic to use its influence in the
promotion of the treaty in contemplation. The multiplicity of national concerns
with which the officers of the French government were then occupied, and the
time requisite for obtaining from London ( where funds had been deposited) the
sums of money intended as peace presents, retarded the conclusion of
arrangements at Paris till some time in September.

In the mean time it had been deemed expedient by Cols. Monroe and Humphreys,
that Joel Barlow, Esquire. should be consulted, and if his assent could be obtained
that he should be employed in negociating with the Barbary States: to which Mr.
Barlow consented. By the 11th of September all the papers on the part of Col.
Humphreys relative to Mr. Barlow's mission were in readiness, and as soon as
the peace presents were prepared for him, he set out, with instructions and
powers from the Republic of France to its agents in Barbary, to execute the
business that had been entrusted to him.

On the 12th of September Col. Humphreys left Paris, and arrived at
Havre-de-Grace the 14th; where he found the captain and mate of the United
States brig Sophia both sick with fevers. While he was waiting here with great
impatience for their recovery, he received information from the American consul
at Marseilles, that Mr. Donaldson had concluded a treaty of peace with the dey
of Algiers. He judged it expedient, notwithstanding, that Mr. Barlow should
proceed with the presents, and if they were not wanted at Algiers they would be
necessary in the negotiation with Tunis and Tripoli.

Col. Humphreys sailed from Havre-de-Grace about the 5th of October, and after
a stormy passage of more than forty days, arrived at Lisbon the 17th of
November, where he found captain O'Brien, who had arrived about the 1st of
October, with the treaty with Algiers. Mr. Donaldson arrived at Algiers on the
3d of September; the treaty was concluded on the 5th, and the peace presents
immediately given by a loan. As Mr. Donaldson knew that funds had been lodged
in London to fulfill the stipulations of the treaty, he engaged to make the
payments in three or four months.

Col. Humphreys had received advice, under date of the 30th of July, from the
Messrs. Barings in London, to whom the funds had been remitted, that having
made considerable progress in the ^ales of the United States stock, they should
have at his disposal the whole of the value of 800,000 dollars, meaning to
furnish, by anticipation, the value of that part which remained unsold, if the
service of the United States required it. Col. Humphreys, calculating upon the
certainty of payment after this period, sent captain O'Brien from Lisbon to
London in the brig Sophia to receive the money. But owing to contrary winds he
did not leave Lisbon till the 24th of December.

In consequence of the disappointments in the pecuniary arrangements the treaty
was in the most imminent danger of being ultimately frustrated; the dey became
impatient, and threatened to abandon it; and it was with the utmost difficulty
that it was prevented. Mr. Barlow did not arrive at Alicant until February
1796, where he pr^^^osed to wait the arrival of the funds; but shortly after
receiving intelligence from Algiers that the American negotiation was in a most
critical situation, he determined to go thither immediately with the hopes of
soothing the dey. He arrived there the 5th of March. The time for the payment
of the stipulated sums had before been prolonged to the 8th of April. On the 3d
of that month the dey declared that his final determination was, that Mr.
Barlow and Mr. Donaldson should leave Algiers in eight days; and if the money
was not paid in 30 days after, the treaty should be at end, and his corsairs be
permitted to bring in American vessels. Under these imperious circumstances,
and as the last hope of saving the treaty, they were induced to offer the dey
the present of a frigate; which fortunately succeeded. But Col. Humphreys
conceiving himself not authorized to confirm this promise, dispatched captain
O'Brien in the brig Sophia to America, for the purpose of referring the matter
to the executive of the United States, and obtaining his concurrence. There was
evidently no alternative, and therefore the executive was under the absolute
necessity of confirming the promise. This frigate This frigate is to carry 36
guns, is sheathed with copper, and intended to be a vessel of 538 tons burden.
The whole cost is above 90,000 dollars. She was launched in July 1797, and it
is expected she will arrive at Algiers about the beginning of September next.
was built in Portsmouth, New Hampshire, and in conformity to promise is
shortly to be sent to the dey.

While the business was in this precarious situation, owing principally to the
convulsions in Europe, Mr. Donaldson set out for Leghorn, where he procured a
loan of 400,000 dollars of the Messrs. Fonnereau, and as that port was
blockaded by the British fleet, Mr. Donaldson obtained permission from the
court of Great Britain that the money might be exported from thence without
being subject to capture, and it was soon after sent in a Venetian vessel to
Algiers.

Captain O'Brien after he had received the determination of the executive, set
sail from Philadelphia in June 1796, and arrived in Lisbon sometime in July. In
the mean time Col. Humphreys had advantageously negociated bills on London for
225,000 dollars, which he had received, and this sum was embarked on board the
brig Sophia, consigned to the care of captain O'Brien. This money was insured
at a small premium against the dangers of the seas; but against all risks so
high a premium was demanded that Col. Humphreys judged it inexpedient to give
it, seeing the Sophia was a vessel of the United States having a special
passport from the President, as well as one in the Turkish language under the
seal of the dey of Algiers.

On the 4th of August capt. O'Brien set sail for Algiers, and on the 18th he
was captured off that city by a Tripolitan corsair, who carried his vessel,
money and crew in triumph to Tripoli, (which lies on the Mediterranean, about
130 miles to the south-eastward of Algiers), accompanied by the ship Betsy of
Boston, whose crew were made slaves. This immense sum in specie, more perhaps
than they had ever captured at once before, was landed amidst the firing of
cannon, the display of colors, and the shouts of the populace. The
extravagance of their joy, however, was soon abated when capt. O'Brien
exhibited to them the passport of the dey of Algiers; he demonstrated to them
that he was still the slave of the dey, and though the money had been delivered
to him by the United States, yet it was the the same in effect as if it had
been delivered to the dey himself. After an examination of two days the vessel
was liberated, and capt. O'Brien immediately set sail for Algiers, where he
arrived the first of October, and delivered the money to the American consul
residing there; who had previously procured the loan of the necessary sums from
the Messrs. Buckras, a Jewish company in Algiers, who had received satisfactory
information of the certainty of repayment. With this timely loan Mr. Barlow
fulfilled his stipulations with the dey, who was so highly pleased with the
present, and in consequence reposed such confidence in the United States, that
he offered Mr. Barlow upon their account the loan of such sums as would enable
him to negociate a treaty of peace with the Tunisian and Tripolitan powers,
which he judged proper to accept.

By the judicious arrangements of Mr. Barlow with the dey, capt. O'Brien was
appointed commissioner on behalf of the United States to negociate a treaty
with the regencies of Tunis and Tripoli. He set sail upon this business the
10th of October, and arrived at Tunis on the 16th, where he had an interview
with the bey, to whom he presented a letter from the dey of Algiers, enclosing
a command that he should make peace with the American commissioner upon the
terms therein prescribed. But the bey totally rejected the terms, and demanded
the payment of a sum equal to thrice that amount. After many audiences and
conferences, capt. O'Brien, finding that the bey would neither accept of a less
sum, nor accede to the terms of the dey, transmitted the Tunisian demand to Mr.
Barlow in Algiers, which he communicated to the dey, who was much exasperated
in consequence, and would not suffer him to acquiesce in so exorbitant a demand.

In this situation capt. O'Brien left the Tunisian business, and proceeded to
Tripoli, where, after much difficulty, he concluded a peace with that power
upon the 4th of November, and procured the release of the American prisoners
who were captured in the ship Betsey. He left captain Joseph Ingraham, the
American charge des affairs, in that place, and sailed from thence the 27th of
November, bringing away the remaining part of the crew of the ship Betsey. On
the 7th of December, in his return to Algiers, he again touched at Tunis, where
he received orders from Mr. Barlow and the dey, by whom he had been invested
with discretionary powers to conduct the negotiation, to demand a definitive
answer from the bey of Tunis, whether he would negociate a treaty of peace with
the United States upon the terms prescribed by the dey? but he found that the
bey still persisted in the exorbitancy of his demands; and after many
conferences and fruitless efforts he sailed from Tunis, and arrived in Algiers
the 3d of January 1797, where he communicated to Mr. Barlow and the dey the
unsuccessful result of his mission. The dey was violently enraged at the insult
offered to his dignity by this rejection of his intercession in the affairs of
the United States, and actuated by some former animosities that still subsisted
between them, he issued immediate orders to his eastern camp of 60,000 men to
enter the Tunisian territory. This army was soon set in motion to enforce a
compliance on the part of the bey. In their rout through the Tunisian dominions
they cut off some hundreds of heads and ears, and after committing great
ravages upon the inhabitants, they returned to the territory of Algiers. This
harsh expedient was adopted in order to ascertain the political disposition of
the government of Tunis, and to decide whether they would submit to the
control of the dey; for the powers relative to the American pacification, the
dey expressly declared, were under his immediate guarantee. Capt. O'Brien, by
the dey's orders, left Algiers the 14th of February, and arrived in
Philadelphia the 1st of April 1797.

The truce which Mr. Barlow concluded with the Tunisian regency, on the 15th of
June 1796, for six months, expired on the 15th of December following. This
truce had been obtained without any presents, by Mr. Famine the French agent at
Tunis, who had been recommended to Mr. Barlow by the French consul Herculais.
Since its expiration the American vessels have been subject to capture by the
Tunisian corsairs, and captain O'Brien, in his publication of April 5th, 1797,
says, "I now tell you heartily, that no American vessel should enter the
Mediterranean until our peace with all the Barbary States is fully established,
and published by the authority of the United States." But with regard to the
Tunisian negotiation, little apprehension is entertained, and it is highly
probable that Mr. Barlow, through the powerful intercession of the dey, has
already concluded a treaty with that government.

At the conclusion of the Algerine treaty, an universal joy diffused itself
among the American prisoners, and they triumphed in the delightful anticipation
of visiting their native shores again. They had long been the victims of the
most complicated calamities, and become familiar with the gloomy prospect of
death. They were haunted with the dismal apprehensions of a servitude for life,
and hope, the pleasing illusion that gilds the dark regions of adversity,
seemed fled for ever. To add to the catalogue of their miseries, the plague
commenced its awful visitation; many of their companions fell a sacrifice to
this dreadful contagion, while others invoked the friendly hand of death to
terminate their sufferings and despair. When intelligence of the treaty was
announced, the captives indulged the animated expectation of an immediate
deliverance, and the sudden transition from such a dark state of despondence,
inspired them with the most ineffable joy. But the fatal delays occasioned in
the remittances of the necessary sums endangered the existence of the treaty,
and overclouded the pleasing prospect. In consequence of these unfortunate
delays, which were principally owing to the convulsions in Europe, the captives
were still consined at hard labor, and the period of their misery was
unfortunately protracted from the 5th of September 1795, the time when the
treaty was formed, till the 9th of July following, when the stipulated payments
were made. Mr. Barlow then paid them a visit while they were at labor, and
when he announced the pleasing intelligence to them, it was so unexpected that
(...) of them would believe him; but their incredulity deserted them when
orders were presented for their immediate appearance before the dey; they bade
an eternal adieu to the huge stones of Bublywhite, and immediately repaired to
the palace with every demonstration of the most extravagant joy; where they
were arraigned in the dey's presence, who sat in state, attended by the cassan
aga, or prime minister, the aga and other officers of government. After a short
pause, the head clerk presented each captive with a Tiscoree, or passport, and
informed them they were at liberty to make immediate preparations for their
return home. Forty-eight Neapolitans were liberated at the same time; one of
whom, in a transport of joy, prostrated himself before the dey and kissed his
hands and feet; but the Americans, who were not quite so servile, repaired with
all expedition to the port of the marine, and embarked on board the ship La
Fortune, which had been chartered for them by the Messrs. Buckras, for the
purpose of conveying them to Marseilles.

The original number of the Americans was now reduced to 85. Many of them died
with the plague, a few with the small pox, and others with the severity of the
labor which had been imposed upon them. Captain Wallace of Richmond met with
an untimely death as he was leaning against the bannisters of an ancient
building, which gave way, and he fell from a considerable height into the
street, where he instantly expired. The plague raged with such violence when
the captives left Algiers that five of them died within a few weeks previous to
their departure; another who was attacked by that fatal malady was left behind,
and many others had their constitutions much injured by the disorder. One of
them was in a state of total blindness, and another was rendered nearly so.
Three of them carried the marks of unmerciful treatment, in ruptures produced
by hard labor; several of them were rendered incapable of gaining their
living, and consequently are objects of the benevolence of their countrymen.

Mr. Barlow was fully sensible of the necessity of their immediate removal from
this most wretched of all conceivable abodes, and was justly apprehensive that
they could not be embarked without some danger of the infection. After his
arrival he was most sedulously employed in effecting their deliverance, and by
his benevolence, which was ever extended to the captives, their condition was
rendered more tolerable, till the final obtainment of their liberty. To this
worthy character, whose heart vibrated with their finer feelings of
philanthropy, while his life was in imminent danger, the most ardent tribute of
gratitude is due, and the captives speak in terms of the warmest affection for
his uniform exertions in rescuing them from this region of horror.

After preparing the necessary articles for their voyage, the Americans set
sail, with the 48 Neapolitans, in the ship La Fortune, under the command of
capt. Calder, and soon bade an eternal adieu to the land of bondage.

While these things were transacting, the Algerines were prosecuting their
piracies against various maritime powers in Europe. An attempt at negotiation
between the "invincible militia" and Portugal was instituted in November 1793,
and a Portuguese frigate was dispatched to Algiers upon this business. The
terms prescribed by the dey were, 1,200,000 Mexican dollars for the treasury;
600,000 dollars for the voice of the dey, and the great officers of the
regency, ambassadorial and consular presents, equal to what Spain gave; and the
payment of 150,000 dollars for the redemption of 75 Portuguese captains. With
these propositions the Portuguese frigate set sail from Algiers the 7th of
November, and arrived at Lisbon soon after. But upon further consideration the
dey was not satisfied with this sum, and the next day he desired capt. Logie,
an English agent, to write to Portugal that he demanded 600,000 dollars for his
family and friends, in addition to what he had previously expressed. The above
terms were set forth in a letter of capt. O'Brien, dated at Algiers, the 28th
of November 1793. When the American captives were informed that capt. O'Brien
had published this exorbitant demand upon the Portuguese, they were highly
offended, and arraigned the precipitancy of the publication; because such
discouraging terms would have a tendency to retard, if not total^y frustrate,
their ransom.
These terms were of course never complied with, and the Portuguese and
Algerines still continue in a state of warfare.

The Dutch truce expired on the 10th of December 1793. But a peace was
concluded in April following, and all the Dutch prisoners were liberated. The
principal powers with which the Algerines are now at war, are the Portuguese
and the Pope. They declared war against the republic of Venice on the 26th of
October 1796, the issue of which we have not heard. But with France, Spain,
England and America they now are at peace.

About the beginning of 1796, the affairs of the Danes assumed a very
disasterous complexion. One of the Neapolitan cruisers had taken a Danish
vessel freighted with 300 Turks, who were bound from the Levant to Algiers.
These Turks were carried to Naples, where they were made slaves; which so
exasperated the dey, that he issued immediate orders for the capture of Danish
vessels, and thirteen sail were shortly after brought into Algiers, where they
were obliged to lie for four months, till the Danish government had negociated
the ransom o^ the 300 Turks: after which the Danes were liberated; but their
cargoes, which consisted chiefly of perishable articles, were mostly destroyed.

About the beginning of 1795, upwards of 200 Corsicans were captured as they
were seeking for coral off the Barbary coasts. While they were busily employed
in a number of fishing boats, under convoy of an English brig It must be
remembered here that Corsica was one of the pearls in his Britsh Majesty's
crown; but it was afterward evacuated by the British.
, two French frigates hove in sight, and soon after a smart engagement took
place between the French, and the English brig; but she was soon captured, and
the Corsican boats fled for refuge to the Barbary shore near Constantina, where
they were all kidnapped by the Moors, and taken to Algiers, where they were
made slaves. After they had amused themselves among the rocks of Bublywhite for
about a year, Mr. North was sent as British agent to negociate their ransom,
and he procured their liberty upon the payment of about 120,000 dollars,
besides the promise of an armed vessel.

Some time in September 1796, the English sent in a French xebeck of
inconsiderable value, lately made a prize, which displeased the dey so much
that he ordered her immediately out of the port. The commanders of two English
frigates which then lay off the harbor, highly resenting this piece of
conduct, hauled their vessels close in under the castle on the mole, and
prepared to pour a broad side into the city. When the dey observed these
preparations, he was thrown into the most violent consternation; the slaves
were immediately ordered to clear away the lumber in the castle, and to get the
guns in readiness for defense. At the same time the fleet of Admiral Jervis,
consisting of 25 sail of the line was cruising off the harbor, and from this
force, the dey expected nothing less than the total destruction of Algiers. At
this critical juncture he made application to Mr. Barlow to use his influence
with the British commanders, to dissu^de them from their designs, and after
distributing some presents to a considerable amount among the officers of the
frigates, they hauled off to a distance, and did not put their design in
execution.

In the beginning of June 17^5, a most bloody and obstinate battle was fought
near Corsica, between an Algerine rover of 34 guns and two Neapolitan frigates
of 20 guns each, in conjunction with one of the Pope's garda costas, of 10 guns
and a number of swivels. The action lasted from ten o'clock in the morning till
four in the afternoon without intermission, and the combatants were for the
greatest part of the time within pistol shot of each other. The corsair fought
under the bloody flag, and rode the greatest part of the time between an
incessant and well directed fire, which cut away almost all her rigging, and
made terrible havoc among her c^ew; yet the russians fought with the utmost
fury and desperation, and attempted several times to board their enemies; but
were repulsed with great loss. In the heat of the engagement all the officers
were killed, and the captain had both his legs carried away by a chain shot, as
he was firing a blunderbuss; yet the barbarian still refused to be taken from
the deck, and died while he was giving the word of command. This loss did not
in the least intimidate the furious crew, who swore they would not submit while
a single man existed. The Christians displayed equal fury during the whole
conflict, and were to a man determined either to conquer or die. Unfortunately
one of the frigates which made the greatest impression upon the corsair, blew
up with a tremendous explosion, and most of the crew perished.

In a short time another disaster occurred. The Pope's cruiser, after a gallant
resistance, was sunk by the enemy's shot. The crew of the remaining frigate
were then obliged to tow her away; while the corsair lay like a log upon the
water, with her fore and main-masts carried away by the board, and her hull so
much shattered that the sunk shortly after the action.

On the 13th of July following the American prisoners set sail from Algiers,
and on the 19th they arrived off Marseilles, where they were obliged to ride
quarantine for 80 days; after which they were permitted to go on shore at that
city, where Stephen Catalon, jun. the American consu^, provided a Swedish bark
for their transportation to America, and procured each of them a suit of
clothes, besides an allowance of 35 cents a day for their subsidence. Fourteen
of their number entered on board of an American ship at Marseilles, to go on a
trading voyage up the Mediterranean, and a few were detained by sickness. Capt.
Penrose, who came with them from Algiers, went to Alicant at the request of Mr.
Montgomery, the American consul who resided there, to take charge of a vessel
intended to ply between that place and Philadelphia; but she not being ready,
captain Penrose returned from thence in another vessel, and landed at Boston.

The remainder of the captives, after a residence of 20 days at Marseilles, set
sail for the port of Philadelphia on the 12th of November, in company with the
two sons of the duke of Orleans, and after a passage of near three months, they
arrived at Marcus Hook, where the vessel was detained by the ice which was then
in the Delaware. On the 8th of February 1797, they were brought to Philadelphia
in carriages, escorted by many hundreds of their fellow citizens who went out
to meet them. Upon their arrival at the Indian Queen tavern, the streets were
so thronged as to render their passage difficult, and as they entered the
house, an ardent acclamation expressed the satisfaction of the people at their
return. Those who had friends in the city to provide for them, retired to
receive their congratulations; but it has been reported by some of the
captives, that those who were not so fortunately accommodated, were left
entirely destitute to wander the streets of the city, at that inclement season
of the year, without friends, or a single cent to provide for their
subsistence. If this be true, it reflects a dishonor upon the humanity of our
government, that these unfortunate men should be rescued from the regions of
misery to starve in a land of freedom.

It must inspire the breasts of the Americans with great regret and
mortification, when they reflect upon the exorbitant sums of money that have
been expended in the negotiation of the Algerine treaty, besides the annual
payment to the dey of 12,000 Algerine sequins The value of the Algerine sequin
(pronounced sh^^en) is 1.963 dollar; or 1 dollar 9^ cents and 3 mills.
in maritime stores, according to the last article of the treaty; and their
mortification will not be diminished when they reflect, that they have now
become the tributaries of a ci-devant Turkish soldier! This additional weight
to the American taxation, which had before increased in a rapid progression, is
not the most comfortable reflection, and would almost induce one to arraign the
negotiation as highly impolitic, were there not a danger of incurring the
imputation of a want of humanity. It is, however, very problematical whether
the advantages to be derived from the Mediterranean trade will ever compensate
for the expenditure of these enormous sums; and it seems rather unjust that the
great burden of guaranteeing this trade should rest upon the shoulders of the
people, while its benefits result to a few individuals, who ought perhaps to
support this branch of commerce under the sanction of insurance.

I have thought proper, in order to represent the Algerine negotiation in a
more comprehensive point of view, to subjoin an estimate of the pecuniary
disbursements, and the several correspondences that have taken place in this
business, according to the following reports.

REPORTS of the SECRETARY of STATE and of the SECRETARY of the TREASURY,
relative to the late Negotiation with the Dey and Regency of ALGIERS.
To the President of the United States, the Secretary of State respectfully
makes the following brief representation of the affairs of the United States,
in relation to Algiers It will not be necessary to give the first part of this
Report relative to the history of the negotiation, as that has been before
fully related.
.
Such arrangements have been made by Messrs. Barlow and Donaldson at Algiers
and Leghorn, as will doubtless ensure the payment of the 400,000 dollars,
originally expected from the latter place; and the same house has become
engaged to the Dey and Regency for the residue of the money due as the price of
peace; without which he would not agree to the redemption of the captives. The
Secretary of the Treasury estimates these further sums to be provided, to
fulfill the terms of the treaty, at Dols. 255,759 For two years annuity to the
dey, 96,246 To which are to be added the 10,000 sequins promised by Messrs
Barlow and Donaldson mentioned in their letter, 1^,000 And the expenses of the
captives while performing quarantine at Marseilles, and for transporting them
to America; estimated by the consul at Marseilles at about 6,500 Dols. 376,505

(Signed) TIMOTHY PICKERING, Sec'ry of State.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE, Jan. 6, 1797.
The Secretary of the Treasury, in obedience to directions from the President
of the United States, respectfully makes the following representation
respecting the application of the fund destined for the execution of the treaty
with Algiers.
In pursuance of an act passed the 21st day of February 1795, the sum of
800,000 dollars was borrowed of the Bank of the United States, which was paid
in 6 per cent. stock. A conviction of the urgency of the case, and a
disposition to accommodate the government, alone induced the bank to consent to
the loan, as the stock was then saleable in large quantities at par, including
interest. Bills of exchange were not readily obtainable, and the sudden
exportation of so considerable a sum of specie would have been attended with
inconvenient effects. Indeed no alternative offered but to renounce the
negotiation, or to remit stock as a fund.

Various causes co-operated to cause a depression of the prices of all kinds of
public stock, soon after the remittances had been made.

The rates at which the sales have been made are as follows: L. s. d. Dols.
cts. 560,000 dols. sold for sterling. 111,053 15 0 240,000 remained unsold at the
date of the latest advices, which may be estimated at 80 per cent. or 43,200 00
0 800,000 dollars in stock will therefore produce in sterling money 154,253 15
0 =685,572. 22 Of the sum of 305,911 dollars 37 cents, appropriated for
treaties with the Mediterranean powers, by the act of May 31st, 1796, there was
estimated, for a deficiency on account of the treaty with Algiers, the sum of
51,132. The whole of the grants for the Algerine treaty may therefore be
considered as equal to an effective fund in London of Dols. 736,704. 22

Dols. cts. The expenses of carrying the treaty into effect are estimated at
525,000. 00 To which are to be added, agreeably to Mr. Donaldson's calculation,
for per centage on the captives. 27,000. 00 Other expenses, 90,000. 00 Amount
of money to be paid in Algiers, 642,000. 00

The expense of remitting the sum last mentioned, from London to Algiers,
according to the best estimate which can he formed, will be as follows: L. s.
d. Dols. cts. 140,000 dols. procured at Leghorn, by bills on London, cost 4
s10, 55-100 sterling per dollar, or sterling 34,110 0 0 260,000 dols. expected
to be obtained at 5 s. will be 65,000 0 0 99,110 0 0= 440,488. 88 40,000
dollars remitted to Hamburgh, cost sterling. 7,200 18 8= 40,013. 04 225,000 dols.
procured at Lisbon, for which drafts have been passed for sterling 50,007 16 0=
222,256. 89 665,000 dollars placed in Leghorn, Hamburgh, and Lisbon, and
supposed to be sufficient to discharge the pecuniary obligations of the treaty,
will probably cost 702,758. 81 Payments made to Col. Humphreys, sterling L.
3,471 0 0 Payment to capt. O'Brien, 31 0 0 3,502 0 0 15,564. 44

The naval stores stipulated by Mr. Donaldson were estimated at 57,000 dollars,
but which, agreeably to his enumeration of the articles, will cost, according
to the estimate of the purveyor, 124,413. 00 The freight of the said stores is
computed at 50,000. 00 The expense of the frigate lately promised, agreeably to
the estimate of the Secretary at War, will be 99,727. 00 The whole expense of
fulfilling the treaty according to the estimate, therefore, is 992,446. 25 From
which sum the effective value of the provisions already made being deducted, as
before estimated, 736,704. 22 There will remain to be provided, Dols. 255,759.
03 By the last article of the treaty, the United States were bound to pay an
annuity of 12,000 Algerine sequins in maritime stores; the cost and freight of
the articles required by the dey, for the two first years' annuity, will,
agreeably to the purveyor's estimate, be Dols. 144,246. 63 From which the
appropriations made by the act of May 6th, 1796, for two years, being deducted,
48,000. 00 There will remain to be provided on this account the sum of Dols.
96,246. 63

(Signed) OLIVER WOLCOTT, jun. Sec'ry of the Treasury.
TREASURY DEPARTMENT, Jan. 4. 1797.
An Estimate of the probable cost of the articles of the Algerine treaty.
L. s. d. 500 barrels of powder, at L.15 is 7,500 0 0 66 tons of lead, at L.40
2,640 0 0 20,000 cannon ball, at L.276 2,760 0 0 5,000 double headed shot 590 0
0 200 pieces of canvass 1,100 0 0 2,000 gun barrels, 2,000 0 0 50 masts, at
L.100 5,000 0 0 100 spars, at L.40 4,000 0 0 10 cables, and cordage 45 tons, at
L. 135 10,575 0 0 300 pine and oak plank, 6 inches thick and 50 feet long 9,000
0 0 2,000 barrels tar ^00 0 0 200 pieces of scantling 540 0 0 100 barrels of
pitch 150 0 0 10 cannon, etc. 500 0 0 L. 46,655 0 0 Equal to Dols. 124,413. 0 0

(Signed) TENCH FRANCIS Purveyor.
29th December, 1796.
An Estimate of the sum necessary to build and equip a frigate, to carry 36
guns for the dey of Algiers. To which is added an estimate of navigating the
same to Algiers.
Dols. cts. Carpenter's bill for building the hull, launching the same,
together with a complete set of masts and yards, per ton, dols. 45, is 24,210.
00 Joiners, smiths, plumbers, boat-builders, carvers, coopers, block-makers,
sail-makers, riggers and rigging, with ship-chandler's bill, dols. 55, 29,590.
00 Ship complete, of 538 tons, at 100 dollars per ton, is 53,800. 00 Copper
sheathing, 4,118. 40 Cannon, 8,428. 60 Copper, pintles and braces, 1,240. 00
Powder, shot, and other military stores, 13,551. 00 Forty men, including
officers, their pay and subsistence for five months, 8,589. 00 Contingencies.
10,000. 00 Dols. 99,727. 00

(Signed) JAMES M'HENRY.
WAR-OFFICE, 26 th Dec. 1796.
In the execution of the business with which Baring and Co. have been
entrusted, they have communicated to Mr. Pinckney, from time to time, every
material circumstance which has occurred; but as the present position is
extremely critical and important, they will endeavor to state as concise a
narrative as possible from the commencement of the business, for the
consideration and determination of Mr. King.
March 7, 1795. The President of the Bank remit to Baring and Co. 800,000
dollars in certitificates of 6 per cent stock, with orders to sell the same
without causing a depression in the prices, and thus injuring the credit of
American funds. The net proceeds, after deducting the usual commissions, are to
be held at the disposal of Col. David Humphreys; and we are directed to inform
Col. Humphreys of the progress we may make, from time to time, in the sales of
the stock, and also of the terms upon which remittances can be made to Cadiz or
Leghorn. This contains nearly the whole of our orders, or at least the whole of
what we conceive to be necessary for the information of Mr. King, in the
present moment; the further letters from America being almost wholly answers to
our numerous letters, and do not contain a syllable of disapprobation with
regard to our conduct, but the reverse.

March 31. Col. Humphrey writes from Philadelphia, that we would furnish him
with information, assistance, etc. directed to him at Lisbon.

April 28. We wrote very fully to Col. Humphreys, communicating every
information relative to the probable sale of the stock, and the various means
by which he could execute his commission through London, Cadiz, Lisbon, and
Italy in general.

May 19. We wrote still more fully, in answer to his letter of the 31st March,
wherein we offered to anticipate a considerable sum, on the value of the
effects in our hands, for which there was no demand at the moment. We explained
to him the value of the Italian coin, those of Spain being well known;
mentioning that it was easier to procure money at Leghorn, where there was no
restraint, than at Cadiz where dollars were more plentiful, but the exportation
was exclusively in the bank of St. Charles, from whom it was difficult to
obtain permission. That we could procure any quantity in London: to which we
added the names of our correspondents at the different places, offering every
service in our power, direct or indirect.

May. 18. Col. Humphreys advises his arrival at Gibraltar.

July 21. We advise Colonel Humphreys that we had sold, 300,000 dollars: --
that we were ready to pay 100,000, to his order; and if he wanted a further
sum, we desired to be informed.

July 27. Colonel Humphrey directs us to pay 40,000 dollars to Mr. Deas, for
Mr. Andrews, which was immediately complied with, by a credit on Hamburgh, for
that value.

July 30. We inform Colonel Humphreys that having made further progress in our
sales, we should hold the whole of the value of the 800,000 dollars at his
disposal: meaning to furnish, by anticipation, the value of that part which
remained at that time unsold, if the service of the United States required it.

November 28. Is the next letter from Colonel Humphreys, and the commencement
of our difficulties; -- he informs us, that he should send the Sophia, for the
purpose of receiving Portugal gold and Spanish dollars, in London, to the
amount of 650,000 Spanish dollars. He further opens credit in favor of Messrs.
Dohrman, of Lisbon, which from the scarcity of paper at the time was effected
to a very trifling amount.

This letter was followed and confirmed by others from Colonel Humphreys, dated
the 16th, 22d, and 24th December, of a similar tenor, or very nearly so, and
the arrival of the brig Sophia from Lisbon.

Although Col. Humphreys has not mentioned to us the reasons of this
proceeding, we may impute it to the advice contained in our letter of the 19th
May, and indeed the well known facility with which a sum of that description
could be procured in London, of Spanish dollars, having ourselves never
experienced the least difficulty in disappointments for large sums.

December 22. We answered these letters, advising Colonel Humphreys of the
impossibility to procure Portugal gold, none having been received for many
years. Of the extraordinary turn which had appeared with regard to bullion, in
consequence of the immense drains upon this country, for carrying on the war,
and which has finally compelled the minister to abandon his favorite project of
a second loan to the emperor; but as the difficulty had only begun to appear,
we hoped that with some delay, we should be able to collect the dollars for the
purpose of executing the orders of Col. Humphreys.

Jan. 17, 1796. Finding it impossible to procure gold, and no silver arriving,
we submitted the whole of the orders and correspondence to Mr. Pinckney; when
it was determined to purchase such silver as might arrive; but, at all events,
to detain the Sophia, which could not be wrong, as the westerly winds would
have prevented her sailing.

In the mean while we wrote to Messrs. Parish and Co. of Hamburgh, to know
whether Portugal gold or Spanish dollars could be obtained in that place.

January 19. 26 -- February 2, 12. Are letters we wrote to Colonel Humphreys,
wherein we acquaint him with our prospects, from time to time, that Parish and
Co. gave us reason to hope for the execution of a part of the order, but that
no silver had arrived in London.

February 16. Having determined, with the approbation of Mr. Pinckney, to send
the Sophia to Hamburg, in consequence of the encouragement of Messrs. Parish
and Co. on applying to capt. Crandon, he observed that it was contrary to his
instructions, which were to return to Lisbon: And as considerable doubts
existed about proceeding to Hamburgh, Mr. Pinckney dec^^^^d giving a positive
order to captain Crandon, which proved fortunate, as immediately after advice
was received from Messrs. Parish and Co. that the dollars they had in view had
been purchased.

On this occasion, and under this date, we wrote to Colonel Humphreys, by the
brig Sophia, and by the packet, acquainting him with our disappointment in
toto; which we accompanied, at the intimation of Mr. O'Brien, with letters of
credit on Madrid and Cadiz; and, in order to finish this part of the subject,
as a justification for permitting the Sophia to return, we should observe, that
if she had been detaintained for six months, we could not have procured one
half of the quantity of Spanish dollars required.

March 1. We advised Colonel Humphreys that we had received a large sum in
bills, drawn from Leghorn, on the British government; being for money sent to
Algiers, and which appeared afterward to be for the release of the Corsican
prisoners.

March 21, -- 29. Are answers to letters from Col. Humphreys, relative to our
accounts, chiefly dated the 27th February, and 9th March, which we do not
notice, concluding that he was satisfied, as nothing appears in reply to us;
but as there was reason to fear the business could not be executed in Spain,
the government there refusing a license, notwithstanding the endeavors of
Messrs. Joys and Sons, aided by the American minister or resident.

April 1. We wrote to Messrs. Fonnereau, of Leghorn, not only to open the
necessary credit, but to explain to them, in a full and confidential manner,
the nature and extent of our preceding disappointments; requesting (with the
approbation of Mr. Pinckney and Col. Humphreys) that they would convey to
Algiers such information as should satisfy the dey, that the delay in paying
the money did not arise from the want of funds, credit, or endeavors on the
part of the United States, but must be solely attributed to the political
convulsions in Europe, which had annihilated the usual channels or modes of
procuring the coin for the purpose.

It is unnecessary to quote dates of letters, as there appears but one opinion
on the subject, namely, "that the business must finally be done at Leghorn, and
both Mr. Pinckney and Col. Humphreys recommend most earnestly that the
information alluded to should be conveyed to Algiers.

April 19. Fonnereau answer our letter of the 1st, promising to follow the
orders of Col. Humphreys, and that -- would communicate to Algiers every thing
we had desired.

June 17. Fonnereau advise the delivery to them, on that day, of the orders
from Col. Humphreys, to pay to the order of Mr. Donaldson, 400,000 Spanish
milled dollars, which they acquaint him shall be immediately complied.

June 19. Mr. Donaldson acquaints Messrs. Fonnereau, that he should accept the
sum; and on a meeting between them and --, the price of the dollars, with that
of Agio, was settled to the satisfaction of --

June 20, -- 24. Fonnereau drew for what money they could procure, and on the
14th write, "enclosed you have Mr. Donaldson's receipt for dols. 140,000, paid
to him by order of Col. Humphreys: This business might have been completely
finished by our giving to Mr. Donaldson bills on you, or on Hamburg, for the
remaining 260,000 dollars, which -- offered to negociate for him, and to give
him a receipt for the whole 400,000 dollars, which he engaged to ship to
Algiers; but a certain diffidence on his side, would not permit him to sign
receipts to us, for more than he had absolutely received in cash."

June 27. The French entered Leghorn, and Fonnereau embarked on board an
English frigate.

July 15. Mr. Donaldson draws on us for the sum^ of dollars 10,000; -- under
the same dates enquires about Mr. Donaldson's credit on us, and whether we have
orders for more than dols. 400,000.

This question leads to a state of the account, with an estimate of the effects
in our hands. On the original sum sent to us, we have only sold 560 m. dollars,
the price having fallen at one time so low as 82, and believing that government
would feel reluctant to sell under 90, we had determined to anticipate on the
value of the remainder, waiting for our reimbursement in the due time.

L. The 560 dollars above, have procured Some part was sold above 90 per cent.
and none below that price, which leaves scarce 3 s11 1-2 per dollar. 111,033
The present price is 86, with little demand; suppose the remaining 249 m.
dollars produce 3 s9 per dollar, the amount will be 45,000 Total amount of
sales and effects, 156,053

The great defalcation in the nominal dollars, arises from the remittances
being made in funds which sell at 10 per cent. under par, and the payments
being made in foreign money, at a rate very much above par, -- that at Leghorn
in particular has advanced 16, 18 per cent. above what it was not a long time
since.

Our payments are as follow: L. Credit on Hamburg, dollars 40 m. 9,002 Drafts
of Dohrman, 50,000 Remittances to Col. Humphreys, 3,036 His draft 12th
December, 455 Paid O'Brien, 31 Paid sundry persons for the dividends on stock
sold, 2,497 Dollars 140 m. paid by Mr. Donaldson, we calculate pirce 4 s10
55-100 each, 34,110 99,118 Suppose the remaining dollars 260 m. which includes
Mr. Donaldson's drafts, calculated at the same rate, the amount will be, at 5
s. 65,000 Total amount of payments, 164,118 Ditto of sales and effects, 156,653

The sum of L. 2,497 paid for us by dividends, will be received again by us
from America, and of course, appear ultimately to the credit of the United
States.

Under all the circumstances which have been stated, it is submitted to Mr.
King, -- what ought to be done in the present moment?

Mr. Fonnereau says, that reliance may be had on -- having conveyed to Algiers
the information requested; and moreover, that it will be thoroughly
satisfactory at that place.

In the present situation of Leghorn there is in fact no exchange; and the
drafts of Mr. Donaldson must be negociated elsewhere -- The Italians, moreover,
kn^w, that bills drawn from Leghorn subsequent to the entry of the French,
cannot be paid in London without a license, etc.

Baring and Co. can have no difficulty with regard to themselves; they are
directed to hold the proceeds, or value (which they conceive to be equally the
intention of the United States) at the disposal of Colonel Humphreys, who
directs them to pay 40,000 dollars to the order of Mr. Donaldson, which will be
punctually complied with, to the extent of sales, and value of what remains,
under a proper license: But that zeal which has induced them to follow this
business into foreign parts, without any other motive for their so doing,
induces them to submit the difficulties which occur with regard to the actual
position of Leghorn, -- a doubt whether the business can be executed from
thence, at present, -- and still more, the defalcations which must arise,
respecting the funds, to the consideration of Mr. King, for his better
judgment, and which, they trust, will serve as an apology for the detail with
which they now trouble him.

156,053 Sales and supposed value. 2,497 Dividends. 158,550 5,568 Deficient,
supposing Mr. Donaldson can negociate the remaining dollars, 260 m. at 5 s.
those of Mr. Fonnereau having cost 4 s10 55-100. 164,118

29 th August, 1796.
An estimate of the probable cost and freight of the maritime stores necessary
for paying the first and second years' annuities to the Dey and Regency of
Algiers.
1000 barrels powder, L.15,000 00 0 2000 pine and oak planks, 6,000 00 0 3000
pine boards, 4,500 00 0 2000 pine staves, 50 00 0 100 dozen long (...) brushes,
100 00 0 34 cables, 80 tons, 10,800 00 0 10 coils white rope, 11,200lb. 500 00
0 5 tons yarn, 975 00 0 100 bolts of canvass, 550 00 0 (...) tons lead, 120 00
0 55 tons spikes, 3,597 10 0 2000 bomb shells, 650 00 0 L.42,842 10 0 Equal to
Dols. 114,246. 0 0 To transport the above to Algiers, suppose 30,000. 0 0 Dols.
144,246.00

TENCH FRANCIS. Purveyor.
29 th December, 1796.
These are all the official estimates and correspondencies that have as yet
transpired in the Algerine business. But these enormous expenditures are not
the sole loss that has been sustained by the Americans. They have incurred the
additional expense of equipping a number of vessels, in conformity to an (...)
of Congress passed soon after the Algerine captures, empowering the President
to purchase, or cause a number of vessels to be built, for the protection of
the commerce of the United States against the Algerines. Another item to be
included in the account is the loss of the eleven sail of American vessels, and
their cargoes, the most of them very valuable. The dey sold several of these
vessels for a considerable price to the Swed^^ (...) in Algiers, who now
employs them in the Levant trade. The value of these vessels and their cargoes,
with many contingent expenses that have never been included, will amount to at
least 180,000 dollars, which, added to the sum total, as stated by the
Secretary of the Treasury, will amount to the sum of 1,172,446 dollars and 25
cents, -- the whole loss that the people of the United States have sustained by
the piratical aggressions of this miscreant nation.

CHAP. V.
The Algerine and Tripolitan treaties.

A TREATY OF PEACE AND AMITY CONCLUDED SEPTEMBER 5, 1795, BETWEEN HASSAN
BASHAW, DEY OF ALGIERS, HIS DIVAN AND SUBJECTS; AND GEORGE WASHINGTON,
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF NORTH AMERICA, AND THE CITIZENS OF THE SAID
UNITED STATES: WITH THE PRESIDENT'S PROCLAMATION, ANNOUNCING ITS RATIFICATION.
GEORGE WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
To all to whom these presents shall come, -- Greeting:
WHEREAS a Treaty of Peace and Amity has been concluded in the manner herein
after mentioned, by the Plenipotentiary of the United States of America, and
the Dey and Regency of Algiers; which Treaty, written in the Arabic language,
being translated into the language of the United States, is in the words
following, to wit: "A Treaty of Peace and Amity concluded this present Day Iima
artasi, the twenty-first of the Luna safer year of the Hegira 1210,
corresponding with Saturday the fifth of September, one thousand seven hundred
and ninety-five, between HASSAN BASHAW, Dey of Algiers, his Divan and subjects,
and GEORGE WASHINGTON, President of the United States of North America, and the
citizens of the said United States.

ARTICLE 1st. From the date of the present treaty, there shall subsist a firm
and sincere peace and amity between the PRESIDENT and citizens of the United
States of North America, and HASSAN BASHAW, Dey of Algiers, his Divan and
subjects; the vessels and subjects of both nations reciprocally treating each
other with civility, honor and respect.

ARTICLE the 2d. All vessels belonging to the citizens of the United States of
North America, shall be permitted to enter the different ports of the Regency,
to trade with our subjects, or any other persons residing within our
jurisdiction, on paying the usual duties at our custom house that are paid by
all nations at peace with this Regency; observing that all goods disembarked
and not sold here shall be permitted to be reimbarked without paying any duty
whatever, either for disembarking or embarking. All naval and military stores,
such as gunpowder, lead, iron, plank, sulphur, timber for building, tar, pitch,
rosin, turpentine, and any other goods ^enominated naval and military stores,
shall be permitted to be sold in this Regency, without paying any duties
whatever at the custom house of this Regency.

ARTICLE 3d. The vessels of both nations shall pass each other without any
impediment or molestation; and all goods, m^^ies or passengers, of whatsoever
nation, that may be on board of the vessels belonging to either party shall be
considered as inviolable, and shall be allowed to pass unmolested.

ARTICLE 4th. All ships of war belonging to this Regency, on meeting with
merchant vessels belonging to citizens of the United States, shall be allowed
to visit them with two persons only beside the rowers; -- these two only
permitted to go on board said vessel, without obtaining express leave from the
commander of said vessel, who shall compare the passport, and immediately
permit said vessel to proceed on her voyage unmolested. All ships of w^^
belonging to the United States of North America, on meeting with an Algerine
cruiser, and shall have seen her passport and certificate from the Consul of
the United States of North America, resident in this Regency, shall be
permitted to proceed on her cruise unmolested: no passport to be issued to any
ships but such as are absolutely the property of citizens of the United States:
and eighteen months shall be the term allowed for furnishing the ships of the
United States with passports.

ARTICLE 5th. No commander of any cruiser belonging to this regency, shall be
allowed to ^^ke any person, of whatever nation or denomination, out of any
vessel belonging to the United States of North America, in order to examine
them, or under pretense of making them confess any thing defired; neither shall
they inflict any corporal punishment, or any way else molest them.

ARTICLE 6th. If any vessel belonging to the United States of North America,
shall be stranded on the coast of this Regency, they shall receive every
possible assistance from the subjects of this Regency: all goods saved from the
wreck shall be permitted to be reimbarked on board of any other vessel, without
paying any duties at the custom house.

ARTICLE 7th. The Algerines are not, on any pretense whatever, to give or sell
any vessel of war to any nation at war with the United States of North America,
or any vessel capable of cruising to the detriment of the commerce of the
United States.

ARTICLE the 8th. Any citizen of the United States of North America, having
bought any prize condemned by the Algerines, shall not be again captured by the
cruisers of the Regency the^ at sea, although they have not a passport; and
certificate from the Consul resident being deemed sufficient, until such time
they can procure such passport.

ARTICLE the 9th. If any of the Barbary states at war with the United States of
North America, shall capture any American vessel and bring her into any of the
ports of this Regency, they shall not be permitted to sell her, but shall
depart the port on procuring the requisite supplies of provision.

ARTICLE the 10th. Any vessel belonging to the United States of North America,
when at war with any other nation, shall be permitted to send their prizes into
the ports of the Regency, have leave to dispose of them, without paying any
duties on sale thereof. All vessels wanting provisions or refreshments, shall
be permitted to buy them at market price.

ARTICLE the 11th. All ships of war belonging to the United States of North
America, on anchoring in the ports of the Regency, shall receive the usual
presents of provisions and refreshments, gratis. Should any of the slaves of
this Regency make their escape on board said vessels, they shall be immediately
returned: No excuse shall be made that they have hid themselves amongst the
people and cannot be found, or any other equivocation.

ARTICLE the 12th. No citizen of the United States of North America, shall be
obliged to redeem any slave against his will, even should he be his brother:
neither shall the owner of a slave be forced to sell him against his will: but
all such agreements must be made by consent of parties. Should any American
citizen be taken on board an enemy-ship, by the cruisers of this Regency,
having a regular passport, specifying they are citizens of the United States,
they shall be immediately set (...) liberty. On the contrary, they having no
passport, they and their property shall be considered lawful prize; as this
Regency know their friends by their passports.

ARTICLE the 13th. Should any of the citizens of the United States of North
America die within the limits of this Regency, the Dey and his subjects shall
not interfere with the property of the deceased; but it shall be under the
immediate direction of the consul; unless otherwise disposed of by will. Should
there be no consul, the effects shall be deposited in the hands of some person
worthy of trust, until the party shall appear who has a right to demand them;
when they shall render an account of the property. Neither shall the Dey or
Divan give hindrance in the execution of any will that may appear.

ARTICLE the 14th. No citizen of the United States of North America, shall be
obliged to purchase any goods against his will; but on the contrary, shall be
allowed to purchase whatever it pleases him. The consul of the United States
of North America, or any other citizen, shall not be amenable for debts
contracted by any one of their own nation; unless previously they have given a
written obligation so to do. Should the Dey want to freight any American vessel
that may be in the Regency, or Turkey, said vessel not being engaged; in
consequence of the friendship subsisting between the two nations, he expects to
have the preference given him, on his paying the same freight offered by any
other nation.

ARTICLE the 15th. Any disputes or suits at law, that may take place between
the subjects of the Regency and the citizens of the United States of North
America, shall be decided by the Dey in a po^^on, and no other. Any disputes
that may arise between the citizens of the United States, shall be decided by
the consul; as they are in such cases not subject to the laws of this Regency.

ARTICLE the 16th. Should any citizen of the United States of North America,
kill, wound, or strike a subject of this Regency, he shall be punished in the
same manner as a Turk, and not with more severity. Should any citizen of the
United States of North America, in the above predicament, escape prison, the
consul shall not become answerable for him.

ARTICLE the 17th. The Consul of the United States of North America, shall have
every personal security given him and his household: he shall have liberty to
exercise his religion in his own house. All slaves of the same religion shall
not be impeded in going to said Consul's house, at hours of prayer. The Consul
shall have liberty and personal security given him to travel whenever he
pleases, within the Regency: he shall have free license to go on board any
vessel lying in our roads, whenever he shall think fit. The Consul shall have
leave to appoint his own Drogaman and Broker.

ARTICLE the 18th. Should a war break out between the two nations, the Consul
of the United States of North America, and all citizens of North America, and
all citizens of said States, shall have leave to embark themselves and property
unmolested, on board of what vessel or vessels they shall think proper.

ARTICLE he 19th. Should the cruisers of Algiers capture any vessel, having
citizens of the United States of North America on board, they having papers to
prove they are really so, they and their property shall be immediately
discharged. And should the vessels of the United States capture any vessels of
nations at war with them, having subjects of this Regency on board, they shall
be treated in like manner.

ARTICLE the 20th. On a vessel of war belonging to the United States of North
America anchoring in our ports, the Consul is to inform the Dey of her arrival;
and she shall be saluted with twenty-one guns; which she is to return in the
same quantity or number. And the Dey will send fresh provisions on board, as is
customary, gratis.

ARTICLE the 21st. The Consul of the United States of North America, shall not
be required to pay duty for any thing he brings from a foreign country for the
use of his house and family.

ARTICLE the 22d. Should any disturbance take place between the citizens of the
United States and the subjects of this Regency, or break any article of this
treaty, war shall not be declared immediately; but every thing shall be
searched into regularly: the party injured shall be made reparation.

On the 21st of the Luna of Safer. 1210, corresponding with the 5th September
1795, JOSEPH DONALDSON, jun. on the part of the United States of North America,
agreed with HASSAN BASHAW, Dey of Algiers, to keep the articles contained in
this treaty sacred and inviolable; which we the Dey and Divan promise to
observe, on consideration of the United States paying annually the value of
twelve thousand Algerine sequins in maritime s^ores. Should the United States
forward a larger^ quantity, the overplus shall be paid for in money, by the Dey
and Regency. Any vessel that may be captured from the date of this treaty of
peace and amity, shall immediately be delivered up on her arrival in Algiers.

Signed, VIZIR HASSAN BASHAW, JOSEPH DONALDSON, jun^.

Seal of Algiers stamped at the foot of the original Treaty in Arabic.
To all to whom these presents shall come, or be made known,
WHEREAS the underwritten David Humphreys, has been duly appointed
Commissioner Plenip^tentiary by letters patent under the signature of the
President and seal of the United States of America, dated the 30th of March
1795, for negociating and concluding a treaty of peace with the Dey and
Governors of Algiers; whereas by instructions given to him on the part of the
Executive, dated the 28th of March and 4th of April 1795; he has been further
authorized to employ Joseph Donaldson, junior, on an agency in the said
business; whereas by a writing under his hand and seal, dated the 21st of May
1795, he did constitute and appoint Joseph Donaldson, junior, agent in the
business aforesaid; and the said Joseph Donaldson, junior, did on the 5th of
September 1795, agree articles of the preceding treaty sacred and inviolable:

Now, know ye, That I David Humphreys, Commissioner Plenipotentiary aforesaid,
do approve and conclude the said treaty, and every article and clause therein
contained; reserving the same nevertheless for the final ratification of the
President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent
of the Senate of the said United States.

(Seal) In testimony whereof, I have signed the same with my hand and seal, at
the city of Lisbon, this 28th of November 1795. DAVID HUMPHREYS.

Now be it known, That I GEORGE WASHINGTON, President of the United States of
America, having seen and considered the said treaty, do, by and with the advice
and consent of the Senate, accept, ratify, and confirm the same, and every
clause and article thereof. And to the end that the said treaty may be observed
and performed with good faith on the part of the United States, I have ordered
the premises to be made public; and I do hereby enjoin and require all persons
bearing office civil or military within the United States, and all other
citizens or inhabitants thereof, faithfully to observe and fulfill the said
treaty, and every article and clause thereof.

In testimony whereof, I have caused the seal of the United States of America
to be affixed to these presents, and signed the same with my hand. (Seal) Done
at the city of Philadelphia, the seventh day of March, one thousand seven
hundred and ninety-six, and of the Independence of the United States of
America, the twentieth. G^. WASHINGTON. By the President.
TIMOTHY PICKERING, Sec'ry of State.

A TREATY OF PEACE AND AMITY CONCLUDED, NOVEMBER 4, 1796, BETWEEN THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA AND THE BEY AND SUBJECTS OF TRIPOLI OF BARBARY, WITH THE
PRESIDENT'S PROCLAMATION, ANNOUNCING ITS RATIFICATION.
JOHN ADAMS, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
To all to whom these presents shall come, -- Greeting:
WHEREAS a Treaty of Peace and Friendship has been concluded in the manner
herein after mentioned, by the Plenipotentiary of the United States of America
and the Bey and subjects of Tripoli of Barbary; which treaty written in the
Arabic language, being translated into the language of the United States, is in
the words following to wit:

TREATY OF PEACE AND FRIENDSHIP Between the United States of America and the
Bey and Subjects of Tripoli-of Barbary.

ARTICLE 1st. There is a firm and perpetual peace and friendship between the
United States of America, and the bey and subjects of Tripoli of Barbary, made
by the free consent of both parties, and guaranteed by the Most Potent Dey and
Regency of Algiers.

ARTICLE 2d. If any goods belonging to any nation with which either of the
parties is at war, shall be loaded on board of vessels belonging to the other
^arty, they shall pass free, and no attempt shall be made to take or detain
them.

ARTICLE 3. If any citizen, subjects or effects belonging to either party shall
be found on board a prize vessel taken from an enemy by the other party, such
citizens or subjects shall be set at liberty, and the effects restored to the
owners.

ARTICLE 4. Proper passports are to be given to all vessels of both parties, by
which they are to be known. And considering the distance between the two
countries, eighteen months from the date of this treaty shall be allowed for
procuring such passports. During this interval the other papers belonging to
such vessels shall be sufficient for their protection.

ARTICLE 5th. A citizen or subject of either party having bought a prize
condemned by the party, or by any other nation, the certificate of
condemnation, and bill of sale, shall be a sufficient passport for such vessel
for one year: this being a reasonable time for her to procure a proper passport.

ARTICLE 6. Vessels of either party putting into the ports of the other, and
having need of provisions or other supplies, they shall be furnished at the
market price. And if any such vessel shall so put in from a disaster at sea,
and have occasion to repair, she shall be at liberty to land and reimbark her
cargo, without paying any duties. But in no case shall she be compelled to land
her cargo.

ARTICLE 7. Should a vessel of either party be cast on the shore of the other,
all proper assistance shall be given to her and her people; no pillage shall be
allowed, the property shall remain at the disposition of the owners, and the
crew, protected and succored till they can be sent to their country.

ARTICLE 8. If a vessel of either party should be attacked by an enemy within
gunshot of the ^orts of the other, she shall be defended as much as possible.
If she be in port she shall not be seized or a tacked when it is in the power
of the other party to protect her; and when she proceeds to sea no enemy shall
be allowed to pursue her fr^^ the same port within twenty-four hours after her
departure.

ARTICLE 9. The commerce between the United States and Tripoli -- the
protection to be given to merchants, masters of vessels, and seamen -- the
reciprocal right of establishing Consuls in each country, and the privileges,
immunities and jurisdictions to be enjoyed by such Consuls, are declared to be
on the same footing with those of the most favored nations respectively.

ARTICLE 10th. The money and presents demanded by the Bey of Tripoli, as a full
and satisfactory consideration on his part, and on the part of his subjects,
for this treaty of perpetual peace and friendship, are acknowledged to have
been received by him previous to his signing the same, according to a receipt
which is hereto annexed, except such part as is promised on the part of the
United States to be delivered and paid by them on the arrival of their Consul
in Tripoli, of which part a note is likewise hereto annexed. And no pretense of
any periodical tribute or further payment is ever to be made by either party.

ARTICLE 11th. As the government of the United States of America is not in any
sense founded on the Christian religion, as it has in itself no character of
enmity against the laws, religion or tranquillity of Musselmen -- and as the
said states have never entered into any war or act of hostility against any
Mahomedan nation, it is declared by the parties, that no pretext arising from
religious opinions shall ever produce an interruption of the harmony existing
between the two countries.

ARTICLE 12th. In case of any dispute arising from a violation of any of the
articles of this treaty no appeal shall be made to arms, nor shall war be
declared on any pretext whatever. But if the Consul residing at the place where
the dispute shall happen, shall not be able to fettle the same, an amicable
reference shall be made to the mutual friend of the parties, the Dey of
Algeirs, the parties hereby engaging to abide by his decision. And he, by
virtue of his signature to this treaty, engages for himself and his successors,
to declare the justice of the case according to the true interpretation of the
treaty, and to use all the means in his power to enforce the observance of the
same.

Signed and Sealed at Tripoli of Barbary, the 3d day of Jumad, in the year of
the Hegira 1211, corresponding with the 4th day of November 1796 -- by (L. S.)
JUSSUF BASHAW MAHOMET, Bey. (L. S.) MAMET. Treasurer. (L. S.) AMET, Minister of
Marine. (L. S.) AMET, Chamberlain. (L. S.) ALLY, Chief of the Divan. (L. S.)
SOLIMAN KAYA, (L. S.) GALIL, General of the Troops. (L. S.) MAHOMET, Cmdt. of
the City. (L. S.) MAMET. Secretary.


Signed and Sealed at Algiers, the 4th day of Argil, 1211, corresponding with
the 3d day of January 1797, by (L. S.) HASSAN BASHAW, Dey. And by the Agent
Plenipotentiary of the United States of America. (L. S.) JOEL BARLOW.
I Joel Barlow, Agent and Consul General of the United States of America, for
the City and Kingdom of Algiers. certify and attest that the foregoing is a
true copy of the treaty, concluded between the United States, and the Bey and
Subjects of Tripoli of Barbary, of which the original is to be transmitted by
me to the Minister of the said United States, in Lisbon.

(L. S.) In testimony whereof, I sign these presents with my hand, affix
thereto the seal of the Consulate of the United States at Algiers, this 4th of
January 1797. JOEL BARLOW.



To all to whom these presents shall come or be made known:
Whereas the under written David Humphreys, has been duly appointed
Commissioner Plenipotentiary, by Letters Patent under the signature of the
President and seal of the United States of America, dated the 30th of March
17^5, for negociating and concluding a Treaty of Peace with the Most
Illustrious, The Bashaw, Lords and Governors of the City and Kingdom of
Tripoli: Whereas by a writing under his hand and seal, dated the 10th of
February 1796, he did (in conformity to the authority committed me therefore)
constitute and appoint Joel Barlow, and Joseph Donaldson, junior, agents,
jointly and separately, in the business aforesaid: Whereas the annexed Treaty
of Peace and friendship, was agreed upon, signed and sealed at Tripoli of
Barbary on the 4th of November 1796, in virtue of the power aforesaid, and
guaranteed by the Most Potent Dey and Regency of Algiers; and whereas the same
was certified at Algiers on the 3d day of January 1797, with the signature and
seal of Hassan Bashaw, Dey, and of Joel Barlow, one of the agents aforesaid --

Now know ye, That I David Humphreys commissioner plenipotentiary aforesaid, do
approve and conclude the said treaty, and every article and clause therein
contained, reserving the same nevertheless for the final ratification of the
President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent
of the Senate of the said United States.

In testimony whereof, I have signed the same with my name and seal, at the
city of Lisbon this 10th of February, 1797. (L. S.) DAVID HUMPHREYS."

Now be it known, That I John Adams, President of the United States of America,
having seen and considered the said Treaty, do, by and with the advice and
consent of the Senate, accept, ratify, and confirm the same, and every clause
and article thereof. And to the end that the said Treaty may be observed and
performed with good faith on the part of the United States, I have ordered the
premises to be made public; -- and I do hereby enjoin and require all persons
bearing office, civil or military, within the United States, and all other
citizens or inhabitants thereof faithfully to observe and fulfill the said
Treaty and every clause and article thereof.

(L. S.) In the testimony whereof, I have caused the Seal of the United States
of America to be affixed to these Presents, and signed the same with my hand.
Done at the City of Philadelphia, the Tenth day of June, one Thousand seven
Hundred and Ninety-seven, and of the Independence of the United States the
Twenty-first. JOHN ADAMS. By the President.
TIMOTHY PICKERING. Sec'ry of State.

END OF THE HISTORY.
DESCRIPTION OF ALGIERS; COMPREHENDING AN AMPLE ACCOUNT OF ITS TERRITORY AND
INHABITANTS.

DESCRIPTION, etc.
CHAP. I.
Its division; rivers, soil, climate, and productions; animals, antiquities and
curi^^ities; inhabitants, customs and manners; dress, language, corsairs and
commerce; revenues, government, punishments and religion.

THE kingdom of Algiers is situated between 32 and 37 degrees of north
latitude, which corresponds to that of the United States from near the southern
boundary of Virginia to near the river Savannah in Georgia, and between 76 and
84 degrees 20 minutes east longitude from Philadelphia. It extends 480 miles in
length from east to west along the northern coast of Africa, and 320 miles in
breadth from north to south. It is bounded by the Mediterranean on the north,
by the kingdom of Tunis on the east, by mount Atlas on the south, and by the
river Mulvia, which separates it from the empire of Morocco, on the west, At
the distance of 120 miles from the seacoast, that part of Africa becomes a
barren d^sart, almost entirely uninhabitable either by man or beast.

This country derives its name from its metropolis, and is at present divided
into three provinces or districts, viz. the eastern, western, and southern. The
eastern, or Levantine government, which is by far the most considerable of the
three, and is also called Beylick, contains the towns of Bona, Constantina,
Gigeri, Bugia, Steffa, Tebef, Zamoura, Biscara, and Necanz, in all which the
Turks have their garrisons: besides which, it includes the two ancient kingdoms
of Cuco and Labez, though independent of the Algerine government, to whose
forces their country is inaccessible; so that they still live under their own
cheyks, chosen by each of their adowars or hords. To these may be added a
French factory at Call, under the direction of the company of the French
Bastion. -- The western government includes the towns of Oran, Trem^sen,
Mostagan, Tenez, and Sercelli, with its castle and garrison. -- The southern
government has neither town, village, nor even a house, which obliges the bey
and his forces to be always encamped.

RIVERS.
THE most considerable rivers of Algiers, are 1. The Zha or Ziz, which crosses
the province of Tremesen, and the desert of Anguid, along the frontier of Fez,
and falls into the Mediterranean near the town of Tabecrita, where it takes the
name of Sirut. Its water is clear and full of fish.

2. The Hued-Habra, which falls into the Ziz near the plains of Cirek. Along
its banks live many desperate Arabs, who are troublesome neighbors to the
province of Oran.

3. The Haregol, or Te^^e, called Siga by Prolemy, descends from the great
Atlas, crosses the desert of Anguid, and falls into the sea about five leagues
from Oran.

4. The Mina, supposed to be the Chylematis of Pto^emy, a large river that runs
northward through the plains of Bathala, waters that city and Mina, and falls
into the sea near the town of Arzew. This river has lately received the name of
Cena, from that of a Moabite who repeopled the town of Bathala, which had been
destroyed by the Berimerines.

5. The Sheliff, Zilef or Zilif, a large river, descending from mount
Gnanecexis, running through vast deserts, the lake Titteri, the frontiers of
the Tremesen and Tenez, and falling into the sea a little above the city of
Mostagan.

6. The Celef, supposed to be the Carthena of the ancients, falls into the sea
about three leagues west of Algiers, after a short course of 18 or 20 leagues.

7. The Hued-alquiver, supposed to be the Nalabata, o^ Nasaba, of the ancients,
and called by the Europeans Zinganir, runs down with a swift course, through
some high mountains of Cuco, and falls into the sea near Bugia. It abounds with
fish, of which such immense quantities are caught that they are neglected.
While they city of Bugia was in the hands of the Christians, as Marmol tells
us, the mouth of this river was so choked up with sand, that no vessels could
came up into it: but in 1555, very soon after it was taken by the Moors, the
great rains swelled it to such a degree, that all the sand and mud was carried
off; since which time the galleys and other trading vessels have entered it
with ease, where they lie sa^^ from storms and all winds but that which blows
from the north.

8. The Suf-Gemar, or Suf-Gimmar al Rumniel, supposed to be the Ampsaga of
Ptolemy, takes its rise on mount Auras, on the confines of Atlas; runs thence
through some barren plains, and the fertile parts of Constantina, where its
stream is greatly increased by the influx of other rivers; from thence running
northward, along the ridges of some high mountains, it falls into the sea a
little to the east of Gigeri.

9. The Ladag, or Ludeg, runs down from mount Atlas through part of
Constantina, and falls into the sea a little to the eastward of Bona.

10. The Guadi, or Guadel Barbar, supposed to be the Tusca or Rubricatus of the
ancients, springs from the head of Orbus, or Urbs in Tripoli, runs through
Bugia, and falls into the sea near Tabarca.

SOIL, CLIMATE and PRODUCTIONS.
THIS country consists of eighteen provinces, the climate of which, along the
seacoasts, is remarkably delightful, and the air pure and serene.

The country of Algiers, and the states of Barbary in general, under the Roman
empire were justly denominated the garden of the world; and to have a residence
there was considered as the highest state of luxury. The produce of their soil
formed those magazines which furnished all Italy, and a great part of the Roman
empire with corn, wine and oil.

The soil is covered with almost a perpetual verdure, and is extremely fertile,
particularly on the mountainous parts to the west of Tenez, Bugia, and Algiers
Proper, which produce wheat and fruit in the greatest perfection; and the
northern parts of Tremesen, toward the sea, abound in excellent pasture
grounds, But as we advance into the country, it becomes more parched and barren.

Though the lands are now uncultivated, through the barbarity and oppression of
their government, yet they still produce not only corn, wine, and oil in the
greatest abundance, but dates, raisins, almonds, apples, pears, cherries,
plums, citrons, lemons, oranges, pomegranates, etc. and plenty of roots and
herbs grow in their kitchen gardens. Excellent hemp and flax grow on their
plains; and by the report of those who have traveled thither, the country*
abounds with all that can add to the pleasures of life.

Extreme heat is not common, and the climate is so temperate that the heat of
summer never dries the leaves of the trees, nor the cold of winter makes them
fall; so that they are constantly verdant. In February they begin to bud, and
in May show their fruit in full growth, which is ripe in June. Their vines are
very large and thick, and the bunches of grapes on them are commonly a foot and
an half long. The grapes are fit to gather in June, and the figs, peaches,
nectarines, olives, nuts, etc. in August. The people find means to evade the
sobriety prescribed by the Mohammedan law, and make free with excellent wines
and spirits of their own growth and manufacture. The plains of Moligia produce
wheat, barley and oats, two or three times a year. Their melons are of an
exquisite-taste; some of which ripen in summer, and others in winter. Algiers
produces besides, saltpeter, and great quantities of excellent salt; and lead
and iron have been found in several places.

The country round the city of Algiers is very fertile. Country seats, gardens
and groves of trees are numerous. The Algerines are unacquainted with the art
of pruning and grafting trees. Their gardens are not walled, but fenced round
with a peculiar species of thorns, which, from their prickles, and the
compactness with which their branches interweave are well adapted for that
purpose. Among other rich tracts in the province of Algiers Proper, the great
plain of Met^ijah is admired for its astonishing fertility. It is fifty miles
in length, twenty in breadth, and includes many villas, fragant groves, and
delightful gardens. The soil produces such a profusion of the most delicious
fruits, rice, roots, and grain of every species, that the inhabitants enjoy
annually two, and frequently three crops.

ANIMALS.
NEITHER the elephant nor the rhinoceros are to be found in the States of
Barbary; but their deserts abound with lions, tigers, leopards, hyaenas, and
monstrous serpents. The Barbary horses were formerly very valuable, and thought
equal to the Arabian. Camels and dromedaries, asses, mules, and kumrahs (a most
serviceable creature, begot by an ass upon a cow) are their beasts of burden.
Their sheep yield but indifferent fleeces, but they are very large, as are
their goats, Bears, buffaloes, wild boars, porcupines, foxes apes, hares,
rabbits, ferrits, weasels, moles, cameleons, and most kinds of reptiles are
found here.

There is a peculiar kind of animal, called the gapard, which can easily be
tamed, and is made use of for hunting like a dog. The head of it resembles that
of a cat; the hind legs are longer than the fore, and the tail is finely
mottled. It is so apt to exhaust itself in running that the hunters are obliged
to carry it now and then on their horses, till it has recovered itself. There
is also another curious animal which is between a dog and a fox.

"Besides vermin," says Dr. Shaw, speaking of his travels through Barbary, "the
apprehensions we were under in some parts of this country, of being bitten or
stung by the scorpion, the viper, or the venomous spider, rarely failed to
interrupt our repose."

But the most singular insects are the locusts, which the Doctor in his travels
describes in the following manner. "They were much bigger than our common
grass-hoppers, having brown spotted wings, with legs and bodies of a bright
yellow. Their first appearance was toward the latter end of March, the wind
having been for some time southerly; and in the middle of April their numbers
were so vastly increased, that in the heat of the day, they formed themselves
into large bodies, appeared like a succession of clouds, and darkened the sun.
About the middle of May, each of these bodies began gradually to disappear,
retiring into the Me^tijiah, and other adjacent plains to deposit their eggs.
Accordingly in the month following, their young brood began gradually to make
their appearance, and it was surprising to observe, that no sooner were any of
them hatched, than they immediately collected themselves together, each of them
forming a compact body of several hundred yards in square: which marching
afterward directly forward, climbed over trees, walls, and houses, ear up
every plant in their way, and let nothing escape them. The inhabitants, to stop
their progress, made trenches all over their fields and gardens, and filled
them with water; or else placing in a row great quantities of heath, stubble,
and such like combustible matter, they set them on fire upon the approach of
the locusts. But all this was to no purpose; for the trenches were quickly
filled up, and the fires put our by infinite swarms succeeding one another,
whilst the front seemed regardless of danger, and the rear pressed on so close,
that a retreat was impossible."

Partridges, quails, eagles, hawks, and all kinds of wild fowls are found on
this coast; and of the smaller birds, the capsa sparrow is remarkable for its
beauty, and the sweetness of its note, which is thought to exceed that of any
other bird; but it cannot live out of its own climate. The seas and bays of
this coast abound with the finest and most delicious fish of every kind, and
were preferred by the ancients to those of Europe.

ANTIQUITIES and CURIOSITIES.
THESE matters are well worth the attention of an antiquary, but they are
difficult of access. The reader must naturally conclude that the countries
which were once under the dominion of the Carthagenians, and the pride of the
Phoenician, Greek, and Roman works, are replete with the most curious remains
of antiquity, but they lie scattered among ignorant and barbarous inhabitants.
Some remains of the Mauritanian and Numidian greatness are still visible, and
many ruins which bear evidence of their ancient grandeur and populousness.
These point out the old Julia Caesarea of the Romans, which was little inferior
in magnificence to Carthage itself. A few of the aqueducts of Carthage are said
to be still remaining, but no ve^^ige of its walls. The same is the fate of
Uttica, and many other renowned cities of antiquity; and so overrun is the
country with barbarism, that their very scites are not known even by their
ruins, amphitheatres, and other public buildings which still remain in
tolerable preservation. Besides those of classical antiquity, many Saracen
monuments of the most stupendous magnificence, are likewise found in this tract
of country. These were erected under the califs of Bagdad, and the ancient
kings of the country, before it was subdued by the Turks, or reduced to its
present form of government. Their walls form the principal fortifications in
the country, both inland and maratime. We know of few or no natural curiosities
belonging to the States of Barbary, except its salt pits, which is some places
take up an area of six miles. Doctor Shaw mentions springs found here that are
so hot as to boil a large piece of mutton in a quarter of an hour.

The hot baths of Meereega in the neighborhood of the city of Algiers are also
natural curiosities. The principal one is twelve feet square and four feet
deep. The water is very hot, and when it has filled the larger basin, it runs
through into another of a smaller size, where the Jews bathe, for they are not
permitted to use the same bath with Mahometans. These hot fountains are
conjectured to proceed from the great quantities of sulphur, nitre, and other
inflamable substances in the bowels of the earth. To this cause likewise have
been ascribed those earthquakes, to which the whole country, and Algiers in
particular, is frequently subjected.

The city of Algiers has few subjects of antiquity, and little that merits the
attention of the curious. There are, however, upon the tower of the great
mosque some broken inscriptions; but the letters, though sufficiently large to
be seen at a distance, are so filled up with lime and whitewash that they
cannot be particularly distinguished.

INHABITANTS.
The inhabitants of the territory of Algiers, and particularly those along the
seacoasts, are a mixture of different nations; such as Moors and Morescos
driven out of Catalonia, Arragon, and other parts of Spain, about the end of
the sixteenth century, Jews, Janisaries, and great numbers of Turks, who come
from the Levant to seek their fortune: as well as mulitudes of Christian
slaves. etc.

The Berebers are some of the most ancient inhabitants of the country; and are
supposed to be descended from the ancient Sabeans, who came hither from Arabia
Felix, under the conduct of one of their princes. Others believe them to be the
descendants of some of the Canaanites, who were driven out of Palestine by
Joshua. These are dispersed all over Barbary, and divided into a multitude of
tribes under their respective chiefs; most of them inhabit the mountainous
parts; some range from place to place, and live in tents, or portable huts;
others in scattered villages; they have, nevertheless, kept themselves from
intermixing with other nations. The Berebers are reckoned the richest of all,
go better clothed, and carry on a much larger trassic in cattle^ hides, wax,
honey, iron, and other commodities. They have also some artificers in iron, and
some manufacturers in ^he weaving branch. The name of Bereber is supposed to
have been originally given them on account of their being first settled in some
desert place. Upon their increasing in process of time, they divided themselves
into five tribes, probably on account of their religious differences, called
the Zinhagians, Musamedins, Zene^i, Hoares, and Gomeres; and these having
produced 600 families, subdivided themselves into a great number of petty
tribes.

To these we may add the Z^^owahs by European authors called the Azuagues, or
Assagues, who are likewise dispersed over most parts of Barbary and Numidia.
Great numbers of these inhabit the mountainous parts of Cuco, Labez, etc.
leading a wandering pastoral life. The African historians assure us that they
are some of the descendants of those Phoenicians or Canaanites, who fled from
Joshua and the Israeli^es, according to an inscription in the Punic tongue
engraved on a stone at a fountain, thus, We are fled hither from the presence
of that great robber JOSHUA the son of NUN. They are a kind of Christians that
neither shave their beards, nor cut their hair; and affect to wear a blue cross
painted or burnt on their cheek or hand by way of distinction.

But the most numerous inhabitants are the Moors and Arabs, who trace their
descent from those disciples of Mahomet, who formerly subdued this country; the
former compose the great body of the inhabitants of the towns. But it may
readily be supposed that among such a variety of different races, immense
numbers cannot be said to belong to any particular tribe or nation whatever.

In this country there are many wandering bands of these Arabs, who live
together in camps, and remove from one place to another as they want pasture
for their herds and flocks, or as: any other accidental circumstance happens to
make it necessary. They sometimes pay rent to landlords in corn, fruit, honey,
wax, and other productions; and the dey likewise demands a tribute from them.
The excellence of the climate renders this simple way of living tolerable,
though the tents of these people are mean, their utensils of little value, and
their lodgings filthy. The family and their domestic animals lie promiscuously
in the same tents together, except their dogs, which are left as guards on the
outside. They raise considerable numbers of bees, and silk worms. They subsist
chiefly on bread, rice and fruit, Wine and spiritous liquors are almost
entirely unknown to them.

The dress of the men who compose these tribes is only a long piece of coarse
cloth wrapped round their shoulders, and falling down to their ancles, with a
cap of the same stuff. The sheik, or chief of a tribe, wears a cap a of fine
cloth. The women pay some more attention to the ornamental part of their dress;
but their children are suffered to go stark naked till seven or eight years of
age.

The customs, language and religion of these shepherds bear a strict affinity
to those of Arabia. They are robust, and of a swarthy complexion. The men are
active, the women prolific and the children healthy. They have neither to
encounter the hardships incident to the life of a North American savage, nor
are their constitutions enseebled, as is the case in manufacturing towns, by
sedentary and unhealthy employments.

When a young man of these tribes would marry, he drives a number of cattle to
the hut where the parents of his mistress reside. The bride is set on
horseback, and led home amidst the shouts of a crowd of young people, who have
been invited to the nuptial feast. When she arrives at the hut of her lover, a
mixture of milk and honey is given her to drink, and a song, suitable to the
occasion, is sung. She then alights, and is presented with a stick, which she
thrusts into the ground, and repeats some words to the following effect: As
this stick is fastened in the earth, so am I in duty bound to my husband; as
nothing but violence can remove it, so death alone shall force me from his
love. She then drives his stock to water and back again, to show her
willingness to perform any duty that he may assign her. These previous
ceremonies being settled, all the company enter the hut, and the evening
concludes with the greatest festivity that these people are capable of
enjoying. After the marriage the wife is obliged to wear a veil, and she never
stirs from her hut for the space of a month,

The Arabs are stout, warlike, and skilful horsemen. Their principal arms are a
short lance and scymitar, and they are likewise acquainted with the bow and the
musket. But they are so addicted to robbing, that one cannot safely travel
through the country at a distance from the towns without a guard, or at least a
marabout or saint for a safeguard. For they look upon themselves to be the
original proprietors of the country, and not only as dispossessed by the rest
of the inhabitants, but reduced by them to the lowest state of poverty, and in
consequence they make no scruple to plunder all they meet by way of reprisal.

The inhabitants of this country, especially those near the seacoasts,
generally subsist by piracy; they are allowed to be bold intrepid mariners, and
will fight desperately when they meet with a prize at sea. They are,
notwithstanding, far inferior to the English, and other European states, both
in the construction and management of their vessels.

The inhabitants of the metropolis are extremely vicious; and it is a general
observation that the more distant the people are from the seat of government,
the purer are their manners. Notwithstanding their poverty, they have much
vivacity about them, especially those who are of Arabic descent, which gives
them an air of contentment; and having little to lose, they are peaceable among
themselves.

The Turks who compose the military force, have great privileges, pay no taxes,
and are exempted from public punishment. The lowest soldier domineers over the
most distinguished Moors at pleasure. The people are subjected to the most
absolute despotism, and most cruelly oppressed by a handful of insolent Turks,
the refuse of the streets of Constantinople. If a Turk finds a Moor better
mounted than himself, he takes the liberty of exchanging horses without leave
or ceremony, and he will take apples, oranges, nuts and other articles which
the Moors bring to market, with as much indifference as if they were his
property. The Turks have the exclusive privilege of carrying firearms. Such is
the despotism of the Turkish soldiers that they not only turn others out of the
way in the streets, but will go to the farm houses in the country for twenty
days together, living on free quarters, and making use of every thing, not
excepting the women. They are used more like men of quality than private
sentinels. They are lodged in spacious squares, attended by slaves, and
generally maintained at the public expense. The a^^y of the dey is principally
composed of Turkish soldiers, who are called Janisaries; and though their
numbers are small, yet they tyrannize in the most insolent manner over the
native Moors throughout the whole country. Some good qualities, however,
distinguish them, notwithstanding this excess of despotism. They never game for
money, nor even trifles; and what cannot be said of Christians, they never
profane the name of the Deity. They soon forget their private quarrels; and
after the first paroxysm of resentment has subsided, it is infamy for a Turk to
keep in remembrance the injuries ^e has received. In this respect they are less
barbarous than other nations that boast of their civilization.

When d^ficiencies happen in the army their corsairs are sent out to the Levant
to procure recruits, which generally consist of peasants, outlaws, and persons
of the meanest conditions. Mahomet Bashaw who was dey about the year 1732, was
of this description, and in his celebrated dispute with the deputy of a
neighboring nation he said, My mother sold sheep's ^eet and my father neat's
tongues, but they would have been ashamed to have exposed to sale such a tongue
as yours. These recruits, after they have been a little instructed by their
fellow soldiers, and are furnished with caps to their heads, shoes to their
feet, and a pair of knives to their girdles, quickly begin to assume airs of
importance, and look upon the most considerable citizens as their slaves.

The Algerines eat as in Turkey, sitting cross legged round a table about four
inches high, and use neither knives nor forks in eating. Before they begin,
every one says B^^isme Allah, in the name of God. When they have done, a slave
pours water on their hands as they sit, and then they wash their mouths. Their
drink is water, sherbet and coffee. Wine is not allowed, though drank
immoderately by some.

Both the men and women spend a great part of their time in indolence, the men
in drinking coffee and smoking, and the women in dressing, bathing, conversing
on their sophas, visiting the tombs of their relations, and walking in their
gardens.

The Algerines in general, particularly about the seacoasts, have a pretty
fair complexion; but those in the interior parts of the country, and
particularly the Arabs, are swarthy They are robust and well proportioned, and
expert in the use of fire arms. The Algerine women are beautiful in their
persons, and very delicate in their complexions, but the men are sunburned.
They improve the beauty of their eyes by art, particularly by the powder of
lead ore, the same pigment, according to the opinion of the learned Doctor
Shaw, that Jezebel made use of when she is said to have painted her face; 2
Kings, chap. ix. ver. 30.
the words of the original being that she set off her eyes with the powder of
lead ore.

The Algerines by their law may have four wives, but they usually content
themselves with two, or three at the most. The husband seldom sees his wife
before marriage, but accepts her upon the description of a female confidant.
When the match is agreed upon, the bridegroom sends a present of sweetmeats to
the bride, and entertains her relations with a feast and a musical
entertainment.

After the death of a man his corpse is attended by a number of his male
friends, or if the deceased be a woman she is attended by her female friends.
The corpse is washed with warm soap-suds and wrapped in clean linen. It is then
laid in a coffin covered with green cloth, upon which a turban is placed, and
carried with the head forward to the grave, attended by women who are hired to
lament. These women scratch themselves till the blood runs, distort their
countenances and make a most hideous noise. As the procession enters the burial
ground some marabouts sing without intermission these words, Lahilla Lah
Mahomet ressoul allah, God is God and Mahomet is his prophet. It is then placed
in the grave in an erect posture, with the face turned toward the south. If
the deceased has been a person of distinction grave stones are erected at his
head and feet, with epitaphs, inscriptions, or select sentences out of the
Alcoran.

The chief furniture of their houses consists of carpets and mattr^^^, on which
they sit and lie. In eating their slovenliness is disgusting. They are
prohibited gold and silver vessels, and their meat, which they swallow by
handfuls, is boiled or roasted to rags. Their ordinary food i^ rice and fine
flour made into small grains like shot, which they call Cuzcuz; both which they
boil with meat and fowls, and most commonly eat fruit and herbs with them.

The people in general in traveling walk on foot or use asses, and seldom ride
on horseback, except the governors of provinces and other great personages. The
women seldom walk on foot; but ride upon asses in a square box covered with a
kind of canopy and drawn round with curtains. So that they are ^^^^ely
concealed, and when they set out upon their journey they are attended by a
driver.

DRESS.
The dress of the people in general is a linen shirt, over which they tie a
silk or cloth ves^ment with a sash, and over that a loose coat. Their drawers
are made of linen. The arms and legs of the wearer are bare; but they have
slippers on their feet, and persons of rank sometimes wear buskins. They never
move their turbans, but pull off their slippers when they attend religious
duties, or the person of their sovereign. They are fond of striped and fancied
silks. The viceroy and great men let their beards grow; but the common people
shave both their head and face, and only leave a pair of whiskers, and a lock
of hair upon the top of the head, by which they fancy they are drawn up to
paradise.

The dress of the common people is very plain; they wear a pair of linen
drawers over their shirt, and a loose white woolen jacket with a hood behind,
or a mantle which is commonly black, and reaches only down to the knee, in
which they wrap themselves; but in summer they only wear two shirts.

The men of fashion go more sumptuously clad. Their gowns are made of fur,
silk, or cloth: they have rich garments finely embroidered with flowers of
gold; their turbans are very curiously done up, and elegantly adorned with
jewels; and their legs are covered with boots of shining leather.

The women pay more attention to the ornamental part of dress than men. There
is not, however, much difference between the dress of the sexes; the drawers of
the women are longer, and instead of a turban, they wear a sort of cawl on
their heads. They tie their hair behind, and ornament it with jewels and other
trinkets. They wear fine collars about their necks, bracelets about their
wrists, large pendants in their ears, and curious caps on their heads. When
they go abroad they usually throw over their faces a fine veil, which they
fasten to their breast, and over their garments they wear an upper robe; so
that they are not known, but by the slaves that attend them.

LANGUAGE.
THE Algerines are void of all literature. The original language of this
country appears to have been the Phoenician; after which the Romans obliged
them to exchange it (as they did all their conquered dominions) for their own.
The Arabs afterward introduced theirs, and after them the Turks. The native
Moors make use of the Moresco; but the people of Algiers in general speak a
compound of Arabic, Moresco, and the remains of the ancient Phoenician
language. In the metropolis the Mahometans and Christians use the Lingua
Franca, a mixture of Spanish, Portuguese, Italian and French. The natives of
all denominations for the most part, understand this dialect, which, without
being the proper language of any country on the coast of the Mediterranean, has
a kind of universal currency all over that quarter of the world, as the channel
of information for people who cannot understand each other through any other
medium. The public business of the nation is transacted either in the Arabic or
Turkish, but commonly the former, in which their late treaty with the United
States of America is written.

It is curious that in conversation, the Turks transpose their nouns and verbs,
in the same manner that the Greek and Latin writers have done. The Turkish is a
lofty language, and the Turks when they speak affect a singular majesty of
tone, as expressive of their superiority: which, however, consists in nothing
but their indolence, for they are neither men of learning, nor warriors, -- a
truth that the Russians have long taught them.

GOVERNMENT.
THOUGH Algiers has some appearance of a military republic, yet it is in fact
the most horrible of all monarchies in the world, and as mutable in its
principles as the temper and disposition of those differ, who happen to be in
administration.

Algiers was formerly subject to the Grand Signior, and is still under his
protection; but the dey at present pays no other tribute to him, than that of a
certain number of beautiful Arabian horses, and some other presents which are
sent thither annually. The Grand Signior formerly sent a bashaw, or viceroy, to
Algiers, in whom the sovereignty was vested; but those officers frequently
exercised the most tyrannical power, and exacted from the people such
exorbitant taxes, as produced popular insurrections; till at length the
Janisaries and militia grew so powerful that they deposed them and elected
others in their stead; at which the Port was obliged to connive, lest they
should be provoked to an open revolt, and entirely throw off the Turkish yoke;
since which time the power of the Port has been so gradually diminished that
he can do nothing here without the concurrence of the dey.

The supreme authority of state is ves^el in the dey, who is an elective
monarch, and his sons never inherit the sovereignty by descent. He is elected
by the divan, and is compelled to accept the reins of government under penalty
of death. He seldom secures his office without tumult and bloodshed, and often
falls by the dagger of an assassin: so that out of six deys that have reigned
since 1700, four of them have been actually murdered, and a fifth resigned to
save his life. The bashaws seldom fail of forming parties among the soldiers
against him, and they make no scruple to assassinate him even in council, and
the strongest candidate then fills his place. An unsuccessful expedition, or
too pacific a conduct, seldom fails to put an end to his life and government.

The way in which his authority is exercised, corresponds with that by which it
has been obtained. When Mr. Bruce, as British resident at Algiers, had occasion
to visit the dey, he says he sometimes found him in his hall of audience, with
his clothes all bespattered with blood like those of a carcass butcher. It is a
very frequent amusement with him, to cause the heads of his subjects to be
struck off in his presence. Mr. Bruce said that he knew of one man who was
exceuted for no greater offense than because a gun-flint was found upon him.
His indictment and trial were very concise: "You rascal, what business have you
with a flint unless you were going to conspire against the state?"

The first deys were elected by the militia; who were then called the divan, or
common council; which was at first composed of 800 militia officers, without
whose concurrence he could do nothing; and upon some urgent occasions, all the
officers, residing in Algiers amounting to 1500, were summoned to assist: but
at present he is perhaps the most despotic prince in the world. He is abridged
of no power whatever in administration, and the divan, though they have assumed
a very pompous title, have little else to do but to ratify his decrees. The
divan is composed of persons entirely of his own election whom he removes at
pleasure. Upon important occasions he sometimes assembles the divan to receive
their advice; but his only motive in this is to screen himself against popular
discontents; for his authority is unlimited, and he may either ratify or reject
their decisions as he pleases. When the Grand Signior is at war with a
Christian power, he generally requires his assistance; but he is only obeyed as
the dey thinks proper.

The dey has a corpse of body-guards called foulacks. This is a very necessary,
though sometimes a fruitless precaution, as any Turkish soldier who has the
courage to murder him, stands an equal chance of becoming his successor.
Experiments of this kind are sometimes made. Since the beginning of the present
century, six private soldiers entered into a conspiracy to kill a dey of one of
the states of Barbary. They gave him a mortal wound in his palace, and in the
midst of a crowd of people. He expired, exclaiming, Has nobody the courage to
kill the villain? One of the conspirators, the intended successor, instantly
ascended the vacant throne, and brandishing his naked scymitar, declared that
he would do justice to all! His five associates went about the hall to enforce
the title of their new sovereign, and none present seemed to give themselves
any disturbance about what had happened. He kept his situation unmolested, for
about ten minutes, till an old veteran unobserved took aim at him with a
musket, and shot him dead. Upon this the five others were immediately murdered.
But what showed the nature of the government in its proper light was the
observation of the new dey, who said, that if the usurper could have held his
place for twenty minutes longer, he would have obtained the sovereignty.

The officer next in power to the dey is the Cassan-aga or Cassan-ajee, the
prime minister of state. He keeps one set of the keys of the treasury, the dey
another, and the aga a third, where they all attend once a month to pay the
soldiers.

The officer next in power is the Aga or general of the Janisaries, who is one
of the oldest officers in the army, and holds his post as all other officers
do, at the pleasure of the dey. During the time the aga enjoys his dignity, the
keys of the metropolis are delivered to him. All military orders are issued in
his name, and the sentence of the dey upon any offending soldier, whether
capital or not, can only he executed in the court of his palace.

The next to the aga in dignity, is the Secretary of State, who registers all
the public acts; and after him the Hojecabei^y, who is a kind of chief justice
to settle disputes among the Moors. This officer, and the two last mentioned,
attend at the door of the dey's palace every morning about daybreak, in order
to kiss his hand.

The next in dignity is the Vekelard, or rather Vikelhadge of the marine, who
is the guardian of the navy, from whom all maritime orders issue. He is seated
beneath an arch near the seaside called the skiff, from which he has a full
view of the transactions in the marine.

Below him sits the Baleck bashaw, who is a kind of bailiff to execute his
commands. He takes charge of the magazines of the marine; all naval articles
are under his inspection, and the keys of all the magazines in the town are
entrusted to his care.

The Hojee of the Rap has the charge of the magazines of wheat in the town;
under him are several inferior hojees who execute his orders. No slave can rise
higher than this office.

The Warden Bashaw is the next inferior officer. He is chief overseer of the
slaves, and takes care that they duly perform their duty. He has charge of the
Bagnio Gallaro, the keys of which are delivered him every night by one of his
under wardens who keeps the doors. He has a number of under wardens, who attend
the slaves at their labor.

Besides these there are 30 chiahs, or chows, a kind of high constables, who
sit next to the aga in the divan, and in the same gallery with him. Out of this
class are generally chosen those who go ambassadors to foreign courts, or who
disperse the dey's orders throughout the realm. Next to them are a number of
baleck-bashaws, or eldest captains, who are promoted to that of chiah bashaws,
according to their seniority. The oldack-bashaws, or lieutenants, are next; who
amount to 400, and are regularly raised to the rank of captains in their turn,
and to other employments in the state, according to their abilities. These by
way of distinction wear a leather strap, hanging down to the middle of their
back. One rule is strickly observed in the rotation of these troops from one
deputy to a higher; viz. the right of seniority; one single infringement of
which would cause an insurrection, and probably cost the dey his life.

The other military officers of note are vekelards, or purveyors of the army;
the peys, who are the four oldest soldiers, and consequently the nearest to
preferment; the foulacks, who are the next in seniority to them, and are part
of the dey's bodyguards, always marching before him when he takes the field,
and distinguished by their carbines and gilt scymitars, with a brass gun on
their caps; the kayts, or Turkish soldiers, each band of whom have the
government of one or more adowars, or itenerant villages, and collect their
taxes for the dey; and the sagiards, or Turkish lancemen, 100 of whom always
attend the army, and watch over the water appointed for it. To these we may add
the beys, or governors of the three great provinces of the realm. All the
abovementioned officers ought to compose the great divan: but only the 30
chiah-bashaws have a right to sit in the gallery next after the dey. The rest
are obliged to stand on the floor of the hall, or council chamger, with their
arms across, and, as much as possible, without motion; neither are they
permitted to enter with their swords on. As for those who have any matters to
transact with the divan, they must stand without, let the weather be ever so
bad; and there they are commonly presented with coffee by some of the inferior
officers, till they are dismissed.

The Lisberos are the dey's spies, who keep watch in different parts of the
town, for the purpose of obtaining information of what is said or transacted.
They are perhaps the most mercenary and inhuman set of beings in existence, and
such is their servility to their sovereign, that they would betray even their
own fathers. When they lodge information against any person, the chows are sent
to arrest the delinquent, and he is punished according to his crime.

The divan, or douwan, is the common council of the nation. It is an elective
body, and is principally composed of 30 chiah-bashaws, with now and then the
mufti and cadi upon some emergencies; and on the election of a dey the whole
soldiery are allowed to come in and give their votes. All the regulations of
state ought to be determined by this assembly, before they pass into a law, or
the dey has power to put them in execution. But, for many years back, the divan
is of so little account that it is only convened out of formality, and to give
assent to what the dey and his favorites have previously concerted. They,
however, arrogate to themselves the whole power of the state, and in their
edicts or national ordinances they assume the pompous title of, "We the great
and small members of the powerful and invincible militia of Algiers and of the
whole kingdom, do ordain," etc.

All causes whether civil or criminal, in which the soldiers are concerned, are
tried in this council; but those between the citizens are decided before one of
the chiah-bashaws, and the plaintiffs and defendants always plead their own
causes without the assistance of attorneys. The evidence of two witnesses is
always required, and he who is cast upon any trial receives a number of blows
with a cudgel, and is compelled besides to comply with the sentence that has
been passed.

While the divan are convened the dey holds a fan of feathers in his hand, and
sits cross-legged, after the manner of tailors, upon a large table about two
feet high, covered with a shaggy carpet. Six of the principal chiahs are seated
in the same manner on his right, and six on his left. The rest of the members
stand at both ends of the table, and form a kind of circle.

The method of gathering votes in this august assembly is perfectly agreeable
to the character of those who compose it. The aga, or the president pro
tempore, first proposes the question; which is immediately repeated with a loud
voice by the chiah-bashaws, and from them echoed again by four officers called
bashaldalas; from these the question is repeated from one member of the divan
to another, with strange contortions, and the most hideous growlings, if it is
not to their liking. From the loudness of this growling noise the aga is left
to guess, as well as he can, whether the majority of the assembly are pleased
or displeased with the question; and from such a preposterous method, it is not
surprising that these assemblies should seldom end without (...) tumult or
disorder. As the whole body of the militia is concerned in the election of a
new dey, it is seldom carried on without blows and bloodshed: but when once the
choice is made, the person elected is saluted with the words Alla Barick, "God
bless and prosper you:" and the new dey usually causes all the officers of the
divan who had opposed his election to be strangled, filling up their places
with those who had been most zealous in promoting it. It is true it must be
confirmed by the Port; but that is seldom refused, as the dispositions of the
people are so well known.

From this account of the election of the deys, it cannot be expected that
their government should be at all secure; and as they arrive at the throne by
tumult and bloodshed they are generally deprived of it by the same means,
scarcely one in ten of them having the good fortune to die a natural death.

CORSAIRS AND COMMERCE.
THE Algerines pay but little attention to agriculture or the improvement of
their country, and their singular genius leads them so much to the profession
or piracy that they neglect all internal resources or advantages that might be
derived from their own country. The corsairs or pirates form each a small
republic, of which the raise or captain is the supreme bashaw; who with the
officers under him, form a kind of divan, in which every matter relative to the
vessels is decided in an arbitrary way. These corsairs are chiefly instrumental
in importing whatever commodities are brought into the kingdom either by way of
merchandise or prizes. These consist chiefly of gold and silver stuffs,
damasks, cloths, spices, tin, iron, plated brass, lead, quicksilver, cordage,
sailcloth, bullets, cochineal, linen, tartar, alum, rice, sugar, soap, cotton
raw and spun, copperas, aloes, brazil and logwood, vermilion, etc. Very few
commodities, however, are exported from this part of the world: the oil, wax,
hides, pulse, and corn produced, being but barely sufficient to supply the
country; though, before the loss of Oran, the merchants have been known to ship
off from one or other the ports of Barbary several thousand tons of corn. The
consumption of oil, though here in great abundance, is likewise so considerable
in this kingdom, that it is seldom permitted to be shipped off for Europe.

The other exports consist chiefly in ostriches' feathers, copper, ruggs, silk
sashes, embroidered handkerchiefs, dates, and Christian slaves. Some
manufactures in silk, cotton, wool, leather, etc. are carried on in this
country, but mostly by the Spaniards settled here, especially about the
metropolis. Carpets are also a manufacture of the country, which, though much
inferior to those of Turkey both in beauty and fineness, are preferred by the
people to lie upon, on account of their being both cheaper and softer. There
are also at Algiers looms for velvet, taffaties, and other wrought silks; and a
coarse sort of linen is likewise made in most parts of the kingdom. The country
furnishes no materials for ship-building. They have neither ropes, tar, sails,
anchors, nor even iron. When they can procure enough of new wood of form the
main timbers of a ship, they supply the rest from the materials of prizes which
they have made, and thus find the secret of producing new and swift sailing
vessels from the ruins of the old. The Algerines are more formidable at sea
than any other nation on the coast of Barbary, and the seafaring people are
held in great esteem for the prizes they capture.

The fleet of this regency at present does not amount to more than ten or
eleven sail of the line, though they were formerly much more powerful, and in
the time of Pinchinin their fleet amounted to 65 sail of the line. At sea they
have been regarded as the most desperate and ferocious set of beings in the
world. But this seems a false prejudice that nations have imbibed, and
according to recent accounts they are inferior in naval tactics to every nation
in Europe. Almost all our late captives concur in the opinion that four
American frigates, well manned and disciplined, would be a force sufficient to
reduce them. Though the Turks are so proud and arrogant, yet it is well known
that they are no warriors. Their greatest display of bravery is at the first
onset, but if they meet with a spirited reception from a competent force their
vanquishment is certain. Even the Moors, though they are an illiterate
barbarous race, are superior warriors to the Turks. In their corsairs the most
servile part of the duty is assigned to the Moors, while the Turks spend their
time in smoking and in indolence, except when they come to an engagement with
an enemy, when they fight with small arms and c^lasses. We are ignorant of the
naval force of Tunis and Tripoli; but it must be evident that in this respect
they are much inferior to the Algerines.

Since the establishment of the independence of North America we owe the
security of our commerce in a great measure to the wars that have existed
between the Algerines, the Portuguese, and the Dutch, either of which nations
is much superior in naval strength, and they have so vigilantly guarded the
entrance of the Mediterranean, that the pirates have seldom been able to cruise
out into the Atlantic. Before the Algerine treaty American vessels seldom
entered into the Mediterranean; and when they did so, they derived their
security either from forged or purchased Mediterranean passports. A British
ship has for her protection a pass written upon a large sheet of parchment,
which has by way of ornament some dashes engraved or drawn with a pen upon the
margin. The Algerines cannot read English, and a captain of a corsair would
most probably forfeit his head were he to carry a British vessel by mistake, as
a prize into the harbor of Algiers. They have therefore adopted a singular
contrivance to discover whether such passes are genuine. They keep a stick
marked with notches corresponding to the shape of those dashes, that are
uniformly delineated on the margin of the parchment. When the pass is produced
the measure is applied: so that it is not difficult for the most bungling
artist to deceive them, who has an original pass before him, and in this manner
it is said that many American vessels have been preserved.

REVENUES.
THE revenues of the dey are extremely fluctuating, and his income rises or
falls in proportion to his opportunities of plundering his subjects, or
foreigners; whence they are variously computed by different authors. Dr. Shaw
says, that the taxes of the whole kingdom produce yearly to the dey no more
than 300,000 dollars; but he supposes that the eighth part of the prizes to
which he is entitled, the property of those persons who die without children,
to whom the dey falls heir, with the presents from foreign nations, fines and
oppressions, joined to the yearly contribution raised by the government, may
amount to as much more. He is besides entitled to all Christian slaves, whose
ransoms are his perquisites, which, with the customs paid by the English,
French and other nations, who are suffered to trade with the Barbary States,
will tend considerably to augment his revenue. Both the dey, and officers under
him, enrich themselves by the most open acts of rapine and fraud; it is
therefore no wonder to find the common people imposing upon one another, and
especially upon strangers, seeing they themselves are impoverished by heavy
taxes and the injustice of those who are in authority.

The dey draws immense revenues from his own subjects, which consist in money,
gold, silver, corn, cattle, and such other articles as may be most useful to
the Turks in Algiers. The prizes which the corsairs take at sea, some years
equal the taxes on the people. It is from hence easy to collect that any
calculation of revenue must be extremely questionable, and it can hardly be
supposed that the dey himself is capable of giving an accurate estimate.

The regencies of Tunis and Tripoli acknowledge some subjection to the dey; but
the only annual tribute they pay him is a cargo of butter and oil.

The Alcaide, with a detachment of Turkish soldiers, collects all taxes within
twenty miles of the city of Algiers. Beyond that distance they dey has three
Turkish armies of about 2000 men each, continually reinforced as emergencies
require, and stationed in different parts of his kingdom, for the purposes of
rapine and extortion. These armies are severally commanded by the bashaws of
Constantina, Biscara and Deetrie, at the places of their respective re^idence.
They are neither actuated by justice nor humanity; but with the assistance of
these Turkish oppressors they not only enforce subjection to the dey, but
compel the Moors to the payment of such taxes as they think proper. This
miserable race of beings, who are the objects of every indignity and oppression
that can be offered to human nature, are hunted like wild beasts among the
mountains: those who discover the least reluctance in paying the assessments of
these bashaws, or fly from the rapacity of their pursuers, are beheaded and all
their property confiscated. If they have the least suspicion that a Moor has
concealed any part of his treasure he is tortured till he makes a complete
discovery, and many of these poor wretches who are unable to make any
disclosure are tortured to death, without being able to satisfy their
tormentors. In this manner all gold, silver and other valuable articles, are
extorted from the inhabitants. Some of them, however, have courage enough
sometimes to attack their oppressors in some of the narrow defiles of the
mountains through which they are obliged to pass, where they frequently make
great slaughter among the Turks; but generally after the first fire they fly
for refuge to the craggy recesses of the mountains. They make these tax
gathering excursions twice a year, and in every expedition they bring away
immense numbers of heads and ears, which are sent to the dey, as an evidence of
the bashaws' exertions in having raised the necessary contributions. The dey
requires that the heads of those who are executed near the city should be sent
in, but of those who are murdered at a distance, he only requires the ears, and
the bearer is rewarded with a certain sum of money for each pair he tenders to
his humane sovereign.

Once in every six months each of these bashaws sends in the califs, their
sons, with about 50 mules laden with money and other valuable articles. They
all en^^^ Algiers within nine days of each other. At th^^^ approach the
cassan-aga and aga go out to meet (...), and they form a procession into the
city.

The bashaws visit the dey once in every three years, with about 150 mules
laden with the spoils of the country, and when they approach the city a grand
procession is formed. The cassan-aga, the aga, the vickelhadge, the chows and
lisberos, with a detachment of five or six hundred Turkish soldiers, go out to
meet them, and they are escorted into the city with drums beating, French horns
playing, and colors flying, attended by an immense concourse of people. The
booty is then taken to the dey's palace, where he distributes a portion to his
favo^ite wife, and a part among the different officers of government.

After their entry into the city they wait impatiently for the Ta^tan, an
elegant robe which it is usual for the dey to send them to signify his
approbation of their conduct; and till they receive this present they are in
the utmost suspense and apprehension; for if it does not arrive the day after
their entry, they know that the loss of their heads will be the consequence.

PUNISHMENTS.
IN this country it is not to be expected that justice will be administered
with any degree of impartiality. The M^^ometan soldiery in particular, are so
much favored, that they are not punished in public, and seldom put to death
for any crime, except rebellion; in which case they are either hanged on an
iron hook, or strangled with a bow-string, which is tied round the neck of the
offender, and drawn different ways by two executioners, with all their
strength, so that he is instantly dispatched. Women guilty of adultery, have a
halter tied about their necks, with the other end fastened to a pole, by which
they are held under water till they are suffocated.

The Christian slaves are liable to a variety of punishments. They are
sometimes burned or rather roasted alive. At other times they are impaled. This
is done by placing the criminal on the end of a sharp stake, which is thrust up
his posteriors close by the backbone, till it appears above his shoulders.
Crucifixion, by nailing the hands and feet to walls, is often practiced.

But the most terrible punishments are those inflicted upon the Jews or
Christians who speak against the Mohammedan religion; in which case they must
either turn Mohammedan, or be impaled alive. If they afterward apostatize, they
are roasted alive, or else thrown down from the top of the city walls, upon
iron hooks. These catch by the jaws, the ribs, or other parts of the body,
according as they happen to fall, and the sufferers have been known to hang in
different positions for several days alive, in the most exquisite torture;
though by accident they are sometimes put out of pain at once, as was the case
with John Gascon the Spanish adventurer, as before related. This terrible
punishment has frequently been inflicted upon slaves, but at present it begins
to be generally disused.

There is a law here, by which any woman convicted of an amorous correspondence
with a Christian, is tied up in a sack and thrown into the sea. Examples of
this kind frequently happen, as the fair sex, in this part of the world, are
remarkably frail.

There is another singular punishment which is inflicted upon a gallows, which
shows the savage disposition of the people. Upon each side of the gallows, near
the upper angle, are fixed two chains of different lengths, to each of which is
fastened a sharp hook. The malefactor ascends the ladder with the executioner,
who thrusts the hook on the shortest chain through the palm of his left hand;
after which he thrusts that on the longest chain through the sole of his right
foot, and in this manner the criminal is left hanging in the most excruciating
torture for the space of three of four days before he expires.

The western Moors still practice the barbarous punishment of sawing the
transgressor asunder; which is mostly inflicted upon persons of distinction for
crimes against the state. For which purpose they prepare two boards of the same
length and breadth with the delinquent, and having tied him between them, they
proceed to the execution by beginning at the head. In this manner did Kardinash
suffer, who was formerly their ambassador to the British court.

For clipping or debasing the public coin, the old Egyptian punishment is still
inflicted here, which is cutting off both the hands of the transgressor.

In smaller crimes, or for those not capital, the offenders are fined, o^ their
pay stopped; and if officers, they are reduced to the station of common
soldiers, from whence they may gradually raise themselves to their former
dignity. The most common punishment for offenses not capital is the bastinado;
and the strokes are given either upon the belly, back, or soles of the feet,
according to the pleasure of the cadi, who appoints the number, which sometimes
amount to 200 to 300, according to the indulgence the offender can obtain
either by bribery or friends; and hence he often dies under this punishment,
for want of advocates sufficiently powerful. The most usual mode of bastinading
is upon the soles of the feet. The criminal is laid on his back or belly, his
feet are raised and tied to a stake, held fast by officers for the purpose, and
in this posture the punishment is inflicted by a number of sticks tied
together, of the thickness of one's little finger. A Moor convicted of
house-breaking, has his right hand cut off and fastened about his neck. He is
then led through they city on an ass, with his face^ turned toward its tail.
No respect is paid to the quality of a person; but a pecuniary mulct will
arrest the course of justice, unless the offender is guilty of the most
flagrant crimes.

The usual punishment for debt is imprisonment, according to the practice of
some nations who pretend to the more enlightened. The debtor is usually
detained in prison till the chows or bailiffs have seized and sold his effects:
If the sale amounts to more than the debt, the surplus is returned to the
debtor; if it falls short, he is nevertheless released, and no future demands
are made upon him.

RELIGION.
THE inhabitants of Algiers, as is well known, are Mahometans. But such is the
depravity of their nature, that they have adopted the very worst parts of the
Mohammedan religion, and seem to have retained only as much of it as
counte^ences their vices.

The Mufti, the Cadi, and the grand Marabout, are the principal ecclesiastics.
The first is the high priest of their religion; the second, the supreme judge
in ecclesiastical causes, and in such civil matters as the government does not
interfere. The third is the chief of an order of saints or hermits. These three
persons are distinguished by the largeness of their turbans. They sit in the
divan a little below the dey, on his right hand.

The Algerines have the most singular veneration for idiots; insomuch that
numbers of their marabouts pretend to be of this order, that they may receive
the greater respect from the people. These marabouts either live sequestered in
caves, or wander bare legged and bare footed from city to city, with ragged
clothes and a staff in their hands, with which they touch ^uch persons as they
think proper, and the person who is touched in this manner regards it as the
most signal favor that can be conferred upon him, because he is persuaded that
his sins are thereby forgiven. These marabouts study magic and astrology; they
undertake to cure all diseases, and to inspire love by numbers, and the powers
of incantation. They lead very austere lives, and generally employ themselves
in counting their beads, or in prayer and meditation. This saintship goes by
succession, and the son is entitled to the same veneration and respect as his
father, provided he can support the same gravity and decorum. Some of them are
reputed to possess the same faculty as their prophet in receiving visions and
conversing with the Deity.

In Algiers there are many mosques, in which these marabouts are buried, who
are venerated as saints, and burning lamps are placed round their sepulchers,
to which people send presents to obtain relief in sickness, or go thither upon
pilgrimage, Those who are subject to the falling sickness are more highly
venerated, because Mahomet was troubled with this disease, and declared that at
that time God by his angel Gabriel revealed to him the most sacred mysteries of
his religion.

All those Algerines who are of sufficient ability deem it an indispensible
duty to go once in their lives upon a pilgrimage to Mecca, and in consequence
of the immense numbers who resort thither from different parts of Turkey, this
city is more thronged than any city in the world.

As the imposition of Mahometanism has been propagated over such extensive
tracts of country in the other three quarters of the globe, and forms so
interesting a particular in the history of mankind, it will not per^aps be
impro^^r to give some account of the great founder of this religion.

Mahomet, or Mohammed, styled, the Impostor, was born about the end of the 6th
century of the Christian era. He came into the world under many disadvantages.
His father Abd'allah was a younger son of Abd'a^^othaleb; and dying very young,
and in his father's life time, left his widow and infant son in very mean
circumstances, his whole substance consisting but of five camels and one
Ethiopean female slave. Abd'almotaleb was therefore obliged to take care of his
grandchild Mahomet; which he not only did during his life, but at his death
enjoined his eldest son Abu Taleb, who was brother to Abd'allah by the same
mother, to provide for him for the future, which he very affectionately did,
and instructed him in the business of a merchant, which he followed; and to
that end he took him into Syria when he was but thirteen years old. He
afterward recommended him to Khadijah, a rich widow, for her factor, in whose
service he behaved himself so well, that by making him her husband she soon
raised him to an equality with the richest in Mecca.

After he began by this advantageous match to live at his ease, he formed the
scheme of establishing a new religion, or, as he expressed it, of replanting
the only true and ancient one professed by Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus,
and all the prophets, by destroying the gross idolatry into which the
generality of his countrymen had fallen, and weeding out the corruptions and
superstitions which the latter Jews and Christians had, as he thought,
introduced into their religion, and reducing it to its primitive purity, which
consisted chiefly in the worship of one God.

Before he made any attempt abroad, he rightly judged that it was necessary for
him to begin with the conversion of his own household. Having therefore retired
with his family, as he had done several times before, to a cave in mount Hara,
he there opened the secret of his mission to his wife Khadijah; and acquainted
her that the angel Gabriel had just before appeared to him, and told him that
he was appointed the apostle of God. Khadijah received the news with great joy:
swearing by him in whose hands her soul was, that she trusted he would be the
prophet of his nation.

Encouraged by so good a beginning, he resolved to proceed, and try for some
time what he could do by private persuasion; not daring to hazard the whole
affair by exposing it too suddenly to the public.

The next person Mahomet applied to was Abu Beer, a man of great authority
among the Koreish, and one whose interest he well knew would be of great
service ^o him; as it soon appeared: for Abu Beer being gained over, prevailed
also upon some of the principal men of Mecca to follow his example, who with a
few more were converted in the space of three years: at the end of which time
Mahomet having, as he hoped, a sufficient interest to support him, made his
mission no longer a secret, but gave out that God had commanded him to
admonished his near relations; and in order to do it with more convenience and
prospect of success, he directed Ali to prepare an entertainment, and invite
the sons and descendants of Abd'almotaleb, intending then to open his mind to
them. This was done, and about 40 of them came; but Abu Laheb, one of his
uncles, making the company break up before Mahomet had an opportunity of
speaking, obliged him to give them a second invitation the next day; and when
they were come, he made the following speech to them; "I know no man in all
Arabia who can offer his kindred a more excellent thing than I now do to you; I
offer you happiness both in this life, and that which is to come; God Almighty
has commanded me to call you unto him: Who, therefore, among you will be
assistant to me herein, and become my brother and my vicegerant?" All of them
declining the matter, Ali at length rose up, and declared he would be his
assistant; and vehemently threatened those who should oppose him. Mahomet upon
this embraced Ali with great demonstrations of affection, and desired all those
who were present to hear and obey him as his deputy; at which all the company
broke out into a great laughter.

This repulse, however, was so far from discouraing Mahomet, that he began to
preach in public to the people, who heard him with some patience till he came
to upbraid them with the idolatry and perverseness of themselves and their
fathers: which so exasperated them, that they declared themselves his enemies;
and would soon have accomplished his ruin had he not been protected by Abu
Taleb. The chief of the Koreish threatened him with an open rupture if he did
not prevail on Mahomet to desist. At this Abu Taleb was so far moved, that he
earnestly dissuaded his nephew from pursuing the affair any farther,
representing the great danger of such an undertaking. But Mahomet was not to be
intimidated, and told his uncle plainly, that if they set the sun against him
on his right hand, and the moon on his left, he would not leave his enterprise.
Abu Taleb seeing him so firmly resolved to proceed, used no further arguments,
but promised to stand by him against all his enemies.

The Koreish, finding they could neither prevail by fair words, nor by menaces,
tried what they could do by force and ill treatment; using Mahomet's followers
so very injuriously, that it was not safe for them to continue at Mecca any
longer; whereupon Mahomet gave leave to such of them as had not friends to
protect them, to seek for refuge elsewhere.

In the sixth year of his mission, Mahomet had the pleasure of seeing his party
strengthened by the conversion of his uncle Hamza, and Omar Ebn al Kattab, who
was at first a violent opposer of the prophet. As persecution generally
advances rather than obstructs the spreading of a religion, Islamism made so
great a progress among the Arab tribes, that the Koreish, to suppress it
effectually if possible, in the seventh year of Mahomet's mission, made a
solemn league against the Hashemites and the family of Abd'almotaleb, engaging
themselves to contract no marriages with any of them; and to give it the
greater sanction, reduced it into writing, and laid it up in the Caaba.

The families in consequence continued at variance for three years; but in the
10th year of his mission Mahomet told his uncle Abu Taleb, that God had
manifestly showed his disapprobation of the league which the Koreish had made
against them, by sending a worm to eat out every word of the instrument except
the name of God. Of this accident Mahomet had probably some private notice: for
Abu Taleb went immediately to the Koreish, and acquainted them with it;
offering, if it proved false, to deliver his nephew up to them; but in case if
were true, he insisted that they ought to lay aside their animosity, and annul
the league they had made against the Hashemites. To this they acquiesced; and
going to inspect the writing, to their great astonishment found it to be as Abu
Taleb had said; and the league was thereupon declared void.

In the same year Abu Taleb died at the age of above fourscore; and about a
month, or, as some write, three days after his death, Mahomet had the
additional mortification to lose his wife, who had so generously made his
fortune. For which reason this year is called the year of mourning.

On the death of these two persons, the Koreish began to be more troublesome
than ever to their prophet, insomuch that he found himself obliged to seek for
shelter at Tayef, where he applied himself to two of the chief of the tribe of
Thakif, who then were the inhabitants of that place; but they received him very
coldly: and he was soon afterward obliged to depart from thence and return to
Mecca, where he put himself under the protection of the Al Motaam Ebn Adi.

This repulse greatly discouraged his followers: but Mahomet notwithstanding
boldly continued to preach to the public assemblies at the pilgrimage, and
gained many proselytes among them.

In the 12th year of his mission Mahomet gave out that he made his
night-journey from Mecca to Jerusalem, and from thence to heaven, so much
spoken of by all that write of him.

This story seemed so ridiculous that several of his followers left him in
consequence, and would probably have ruined the whole design, had not, Abu
Beker vouched for his veracity, and declared, that if Mahomet affirmed it to be
true, he verily believed him. Which happy incident not only retrieved the
prophet's credit, but increased it to such a degree, that he was afterward
able to make his disciples swallow whatever he pleased to impose on them. This
fiction, notwithstanding its extravagance, was one of the most artful
contrivances Mahomet ever devised, and what chiefly contributed to the raising
of his reputation to that great height to which it afterward arrived.

In this year, called by the Mahometans the accepted year, twelve men of
Yathreb or Medina, came to Mecca, and took an oath of fidelity to Mahomet at al
Akaba, a hill on the north of that city; after which Mahomet sent one of his
disciples, named Masab Ebn Omair, home with them, to instruct them more fully
in the grounds and ceremonies of his new religion.

Masab being arrived at Medina, by the assistance of those who had been
formerly converted, gained several proselytes, and Mahometanism was propagated
so rapidly that there was scarce a house wherein there were not some who had
embraced it.

The next year, being the 13th of Mahomet's mission, Masab returned to Mecca,
accompanied by 73 men and two women of Medina, who offered Mahomet their
assistance, which he readily accepted; as he was in the most imminent danger
from his powerful adversaries in Mecca. Out of this number Mahomet chose twelve
persons, who were to have the same authority among them as the twelve apostles
of Christ had among his disciples.

Hitherto Mahomet had propagated his religion by fair means; so that the whole
success of this enterprise, before his flight to Medina, must be attributed
solely to persuasion. For before his second oath of fealty or inauguration, at
al Akaba, he had no permission to use any force at all; nor would he suffer it.
And he was far from allowing it in his followers; but exhorted them to bear
patiently those injuries which were offered them on account of their faith. But
this great passiveness seemed entirely owing to the great superiority of his
opposers for the first twelve years of his mission; for no sooner was he
enabled, by the assistance of those of Medina, to oppose his enemies, than he
proclaimed that God had permitted him and his followers to attack the insidels,
to destroy idolatry, and to establish the true faith by the sword; for he found
by experience, that his designs would otherwise have proceeded very slowly, and
he well knew that innovators, when they depend solely on their own strength,
and can compel, seldom run much risk; from whence, says Machiavel, it follows,
that all the armed prophets have succeeded, and the unarmed ones have failed.

That Mahomet had a right to take up arms for his own-defence, may perhaps be
allowed; but whether he ought afterward to have established his religion by
compulsion is not so easy to determine. Having provided for the security of his
companions as well as his own, by the league offensive and defensive which he
had now concluded with those of Medina, he directed them to repair thither,
which they accordingly did; but he himself, with Abu Beker and Ali staid
behind, having not yet received the divine permission, as he pretended, to
leave Mecca. The Koreish, fearing the consequence of this new alliance, began
to think it absolutely necessary to prevent Mahomet's escape to Medina; and
having held a council thereon, they came to a resolution that he should be
killed: and agreed that a man should be chosen out of every tribe for the
execution of this design; each of whom should have a blow at him with his
sword, that the guilt of his blood might fall equally on all the tribes, to
whose united power the Hashemites were much inferior, and therefore durst not
attempt to revenge their kinsman's death.

This conspiracy was scarcely formed, before it came to Mahomet's knowledge;
and he gave out that it was revealed to him by the angel Gabriel, who had now
ordered him to retire to Medina. Whereupon, to amuse his enemies, he directed
Ali to lie down in his place, and wrap himself up in his green cloak, which he
did; and Mahomet escaped miraculously, as they pretend, to Abu Beker's house,
unperceived by the conspirators, who had already assembled at the prophet's
door. They, in the mean time, looking through the crevice, and seeing Ali, whom
they took to be Mahomet himself asleep, continued watching there till morning,
when Ali arose, and they found themselves deceived.

From Abu Beker's house Mahomet and he went to a cave in mount Thur, to the
south-east of Mecca, where they lay hid three days to avoid the search of their
enemies; which they very narrowly escaped, and not without the assistance of
more miracles than one: for some say that the Koreish were struck with
blindness, so that they could not find the cave; others, that after Mahomet and
his attendants were got in, two pigeons laid their eggs at the entrance, and a
spider covered the mouth of the cave with her web, which made them look no
further. Abu Beker, seeing the prophet in imminent danger, became very
sorrowful; whereupon Mahomet comforted him with these words recorded in the
Koran, Be not grieved, for God is with us. Their enemies being retired, they
left the cave, and set out for Medina, by a by-road; and having fortunately
escaped some who were sent to pursue them, arrived safely at that city; whither
Ali followed them in three days, after he had settled some affairs at Mecca.

The first thing Mahomet did after his arrival at Medina, was to build a temple
for his religious worship, and a house of his own accommodation.

After being securely settled there, and able not only to defend himself
against the insults of his enemies, but to attack them, he began to send out
small parties to make reprisals on the Koreish; the first party consisting of
no more than nine men, who intercepted and plundered a caravan belonging to
that tribe, and in the action took two prisoners. But, what established his
affairs very much, and was the foundation on which he built his succeeding
greatness, was the gaining the battle of Beder, which was fought in the second
year of the Hegira, and is famous in the Mohammedan history. Some reckon no less
than twenty-seven expeditions wherein Mahomet was personally present, in nine
of which he gave battle, besides several other expeditions in which he was not
present. His forces he maintained partly by the contributions of his followers
for this purpose, which he called by the name of zacat or alms, and the paying
of which he very artfully made one main article of his religion; and partly by
ordering a fifth part of the plunder to be brought into the public treasury for
that purpose, in which matter he likewise pretended to act by the divine
direction.

In a few years, by the success of his arms, (notwithstanding he sometimes came
off by the worst)* he considerably raised his credit and power. In the sixth
year of the Hegira he set out with 1400 men to visit the temple of Mecca, not
with any intent of committing hostilities, but in a peaceable manner. However,
when he came to al Hodeibiya, which is situated partly within and partly
without the sacred territory, the Koreish sent to let him know that they would
not permit him to enter Mecca, unless he forced his way; whereupon he called
his troops about him, and they all took a solemn oath of homage to him, and he
resolved to attack the city; but those of Mecca sending Arwa Ebn Masud, prince
of the tribe of Thakif, as their ambassador, to desire peace, a truce was
concluded between them for ten years, by which any person was allowed to enter
into a league either with Mahomet, or with the Koreish, as he thought fit.

It may not be improper, in order to show the inconceivable veneration and
respect the Mahometans by this time had for^ their prophet, to mention the
account which the above mentioned ambassador gave the Koreish of their
behavior, at his return. He said he had been at the courts both of the Roman
emperor and the king of Persia, and never saw any prince so highly respected by
his subjects as Mahomet was by his companions: for, whenever he made the
ablution, in order to say his prayers, they ran and catched the water that he
had used; and whenever he spit they immediately liked it up, and gathered every
hair that fell from him with great superstition.

In the seventh year of the Hegira, Mahomet began to think of propagating his
religion beyond the bounds of Arabia; and sent messengers to the neighboring
princes, with letters to invite them to Mahometanism. Nor was this project
without some success. Khosru Parviz, then king of Persia, received his letter
with great disdain, and tore it in a passion, sending away the messenger very
abruptly: which when Mahomet heard, he said God shall tear his kingdom. And
soon after a messenger came to Mahomet from Badhon king of Yaman, who was a
dependent on the Persians, to acquaint him that he had received orders to send
him to Khosru. Mahomet put off his answer till the next morning, and then told
the messenger it had been revealed to him that night that Khosru was slain by
his son Shiruyeh; adding, that he was well assured his new religion and empire
should rise to as great a height as that of Khosru; and therefore bid him
advise his master to embrace Mahometanism. The messenger being returned, Badhan
in a few days received a letter from Shiruyeh, informing him of his father's
death, ordering him to give the prophet no further disturbance. Whereupon
Badhan and the Persians with him turned Mahometans.

The emperor Hera^lius, as the Arabian historians assure us, received Mahomet's
letter with great respect, laying it on his pillow, and dismissed the bearer
honorably. And some pretend that he would have professed this new faith, had he
not been afraid of losing his crown.

Mahomet wrote to the same effect to the king of Ethiopia, and to Mohawkas,
governor of Egypt, who gave the messenger a very favorable reception, and sent
several valuable presents to Mahomet, and among the rest two beautiful girls,
one of which, named Mary, became a great favorite with him. He also sent
letters of the like purport to several Arab princes: particularly one to al
Hareth Ebn Abi Shamer king of Ghassean, who returning for answer that he would
go to Mahomet himself, the prophet said, May his kingdom perish; another to
Hawdha Ebn Ali, king of Yamana, who was a Christian, and, having some time
before professed Islamism, had lately returned to his former faith; this prince
sent back a very rough answer, upon which Mahomet cursing him, he died soon
after: and a third to al Mondar Ebn Sawha, king of Bahrein, who embraced
Mahometanism, and all the Arabs of that country followed his example.

The eighth year of the Hegira was a very fortunate year to Mahomet. In the
beginning of it, Khaled Ebn al Walid and Amru Ebn al As, both excellent
soldiers, the first of whom afterward conquered Syria and other countries, and
the latter Egypt, became proselytes to Mahometanism. And soon after the prophet
sent 3000 men against the Grecian forces, to revenge the death of one of his
ambassadors, who, being sent to the governor of Bosra on the same errand as
those who went to the abovementioned princes, was slain by an Arab, of the
tribe of Ghassan, at Muta, a town in the territory of Balka in Syria, near
which they encountered. The Grecians being vastly superior in number (for,
including the auxiliary Arabs, they had an army of 100,000 men) the Mahometans
were repulsed in the first attack, and lost successively three of their
generals, viz. Zeid Ebn Haretha Mahomet's freedman, Jaafar the son of Abu
Taleb, and Abdallah Ebn Rawaha: but Khaled Ebn al Walid, succeeding to the
command, overthrew the Greeks with great slaughter, and brought away abundance
of rich spoil; on occasion of which Mahomet gave him the title of Seif min
soyuf Allah, "one of the swords of God."

In this year Mahomet took the city of Mecca, the inhabitants whereof had
broken the truce concluded on two years before. For the tribe of Beker, who
were confederates with the Koreish, attacking those of Khozaah, who were allies
of Mahomet, killed several of them, being supported in the action by a party of
the Koreish themselves. In consequence of this violation, Abu Sosian himself
made a journey ^o Medina on purpose to heal the breach and renew the truce: but
in vain: for Mahomet, glad of this opportunity, refused to see him: whereupon
he applied to Abu Beker and Ali: but they giving him no answer, he was obliged
to return to Mecca as he came.

Mahomet immediately gave orders for preparations to be made, that he might
surprise the Meccans while they were unprovided to receive him: in a little
time he began his march thither; and by the time he came near the city, his
forces were increased to 10,000 men. Those of Mecca, being not in a condition
to defend themselves against so formidable an army, surrendered at discretion,
and Abu So^ian saved his life by turning Mohammedan. About 28 of the idolaters
were killed by a party under the command of Khaled; but this happened contrary
to Mahomet's orders, who, when he entered the town, pardoned all the Koreish on
their submission, except three men and one woman who were put to death, the
rest obtaining pardon on their embracing Mahometanism.

The remainder of this year Mahomet employed in destroying the idols in and
about Mecca, sending several of his generals on expeditions for that purpose,
and to invite the Arabs to Islamism: wherein it is no wonder if they now met
with success.

The next year being the ninth of the Hegira, the Mahometans call the year of
embassies: for the Arabs had been hitherto expecting the issue of the war
between Mahomet and the Koreish: but as soon as that tribe, the principal of
the whole nation, and the genuine descendants of Ishmael, whose prerogatives
none offered to dispute, had submitted, they were satisfied that it was not in
their power to oppose Mahomet; and therefore began to come into him in great
numbers, and to send embassies to make their submission to him, both to Mecca,
while he staid there, and also to Medina, whither he returned this year. Among
the rest, five kings of the tribe of Hamyar professed Mahometanism, and sent
ambassadors to notify the same.

In the tenth year, Ali was sent into Yaman to propagate the Mohammedan faith
there, and, as it is said, converted the whole tribe of Hamdan in one day.
Their example was quickly followed by all the inhabitants of that province,
except only those of Najran, who, being Christians, chose rather to pay tribute.

In the eleventh year Mahomet died; thus was Mahometanism established, and
idolatry rooted out even in Mahomet's time, throughout all Arabia, except only
Yamana, where Moseilama, who set up also for a prophet as Mahomet's competitor,
had a great party, and was not reduced till the kalifat of Abu Beker, and the
Arabs being then united in one faith, and under one prince, found themselves in
a condition of making those conquests, which extended the Mohammedan faith over
so great part of the world.

The mosque which contains Mahomet's tomb, stands nearly in the center of
Medina, which, in consequence, is called the most holy city. It is a
magnificent structure, supported by 400 stately columns, and lighted up with
300 superb lamps of superior luster, which are kept continually burning. It has
a small tower covered with plates of silver, and the floor is covered with a
cloth of gold. It is more visited than any city in the world except Mecca.
Mahomet's coffin stands under the cupola. It has long been the vulgar opinion
that this coffin is made of steel, and suspended in the air by the power of two
magnets, but this notion is erroneous, and has long ago been exploded. The tomb
lies exposed to view from the middle to the bottom of the dome, and is
surrounded by a small wall, which is pierced with windows senced with silver
grates. The inside is adorned with precious stones of immense value, especially
on that part of the cupola which is over the head of the prophet. Over his feet
is placed a golden crescent of exquisite workmanship, and sparkling with the
most costly brilliants. A canopy of the most elegant embroidery is extended
above, and over the coffin is thrown a rich pall of gold and silver tissue,
which are annually sent thither by the bashaw of Egypt, by order of the Grand
Signior, and with the greatest magnificence. It is commonly carried upon the
back of a stately camel, and when the precious gift is taken off, the beast is
no longer used in servile drudgery.

The place where the coffin lies, is supported by pillars of black marble, and
encompassed with a balustrade of silver, hung with such a number of burning
lamps, that the smoke darkens the place. The cupola is hung with white and red
damask, and has these words embroidered upon it in Arabic letters of gold, God
is God, and Mahomet is his prophet. The place is a hundred paces long and
ninety broad; it has two gates and a vaulted nave. The concourse of pilgrims
that resort to this dome is astonishing, and every Mussulman is bound by his
religion to visit this tomb at least once in his life; after which he is for
ever regarded as a saint.

The first article of the Mohammedan religion is that there is no God but the
true God, and Mahomet is his apostle. The Alcoran enjoins the belief of angels;
and teaches that they are pure and subtle bodies, that there is no distinction
of sexes among them, and that they do not propagate their species that they
have various forms and offices; that some adore God in different postures, and
others sing praises to him or intercede for mankind.

Mahomet named to devil Eblis from his despair. He was one of the angels called
Azazil, who are in God's immediate presence, and he fell for refusing to pay
homage to Adam at God's command. The Mahometans believe in a subordinate race
of angels called (...) formed of grosser fire, who propagate their species, are
subject to death and liable to future rewards and punishments.

They believe in no less than 124,000 prophets, some say more, who have been
sent into the world at different periods; among whom were No^h, Abraham, Moses,
Jesus, and M^^met, and that the laws of each of these prophets, successively
abrogated those of their immediate predecessors.

The next article of the Mohammedan faith is the doctrine of the resurrection;
but the time is known to none but God alone. Mahomet conversed with Gabriel
upon this subject; but the angel acknowledged his ignorance of the time. They
believe that the resurrection will extend to all animals, and that angels,
genii, and men will rise, some to eternal happiness and others to eternal
misery.

They believe in paradise, which they imagine to be situated above the seven
heavens, or in the seventh immediately under the throne of God; and to
represent the amenity of the place they say that the earth of it is of the
finest wheat flour, or of the purest musk; that its stones are pearl and
jacinths, the walls of its buildings are embellished with gold and silver, and
that the trunks of all its trees are of pure gold; among which the most
remarkable is the tree Tuba, or the tree of happiness, which stands in
Mahomet's palace, and a branch of it extends to the abode of every true
believer; that the boughs are loaded with the most exquisite fruits of
surprising bigness, and of tastes unknown to mortals; of which if a man desire
to eat the branches will bend down and present him their fruit; that this tree
will supply him with the richest garments of silk; that beasts will burst forth
from the fruit, adorned with the richest trappings ready for true believers to
ride upon, and that this tree is so large that a person mounted on the swi^test
horse, would not be able to gallop from one end of its shade to the other in an
hundred years. Some of the rivers of paradise, they say, flow with the purest
streams of water, some with milk, some with honey, and others with wine, all
which take their rise from the root of the tree of happiness; besides which,
they say, it is watered by infinite numbers of springs and fountains, whose
pebbles are rubies and emeralds, their beds of musk, and their sides of saffron.

But all these glories will be infinitely transcended by the charms of women of
the most ineffable and ravishing beauty, the residents of paradise, whose
society will be a perpetual source of felicity to the faithful. These, the
Alcoran says, are formed of pure musk, and free from all impurities incident to
the sex, of the most exemplary modesty, and secluded from public view in
pavilions of hollow pearl, threescore miles long and as many broad; and that
the inhabitants of paradise may enjoy these pleasures in their fullest extent,
it is said they will be endowed with extraordinary faculties, and flourish in
eternal youth.

CHAP. II.
A short account of the principal cities. The city of ALGIERS. Its origin,
situation, houses, water, public buildings, bagnios, streets, gates, walls,
mole, castles, and fortifications.

THERE are few towns of any consequence, even along the seacoasts; though when
successively under the dominion of Carthage and Rome, it abounded with populous
cities. All the seaport towns, except the metropolis, are thinly peopled;
those in the interior part of the country still more so, and they are inhabited
by a haughty robust people, who trade into Biledulgerid and the country of the
blacks.

BONA is supposed to be the same place with the ancient Hippo, a seaport built
by the ancients. It was formerly the capital of the province of Bona. It lies
on the Mediterranean sea, and there is a coral fishery near it. It is a town of
no importance, and of slender population. In this part of the world, elegant
architecture has, for many centuries, been utterly forgotten or despised. The
buildings of Bona, as every where else, are therefore mean. It is exposed to
the incursions of the Arabs. The name of this people is used by travelers in a
very indefinite manner. Algiers is at the distance of some hundreds of leagues
from Arabia: but as this part of Africa was formerly conquered by that nation,
under the banners of Maho^^^, the name is still applied to a race of tawny and
independent barbarians, who wander in gangs about the country, and unite the
double profession of a shepherd and a robber. Bona was formerly a magnificent
city. Its grandeur is now only to be traced in the ruins of a monastery. It has
a fortress, and a garrison of three hundred Turks, as these banditti choose to
call themselves; a Turk being the most reputable character in that country.
These adventurers however are not Turks, but the sweepings of all nations
blended together. They are commanded by an aga, who is likewise governor of the
town. Bona was taken by Charles V. in his expedition to Tunis, but was not long
after recovered by its former masters.

CONSTANTINA is situated on the river Sef Gomar, forty-eight miles from the
seacoast. It received its present name from that of a princess, the daughter
of the emperor Constantine, to whom it is indebted for its magnificence. The
situation is on a peninsula, difficult of access, except toward the
south-west. It is one mile in circumference, well fortified, and contains many
fragments of ancient architecture. In particular there is a part of noble
bridge; and near it is a large subterraneous aqueduct, which terminates in a
cascade* State criminals are sometimes precipitated down this place, and dashed
to pieces against the rocks at its bottom. A bey resides here, and has under
his command three hundred Turkish horse, and one thousand five hundred Moorish
soldiers. The inhabitants of Constantina are said to be opulent and haughty.
This city was formerly the residence of a race of kings who governed the
province of Constantina, of which it is the metropolis; but in the year 1520,
the whole territory^^ was conquered by Barbarossa, that distinguished tyrant,
who annexed it to the government of Algiers. Some splendid ruins exist in the
vicinity of Constantina. Upon the seacoast, at a small distance from it, are
the traces of a Roman colony, anciently called Colo. It is situated on a high
rock, and has a garrison. Adjoining to it is a French factory, to which the
Moors bring hides, wax, and wool, for sale. At no great distance are the
remains of the ancient city of Stora. It is said that the mountainous part of
this te^^^troy is inhabited by a hardy people, who can raise forty thousand
^ighting men.

GIGERI is situated about fifteen miles from Bona. It contains about fifteen
hundred houses, and the inhabitants are very poor. It is defended by a fort and
a small garrison. The natives of this part of the country are independent and
barbarous. They retire, when circumstances require it, to inaccessible
fastnesses, and set the dey of Algiers at defiance. Ships, when wrecked on this
coast, are plundered, and the crews are treated with the utmost savagenss. In
this respect, however, the natives of the territory of Gigeri cannot differ
much for the worse from the rest of their countrymen; nor is the practice
peculiar to Barbary. Scenes of the same kind are frequently acted with
impunity, on the coast of Cornwall, and other maritime counties of England
There is a story of an English parson, whose congregation, during the time of
divine service, heard of a shipwreck. In spite of his utmost efforts to detain
them, the whole assembly rushed out of the church, in a body, to divide the
plunder.
. The French, in the year 1666, had begun to fortify O^geri. They were driven
from it by the Algerines, with the loss of their cannon, and most of their
effects.

BUGIA was formerly the capital of a kingdom of the same name. It stands at the
mouth of the river Major, or Zinganor, about twenty leagues to the eastward of
Algiers. It is little better than a heap of ruins; a description which applies
to almost every town in that part of the world. It has three castles, two at
the port, and one upon a rock, at a small distance behind them. In the year
1671, a British admiral took or destroyed, in this harbor, nine Algerine ships
of war. It is extremely seldom that an admiral has been charged with such a
laudable commission,

STESSA, or STEFFA, is situated in a fertile valley, sixty miles to the south
of Bugia, and fifteen miles from the sea. It exhibits only the melancholy ruins
of its former magnificence, containing about three hundred miserable families.

TEBEF was formerly a flourishing city, but is at present extremely reduced.
ZAMOURA is in the same condition. It is defended by a fort.

COUCO was once the metropolis of a kingdom (...) the same name. Its sovereigns
were in the habit of forming alliances with the court of Spain. For this reason
the Algerines, in the beginning of the seventeenth century, ravaged the whole
country, and destroyed every town in it. The inhabitants have still supported
their independence, by taking refuge in the mountainous parts of the country,
which are said to be very fertile; but the Algerines prevent them from holding
any intercourse with foreign nations.

BISCARA has a fort and garrison. One of the chief employments of the people
here is to catch and tame lions, tigers, and other beasts of prey, which they
carry for sale to Algiers.

NECANZ is one of the most pleasant towns in Barbary. It is watered by an
agreeable river, whose banks are adorned with a variety of beautiful trees. The
town contains a magnificent mosque and a college for the education of Mohammedan
students.

ORAN is situated about two hundred and fifty miles west of Algiers. It lies
partly on a plain, and partly on the ascent of a hill. It is a mile and half in
circumference and tolerably fortified. But it is unfortunately commanded by
some of the neighboring eminences; so that a garrison of ten or twelve
thousand men is necessary to defend it with success against a skilful enemy. As
the Spanish coasts and merchant ships had suffered much from the corsairs of
this port, Ferdinand king of Spain determined to attempt its reduction. For
this purpose he transported into Africa an army, under the command of his prime
minister cardinal Ximenes, who maintained a correspondence with some of the
people of Oran; and when the Moors sa^lied out to attack the Spanish army,
their perfidious countrymen shut their gates against them, Ximenes killed four
thousand of the barbarians, and set at liberty twenty thousand Christian
slaves. The Algerines, during almost two hundred years, made frequent and
unsuccessful attempts to recover the town. At last, in 1708, they retook it. In
June 1732, a Spanish army was disembarked not far from Oran. The Turkish
commander, his troops, and the inhabitants were seized with a panic, and
abandoned their fortifications without much resistance. The victors found in
the place an hundred and forty-six pieces of cannon, besides mortars, and at
least fifty ship loads of provisions. This latter supply contributed much to
the preservation of their new conquest. Without it they must have run the
greatest hazard of perishing in the midst of success; as a tempest, which
lasted for several days, cut off all intercourse between the army upon shore,
and the fleet at sea. The Moors not long after attacked the Spaniards with
great fury, but were finally repulsed with great slaughter on both sides. The
greatest part of this town has lately been laid in ruins by an earthquake;
since which it has been evacuated by the Spaniards, and left in possession of
the Turks. From these ruins the dey of Algiers has lately exported great
quantities of white stone for the purpose of building his new mosque.

TREMESEN was formerly the capital town of a kingdom of that name. It is
situated ninety miles south-west of Oran, surrounded by a strong wall and well
fortified. It has five gates with drawbridges before them, and a castle
containing handsome barracks for the Janisaries who are in garrison. Tremesen
while a metropolis was a splendid city. It contained one hundred and fifty
mosques, and one hundred and sixty public baths. Since it ceased to be the seat
of an independent government, it has fallen into ruins and desolation. The
mosques are reduced to eight, and its public baths to four. The inhabitants are
extremely indigent.

MOSTAGAN stands fifty miles east of Oran. This town is built in the form of a
theater opening to the sea, and surrounded on every other side with rocks that
hang over it. The ruins of an old Moorish castle stands in a space between the
rocks, and there a strong stone wall toward the port, with a modern built
castle, garrisoned by a number of Turks. The citadel is erected upon the summit
of one of rocks, and commands both city and territory. The haven is commodious,
and the town is well supplied with water. The neighboring mountains are
inhabited by a people called Magarabas, who live in tents, and possess a great
number of flocks. There is a handsome mosque in this town.

TENEZ is situated about one hundred miles to the eastward of Oran, twenty
miles east of Mostagan, and at a league distant from the sea, where it has a
convenient port. There is a castle that was once a royal palace, and in which
the governor resides. The fortifications are strong, the garrison numerous, and
the neighboring territory fertile.

SERCELLI lies between Tenez and Algiers, about twenty-four miles to the
westward of the latter. It is defended by a Turkish garrison, and has a port
which will only admit of small vessels This was anciently a large and populous
city, but is at present a poor and desolate place.

THE CITY OF ALGIERS.
Its Origin.
THE names of the original founders of this city have never been satisfactorily
ascertained. The accounts transmitted to us by historians are involved in much
doubt and uncertainty, and its foundation has been ascribed to various princes
generally of Roman extraction.

The testimony of Strabo, however, seems the most authentic. In his account of
Mauritania Caesariensis he informs us, that there was formerly an ancient city
on the Mediterranean known by the name of Jol, which was founded by Juba the
father of P^olemy, and son of Juba the first king of that name in Mauritania.
It is situated, according to him, about the thirty-seventh degree of north
latitude, and has a small island in the harbor; and as there is no other place
upon the Mediterranean thus circumstanced, it may be presumed that the ancient
city of Jol is the same as that of Algiers.

Juba was taken prisoner in the wars between Pompey and the Caesarian party,
and carried to Rome, where he was ordered to be educated. He soon acquitted
himself so well in his studies, that Augustus not only gave him his liberty,
but married him to the beautiful Silene, the daughter of Mark Anthony and
Cleopatra, and restored him his father's extensive kingdom of Mauritania, which
at that time included the kingdoms of Morocco, Fez, Tremesen, Oran, Tunis,
Algiers and Bugia. As a grateful acknowledgement for so signal a favor, he
gave the city of Jol the name of Jol Caesarea, and as he conferred a new name
upon this city in particular, in order to perpetuate the remembrance of his
noble friend, we may presume it was anciently one of the most important cities
in Mauritania.

Toward the end of the seventh century, the Mohammedan Arabs overran all
Mauritania; and as they seemed to have a particular hatred to the works, as
well as the names of the Romans which they abolished, they called this city
Algezair or rather Al Jezier, or Al-Jezerah, an Arabic word which signifies
belonging to an island, because there was an island before it, which is now
joined to it by a mole, and forms one of the sides of the harbor. The Turks
call is Al Jezeire Al Gazie, i. e. Algiers the warlike, and in their public
letters and records Al Je-Zeire, i. e. the island of the west, to distinguish
it from a city of the same name near the Dardanelles. Doctor Shaw says we
should pronounce it Al-Je-Zeirah.

Situation.
THIS city is the capital of the kingdom of Algiers and probably the I^o^ium of
the ancients. It is situated at the 36th degree 49th minute of North Latitude,
and the 77th degree 37th minute of East Longitude from Philadelphia, and lies
nearly in the same latitude with the southern boundary of Virginia in the
United States. It is built on the declivity of a mountain by the seaside,
facing the north, on a bay of the Mediterranean sea. The houses rise gradually
from the seashore, in the form of an amphitheatre, and terminate nearly in a
point toward the summit of the mountain. The town, with its mosques, castles,
and other public buildings, has a beautiful appearance at a distance when
approaching from the water, and when first discovered looks like the top-sail
of a ship.

Houses.
THE sides of the houses are white, and in consequence at a distance one would
take it to be a place where they bleach linen. The roofs are flat; so that the
people can visit each other, at a considerable distance without going into the
streets. Where the houses are of an unequal height, there is always a
communication by a ladder. As they are open at top it is easy for any one to
enter them, but theft and robbery are scarcely ever known; for if a stranger is
apprehended in a house without having previously sent in his name, he seldom
escapes capital punishment. The tops of the houses are paved with a kind of
brick or tile, and a brick wall is built up about breast high to prevent
persons from falling. Above these, summer houses are erected, and as there are
no squares, gardens, or public walks in the whole city, the inhabitants repair
to these places after their business is finished, for the purpose of
recreation, and the pleasure of seeing their corsairs bring in prizes. One
house rises above another in such a manner that they do not hinder each other's
prospect toward the sea. They are square and built of stone and bricks, with a
square court in the middle; around this court is a double range of galleries,
one above the other, and both supported by columns. The houses are in general
three stories high, and cont^in five or six families; and such is their
singular prediliction for white, that all the outsides and insides of their
houses, mosques and public buildings, are whitewashed once a year. Their number
is computed to be about 15000. Their rooms are paved with square tiles or
bricks of several colors neatly joined together. The inward rooms have no
light but what they receive from the gates, which are large, and reach up to
the ceiling. Those fronting the streets have some windows, in which are fixed
round cross bars of iron four or five inches asunder, but they have no panes of
glass; so that they resemble prisons rather than houses. They have no chimnies,
but make their fires in earthen pots, commonly placed near the door to let out
the smoke, which is apt, however, to sully their walls. Their household
furniture consists of a few earthen pots, platters, spoons, ladles, wooden
trunks, and a mat and two quilts laid on the floor, which serves them for a bed.

Water.
THEY have neither springs nor wells in the whole city; and till the last
century their only supply was rain water, when a Moor who had been driven from
Spain constructed two aqueducts, by which they are now supplied from a spring
which rises out of a hill about 1700 paces from the city, near the place where
Charles V. pitched his tent in 1541. Since which time aqueducts have been
formed from several other springs in the country; and the water is plentifully
conveyed into the city by conduits or pipes under ground, which supply upwards
of 150 fountains; at each of which a bowl is fastened for the use of
passengers. The water which falls to the ground runs off through small holes in
the streets near each fountain, and discharges itself into common sewers,
through which the filth of the city is conveyed away. All these pipes discharge
themselves into the common reservoir at the end of the mole, where the ships
take in their water. Every one takes his turn at these places, except the
Turks, who are first served, and the Jews last, who in this particular are
postponed even to the slaves themselves.

Public Buildings, etc.
THERE are ten great mosques and fifty smaller ones, which have a s^^iking
effect. The dey's new mosque was begun about the year 1790, and stands upon the
ground that was formerly occupied by the Bagnio Cedimo. It is 60 by 40 feet,
three stories high, and supported by pillars of white marble imported from
Genoa. The walls are of white stone from the ruins of Oran, and the American
slaves were generally employed on Friday in carrying them from the mole up to
the mosque.

Near this mosque stands the Logger Bastion, the place of execution for Turks
and Coulolies.

The seraglio of the dey's favorite wife is the most superb edifice in the
city. It is supported by pillars of curious workmanship, embellished in an
elegant style of architecture, and from the ceiling of each apartment is
suspended a clustre of lamps that make a splendid appearance.

The dey's palace is the largest edifice, and stands nearly in the center of
the city. This building is very extensive, and surrounded by two superb
galleries supported by marble pillars.

There are nine fine structures which the Janisaries occupy as cazarees or
barracks, which will hold 600 each; six of which are appropriated to the use of
unmarried Turkish soldiers. Upon the top of these cazarees there are Turkish
soldiers always stationed, who cry out with a loud voice whenever a sail is
discovered at sea.

There are three great colleges or public schools, and a great number of petty
ones for children; four fundies or public inns, such as in Turkey; and above
sixty public bagnios or baths, at a very moderate rate. The women have baths of
their own, where the men dare not come. But they have no caravanseras; but only
a few tippling huts, cook-shops, etc. kept by Christian slaves, for the
accommodation of Greeks, and the poorer ^ort of travelers, where any thing may
be had for money.

There are several tolerable edifices without the walls of the town, which add
to the beauty of the environs. Among these are a great number of Turkish
sepulchers and monuments; as also cells or chapels, dedicated to marabouts, or
reputed saints, which the women go to visit every Friday. One of these
monuments contains six magnificent tombs of a circular figure, which were
erected to the memory of six deys, who were, in the course of a few days,
successively elected and murdered. With respect to the burial of their dead,
the Mahometans discover a degree of delicacy, of which Christians have no
conception. Their graves are never broken up a second time, and the professors
of the Mohammedan religion regard it as an act of the most barbarous sacrilege
to disturb the remains of the dead, by opening their graves at any distance of
time, or upon any pretense whatever. Hence their burial grounds in the
neighborhood of a large city are sometimes ten miles in extent.

Bagnios.
THERE are but two bagnios in the city, built of stone, where the slaves are
lodged, the one called the Bagnio Baleck and the other the Bagnio Gallaro; the
former of which i^ much the largest, and will contain three times as great a
number as the latter. They stand in the main street within about fifty yards of
each other, between Bubazoon and the dey's palace. The lower apartments of
these bagnios are occupied as taverns, which are kept by slaves, who pay the
dey an annual tribute for the privilege, according to the quantity of liquor
they sell. The tavern-keepers frequently manufacture their own wine in these
bagnios, from g^^pes purchased of the Moors. To these places the Turks resort
while the slaves are at labor; but soon as the slaves return the warden bashaw
compels them to retire: for they are not suffered to be with the slaves. Each
apartment is large enough to accommodate about a dozen slaves. The windows are
formed of round cross bars of iron about three or four inches apart, but
without panes of glass. Down the sides of the walls hang heavy chains of long
links fixed to staples, with rings to the ends, in which all disorderly slaves
are confined either by the leg or neck till morning, when they are punished
according to their crimes. These bagnios are under the guardianship of two
corporals, who are chosen from among the strongest and most robust of the
slaves whom they attend at labor.

In the bagnio Gallaro five apartments are occupied by wild beasts, such as
lions, tigers, leopards, etc. intended as presents to nations in alliance with
the dey. Some of these beasts sometimes break loose from their boxes, and they
are not confined again till some one falls a victim to their fury.

Besides these ta^erns there is one called the Rappagee, near the the port of
Bubazoon, and another called the Sanduke of the Luke, intended as a kind of
hospital for lunatics.

The celebrated admiral Pinchinin was the owner of a large bagnio about the
year 1640, which is described as follows. This bagnio was occupied by all such
slaves as were intended for his galleys. It was a spacious building through
which there was a narrow passage or entry, which led into a large vault, that
received only a small portion of light from a grate above; but so insufficient
that in some of the apartments it was necessary to keep lamps burning the whole
day. In the upper parts of the building there was a large square, containing
several galleries two stories high, between which were several apartments, and
a church for Christian slaves large enough to contain 300 persons. The roof was
flat and terraced according to the Spanish mode. This bagnio contained 550
slaves belonging to Pinchinin, whom he allowed three hours every day to provide
for their own subsistence, which they employed in stealing and the practice of
every species of villainy. The articles that had been stolen the preceding day
were sold every morning at public auction in the bagnio, and thus were these
miserable beings supported. But great numbers of them, notwithstanding, starved
to death every year, and a traveller informs us that twenty Englishmen died
here in one winter through mere want.

Streets.
NONE of the streets in Algiers have any names. They generally ascend with the
hill, and are so extremely narrow that two persons can scarcely walk abreast.
The middle part is lower than the sides for the purpose of conveying off the
water more conveniently. The principal street is 1200 paces in length; it runs
north and south from the port of Bubazoon to Babloet, and is not above twelve
feet wide. This street is filled with elegant houses, and the stores of the
principal merchants, in which there are markets for corn, bread, meat, fish,
etc.

When any loaded beasts, such as camels, horses mules or asses pass along, one
is forced to stand up close to the wall to let them pass by; and what is still
worse, the insolence of the Turkish soldiers is such that a Christian, of
whatever rank he may be, must stand close against the wall till they have
passed by; otherwise they would not fail to show their superiority by acts of
violence. It has been thought that the streets were made narrow, in order that
the buildings might afford a shelter against the heat of the sun; but it is
evident that their narrowness is intended to prevent the bad effects of
earthquakes; since the fronts of almost all the houses are supported by
rafters, which extend from one to the other across the streets.

Gates.
THE city has five gates, which are open from daybreak till sunset; after
which no one can enter the city. 1. PORTA PISCOU, or fisher's gate, opens to
the mole on the east; near this gate is the place of rendezvous for fishing
boats. The fisherman sit in rows within the gate, and expose their fish to sale
in large baskets. 2. PORTA NOVA, or Newgate, opens to the south-west, and is
the passage to the imperial castle. 3. BABLOET, or as it is rather pronounced
Bublywhite, stands to the north. 4. BABAZIRA, which opens into the harbor.
This is the gate where the American prisoners were examined when they passed
from the marine. 5. BABAZON, or rather Bubazoon, is due south: but neither this
nor Babloet are of much consideration. Near this gate is the place of execution
for slaves: a platform is built on the top, about fifty feet high, from whence
criminals are precipitated down an oblique wall, in which are fixed ganches or
hooks at short distances, by which the malefactor is either hung or torn to
pieces; and should he escape these, he is sure to be dashed to pieces upon
sharp rocks which lie below.

City Wall.
THE city is surrounded by a wall about a league in circumference, and defended
by square towers and bastions with which they are flanked. The lower part of
the wall is of hewn stone; it is twelve feet thick, thirty feet high on the
land side, and forty feet toward the sea; and contains many houses.

Mole.
THE harbor is the work of immense labor and difficulty. It is about fifteen
feet deep, and extremely dangerous for vessels. It is formed by a mole in the
form of a semicircle, about 500 paces in length, lying north-east and
south-west from the town to a small island or rock called the Lantern; from
which another mole of the same length is extended north and south, for the
purpose of forming a shelter. In the angle of these two moles stands a square
edifice, in the middle of which there is a court with rails, and four fountains
used for ablutions when the hour of prayer is proclaimed. Round the four sides
is a seat covered with a mat, where the admiral and officers of the navy hold
their daily meetings. The castle called Sardinia, and the castle of the Lantern
stand on the mole; the former of which is mounted with two, and the latter with
three tire of guns. The lower tire are 32 pounders; but they are never prepared
for defense upon sudden emergencies, for the lower apartments are so filled
with large quantities of lumber and naval stores, that an enemy, suddenly
running into the harbor, might destroy the city before they could bring their
heavier pieces to play. Along the side of the mole there is a wharf for loading
and unloading ships, and for mooring galleys and other vessels. Beneath the
mole on one side is a stone quay, and on the other side a sandy and rocky bank.
All vessels lying along side the mole are moored about fifteen yards from the
shore, and secured by a number of cables which extend in different directions,
and are lashed fast to cannon planted in the mole. The most boisterous sea is
occasioned by a north-east wind. I^ the time of violent storms a number of the
slaves, particularly sailors, are continually stationed upon the mole, with
Turkish guards, to assist the vessels in case of necessity.

The winter is the most dangerous season for vessels, and whenever a violent
northern or north-east wind blows, they are in danger either of being greatly
damaged or driven on shore.

On the north side of the rock is situated the light-house fort, which is
diligently lighted every night for the security of vessels entering the
harbor. It has three batteries of brass cannon. A little to the southward of
this there is another which defends the entrance of the harbor, and is mounted
with 80 pieces of cannon, 12, 18, and 36 pounders, pointed from north to south;
most of which were taken taken from the Tunisians in 1617. On the north and
south mole there are rope-walks and several magazines, where naval stores, and
the cargoes of captured vessels are deposited.

Castles and Fortifications.
NEAR the city on the land side are four castles, the most considerable of
which is the imperial castle, or the castle of the emperor, which is situated
on an eminence at the distance of half a league to the south south-west, and
commands the whole city, harbor, and the adjacent country. It is so called
because the emperor Charles V. laid the foundation of it in 1541, when he was
besieging the city. But it is only mounted with a few pieces of small cannon,
either through neglect or an apprehension that it might prove destructive to
the city in case it should fall into the hands of an enemy; for it is situated
on so advantageous an eminence that from it the city might soon be battered
into ruins.

The new castle, commonly called the Star, is built in a hepta^onal form, and
situated on an eminence to the south-west. The other two are called Bubazoon
and Bobloet, because they are near and opposite the gates of the same name; but
neither of them are of much consideration.

Besides these there are several along the shore on the west side of the city.
The battery of the mole gate stands upon the east angle of the city, and is
mounted with six pieces of ordnance, one of which has seven cylinders, each of
them three inches in diameter. About half a league to the west south-west of
the harbor is the battery of the fisher's gate, which is defended by a double
tire of cannon, and commands the entrance of the port and the road before it.

The strongest fortifications are at the entrance of the harbor, the situation
of which adds to its security; as the northern winds are generally violent, and
occasion such a sea, that ships would be exposed to great danger, either in the
road or along the shore.

Many former writers, either through ignorance, or a misgrounded prejudice,
have represented all these fortification so impregnable that they bid defiance
to the confederated powers of the Christians. But recent and more accurate
observations have detected the fallacy of this account: and all persons of
observation who have lately resided there, unanimously concur in the opinion,
that three or at most four British fifty-gun ships, provided they met with no
disaster from the elements, would soon batter it about the ears of the
inhabitants from the harbor. A late writer observes, that notwithstanding
their fortifications, the city is so commanded by the adjacent kills on every
side but that of the sea, that from these eminencies, where it is most
vulnerable, a besieging army would soon batter it into a heap of ruins.

It is not a little singular, however, that this city has, for several ages,
braved some of the greatest powers in Christendom: but this must be imputed to
the very injudicious conduct of most of the besiegers, or the violence of
tempests which have proved destructive to so many vessels in their harbor. The
Spaniards in their attempts to reduce Algiers, have been the most material
sufferers; but the pusilanimity of their forces has long been proverbial, and
Spanish discomfiture is no kind of criterion to judge of the defensive powers
of the Algerines.

CHAP. III.
Inhabitants, customs and manners of the city of Algiers.

THE present dey of Algiers was originally a Turkish soldier, and was imported
into Algiers from a place near Smyrna about the year 1786. He was at first
employed about the old dey's palace, and by his artifice he soon after became
so great a court favorite, that he obtained the office of vichelhadge of the
marine. Shortly after this event the cassan-aga, or prime minister, through the
intrigues of the bashaw of Constantina with the old dey, fell a victim to the
bow-string, and Hassan Bashaw, the present dey, was promoted to the vacant
office of cassan-aga, Cedelli, who was a Grecian of an enterprising spirit,
succeeded him in the office of vichelhadge, and the old dey shortly after dying
a natural death, Cedelli, who was Hassan's friend, insisted upon his assuming
the imperial chair. Hassan discovered great reluctance; but Cedelli, who came
armed with a party for the purpose, forced him into the chair and supported him
there. The aga shortly after made his appearance, intending to contest the
right of sovereignty with him, and attempted to assassinate him him in his
seat; but he was seized by the chiahs, who dragged him to the Logger Bastion,
where he received the bow-string, and one of Hassan's friends was appointed aga
in his stead. Hassan afterward^ married the daughter of the former cassan-aga,
who had been executed through the intrigues of the bashaw of Constantina, and
after Hassan was established in the sovereignty, she persuaded him to
bow-string this bashaw; and as she was Hassan's favorite wife her desire was
granted, and the bashaw fell a victim to her resentment.

Cedelli soon after greatly incurred the displeasure of Hassan. The dey had
issued orders that no Dutch vessels should be captured within forty days; but
Cedelli, either through design or inadvertence, gave instructions to the
corsairs to make immediate captures, and several Dutch vessels were brought
into Algiers; which so violently exasperated Hassan, that he demanded in a
vengeful and sarcastic tone, whether he or Cedelli was dey of Algiers? Cedelli
fortunately escaped the bowstring, but was immediately banished from Algiers.

When consuls, foreign agents, and other official characters enter the dey's
palace, they are requested to pull off their shoes, and this ceremony is always
expected. His visitors then approach him with great reverence and kiss his
hand. The dey and his visitors are seated on slabs of marble or slate
projecting from the wall, about three feet high, upon which are placed cushions
elegantly embroidered and fringed with gold, where his visitors sit cross
legged. The dey sits with a large fan of ostriches' feathers in his hand. All
other Turks of distinction receive their visitors in the same manner. While
they are thus seated they are served by slaves with coffee, which is considered
the greatest treat that can be given, and as a particular mark of distinction
conferred upon his visitors.

No person is suffered to enter his palace with d^ggers or any kind of arms;
and when such attempts are made, the dey, through apprehension of as^^sination,
makes the most hideous outcries; the delinquent is seized, and several hundred
strokes of the bastinado are inflicted upon him for the offense.

When the Grand Signior approves of the dey's conduct he sends him an elegant
robe called a Ta^tan to signify his approbation of his conduct in
administration. A present of this nature is highly acceptable, because it is a
great protection to his person, and conciliates the minds of the people in his
favor.

The present dey is about 50 years old. His face is decorated with a long black
beard. He is a man of a venerable aspect and of a mejestic person, being about
six feet high, but rather inclining to leanness. He speaks in a very imperious
and authoritative tone, as is the case with all the Turks. He goes bare legged,
but with slippers on his feet, and cannot be distinguished by his dress from
the rest of the Turks; but only by the greater veneration that is paid him.

When he walks the streets of Algiers his lisberos go before him with clubs in
their hands to clear the way, and as he approaches every person flies with
precipitation into bye-ways; for if any one comes within the reach of their
clubs he is sure to be knocked down and trampled under foot. When he rides out,
even upon a full gallop, these lisberos run before him, and every obstacle must
give way at his approach.

While the American prisoners were in Algiers the dey once condescended to
visit the marine, which was looked upon as the most singular event that ever
occurred; for neither the dey, the cassan-aga, nor aga, are ever known to pay
such visits. As he approached the shore the cannon of the castles, and on the
walls of the city were fired, trumpets sounded, and French horns played from
the marine. He was attended by all the raise or commanders of vessels, who
regarded this visit as the very highest compliment. He gave the warden bashaw a
considerable sum of money to be distributed among the slaves. After examining
the marine he was invited into the skiff of the vichelhadge, where he sat down
with his attendants and after drinking a dish of coffee retired to his palace.

The dey keeps about 30 concubines in his seraglio, who are attended by black
enuchs, but the women are never seen by the slaves. He has but one child, a
daughter about seven years old, who is the greatest favorite imaginable with
the dey. She was engaged to be married to the late vichelhadge of the marine,
who was the dey's relation. But he was either killed or drowned in his voyage
to the Levant, where the dey sent him with a large sum of money, for the
purpose of building a superb mosque at the place of his birth.

From the most authentic accounts it appears that many of the people of
Algiers, and the kingdom in general, are hospitable, humane, and of strict
integrity. A Moor when he finds any articles that have been lost, never
clandestinely appropriates them to his own use, but has them always cried
through the streets that the owner may possess his property again. But in
consequence of the violence that is exercised over them, and their total
subserviency to the rapacious views of their Turkish oppressors, they support
perhaps the most infamous character of any nation in the world. Every spark of
political liberty is totally extinguished, and the government has now attained
to the very acme of the most horrible despotism. As the Turks maintain their
ascendency by the most rigorous measures, their government exhibits a perpetual
scene of jealousy, apprehension and oppression; no man can promise himself a
moment's security either in his person or property; for the power of life and
death is vested in the hands of the dey, which he exercises with impunity; and
whenever he covets the riches of any of his opulent subjects, he orders them to
be dispatched with a bow-string, and falls heir to what they possessed. When
the order of execution is announced to any one, he submits patiently to his
fate, which he has perhaps long anticipated, and as soon as the order is
executed there is an immediate scramble among the servants for the money,
jewels, and other valuable articles which belonged to their master.

According to the common computation, the number of inhabitants in this city is
100,000 Mahometans, 1500 Jews, and 2000 Christian slaves; but no census can be
accurate for any length of time, as thousands are carried off by the plague;
and the number of slaves is still more fluctuating, as they are subject to an
uncertain increase by capture, and a diminution by ransom, or death by the
severity of their toils.

The city of Algiers is visited almost every year by the plague, which
generally begins in May, and continues for the space of three months. When it
commences its visitation no person is at liberty to circulate any report of its
existence, or his life would be in danger; but when the contagion becomes more
prevalent one of the marabouts visits the dey and informs him of its existence;
after which the citizens are at liberty to take every precaution for their
preservation; some retire into the country, but the dey and most of the people
always remain in the city. The first stage of this disorder is a violent fever
which brings on a delirium, but if the patient can survive this fever he has
every assurance of his recovery. The disease, however, operates differently
upon different constitutions; some blead at the mouth, nose, and ears; some
break out in lived spots all over their bodies, and many continue in a state of
coma, or lethargy, till they expire, which (...) generally at the end of the
third day after the disorder seizes them. About one half of those who are
attacked by this disorder recover, but they are notwithstanding always liable
to, though not so susceptible of the infection after they have once been seized
with it.

A most malignant plague raged in Algiers about the year 1787, which carried
off immense numbers of the inhabitants; the disease was so virulent that the
streets were filled with dead bodies, and the mortality so great that a
sufficient number of persons could scarcely be procured to bury them. Slaves
are very frequently seized with this disorder at their labor, and they are
suffered to die upon the ground without any assistance, and with as much
unconcern as if they were beasts* As they have neither medical books, nor men
of learning, it must naturally be supposed they have no physicians. When a
person is seized with any disorder the only mode of cure is to rub the patient,
and at the same time to place his body in a variety of attitudes, and if this
whimsical treatment does not succeed, nothing farther is attempted.

The people of A^giers eat no breakfast, but between six and seven o'clock in
the morning they drink coffee, with which they are served by persons called
coffeegees, whose business it is to supply the (...) every morning with this
article. It is drank without either sugar or cream, in cups and sauc^^ (...)
after the European fashion; but the more opu^^nt citizens use saucers of gold
placed beneath their common ones, for the purpose of cooling their coffee. They
dine at eleven, and drink coffee again at four in the afternoon. In eating they
are seated cross-legged on mats round tables about six inches high, and they
use neither knives nor forks. Their common food is mutton, beef or poultry,
boiled to rags, which they eat with cuzcuz. An Algerine never suffers his wives
to eat with him, but obliges them to serve him till he has finished his meal,
at which time they are permitted to sit down to the table. The Turks in
particular are very tenacious of this precedence, because they regard women as
an inferior order in creation, and consequently not entitled to similar
distinctions.

The use of particular meats is strictly forbidden, and in conformity to the
custom of the eastern nations the Alcoran prohibits the use of swine's flesh,
the eating of blood, and whatever dies of itself, or is strangled, or killed by
a blow, or fall, or by any other beast. In which particulars Mahomet seems to
have adopted the laws of the Jews, by which all these things are forbidden. But
he permitted some ^^ings to be eaten which Moses did not, as camels' (...) in
particular; and upon particular emergencies, when people are in danger of
starving, the Mahotan law suffers them to eat any kind of prohibited ^ood. The
Algerines have such a singular aversion to hogs that they will fly at the sight
of one as quickly as from the most ferocious wild beast; for they deem it a
great contamination even to be touched by a swine, and a hundred well
disciplined hogs would take Algiers much sooner than an army of the very
bravest Spaniards. Many, however, among the less conscientious Moors, who are
not so apprehensive of pollution, bring considerable quantities of pork to
market, which they sell at a very moderate price to the Christian slaves, who
derive a great benefit from this custom; for a full grown hog is frequently
sold for less than a sequin.

The people have so singular an attachment to coffee, or the use of it is so
extremely fashionable, that tradesmen and mechanics while they fit engaged at
their business along the platforms in front of their houses, have their dishes
of coffee before them. The Turks, and especially those who are too
conscientious to make use of spiritous liquors, spend whole days at the coffee
houses in smoking and sipping coffee: and as they devote no part of their time
to reading or the improvement of the mind, they appear entirely divested of all
reflection, and become the mere slaves of their sensual appetites.

The use of coffee first took its origin at Aden in Arabia Felix about the year
1436; from whence it was gradually introduced into Mecca, Medina, Syria, Europe
and other parts of the world. It has been the subject of great contention and
disorders; the use of it has been often proscribed, and as often declared
lawful and allowed: but at present it is universally tolerated.

The drinking of wine, under which name is comprehended all kinds of strong
liquors, is forbidden in the Alcoran in more places than one. Some have
imagined that excess only is therein forbidden, and they allege that the
moderate use of wine is allowed in two passages of the Alcoran; but the more
received opinion is, that the use of strong liqours either in a greater or less
quantity is absolutely unlawful; and though libertines indulge themselves in a
contrary practice, yet the more conscientious, and especially those who have
performed a pilgrimage to Mecca, are so rigid that they deem it unlawful not
only to taste wine, but to make it, or to maintain themselves by the purchase
and sale of that liquor.

They are, however, extravagantly fond of wine, and if one asks them how it
happens that they venture to drink it when it is so strictly forbidden, they
answer that it is with them as with the Christians, whose religion prohibits
drunkenness, and who delight notwithstanding in drinking to excess. The dey was
formerly much addicted to this practice, but since he has been in
administration, he has become very exemplary in this respect, and it is
dangerous for any of his visitors to breath the fumes of wine in his prefence.

It has been a question whether coffee is not impliedly prohibited by the
Alcoran, because it has an intoxicating property; and it is probable that the
former prohibition of it originated from this circumstance alone.

The more conscientious reject the use of Tobacco, not only because it
intoxicates, but in consequence of a traditional saying of their prophet,
which, if it were really his, would prove him a prophet indeed, That in the
latter days there should be men who should bear the name of Mussulmen, but
should not be really such, and that they should smoke a certain weed which
should be called Tobacco.

Opium, though not mentioned in the Alcoran, is esteemed unlawful by the more
rigid Mahometans, because it intoxicates in a more extraordinary manner.

The greatest part of the Turks, however, disregard all this abstinence, and as
these lords of the Algerines are supported at the public expense, their whole
life, is an uninterrupted series of intrigue, debauchery and intoxication:
foibles natural to all those who have no other pursuit in life to engage their
attention. The greatest tyrants in nature are drunken Turkish soldiers, who
seem to be under no restraint either of law or conscience. Great numbers of
these brutes, after having intoxicated themselves, issue forth into the streets
with their tahans, or swords drawn, and every person must fly at their
approach, or they would be in danger of their lives. The Jews in particular are
ever the objects of their indignation, and whenever they discover a Jew they
immediately pursue him, while the poor despised wretch flies with the most
hideous outcries to avoid the outrage of these banditti, who are at liberty to
commit any act of violence upon him, with impunity; for should a Jew make
application for redress of grievances, he would in all probability be
bastinaded for his presumption. So cordially is this race of people despised,
that when one wishes to cast any obloquy, or aspersion of ignominy upon
another, he calls him Judeo or Jew; and even herdsmen in driving their cattle
will call them Judeo, which is the most ignominious term of reproach that can
be given.

The Turks are so proud that, like the American Indians, they deem themselves
superior to all other nations in the world, and the most valiant among the race
of men. They imagine that the world was made for them alone; and consequently
they entertain a perfect contempt for all other nations in general, especially
those who are of a different religion, and they commonly call Christians, dogs.
Some carry this superstitious aversion to so great an excess, that if the first
person they meet in the morning, when they come out of their houses, be a
Christian or Jew, they return home immediately, saying, God preserve us from
the devil.

The Turks are, as is the case with many other people, most extravagantly fond
of money, and they have long been proverbial for their mercenary dispositions.
The consuls of foreign nations find that the Algerines are not to be wrought
upon by remonstrance; they expect something more substantial, and more is to be
gained by flattery, and an artful address, than by the most powerful arguments:
for according to the old adage, Give a Turk money with one hand, and he will
let you pluck his eyes out with the other. This was remarkably verified in the
case of a British consul, who once made application to Ali Bashaw, a late dey,
and urged a complaint against the depredations of the Algerine corsairs,
without the grand preliminary, money. The dey appeared somewhat restless, and
petulantly answered, The Algerines are a set of rogues and I Am their captain:
so that national justice and honesty are great rarities here.

To complete the picture of human depravity, the Turks are guilty of the most
unnatural crimes, which are here regarded with such perfect indifference, that
the poorer sort of people send their children into the streets to seek a
subsistence by the most nefarious prostitution, and neither punishment nor the
least shade of ignominy is the consequence of detection. A Turk will sigh with
as much ardency for a handsome boy, as old Virgil, who appears to have been a
lover of this description, lamented the loss of the beautiful Alexis. Sodomy is
so extremely fashionable among them, and so little are they disposed to keep
this foible a secret, that it is the subject of their most plaintive songs, and
they will spare no pains in procuring the gratification of their infamous love.
We are told of a Turk who being disappointed in one of his ignominious amors,
and being actuated by the most singular impulse, commanded his slave to place a
red hot brand of fire upon his naked arm, which he suffered to be burnt almost
to the bone.

It was customary with former deys to send an annual tribute of a number of
beautiful boys to the Grand Signiors, who are a little tinctured with this
vice; but at present this tribute consists of a number of Arabian horses. We
are credibly informed, that the famous admiral Pinchinin, kept in his house
forty young boys between nine and fifteen years of age, who were never suffered
to go into the streets, lest they might be seduced by the Turks. Pinchinin was
not, however, addicted to this vice; but what discovered the most singular
pride in human nature, was that he kept these boys merely through a principle
of vanity and ostentation.

One virtuous trait in a Turk's character is that he abstains from all profane
swearing, and is never guilty of such blasphemous imprecations as a Christian.
The American slaves were much addicted to this vice, and did not hesitate to
reproach their Turkish overseers with the most opprobrious language; so tha^
several of their overseers soon learnt to swear in English as well as the
Americans themselves.

We ought not, however, to be too precipi^^^e in applauding them for any
superior sanctity in (...) respect, and we may perhaps impute this virtue
^^ther to the genius of their language, than to she dictates of their
conscience.

Their common mode of swearing is Judeo, Jew, pero, dog, and ^ans suffeeda, a
dog without a soul; which la^t is the dey's favorite exclamation in swearing.
All these terms, though they appear to be not so blasphemous as either those of
the French or English, yet they are no doubt equally as immoral; for in the
depravity of their dispositions they are not rivalled by any nation under
heaven.

The Algerines never shake hands when they meet, but the usual mode of
^alutation, is a slight ininclination of the head, and placing both hands upon
their breasts, imploring a thousand blessings, and calling those whom they
salute brethren. When relations or intimate friends meet they embrace and kiss
each other's shoulders. The Turkish good morrow, is Salam mallicum mallix
salama, and the Moorish, washalic, washington, or washingtuma. The great men,
and particularly the dey, are saluted with effendi, or your grace. When they
meet a person of distinction, they advance toward him without bowing, and when
they are within reach, they stoop down, and taking hold of the corner of his
garment, lift it about two feet high, or let it fall according to the quality
of the person. After speaking of their business, they perform the same ceremony
of respect a second time, and then retire.

The Turks, as before observed, have the exclusive privilege of carrying arms,
and they take take great pains to preserve them as bright as possible. Their
musk^t^ are mounted with silver and the heads of their swords with gold. These
swords they call tahans, which they always wear in public in a kind of sash or
girdle, which is tied round their middle. They receive the necessary supplies
of ammunition generally once a month, and the dey uses great caution in the
distribution of this article. His own palace is converted into a magazine,
where all the lead in the city is deposited under his own immediate direction,
and served out in such portions as necessity requires. His magazines of powder
are well secured upon the mole, and all this precaution he uses to prevent any
effectual opposition in case of an insurrection.

The Algerines read no other books but the Alcoran, and the comments of authors
who have written thereon: of course the sphere of their knowledge cannot be
expected to be very extensive. They understand a few of the first principles of
arithmetic, but of geometry, poetry, painting, and the sublimer strains of
music, they have scarcely any conception. All their books are manuscripts, and
there is not a press in all the city. To them the art of printing appears
perfectly contemptible: they repose no kind of confidence in it, and it is
regarded as an imposition rather than a benefit.

Painting is so much despised, that many figures, such as men, women, beasts,
etc. are prohibited, and the sight of them is regarded as a great sin. They
are, however, great admirers of watches and clocks; but if they see them
embellished with any of these figures they cannot refrain from expressing their
anger. They have a similar aversion to bells, and they are so exasperated at
the sound, that the crews of many foreign nations lying in their harbor have
often been beaten for ringing their bells.

Gaming is prohibited in the same passages of the Alcoran which prohibit the
use of wine. The word, as it is there used, signifies a particular mode of
casting lots by arrows according to the practice of the pagan Arabs. But the
commentators agree, that under the name of lots are comprehended all games
whatsoever which are subject to chance or hazard, such as cards, dice, tables,
etc. which are forbidden. All these games are deemed so highly ^^agitious by
the more rigid Mohometans, that they judge the evidence of him who plays at
them of no validity in a court of justice.

The only game that is played in Algiers is chess, and this the Mohammedan
doctors allow, (though others have doubted its legality) because it depends
solely upon art and the skilful management of the pieces used in playing. But
it is never suffered to prevent the regular performance of their devotions, and
persons are never permitted to play for money, or things of the most trifling
value.

In Algiers the men have no intercourse with the women before marriage, and
marriage contracts are entirely negociated by female confidants employed by the
men, who tender the parents a certain sum of money according to their demand,
and the lady is thus purchased as though she were an article of merchandise.
Hence it seldom happens that marriages thus contracted are cemented with love,
and by thus violating the law of nature, they lay a sure foundation for
intrigue, jealousy, and the most boisterous passions. When the marriage
contract is concluded, the principal nuptial ceremony consist in escorting the
lady to her husband. A procession of her female friends and relations is formed
about ten o'clock at night, attended by a number of black female flaves with
burning torches in their hands, and as this procession moves along they make a
strange kind of noise at intervals till they enter the house of the husband,
who for the first time beholds his fair bride, whom his imagination had long
perhaps portrayed as the paragon of all excellence. The company then retires,
and the next day the marks of virginity are triumphantly displayed upon the
tops of their houses, in the presence of the bride's friends and relations
(...) if this evidence of virtue cannot be produced, the husband returns his
wife to her parents, and the marriage is dissolved without further ceremony.

The Algerine women are remarkably amorous, and though all intercourse between
them and the Christians is prohibited under penalty of death, yet it does not
deter them from their attempts to circumvent every Christian slave who comes in
their way, for whom they have a remarkable attachment. Numbers of these frail
fair ones rove the streets every night for the purpose of intrigue, and they
make the first advances with great effrontery and adroitness; but such is the
vigilance of the lisberos, who are highly rewarded for every Christian that is
detected, that those who are venturesome enough to undertake an amorous
correspondence, are every moment in imminent danger of falling a sacrifice to
their gallantry.

Some of the former deys had it in contemplation to incorporate the slaves with
the citizens, and to permit their intermarriages, but the marabouts, who were
apprehensive that such a law would contaminate the purity of Mohammedan blood,
remonstrated so strongly against it, that all intercourse between Christian
slaves and Moorish women was made a capital crime.

The women lead a most indolent life; they commonly amuse themselves with
needle work or embroidery; but are never subjected to domestic drudgery, which
is done by slaves, and whatever their condition may be, they are never engaged
in any employment out of their houses.

In their dress they display neither taste nor judgment, and to an American or
European they appear extremely uncouth. When they visit or appear abroad the
beauty of their persons is entirely concealed. They wear a clumsy kind of
pantaloons, and according to the phrase of the American captives, they resemble
a bundle of rags in motion, rather than women. Like the French ladies they are
very fond of rouge; but instead of their cheeks they have a singular fancy in
painting their foreheads with a stripe of red, which extends above their eye
brows.

Their dishabille, or rather the manner in which they dress in their houses, is
very lascivious. They wear a cap formed of threads of gold interwoven like net
work, round which is tied a fine silk handkerchief, and their hair hangs
confined in a small ^ilken pouch. Their breasts, arms, and legs are naked, but
the rest of their body is covered with a large silk mantle, which only reaches
down to the knees, and is tied about their middle with a kind of sash. Their
slippers are elegantly wrought with gold; and round their wrists and ancles
they wear bracelets set with jewels. They ride concealed in a large square box
covered with a kind of red baize, placed upon asses or mules, and when they
walk the streets they are always veiled. They are extremely cautious of
discovering their faces to strangers,*particularly to Christian slaves, which
they deem so sacred that they would sooner disclose any other part of their
body. An American slave was ordered one day by a Turk, to carry some bottles of
wine from one of the bagnios to his house, and in passing through one of the
apartments he surprised the Turk's lady, whose face was perfectly unveiled. The
disconcerted fair one, overcome with astonishment at the sudden and unexpected
appearance of a slave, immediately covered her face with her pettycoats, and in
so doing disclosed those parts which were much more the object of the
American's risibility.

There is not much difference, as we have before observed, between the dress of
the men and women. The men wear a kind of clumsy trowsers which reach down to
the knees, somewhat resembling the Roman habit. Their legs and arms are bear;
but in cold or wet weather they wear capoots; a kind of great coats which
nearly cover the whole body.

The dress of the marabouts is a kind of green coat, or gown which reaches down
to the knees. The hats of some of them, or rather the covering of their heads,
resembles a large dish formed of linen drawn over a piece of circular
pasteboard: others wear a high cap somewhat in the form of a sugar loaf with a
small part of the top cut off. Some of the marabouts are so highly venerated by
the Moors, that they run and kiss their hands as they p^ss along the streets.
The dey is considered as the grand or supreme marabout of his kingdom.

The dress of the Jews does not differ much from that of the Turks, and the
manner in which they are principally distinguished, consists in the difference
of color, which is black, a distinction they are obliged to observe. There is
also a difference in the form of their turbans, and their slippers which have
such a small portion of upper leather, that they can scarcely keep them on
their feet; for they are not suffered to wear shoes without paying an
exorbitant duty to the dey for the privilege.

They have few funeral ceremonies, and they never change their dress when any
of their relations die. They wash the dead with great care, and burn incense
about them to drive away evil spirits. They have no coffins, but bury them in a
clo^^ open at top and bottom. Before the interment they expose their dead in
the house, upon a bier, under a pall of different colors fringed with gold
according to the quality of the person. The place of interment is without the
walls of the town, and the corpse is attended thither by four, or sometimes
eight carriers. No women ever attend their funerals, but a few days after, the
female relations visit the grave, over which they weep and strew wreaths of
flowers.

The Algerines believe that when the deceased is laid in the ground, two angels
come, and make him get upon his knees to render an account of his actions. If
he has lived a virtuous life, two angels as white as snow, succeed those who
came to examine him, and entertain him with a full account of the pleasures he
is to enjoy in the next world. But if he has lived a vicious life, two angels
as black as jet are commissioned to inflict the most cruel tortures upon him.
One, they say, strikes him into the earth with a club, and the other pulls him
up again with an iron hook; and thus they employ themselves in the infliction
of this cruel punishment* without the least respite till the day of judgment.

In religion it seems that rigorous restrictions are no criterion to judge of
the political integrity of a nation; for though the Algerines are as
punctilious in their religious services as any people whatever, yet they
support the most infamous national character upon earth. They worship no less
than five times in the twenty-four hours; once just before daybreak, again at
one o'clock, and at the time of lazar in the afternoon, and about one o'clock
at night. Just before their worship commences in the day, a small white flag is
raised on all the mosques, as a signal for preparation; the marabouts soon
after ascend the cupola of the mosques, and turning their face to the east and
raising their hands to their heads, cry out with a loud voice; upon which the
male inhabitants wash their hands, face, and feet, and repair to the mosques,
where they arrange themselves in files, with their face turned toward the
east. None of their mosques have pews, but they are paved with marble. Before
each person is placed a straw mat, upon which he kneels. After a short pause of
silence, during which their lips are in continual motion, they all raise their
hands to their heads, then place them on their knees, kneel down on their mats,
and all prostrate their heads upon the floor at the same instant, from which
they immediately rise again into an erect posture. By continual practice they
perform these evolutions with the greatest precision imaginable, and all their
motions correspond more perfectly in point of time than the exercise of the
best disciplined troops. This ceremony continues about fifteen minutes, after
which the worshippers retire to their business.

A fimilar ceremony is observed every day in the marine. The marabout who
officiates there cries out from the top of one of the castles on the mole,
which is the signal for diving, as the Americans facetiously termed it. The
marabouts have nothing to do in this part of religious duty; but they deliver a
discourse every Friday in the mosques, from a kind of rostrum or pulpit. This
discourse, and their other religious ceremonies, continue on that day from
eleven till one o'clock, during which time the gates of the city and the doors
of the bagnios are shut. The people do not attend public worship at night, but
as soon as they hear the voice of the marabout, they rise up and perform their
exercise of devotion in their own apartments. All the Mahometans who reside
near the city, immediately prostrate themselves as soon as they see the flags
raised on the mosques; and besides all this religious servitude these very
righteous people daily employ themselves, like the illiterate among the Roman
Catholics, in counting over their strings of beads.

The dey only attends public worship on Fridays, at a mosque nearly opposite to
his palace, where the principal Turks assemble, and he passes between two files
of his Turkish guards, who are stationed between the door of his palace and
that of the mosque.

After performing the exercise of humility, and hearing a discourse from the
marabout, he retires to his palace where, as he enters, he is sprinkled with
holy water of a fragrant smell.

Every Friday is devoted to public worship, and corresponds to the Jewish
Saturday, or Christian ^unday. Many reasons are given why this day was
appointed for this purpose. Some are of opi^^on that it was the day on which
God finished the works of creation; but Mr. Sale remarks, that Mahomet seems to
have preferred that day principally because it was the day on which the people
were accustomed to assemble long before his time: though such assemblies were
perhaps intended for civil rather than religious purposes. Though the
Mahometans in general do not conceive themselves obligated to keep that day so
holy as the Jews and Christians are bound to keep their Sabbath, (there being
permission in the Alcoran, as is generally supposed Chap. 62.
, that that they may return to their employments or diversions after divine
service is ended,) yet the more devout disapprove of the practice of applying
any part of that day to worldly concerns, and require it to be wholly dedicated
to the purposes of religion. The slaves are neither exempted from labor upon
this, nor any other day of the week; but they are generally allowed one Friday
in every month for the purpose of rest or recreation.

All these religious restrictions are, however, insufficient, and once every
year they are subjected to a rigorous abstinence called Ramadan, or Ramazan,
which generally begins in May, and continues from the time the new moon first
appears till the appearance of the next new moon, during which time they
refrain from women, and neither eat, drink, snuff, nor smoke tobacco, from
daybreak, till sunset. The punctilious observance of this duty is enjoined
under penalty of death, and those who are detected in indulging their
appetites, some say, are compelled to drink melted lead as a punishment for
their crime. About sunset the (...) of the marabout rises, as a signal for
eating, which is looked for with great anxiety; after which they are at liberty
to gratify their appetites as they please. During the time of Ramadan an
universal moroseness prevails among the people, and the dey, who finds it
necessary to conform to this custom, is so much out of humor, that no business
can be transacted with him during the continuance of this fast. The Turks
experience the greatest mortification, because they are abridged of all the
pleasures their sensual natures are capable of enjoying; they are neither
permitted to frequent the bagnios, taverns, nor coffee-houses, and they wait
for the termination of this fast with the greatest impatience. Toward the
expiration of the month the Turks ascend their cazarees every evening, and look
with longing eyes toward the west for the discovery of the new moon, which is
called the moon of Che^val; for at the moment of its appearance the fast is at
an end: the Turks then indulge the most extravagant mirth; they fire a feu de
joye to congratulate its appearance, and to proclaim the end of the fast.

This fast, which is the third point of religious practice, is a duty of so
much importance, that Mahomet used to say, It was the gate of religion, and
that the odor of the mouth of him who fasteth is more grateful to God than
that of musk.

According to the Mohammedan divines there are three degrees of fasting; 1st.
The restraining the belly and other parts of the body from satisfying their
lust. 2d. The restraining the ears, eyes, tongue, hands, ^eet, and others
members from sin. 3d. The fasting of the heart from all worldly cares, and
refraining the thoughts from every thing besides God. The Mahometans are
obliged, by express command of the Alcoran, to fast the whole month of Ramadan,
and in consequence of this abstemious severity, which is a real sin against the
law of nature, an universal gloom overwhelms the minds of the people; they are
extremely vengeful, and more murders and assassinations happen then than at any
other time. The slaves are not compelled to conform to any of their religious
ceremonies or restrictions; but during the time of Ramadan they are subjected
to the infliction of the severest punishments: for such abstinence has a
tendency to excite the most boisterous passions of the human breast.

This fast is succeeded by a Bairam or festival, called the feast of the
breaking of the fast, which continues for three days, during which time the
half starved Turks riot in the opposite extreme of intemperance. They hold a
kind of fair out of town, where they divert themselves with drinking, feasting,
music, bonfires, wrestling, swinging, and feats of horsemanship. The colors of
all nations are displayed in the marine, and during this festival the slaves
are exempted from labor.

But their greatest festival is on the fifth of September, the day of the
nativity of their prophet, which is celebrated with great solemnity. All the
schoolmasters in the city, with their scholars, assemble at the chief mosque,
from which they form a procession through the streets, each carrying a burning
torch in his hand, and singing an eulogy in praise of their great prophet. Two
of the masters carry on their shoulders a superb pyramid ornamented with
wreathes of flowers, and a cross on the top of it, and followed by a band of
(...) and instrumental music after the Turkish manner. All the houses at the
corners of the streets are (...) with tapestry and burning lamps. The cooks of
the divan to the number of 200 also form a procession, each carrying a clean
napkin or towel on his shoulder and a torch in his hand. They parade the
streets two by two, from seven till eleven o'clock in the day, and the ceremony
ends with a hymn in praise of their prophet, performed with instruments of
music before the doors of some of their great men. About midnight torches are
kept burning in every house, because Mahomet was born at that hour. This feast
continues for eight days, during which time any person is at liberty to walk
the streets at night without a lighted torch, which they cannot do at other
times without incurring the penalty of corporal punishment.

There is a singular custom established here, of a religious nature, for the
remission of the punishment of offenders who fly to the mosques for protection,
which is called taking the marabout, and these places are an asylum for every
description of criminals. In the front of every mosque there is suspended a
long chain, which the criminal seizes; whereupon he is generally taken into the
sanctuary and covered with the marabout's colors, from whence he is not
suffered to be taken till his pardon is granted. One of these chains is
suspended in front of the dey's palace, who sometimes pardons offenders who fly
thither for refuge, and another is suspended at the cazarees of the Turks,
where criminals are more inviolably protected.

A quarrel took place not long since between two lads about twelve years of
age, the one a Turk and the other a Moor, as they were passing from the marine
to the city. When they came opposite to the cazarees, the young Turk, taking
the advantage of the Moorish lad, ran up to him with his drawn tahan, and gave
him a wound through the back, of which he instantly expired, and immediately
fled for refuge to the cazarees, where he was protected, till the friends of
the Turkish lad procured his pardon by paying the parents of the deceased a sum
of money as a compensation for their loss.

It is a vulgar opinion among the Algerines, and the Mahometans in general,
that women have no souls; or if they have, that they die like those of the
brutes, and will receive no reward in the next life. This is probably the
reason why they are never suffered to go upon a pilgrimage, or to attend public
worship in their mosques. But whatever may be the vulgar belief* it is evident
that Mahomet had too great a respect for the fair sex, to inculcate such a
doctrine; for there are several passages in the Alcocoran, which expressly
affirm that women in the next life will not only be punished for their evil
deeds, but will be rewarded for their virtues as well as men, and that in this
respect God will make no distinction of sexes.

It is true that the general notion is, that they will not be admitted into the
same abode with the men, because their places will be supplied by paradisiacal
females, but that a separate place of happiness will be assigned to good women,
where they will enjoy every delight in its fullest extent: yet some allege that
a man will have those who were his wives in this world, or at least such of
them as he shall desire. One circumstance with which Mahomet acquainted his
followers, ought to corroborate their belief of the future existence of the
female soul. An old woman desired him to intercede with God for her admission
into paradise; but Mahomet told her that no old women would ever enter that
place; upon which the old woman began to weep immoderately, and Mahomet
explained himself by assuring her, that God would make her young again.

The Alcoran certainly establishes a different belief in the following words:
Verily the Moslems (or Mussulmen) of either sex, and the true believers of
either sex; and the devout men, and the devout women; and the men of veracity
and the women of veracity; and the patient men and the patient women; and the
humble men and the humble women; and the alms-(...) of either sex; and the men
who fast and the women who fast; and the chaste men and the chaste women; and
those of either sex who remember God frequently; for them God has prepared
forgiveness and a great reward Chap. XXXIII. entitled The Confederates.
.

Great numbers of the citizens of Algiers perform a journey to Mecca every
year, and many vessels are employed in transporting them to this holy city for
the purpose of manufacturing them into saints. This pilgrimage is so necessary
a point in practical religion, that according to a tradition of Mahomet, he who
dies without performing it may as well die a Jew or Christian. It is deemed a
duty particucularly incumbent, and the Alcoran expressly enjoins it upon all
those who are of sufficient ability to perform the journey Chap. III. page 48.
.

Mr. Tournefort tells us, that the four places of rendezvous for pilgrims, are
Damas, Cairo, Babylon, and Zebir. At these places they dress themselves in the
sacred habit, which consists of two woolen wrappers, one about the middle to
cover their nakedness, and the other thrown over their shoulders; and in this
dress they enter the sacred territory. While they are thus accoutred they are
neither suffered to hunt nor to fowl, (though they may fish) and this precept
is punctiliously observed.

During his pilgrimage a man must keep a constant guard over all his word and
actions; he must avoid all quarrelling and abusive language; he must refrain
from all obscene discourse and sexual commerce, and con^^^ his whole attention
to the pious work in which he is engaged. All the caravans which come from
different parts of the Mohammedan dominions, concert their measures in such a
manner that they arrive the same day at the hill Arafagd, which is about a
day's journey from Mecca: on this celebrated hill they imagine that the angel
first appeared to their prophet, and in consequence the Mahometans have founded
one of their principal sanctuaries on this spot.

After having killed and distributed some sheep among the poor they proceed to
Mecca, and from thence to Medina to visit the tomb of their prophet, which is
covered with a magnificent pall, annually sent thither by order of the Grand
Signior, which pall is every year cut away by the pilgrims, who esteem the
smallest piece of it as the most invaluable relic. The Grand Signior also sends
500 sequins, an Alcoran covered with gold, several rich carpets, and a great
many pieces of black cloth for hangings, as presents to the mosques at Mecca.
The noblest camel that can be found is chosen to carry this Alcoran, and at his
return he is hung with garlands of flowers, loaded with benedictions,
sumptuously fed, and exempted from labor all the rest of his life.

The pilgrims who have performed the tour of Mecca are held in great veneration
the remainder of their lives; are absolved from every sin, and may commit new
crimes with impunity. Mr. Tournefort says, according to the Mohammedan law they
cannot be put to death; but are reputed incorruptible, irreproachable, and
sanctified from this world. It is reported of some of the Indians, continues
he, that they put out their eyes after they have seen what they call the holy
places of Mecca, pre^ending that after such a sight their eyes ought not to be
polluted by the sight of worldly things.

CHAP. IV.
The Slaves of Algiers.

WHATEVER speculative maniacs or mercenary enthusiasts may allege in favor of
slavery, it is obviously repugnant to the imprescriptible rights of human
nature, and an incontestible evidence of the remains of barbarism in those
nations who sanction so diabolical a principle.

There appear to be three stages in the progress of mankind from savage
rudeness to a state of true refinement. First, a state of canibalism, in which
any tribe or nation of men deal indiscriminate death and destruction among the
rest of their fellow creatures; second, a state of oppression, in which, though
they are exempted from the fangs of savage rapacity, yet they are compelled to
submit to the loss of their liberties; third, the emancipation of mankind, when
the more general diffusion of science will teach them the true principles of
justice and humanity. But the grand science of universal benevolence must be
reserved for future ages; for though many modern nations imagine themselves to
be eminently enlightened, yet they are in fact but just beginning to emerge
from the intermediate state between barbarity and true refinement.

For the practice of slavery we are not to reprobate the Algerines alone; for
the divan of Great Britain are equally reprehensible, and have more eminently
distinguished themselves in this nefarious commerce. From them we have adopted
the execrable practice, and the United States, emphatically called the land of
liberty, swarm with those semi-barbarians who enthral their fellow creatures
without the least remorse. With what countenance then can we reproach a set of
barbarians, who have only retorted our own acts upon ourselves in making
reprisals upon our citizens? For it is manifest to the world, that we are
equally culpable, and in whatever terms of opprobrium we may execrate the
piratic disposition of the Africans, yet all our recriminations will recoil
upon ourselves.

Having premised thus much, we shall now proceed to make a few observations
upon the slaves of Algi^rs, and as a preliminary we shall detail the
particulars of the capture of the ship President, that the public may have some
idea of these banditti of the ocean.

On the 23d of October 1793, about nine o'clock in the morning, the crew of the
ship President, when they were only within a few hours sail of Cadiz, the port
to which they were bound, discovered an armed xebeck of 16 guns* under Spanish
colors, bearing down upon them; upon which the American flag was immediately
hoisted, and as a very light breeze prevailed it was a considerable time before
the two vessels were within hail of each other. When the xebeck came within
gunshot of the American vessel she hauled down her Spanish colors, hoisted
the bloody flag, and fired a platoon of small arms. This circumstance threw
them into the most violent consternation imaginable, and their first aim was to
secure their clothes, money, and other articles. The pirates soon after hoisted
out their boat, into which about thirty armed men entered, who rowed with great
violence toward the American vessel, which they boarded with pistols and drawn
swords, and with the greatest fury and shouting imaginable, in order to impress
the minds of the Americans with a conviction of their great intrepidity in a
naval attack.

As soon as they were on deck, they fell foul of the crew like so many ravenous
wolves that had broken loose from their kennel; they tore off their (...), and
the most furious scramble succeeded (...) can be conceived; every one being
anxious to appropriate most of the booty to himself. One American assures us
that he was seized by no less than four Algerines at once, who threw him down
and stripped him naked; but what evinced the most singular ferocity in human
nature, in scrambling for his clothes those furies came to blows among
themselves; the moment one had torn off his coat, another attempted to wrest it
from him, and a bustle ensued between them. The two that had seized his
trowsers tore them in pieces in their struggle for possession, and a scene of
similar rapacity was acted toward every other American. Every part of the
vessel was rifle^^ chests were broken open, and they seized every article that
could be carried off with an avaricious fury, characteristic of no other nation
under heaven.

After they had loaded themselves with plunder, they thrust all the American
crew into their boat, in this naked and insulted condition, at the point of
their cutlasses; those who discovered any reluctance, were knocked down and
kicked into the boat, where they were trampled under foot by this clan of
desparadoes. They were taken on board the xebeck, and another boat's crew
immediately returned to take charge of the American vessel. Here they had the
pleasure of being introduced to Raise Mahomet, the commander of the xebeck, an
emaciated loathsome figure, who sat smoking his pipe upon a sheep-skin, and
sipping a dish of coffee which was placed before him. It is not a little
surprising, that such a miserable object should be appointed to the command of
a corsair, and this circumstance must evince the futility of their naval
policy. He appeared to be upwards of a hundred years old, and through age and
impotency, was scarcely able to support a tottering frame. His hands were
palsied; his eyes sunk deep in his head, and through weakness dripped a
continual flow of tears. From his ghastly visage flowed a beard of the
brightest silver, except where it was sullied by the drippings of his coffee,
and an involuntary discharge of spittle. His voice was scarcely audible, and in
his exterior he resembled some old hermit, that had been immured a hundred
ye^^^*

Such was the commander of the Algerine xebeck. When they had feasted their
curiosity upon this very venerable figure, their attention was turned to their
new quarters, which they surveyed with new astonishment. Nearly a hundred and
fifty Algerines were crowded into this vessel, and whatever description can be
drawn by the most fertile imagination, of lice, fleas, filth and stench, was
here nearly realised. Their decks were never suffered to be swept or washed,
and they seemed to preserve their dirt with a kind of veneration. These
delicate planks they substituted for tables, upon which they ate their
provisions, which consisted of olives, bread, vinegar and oil. When they had
finished their meals, they threw part of the fragments overboard, and the
remainder was trampled into the general mass of filth.

As soon as they had secured their prize, the most extravagant mirth and
boisterous exultation succeeded; to commemorate the event a sheep was
sacrificed, and after besmearing the sides of the vessel with its blood, they
concluded the ceremony by devouring its flesh.

After the termination of this festivity, the prisoners were arraigned on deck,
and a second stripping took place. Those who had not been deprived of all their
clothes at first, were now stripped naked, and in their stead they were
accommodated with a few dirty rags, which had been the refuse of this lousy
crew. By Mahomet's order, the clothes of the captives were all thrown together
in a heap, and sold at public vendue.

The most laborious part of duty in the xebeck was then assigned to the
Americans, and the pirates, solely intent upon securing their prize,
immediately stood in for the streights without looking out for further plunder.
In their passage the Americans could not help remarking the continual dread and
apprehension of these free-booters, who were continually looking out with their
glasses, and like a band of thieves who were conscious of the villainy of their
profession, they trembled with the most visible consternation at every sail
that hove in sight. The Americans represent these pirates as the most
undisciplined and pusilanimous sailors in the world, and insist that the most
inconsiderate naval force with British discipline, is sufficient to defeat or
keep any of them at bay. The greatest display of Algerine bravery, is at the
commencement of an engagement, when they endeavor to intimidate their enemies,
like the American savages, with the most horrible yells.

In the afternoon of the same day the President was captured they fell in with
a British frigate, when the Americans were ordered below, and on the second day
with a British merchantman, with whom they had before been in company without
the streights, whom they requested to publish an account of their capture at
the first port they touched.

On their passage up the streights they had it frequently in contemplation to
rise upon the Algerine crew, to disarm those upon watch, and to confine the
rest below by securing the hatches; but their small number deterred them from
such an attempt.

On the 30th of October they arrived at Algiers, and were taken ashore to the
vichelhadge's skiff, where they were attended by the dey's scrivan or head
clerk, who conducted them to the palace. Here they were lodged in an outer
court, which had been occupied as a kind of black-smith's shop, where they were
refreshed with a mess of cuzcuz, and after reposing the first night upon some
sacks of straw, they were ordered to the Bagnio Baleck.

When the crews of the American vessels were captured they were entirely
stripped of their dress, and presented in exchange with a parcel of old rags
and a pair of coarse trowsers, which only reached down to their knees. They
labored for several months in this wretched apparel, which was not sufficient
to protect them from the rays of a scorching sun, till at length each captive
was accommodated by the United States with a hat and a suit of blue clothes,
which were sent them from Alicant by Mr. Montgomery the American consul; a
provision which they received annually while they continued in this miserable
abode. They were also furnished with money, which had been deposited by Mr.
Humphreys at Alicant, and transmitted to the Swedish consul in Algiers, upon
whom the American captains drew every month for the sums that were severally
allotted to the captives. To each private there was granted an allowance of 3
dollars and 75 cents, to each mate 6 dollars, and to each captain 8 dollars per
month -- a very unjust distinction, especially as the privates were subjected
to much greater hardships than either the captains or mates. By this allowance
their situation was rendered less deplorable, and they were enabled to procure
a supper of meat every night, instead of the black bread and oil with which
they were daily furnished. It is observable that no nation made any provision
for their enslaved countrymen but the United States, and in consequence the
Turks gave them the appellation of cavalero, or gentlemen.

Every public slave wore an iron ring round his ancle, which was always an
evidence of his belonging to the public, and no Turk could molest or even
insult a slave of this description with impunity; but this badge was not
conferred upon the private slaves. To this ring was fastened a chain with long
links, which was bound round their body to prevent their escape whenever
foreign vessels lay is the harbor.

When there is a public ransom of slaves there is no difference in the price
between the officers and men, but in private ransoms the dey demands 4000
dollars for each captain and mate, and 2000 dollars for every private. All
slaves who die after the conclusion of treaties are paid for, and the dey
exacted the usual sums for all the American captives who died after the 5th of
September 1796.

When a corsair takes a prize he carries the captives directly to the palace of
the dey, where the European consuls assemble, to see if any of the prisoners
belong to their respective nations, who are at peace with Algiers. In that case
they reclaim them, provided they were only passengers; but if they have served
on board of the ships of any people at war with this regency, they cannot be
discharged without payment of the full ransom.

The deys formerly had their choice only of every eighth slave, and they
generally chose the masters, surgeons, carpenters, and the most useful hands
belonging to the several prizes, besides persons of quality, for whom they
expected a large ransom; but at present it seems that the dey is entitled to
any number he thinks proper to make choice of, who are generally employed in
menial offices about the palace. He also is entitled to all captured vessels
and their cargoes, and the raise or captains generally receive, besides their
monthly pay, a certain premium, or extra-compensation from the dey for every
captured vessel.

The remainder of the slaves are sent into the service of the public; but if
they can procure a little mo^^ey from their friends, or borrow any of the Jews
upon exorbitant interest, they are permitted to keep ^^^verns, they paying to
the dey a certain duty in proportion to the wine they sell; and notwithstanding
this interest and duty, many have managed so well as to raise money enough to
purchase their liberty, and to carry away a quantity besides: for they are
allowed a property in what they get. To these taverns resort Turks, Moors, and
Christians promiscuously. But a Mussulman would not keep one of these taverns
for the world himself, and consequently they are kept by Christians and Jews.
And a tavern-keeper, though a slave, is empowered to strip any of his guests,
even the Turks themselves, if they refuse to pay their reckoning; and herein he
is protected by the dey himself.

The condition of those who are slaves to private individuals, depends very
much upon the disposition of their master, and the slaves' own conduct. Some of
them fare better in Algiers, than ever they did in their own countries, and if
they are good for any thing, are entertained rather as companions than
servants; though by far the greater number are barbarous masters, who treat
their slaves with great cruelty, and persons of quality, or those who are
suspected to be in affluent circumstances, experience a greater severity of
treatment, in order that they may be compelled to redeem themselves at an
extraordinary price. Their female slaves are sent to the dey's seraglio, where
they are made concubines, or subjected to domestic services, unless a
considerable ransom is expected for them; or if young they are sold to such as
want them for these purposes.

They neither force nor tempt any of the Christian slaves to change their
religion; as it is not their interest that they should be made converts: for in
that case they lose the benefit of their ransoms. The Christians who are free,
generally fare worse than the slaves; because the imperious Turks make it a
point to insult and abuse them; but they dare not abuse the slaves, because
their masters will resent it and demand satisfaction.

Those slaves who are sold into the country are subjected to peculiar
hardships. They are compelled to carry all kinds of burdens to market, and if
they do not render a satisfactory account of the articles entrusted to their
care, they are sure to be beaten. Some of these slaves go naked in the fields
where they tend cattle, drag ploughs, and do all other kinds of the most
servile drudgery.

Many were formerly consigned to the galleys chained by one leg, and fed on
water and hard biscuit, and beaten with a large cow-skin. When they were on
shore they were locked up at night in dungeons called Masmora, where they lay
^n the bare earth. But at present no slaves are confined to the galleys,
because they have so frequently made their escape, or murdered their
commanders, and set themselves at liberty.

While the Americans were enslaved in Algiers, the most exaggerated accounts
were circulated respecting the severity of their afflictions. It was reported
that the tongues of some were cut out, that others were emasculated; and
captain Lawrence of the Hull Packet, who is said to have obtained his
information at Cadiz, informs us that the Americans had their heads shaved
close, and were not permitted to wear any kind of covering on their heads.
Their calamities were indeed without a parallel, but the above accounts were
entirely unfounded.

The greatest severity of their toils consisted in the removal of the fragments
of rocks from Bubly-white, as before mentioned Page 75.
. It has been found by repeated experiments, that the larger these stones, the
more effectually they resist the impetuosity of the sea, and consequently the
great art of the slaves who are appointed to blow them, consists in boring them
in such a manner that an explosion of gunpowder will sever the largest masses
possible: so that the holes which are bored into the rock sometimes extend to
the depth of twenty feet. Round these huge fragments they lash ropes, or rather
cables, of sufficient strength to drag them, and three or four hundred slaves,
and sometimes a greater number, are engaged in rolling one of these stones upon
a carette, or strong four wheel carriage, in order to transport it to the mole.

The Turks make the most astonishing noise, not only in the removal of these
stones, but in moving any weight whatever which requires a number of hands.
They seem to imagine that the greater their vociferation, the greater will be
the exertions of the slaves or laborers; it is immaterial how slowly the work
proceeds, provided there is sufficient noise, and the cry of Hyomoly, or heave
away, is often heard at the distance of more than a league.

When they have launched these unweildy masses of stone upon the carriages, the
cables are fixed to them, and four files of slaves are compelled, like so many
beasts of burden, to drag them from the mountain to the city. In their passage
they are obliged to ascend a steep hill, where their utmost efforts are
sometimes insufficient to drag the enormous weight. The severity of their toils
in attaining the summit of this hill is sometimes inconceivable; the sun pours
down the most intolerable heat upon them, and they are drenched in sweat, and
involved in clouds of dust which attend them in their passage. Thus many become
perfectly exhausted with their toils; and to complete the climax of their
sufferings, their brutal overseers, the wardens, scourge them for the least
remissness with the most savage severity.

When they have ascended the hill, it is necessary to reverse the ropes, and
their utmost efforts are then required to prevent the carette from descending
the hill with the greatest rapidity. Thus, after great labor and difficulty,
they transport these stones to the wharf, where the pantoons are moored, which
is about a league from the mountain, and a stone's throw from the walls of the
city. Here they deposit them, and by means of pulleys and a kind of sleds,
which descend upon gr^a^^d pieces of timber, they discharge them into the
pantoons, which convey them to the mole.

These pantoons are necessary, because the narrowness of the streets renders
the passage of these huge stones through the city impracticable. They are a
species of large flat bottomed boats, that cover about as much water as a
seventy-four gun ship. They have low gunwhales, and long pieces of timber are
nailed across the deck, to prevent the great pressure of the stones
from-injuring the planks. They generally carry three or four of these huge
stones at a load, with a number of smaller ones, which are distributed over
different parts of the deck.

The pantoons are navigated by casting anchors and cables ahead. Fifty or
sixty slaves are necessary to man them, and by means of these cables and
anchors, which are continually carried ahead as occasion requires, they warp
the pantoons to the mole. In their passage they are sometimes subjected to
great danger from sudden squalls of wind, which either blow them out to sea, or
wreck them on the shore. When this happens the greatest bustle imaginable
ensues, and the clamor of the Turks is such, that one would suppose that the
city itself was upon the verge of destruction. The stones are discharged at the
mole by means of a skyler, which is a kind of platform resembling the leaf of a
table, projecting from the stern of the pantoon, and lowered by pulleys; upon
this the stones are placed in succession, by means of crowbars, and deposited
upon such parts of the mole as the sea makes the greatest impression.

Thus have the foolish Turks continued this fruitless labor for upwards of 250
years, without having conceived the project of forming a wall of sufficient
strength to defend the mole from the violence, of the waves; but it is said
that the dey has now such a project in contemplation, which he intends shortly
to put in execution.

The impetuosity of the sea has a continual tendency to bury these stones in
the sand. An eastern, or as it is called a Levant wind will roll such a heavy
sea into the harbor, that in the course of three or four days, the labor of a
whole season will be swept away. The sea at such times breaks with great
violence over the mole, and even the walls of the magazines are sometimes
nearly destroyed.

Two pantoons and two carettes, with a gang of slaves to each of them, are
employed in transporting these stones, and the carettes generally bring each
two loads in a day.

Many slaves are employed at other places in the country. Some at a mountain
called Bubazoon, some at the gardens of different consuls, who reside in the
country, and others in the marine. But on Fridays they are ordered to
Bublywhite, where the vickelhadge and warden bashaws attend, and where, on
those days, there is a general collection of all the slaves.

After they finish their daily* labor they all repair to town to their common
lodgings the bagnios, where they are locked up every night, and prohibited all
intercourse with the citizens. The private slaves are not, however, deprived of
this privilege, and they are permitted to walk the streets at night, provided
they conform to the common custom of carrying a light with them, without which
every person is subject to being arrested by the watchmen of the city, and to
chastisement by the bastinado.

In the bagnios, the chief aim of the slaves is to drown the reflection of
their abject situation by the most cheerful conversation. They have few
amusements here to divert their attention; but some of them, when they have
leisure, follow their professions, in order to obtain a little money. The
principal study of the more humorous Americans, was to dispel the gloom of
their companions and to excite one another to laughter by ludicrous and
satirical remarks upon their situation. Some of them played upon the violin,
and frequently after the toils of the day, they would divert themselves all
night by dancing, drinking and singing, in order to banish the reflection of
slavery. In their frolics they were often very clamorous, and interrupted the
repose of the whole bagnio; at which time some of the slaves would often lodge
complaints against them, and the corporal would then put an end to the frolic
by ordering them to retire to rest.

The slaves are let out of the bagnios at an early hour in the morning, and
they proceed to their labor with pensive hearts and reluctant steps. When they
are employed in the marine they repair every morning ^o a place near the gate
of Babazira, which opens to the harbor, where they are paraded in files along
the platforms of the houses on each side of the street. Here they wait the
arrival of the vickelhadge, who soon makes his appearance, and as he passes
between them they are compelled to pull off their hats as a token of respect.
After him a procession of the slaves is immediately formed, and as he takes his
seat in the skiff, a trumpet is sounded from the marine. They are then embarked
on board the Baleck boats, which are kept for the purpose, and transported to
the cruisers which are stationed in different parts of the harbor.

The business of the marine is the least laborious employment of the slaves.
But even here they are subjected at times to great hardships, and especially
when an expedition is on foot; at which time they are compelled to labor all
night in making the necessary preparations for the cruise. The shore is
illuminated with lamps, and Turkish guards are stationed on the mole, and in
other parts, to prevent their escape.

Their food consists of bread, oil, and vinegar. To each person is distributed
two small loaves of about half a pound each, and a jill of oil a day. These
articles are brought to Bublywhite by muleteers, who are daily employed in
carrying provisions to the slaves. The bread is of the most indifferent
quality, and is made of unboulted meal, ground in mills in the city which are
turned by horses. The general employment of the mul^teers, besides carrying
provisions to the slaves, is conveying lime into the city from the lime-kilns
in the country, for the purposes of building and white-washing houses.

All the fick among the slaves who are incapable of labor are sent to the
hospital opposite to the Bagnio Baleck, which will accommodate about fifty.
This institution is supported at the expense of the Spanish nation, and is
under the superintendance of a physician and (...) Spanish priests. Here they
are well accomm^^^ted with beds, and furnished with provisions in ^^eef and
bread, and medicines are prescribed according to their several complaints. The
upper apartments of this hospital are occupied by such as have the plague, and
the lower parts by those who are confined with other disorders. It is said that
the support of this hospital costs the Spanish nation 40,000 dollars per annum,
which are annualy transmitted to Algiers for this benevolent purpose.

It has been reported that the officers and men of the American vessels were
treated with equal severity; but this was a mistake. Neither the American
captains nor mates were subjected to the labor of the common slaves; but were
employed in the sail-loft in making sails, or in boring pumps for vessels, and
sometimes after lazar in the afternoon they were sent to assist in unloading
the pantoons. This was the general routine of business assigned to the captains
and mates of vessels; but the sailors were indiscriminately empolyed in every
kind of labor.

The Americans supported the best characters of any slaves in Algiers, and the
most of them could always obtain credit in the bagnios for wine and other
liquors; a favor that was conferred upon neither Turks nor Moors, of whom the
tavern-keepers were always obliged to be extremely watchful; otherwise they
would frequently steal away without pa^ing for the liquors they drank.

The most turbulent of the slaves are the Spaniards, who frequently quarrel at
night, and fight in the bagnios with drawn daggers; at which times the
corporals settle disturbances among them with a short rope with a knot in the
end, or confine them in chains till morning.

Those slaves who have incurred the penalty of death are generally executed at
the fountain in front of the dey's palace, where the Turkish executioners
attend. The criminal is made to kneel down; one of the Turks then touches him
on the back part of the head, and as he turns round to see what was the cause,
the other with a sharp sword at the same instant severs his head from his
shoulders. After the execution, the blood is washed through the ground into the
common sewer, and his body is buried in the sand near the sea shore, as they
are not suffered the privilege of a Mohammedan burial.

The American captives generally bore their sufferings with great fortitude,
and conducted themselves with superior decorum; but notwithstanding, frequent
and severe punishments were inflicted upon them for the most trivial
remissness, and a thousand inadvertencies, which are natural to those who have
been accustomed to the enjoyment of their liberties.

Soon after their arrival in Algiers they drew up an affecting address to
Colonel Humphreys, who resided at Madrid, which was duly answered; and as this
correspondence details some particulars that have not been hitherto enumerated,
we shall close the present chapter with its insertion.

Letter from sundry captive American captains, to colonel David Humphreys,
dated Algiers, December 29th, 1793.
WE the subscribers, in behalf of ourselves and brother sufferers, at present
captives in this city of human misery, return you our sincere thanks for your
communications of the 29th ult. and for the provision you have been pleased to
allow us, in order to alleviate somewhat our sufferings in our present
situation.

We have drawn up and signed two petitions, one to the Senate, the other to the
House of Representatives, and we shall esteem it among the many favors you have
rendered us, that you will please to forward these petitions to their
respective address, so that no time may be loft; but that they be laid before
the Representives of our country, hoping that the United States will fully
provide funds for extricating from captivity, and restore us to our country,
families, friends and connections.

We have perused with sentiments of satisfaction and approbation, your memorial
to the regency of Algiers, and have to observe, that its contents fully
coincide with our sentiments on this business, which we trust in the Almighty,
will terminate to the honor and interest of our common country, notwithstanding
the insinuations, (of others in this quarter) to the prejudice of the United
States.

We trust, and hope, that the United States will adopt such effectual plans, in
order to prevent any more of our brethren sharing our unhappy fate, which
unavoidably must happen, if some speedy and effectual means are not immediately
put in execution, as we understand the Portuguese truce with this regency was
agreed on for one year.

What damps our spirits in some degree, is, that we are informed that the
plague, that fatal and tremendous disorder, has given its awful alarm in the
country adjacent. And as your unfortunate countrymen are confined during the
night time in the slave-prisons, with six hundred captives of other nations,
from our crowded situation we must be exposed to this contagious disorder;
which necessitates the subscribers to entreat you, sir, that in this case,
those our friends, and of influence in this regency, will be authorized by you,
and our honored countrymen Mr. Carmichael and Mr. Short, to have a house taken
for the residence of the American masters and mates, and, if possible, the
mariners, to shield them from the threatening storm of mortality and danger.

We make no doubt, but in case of Almighty's wrath visiting this city of
iniquity, but the dey and regency would acquiesce to the proposed plan of
humanity, which would be establishing an example for the general welfare of
mankind -- and would to posterity be recorded to the immortal honor of the
United States.

The same time, honored sir, and friend, be you assured, for your consolation,
that we the American captives, in this city of bondage, will bear our
sufferings with fortitude and resignation, as becoming a race of men endowed
with superior souls in adversity.

We are much indebted to Monsieur Skjoldebrand, and brother, his Swedish
majesty's agents, in this city, for their humanity, and attention to the
American captives; and feel ourselves particularly obliged to you for
recommending us to the good offices of consuls Skjoldebrand, and Mr. Mace, whom
you mention to us as friends.

With sentiments of gratitude and the most profound respect, we remain,

Honored sir, Your most obedient most humble servants, The subscribers, in
behalf of ourselves and brother sufferers. Richard O'Brien, 1785 Isaac
Stephens, 1785 James Tailor, 1793 William Wallace, 1793 Samuel Calder, 1793
William Penrose 1793 Timothy Newman 1793 Moses Morse, 1793 Joseph Ingraham,
1793 Michael Smith, 1793 William Furnass, 1793 John Burnham, 1793 John M'Shane,
1793


TO DAVID HUMPHREYS, Esquire. etc.
To captain O'Brien, and the other captains, etc. of the United States, now
prisoners in Algiers.
Madrid, January 12th, 1794.
I HAVE been favored by the receipt of your joint letter, dated 29th December,
and, as I am about to set out immediately for Lisbon, I shall be able to do
little more than assure you, that your memorials to the Senate and House of
Representatives of the United States shall be forwarded to them in the earliest
and safest manner possible.

Having communicated to Mr. Carmichael, and Mr. Short, your apprehension that
the plague may again be introduced to Algiers, from the adjacent countries,
where it is already said to prevail; we have not hesitated to concur with you
in sentiment, that in case of that dreadful event, it might be useful for you
to have a house hired in the country; in order to endeavor, by all human
precautions, to prevent your falling victims to that terrible disorder.
Whereupon Mr. Robert Montgomery, consul of the United States at Alicant, has
been empowered, in case that dreadful event should happen, to furnish
sufficient money to pay for the hire of a house, in the manner, and for the
purpose you propose. This provisional arrangement to continue in force, until
Mr. Montgomery shall receive ulterior instructions from the government of the
United States, for continuing or suspending the same.

I entreat you will be persuaded, my dear and unfortunate countrymen, that I
receive with great satisfaction the marks of your approbation, of the honest,
but ineffectual efforts I have made in your favor. Would to Heaven, they had
been as successful as they were disinterested and sincere.

I have only to repeat, that you may at all times, and on all occasions, count
upon the sympathetic regard And esteem of

your real friend, And affectionate fellow-citizen, D. HUMPHREYS.
P. S. Though I have repeatedly remarked, that it may perhaps, (for particular
reasons) be inexpedient for me to keep up a regular correspondence with you;
yet it is proper I should add, that I shall always be glad to hear from you;
and that it may be particularly interesting to the government of our country,
to receive at the earliest possible period, all intelligence of importance. I
shall therefore always be ready to communicate such intelligence, until some
nearer, and better channel of communication can be established.



CHAP. V.
Particular anecdotes, occurrences and occasional remarks, which throw some
additional light upon the history, customs and manners of the Algerines.

IT is impossible for any slave to escape from Algiers by land: for if he is
discovered by the Moors he is apprehended and brought back to the city, where
they receive a reward for their trouble. Those that can get on board of French
or English ships obtain their liberties, and no demand is made upon the
commanders to deliver them up: and whe^^ ever foreign vessels lie in the harbor
all the sla^^^ who work in the marine are obliged to wear heavy* chains. But by
water many slaves have escaped, and the Algerines have in consequence become so
extremely vigilant, that an escape is now almost impracticable.

Attempt of fifteen slaves to escape.
WHILE the American captives were employed at Bublywhite, a scheme was
concerted between fifteen Genoese, Portuguese, and Neapolitan slaves, to make
their escape in one of the boats that attend the pantoons. This plot had been
in agitation for several weeks, and in the mean time they had prepared
themselves with weapons of defense, and all necessary articles for their
voyage. About nine o'clock one very hot morning, in the time of Ramadan, while
Montenegro, the warden of the pantoon, lay asleep, these fifteen slaves, at the
word of command, jumped into the boat which lay along side the pantoon, and put
to sea in an instant. The portezero, or boatswain of the pantoon, immediately
waked Montenegro, who was astonished beyond measure when he saw them under
weigh, and hallowed to them in a furious tone of voice to return; upon which
one of the Portuguese waved his naked sword in defiance, the crew gave three
loud huzzas, and rowed with all their might toward the Spanish coast.
Montenegro, dreading the consequences of this piece of neglect, immediately
fled for safety to the grand mosque which stands out of the town.

As soon as the news was announced to the dey, he ordered men to be stationed
on eminences with spy-glasses, to observe the course they steered; and in the
mean time a Spanish built boat, a swift runner (which is always moored near the
seat of the vichelhadge of the marine to be in readiness upon any particular
emergency) was instantly ordered to pursue them. The vichelhadge manned the
boat with a double ^ire of piscorees, or rowers, and that they might pursue
them with greater expedition he embarked himself. By this time the fugitives
were out of sight; but the piscorees steered directly toward that part of the
ocean where they had disappeared. The vichelhadge, in order to encourage them
to greater exertions, frequently threw them money, and they rowed with such
expedition that about noon they overtook the fugitives, who had so completely
exhausted themselves in their endeavors to escape, that they were scarcely
able to move their oars. As soon as their pursuers had overtaken them they
submitted without the least resistance, and passively resigned themselves to
the fury of their pursuers, who beat them most unmercifully, and after securing
them in chains, brought them back to the city, where they arrived about four
o'clock in he afternoon. They were immediately taken before the dey, who
ordered two of the principals to be executed: and they were accordingly led to
the fountain in front of the dey's palace, where they kneeled down, and one of
the dey's guards with a sharp tahan severed their heads from their body.

The dey observed, that had a greater number embarked he would not have
pretended to have sent in pursuit of them; but he naturally concluded that so
small a number would soon exhaust themselves.

One is apt naturally to arraign their impolicy in taking their departure with
so small a number. But we ought to reflect upon the great difficulty and danger
of detection in affecting an escape of this nature; for the very air of the
country seems to inspire the principles of villainy and deception; scarcely any
scheme can be concerted without detection, and there are many miscreants of
slaves here, who would feel no remorse whatever in betraying their most
intimate friends for a trifling reward.

Montenegro, though he was pardoned after this event, yet he forfeited the
royal favor, and was turned out of office; and the pantoons have since been so
well guarded that an escape is totally impracticable.

Spanish desperado.
THE most turbulent and intemperate slaves in Algiers are the Spaniards, who go
armed with a dagger or long knife, and a quarrel with each other generally
terminates in assassination.

About ten o'clock one night, after the American slaves had retired to rest in
the Bagnio Gallaro, a violent quarrel happened between two Spaniards, which
made such an uproar in the bagnio, that one of the corporals, or guardians,
entered the room with a lantern in his hand, in order to quell the disturbance;
and with his rope he fell to beating the Spaniards most unmercifully. One of
them, who did not relish the chastisement very well, desired him to desist, and
threatened to stab him if he persisted in beating him; which so irritated the
corporal, that he deal^ out his blows more furiously than ever. The Spaniard
grown outrageous with such treatment, drew his dagger and gave him four or five
wounds, of which he instantly expired. By this time the second corporal entered
the apartment, and as he entered, the desperate Spaniard rushed furiously upon
him, and in attempting to ward off the blow he received a wound in his arm;
upon which he immediately retreated, and locked himself up in one of the
taverns that stand near the bagnio.

The two Spaniards were now at liberty to decide their dispute, and they rushed
furiously upon each other with their knives; but the least desperate of the
two, after receiving several wounds, made his escape, and left his antagonist
complete master of the bagnio. He now paraded the passage flourishing his
dagger, and threatening vengeance to any one who should attempt to molest him.
Of five or six hundred slaves and others who resided there not one durst
approach him, and he maintained the undisputed possession of the passage. At
this juncture the corporal of the Bagnio Baleck, who was then confined by
fickness in the Spanish hospital, hallowed to him from his window, and ordered
him to put up his knife and go to bed; but the Spaniard, who was little
disposed to obey him, challenged him with the most abusive language to come
down.

In the mean time intelligence of this uproar was communicated to the warden of
the bagnio, who imagined that the whole body of slaves had broken loose, and he
instantly came armed and attended by a number of men in order to quell the
disturbance. When he arrived at the entrance into the bagnio, he commanded the
Spaniard instantly to submit; but he was now grown more furious than ever, and
defied the whole city. During this conference one of his own countrymen stole
softly up behind him and knocked him down with a club. A number of men then
instantly seized him, and chained him to the wall, where he remained till the
next morning, when he was taken before the dey, where he received sentence of
death, and in a few minutes after his head was chopped off in front of the
dey's palace.

Detection of a Neapolitan slave.
A certain Neapolitan who kept a tavern in the suburbs of the city, was one
afternoon discovered in company with a Mo^rish woman, by some of the dey's
lisberos or spies who chanced to ride that way. Several other slaves who
happened to be present at the same time fortunately made their escape; but the
Neapolitan stood motionless with the sudden surprise. The lisberos dismounted
and instantly seized both him and the woman, and immediately carried them
before the dey, who instantly passed sentence of death pon them both. Through
the intercession of some powerful friends the sentence passed upon the
Neapolitan was remitted; but he totally forfeited the privilege of keeping a
tavern, and after receiving 500 strokes upon different parts of his body, he
was consigned to hard labor among the common slaves. But the woman, after
receiving sentence, was immediately carried to the seaside by two
executioners, who tied a large bomb-shell round one of her legs, and threw her
into she sea some distance from the shore, in the presence of the American
captives, who were then employed in the marine. She made the most lamentable
cries, and earnestly entreated her executioners to permit her to take leave of
her children; but they were deaf to her entreaties.

Some days after, by some means or other, the bomb-shell was disengaged from
her leg, and she floated upon the surface of the water. But the Algerines were
greatly astonished when they found she had not been eaten by the fish; a
circumstance so extremely singular, that the superstitious Algerines regarded
it as miraculous, and she was in consequence made a marabout, and ever after
venerated with a kind of religious enthusiasm.

The dey's indignation was so much excited at the atrocity of this interview,
that he decreed that in future all those slaves and Moorish women who (...)
detected together, should be chained with their backs to each other and burnt.

Disappointment of the American slaves.
SOME time in 1795 an English cutter from Gibralter arrived in Algiers with a
number of small pieces of brass cannon, which were purchased by the dey and
carried to his palace. The American slaves, who were then at work in the
marine, soon recognized several persons of their former acquaintance among the
crew of the cutter. A general intimacy took place, and they sympathised so
feelingly for the distress of the Americans, that a scheme was concerted among
them to effect their deliverance from this region of misery. The crew deeply
interested themselves in the accomplishment of this project, and communicated
their intentions to their captain, who perfectly approved of their plan, and
promised every assistance in his power to facilitate their design.

The scheme devised between the parties was as follows: The Americans were to
take the advantage of the first fair wind, and in either going to, or returning
from their labor in the marine, according as the wind should favor them, they
were to take possession of the Baleck boats which transported them, and
instantly row themselves on board the cutter; which being a very swift sailing
vessel would soon have wasted them beyond the reach of their pursuers. The
instant they had boarded the cutter they were to take possession of her
apparently by force, and the British crew were to affect a resistance, that the
dey might entertain no suspicion of their being privy to the conspiracy.

The cutter was in consequence put into complete order, and the necessary
instructions were given that they might cast off and get under weigh in an
instant.

No slaves were perhaps ever presented with so favorable an opportunity as the
present. But the most singular occurrence imaginable frustrated the whole
scheme, when it was upon the point of execution.

The captain of the cutter, on the day of their intended departure, went up to
one of the bagnios in the city, were he accidentally fell in company with two
renegado Irishmen of his acquaintance, who were dressed, as usual, in the
Turkish habit. It was resolved of course to celebrate this unexpected interview
with a course of wine; and they drank till they were all pretty well
intoxicated. While they were in this animated mood they found themselves so
well disposed for adventures, that one of the renegados made a proposal to
visit some of the Algerine courtezans, which was immediately acceded to, and
our captain, who was not, as may well be supposed, over burdened with
circumspection, was conducted to a Moorish brothel in the upper parts of the
city, where these Irishmen had previously formed an acquaintance. Some of the
lisberos, who had suspected their designs, secretly watched their motions, and
discovered the retreat of our frolicsome adventurers. Soon after their entry
these lisberos rushed into the brothel, and surprised our amorous captain and
his friends in the height of their mirth. He was instantly seized and carried
before the dey, who sentenced him to immediate execution; but as he was
preparing to receive the reward of his folly, the British consul, who had
received intelligence of the event, interceded in his behalf, and the dey
remitted the sentence, upon condition that he instantly took his departure from
Algiers. In consequence he was escorted on board his cutter, which was ordered
immediately out of the harbor, and she was not even permitted to remain to
take in the least ballast.

Thus was this scheme most completely defeated by this trivial incident, and
the hopes of the Americans entirely frustrated. When they saw the departure of
the cutter, and were informed of the captain's folly, they were thrown into a
state of inconceivable despondency. The most fortunate breeze imaginable
prevailed when they returned from the marine; but instead of triumphing in the
possession of their liberties, they were obliged to retire to the gloomy cells
of the bagnio, to indulge at leisure the poignancy of their reflections.

These renegados were afterward banished to Tunis; not because their
intercourse with the Moorish women was prohibited, (for the renegados are not
deprived of this privilege) but because they had been accessory to an
infraction of the law. All the Turks were greatly rejoiced at this event,
because these turbulent Irishmen were a terror to all that frequented the
bagnios and other public places in the city.

Flight of the Spanish consul.
A FEW weeks before the American captives left Algiers the Spanish consul fled
to Spain, through apprehension of assassination by the Spanish slaves. A
certain muleteer called Yohan, or Spanish John, who was employed in carrying
provisions from the city to the slaves at Bublywhite, quarrelled with the clerk
A scrivan, or clerk, always attends the slaves at their labor, and calls over
their names at Bublywhite every night and morning.
, in consequence of his neglect in the payment of a sum of money which he had
lent the clerk. After much intemperate and abusive language the Spaniard drew
his knife and murdered him; and after perpetrating this act he fled to the
city, determined, as his case was desperate, to be revenged upon the Spanish
consul and priests who superintended the hospital, as he imagined them to be
the cause of the detention of the Spanish slaves in Algiers Many of these
slaves are criminals, who fly from justice in their own country and become
voluntary slaves in Algiers, whom the Spanish government refuses to ransom; a
matter which they impute entirely to the influence of their consul and priests,
whom they suppose to be (...) of their slavery, and consequently they are ever
(...) objects of their hatred and indignation.
.

As soon as he arrived in town he went to the consul's house, who fortunately
happened to be absent, and from thence to the hospital, with an intention to
murder the head priest, who, he was informed, was likewise absent; upon which
he went into one of the upper apartments, where he found one of the under
priests, whom he stabbed in four or five places; and then retired to the Bagnio
Gallaro, where he paraded one of the apartments with his bloody knife in a
posture of defense.

In the mean time intelligence of the death of the clerk was sent to town;
whereupon the warden bashaw sent one of the chief corporals, to arrest the
murderer, and to take him before the dey. The corporal enquired his motive in
committing such an atrocious act, and Yohan answered him very composedly, that
his intent was to be revenged upon the consul and priests. He alleged, that
they had appropriated, to their own private purposes, all the moneys that had
been sent by the Spanish government for the ransom of the Spaniards, and he
assured the corporal that a conspiracy was formed among the slaves, and though
he had failed, yet others would succeed in accomplishing their destruction.

After this conversation Yohan surrendered himself a prisoner. The corporal
bound him, and immediately conducted him to the palace, where he was executed.

When the existence of this cons^^^cy was announced to the con^ul and priests,
they embarked on board a Spanish vessel in great consternation, and set sail
from Algiers in the height of the plague. After attempting to land to
Carthagena, Alicant, and other ports of Spain, where they were refused
admission, they steered for the island of Minorca, where the consul was under
the necessity of being landed naked upon a rock. Provisions and clothing were
furnished him, and a hut was built for his accommodation, where he was confined
till he was adjudged to be out of danger of the infection; after which he
arrived in Spain, and thus escaped the meditated vengeance of the Spanish
slaves. After beating about the Mediterranean for nearly a month, the priests
arrived at Marseilles about two weeks after the Americans, where they were
obliged to perform quarantine for the space of a hundred days.

The Renegado.
THE renegados are such as relinquish their own religion and embrace the
Mohammedan faith; but this class of men have of late betrayed so much villainy,
that they sustain the most indifferent characters of any people in Algiers.
This will not appear singular when we consider that these apostates are
generally such as fly from justice in their own country; and beside^ none but
the most abandoned Christian would renounce his religion for the fallacy of
Mahometanism.

It is no wonder then that so little encouragement should be given to this
order of men, and though the Mohammedan (...) formerly considered the conversion
of Christian slaves as the most meritorious act, yet at present it is perhaps
totally impracticable for a slave to change his religion; because in such cases
the government is deprived both of their labor and the benefit of their ransom.

The present number of renegados in Algiers is very small. After they are
initiated into the profession of their new faith, they officiate in the
cazarees in the capacity of Turkish soldiers, and are admitted to the
participation of similar privileges; but they are prohibited from leaving the
kingdom of Algiers under penalty of death, and are never delivered up upon the
demand of their nation.

Not long since the captain of a French privaseer; that had brought an English
prize into Algiers, flogged a Genoese sailor who had been shipped on board the
privateer. The Genoese in consequence was so exasperated, that he made his
escape from the vessel, and went to one of the marabouts with a determination
to abjure his religion; to whom he so exaggerated the cruelty of the
Christians, that he was admitted into the order of the prophet.

After a residence of two months in Algiers an English frigate arrived with
dispatches to the British consul, and our renegado, disgusted with his new
situation, and regretting the renunciation of his religion, was resolved to
escape on board the frigate. Accordingly he went down to the shore one morning
as soon as the port of the marine was opened, and stripped himself in order to
swim on board. But after several ineffectual attempts, he was discovered by the
vichelhadge of the marine, with only his handkerchief tied round his middle. He
was immediately seized and brought into the skiff, where he received several
hundred blows; after which he was conducted to the palace where he was executed.

The Muleteer.
THE cellars, or lower apartments of the houses of the Algerines are converted
into stables, and their horses and mules pass through the same door with the
family; and the same arrangements are made even in the palace, where foreign
consuls, agents, visitors, horses, mules, asses and the dey of Algiers, all
(...) through the same door, where two Turkish soldiers are stationed with a
red staff to guard the passage.

Not long before the arrival of the Americans in Algiers, a certain Spanish
muleteer, who had been employed in carrying out the dirt of the palace in
baskets suspended at each side of the mule, by some means or other had procured
a key, by which he could unlock the door of the treasury, which is kept in the
palace, where immense quantities of gold and silver are deposited. Whenever
this muleteer was ordered to the palace he filled the lower part of his baskets
with money, and covered it with dirt; and thus passed undetected, till he had
by this means ransomed several of his countrymen. But his avarice increased
with his riches; and one day when (...) was sent to remove the rubbish of the
palace, he stole into the treasury as usual, and carried away such an enormous
load, that in passing through the court the great weight of the gold bursted
the bottom of one of the baskets, and the money ^ell down upon the marble
pavement with such a noise that it resounded through all he palace. A great
uproar ensued, and the poor muleteer stood petrified with astonishment. The
Turkish guards instantly seized him and carried him before the dey, where he
was strictly examined; but he would neither betray his accomplices, nor
discover the place where he had concealed his treasure. His punishment, as may
naturally be supposed, was the loss of his head; and shortly after his death a
part of the money he had purloined was found in the walls of the Bagnio Baleck,
and a considerable quantity was buried without the town, where he had carried
the dirt of the palace.

Since this accident the doors of the treasury can only be opened by three
keys, which are severally kept by the dey, the cassan-ajee, and the aga, and no
money can be taken from thence without their joint attendance.

Anecdote of an American lad.
IT is impossible to conceive the consternation that always prevails among the
slaves in the palace. Every one is in continual apprehension of losing his
life, and when any order is given, it is executed with the greatest terror and
expedition imaginable.

Among the number of the dey's servants were two lads, the one an American and
the other a Spaniard, who personally attended the dey in the upper apartments
of the palace, and had the charge of his wardrobe. The Spanish lad, conceiving
some enmity against the American, concerted a scheme to be revenged upon him.

One morning the dey, intending to ride out to his country seat, ordered she
American lad in a great hurry to bring him a shirt The shirts that are worn by
the Algerines are sent from the Levant. They are made of muslin, and formed
something like sacks without openings at top, which are made to suit the
convenience of the wearer after they are brought to Algiers.
. The lad ran instantly into the wardrobe, where he met the Spanish boy, who
gave him a shirt without an opening in the top, and he being in too great a
hurry to examine it, carried it immediately to the dey, who by this time stood
naked to receive it; but in attempting to put it on, it became so entangled
about his head that he could scarcely disengage himself; and apprehending that
a conspiracy was formed against his life, he screamed out with the greatest
terror imaginable. As soon as he had disentangled himself he seized his tahan,
and ran naked out of the room to murder the boy, who fled for refuge into a
distant apartment. The dey hallowed to him with the most vengeful tone of voice
to return; upon which the boy came before him trembling and terrified half to
death, entirely ignorant of the cause that had so much excited the dey's
indignation. By this time his passion had a little subsided, and instead of
murdering the boy, he beat him so unmercifully with a rope, that it was
necessary to convey him to the hospital, where he was confined for a week;
after which he was employed in the lower apartments of the palace among the
inferior classe^ of servants.

An expedition to gather cane.
ONCE in every year all the slaves are ordered into the country to cut cane,
which generally happens on the first Friday in January, and this cane is used
for the purpose of lathing their houses.

The 3d of January 1794, was the first time that the American captives went out
upon one of these cane* gathering expeditions. The part of the country to which
they were ordered, lies about a league beyond the gate of Bubazoon. Here they
traversed a number of cane fields without any permission from the owners, and
each slave, after having collected two bundles as large as he could carry,
repaired with them to a particular enclosure, which was appointed as the place
of general rendezvous, where the vichelhadge of the marine, the warden bashaw,
and other wardens attended on horseback. An entertainment was provided at the
expense of the scrivan grandee, or head clerk of the dey, and the warden*
bashaw obliged the tavern keepers to send a supply of wine for the occasion.
All provisions, wines, and other articles necessary for the entertainment, were
brought out by the muleteers in baskets. Upon a part of the enclosure separate
from the slaves, the vichelhadge, the warden bashaw, and the other wardens sat
cross legged upon napkins, and their food was served up to them in earthern
plates, which were placed upon the ground before them. After regaling
themselves, a servant poured water upon their hands and they retired; and the
slaves were then permitted to take their seats upon a different part of the
enclosure, where a number of wooden bowls were placed, filled with vinegar and
oil, in which they soaked their bread, and with this ^^^rse diet finished their
repast. After this the muleteer distributed the wine among them, without any
kind of order. All those who had neglected to provide themselves with vessels,
received no share, which was the misfortune of the Americans; but the old
slaves took care to ^urnish themselves with a number of horns and bottles for
the occasion.

This feast terminated at the sound of a trumpet. All the slaves then
shouldered their bundles, and marched in files up to the gardens of the aga and
cassan-ajee, which were upon the top of a high mountain, where they deposited
at each garden about 50 or 60 of these bundles, and the remainder were taken to
the dey's gardens, which lie, at the distance of about three miles, upon
another quarter of the town; from whence they repaired to the bagnios, and thus
terminated the labor of the day.

Distribution of clothing.
The Friday immediately succeeding this expetion was the day appointed for
distributing clothing to the slaves, which happens only once in every year. It
is a day of general festivity, and all the slaves are exempted from labor.
Early in the morning on this day, they were drawn up in two files in a court
adjoining the palace, where the vichelhadge, and a number of his attendants
served out to each slave in order a suit of clothes in the Turkish fashion,
rolled up in a small bundle. This suit consisted of a pair of short woolen
trows^rs, and a jacket somewhat in the form of a sack, without either buttons
or sleeves; a coarse linen shirt with short sleeves, and a pair of pan^pooses,
or shoes made of yellow leather. During the distribution, the dey presented
himself from an upper apartment, and looked down upon them with a steadfast
countenance, and without the least change of posture during (...) whole time.
As soon as they were withdrawn from the court, great numbers of Jewish and
Moorish chapman appeared, to whom many of the (...) sold their whole suit for
less than a sequin, in (...) to raise a little money for the purpose of
celebrating the day. Thus would many of these poor wretches, for the sake of a
momentary gratification, go nearly naked all the year, and trust to the
generosity of others for a supply.

The Americans bound in chains.
THOUGH Mr. Barlow was highly esteemed by the Amercan captives for his
benevolence, affability, and unremitted exertions to procure their freedom, yet
it seems that Mr. Donaldson, who was of an anstere disposition, was not equally
the object of their esteem; and an occurrence took place that procured him the
irreconcilable hatred of all the American captives.

After he had resided nearly nine months in Algiers, waiting for the necessary
sums to carry the treaty into effect, the Americans, who had become extremely
impatient at the delays, waited upon him one morning in a body, and requested a
definitive answer, whether there was any expectation that they would ever be
released from slavery? But instead of deigning an affable reply to a set of men
grown frantic with their misfortunes and the gloomy anticipation of being
enslaved for life, after fostering the pleasing hope of a speedy deliverance,
he bade them, in an imperious tone of voice, to begone immediately from his
lodgings, or he would find means to compel them.

Irritated by such hauteur of conduct in the American agent, they became very
turbulent, and answered him, that they would not depart till they had received
some information upon the subject. But Mr. Donaldson, was not to be intimidated
into an explanation, and lodged information in the marine of the proceedings of
the Americans, who immediately dispersed; and in consequence of such conduct in
an irritable agent, they were loaded with heavy chains for the space of three
weeks; till the Swedish consul's brother, who was actuated by a little more
humanity, interceded in their behalf, and procured their release.

Thus we often meet with men whose hearts are so delicately impressed with the
softer dictates of philanthropy, that they are ever ready to extend their
benevolence to all mankind; while others, without the least emotion, would
subject their own countrymen to chains and misery. But we may observe perhaps
by way of apology, that Mr. Donaldson's frequent indisposition might have been
^he cause of his petulancy toward his countrymen. At his arrival in Algiers he
was so much afflicted with the gout that he was obliged to be supported as he
walked, and was subject to other infirmities during his residence there.

Succession of Vichelhadges.
THE vichelhadge of the marine who presided previous to the arrival of the
Americans, was sent to the Levant with a considerable quantity of money, to
build a mosque in honor of the dey. But the vessel in which he sailed was never
heard (...) afterward, and it was supposed that this treasure had tempted the
crew to murder him.

After his departure the Baleck Bashaw officiated in his place, till the dey
losing all hopes of his return, elected one of his relations to this office,
who had lately come from the Levant with a new frigate as a present to him. In
consequence of this election, the Spanish consul, who occupied the house of the
former vichelhadge after his absence, resigned it to the new vichelhadge, and
it was repaired for his reception.

While some of the Moorish masons were engagaged in removing the old pavement
in one of the lower apartments, they discovered a chest of money, containing
several thousand dollars, supposed to have been deposited there by Cedelli, a
former vichelhadge. This chest these very honest Moors conveyed to the dey, who
still entertained so strong an enmity against Cedelli, that he refused to
accept any thing belonging to him; but issued orders that it should be
distributed among the officers of the marine, the Moorish carpenters, and the
slaves.

The new vichelhadge resembled none of his predecessors in ferocity of
disposition. He was a man of great sensibility, and so little calculated for
this boisterous employment, that he resigned his office within a month after
his election; and another vichelhadge was chosen shortly after the Americans
left Algiers.

Anecdote of an American black.
IT is customary whenever the slaves have finished the careening of the
cruizers, to fire three guns from one of the castles, as a signal for her to
take in her ballast, guns, and other necessary articles for a cruise. At this
time the vichelhadge of the vessel, at the captain's expense, prepares an
entertainment for the slaves. A quantity of rice, mashed wheat, and three or
four sheep are boiled together in a large copper kettle on the mole. The mutton
is generally distributed among the Moorish carpenters and caulkers, and the
kettle with the cuzcuz is then taken on board the vessel, where it is served
out to the Moors and slaves with a long iron ladle.

One day, after careening a vessel and bringing the kettle aboard, a great
number of the Moors and slaves thronged round to receive their share, and among
the rest an American black named Scipio. While a general competition for being
served first prevailed, one of the Americans took Scipio by the heels, and
pitched him head foremost into the kettle, where he remained till one of the
Moors dragged him out. A great laughter succeeded, and poor Scipio received no
other injury than that of being well while washed with cuzcuz. This occurrence
did not, however, discourage the company from eating, and it is said that a
part of this cuzcuz was afterward sent to the dey.

Spanish deserter.
A SPANIARD, by the name of Mooris, who deserted from a Spanish vessel at Oran,
was brought to Algiers by the Moors, where he was made a slave, till the
Spanish consul interceded for him and procured his liberty. He received him
into his house, where he was well treated, and promised that he should return
to Spain by the first vessel that arrived at Algiers. But the Spaniard, neither
actuated by gratitude for the favors conferred upon him, nor a desire to return
home, stole one of the consul's ho^ses and a considerable sum of money, and
with this booty he took his departure into the mountains among the Moors, where
he remained some months, till his money was all expended; after which they
brought him to town and took him before the dey, who sentenced him to receive
several hundred blows; and the was then appointed to the office of buffidore,
or bellows-blower in the blacksmith's shop on the mole, where he continued till
the plague in 1796 released him from bondage.

The effects of jealousy.
No people in the world are addicted to such intemperate jealousy as the Turks,
and this will not appear singular when we consider that all intercourse between
the sexes is prohibited before marriage; hence it rarely happens that a woman
obtains the object of her affections, and a Turk when he finds himself unable
to excite the esteem, becomes more cautious in securing the person of his wife;
but all this rigor serves only as a stimulus to incontinence, and in
consequence the spirit of intrigue is so prevalent among the women, that
frequently in the absence of their husbands, they send their confidants into
the streets to invite strangers into their houses, for the purpose of indulging
an illicit love.

One of the wives of the captain of the port, or agent in the marine, who
presided previous to the arrival of the Americans, happened to fall in love
with a young Couloly, whom she frequently saw passing and repassing in the
streets. As the Turk was engaged the principal part of the day in the marine,
it afforded the Couloly a most favorable opportunity for frequent interviews,
and he continued this amorous correspondence, till some intimation of it was
whispered to the husband, who hired two Moorish spies, to keep watch near his
house in his absence.

After continuing their watch a few hours the Couloly made his appearance, and
entered the house; upon which intelligence was immediately conveyed to the
Turk, who hastened with all expedition from the marine, boiling with revenge
against his rival, whom he detected in the passage of his house. An immediate
conflict ensued, and the Couloly, after receiving several flight wounds, made
his escape. The Turk then seized his wife by the neck, and as an expiation for
the crime of which he had supposed her guilty, he choked her to death.

When the dey received intelligence of this transaction he instituted a strict
enquiry into the matter. He acknowledged the right of the Turks to put their
wives to death; they being considered as merely the property of their husbands;
but when it appeared, upon examination, that the woman was in a state of
pregnancy at her death, he was violently enraged, and observed, that though the
Turk might exercise this privilege with impunity upon his wife, yet he had no
power whatever over the life of the infant. In consequence of this crime he was
excluded from his office; but he was afterward promoted to the command of a
cruiser, by whom captain M'Shane and his crew were captured.

Neapolitan conspiracy.
The slaves of Algiers are generally Spaniards, Portuguese, Genoese,
Neapolitans and others, whose nations are at war with this regency. Some of
these slaves have been confined 40 years in Algiers, where they have endured
every calamity that can be inflicted on human nature.

About 40 years ago a scheme was concerted between about 50 Neapolitans and 150
Turks, to make their escape to Algiers, where they supposed they would be
highly rewarded for effecting the deliverance of such a number of Turks.
Accordingly after murdering the officers and crew, and taking possession of a
Neapolitan galley, they set sail and arrived safely in Algiers, where they were
for some time highly caressed by the Turks, till the king of Naples sent to the
dey, and desired that he might make slaves of them. This request was readily
complied with, and some of these wretched Neapolitans are still slaves in
Algiers.

Avarice of the former dey.
The former dey of Algiers, whose name, if I mistake not, was Mahomet Bashaw,
was the most miserly dey that ever reigned. It is said that his avarice
increased with his (...) to such a degree, that he would amuse himself in
hunting for aspers An asper is a small thin piece of square tin less than a
penny in value.
in the streets, which he would take up on the ends of his fingers moistened
with spittle.

In changing his clothes one day, (...) happened to leave a few of these aspers
in his apartment, which the captain Proor The captain Proor is the head
sweeper, and according to custom he is always set at liberty whenever a peace
is concluded with any nation.
of the palace took the liberty of converting to his own use, not supposing
that so trifling a sum belonged to the sovereign of Algiers. But the dey was
greatly exasperated when he missed his aspers, and upon examination it was
found that they had been purloined by the captain Proor, who in consequence
lost his head.

Naval expeditions.
SHORTLY after captain O'Brien's arrival in Algiers, one James H^ll, belonging
to his crew, who was an expert (...), was raised to the office of portezero, or
boatswai^^^ a cruiser, formerly a French frigate, which went out upon a cruise
against the Neapolitans. apolitans. Great prepar^^^ons had been made, and the
dey promised himself great success in this expedition, in which his whole fleet
set sail. Some days after they left Algiers the frigate fell in with a
Neapolitan cruiser, and a smart engagement ensued, in which the frigate soon
struck to the Neapolitans. An Algerine xebeck which happened to be in company,
sheared off when she saw the fate of the frigate. The Neapolitans did not think
proper to pursue her; but after taking out all the best hands, from the
frigate, and putting them on board their own (...), they stood in for Naples
with their prize. Toward evening they became nearly becalmed, and the Algerine
xebeck in consequence deemed this a favorable opportunity for recovering the
frigate. Accordingly the crew were ordered to their oars, and she immediately
bore down upon the prize: upon which the men who had charge of her, finding
they were in danger of being overhauled, took to their boats, after setting
fire to a match by which they intended to blow her up; but some of the old
Moors who were left on board, broke loose from their confinement, and prevented
the explosion; soon after which she was re-captured by the xebeck, and carried
into Bona for the purpose of receiving the necessary repairs.

Though the Neapolitans by this unfortunate event lost the frigate, yet they
secured the crew, and carried them to Naples where they were made slaves. After
the return of the xebeck, Mr. Donaldson wrote to Naples in Hall's behalf, who
was soon after liberated and entered on board an English frigate.

Upon the return of the Algerine fleet the dey was most violently exasperated
at the loss of the Algerine crew; immediate preparations were made for another
expedition, and the cruisers were promised an extraordinary reward for every
Neapolitan they should take. But after scouring the Mediterranean for several
weeks, they only captured a few Neapolitan and Maltese boats, which were bound
to Sicily; the crews of which were carried to Algiers and made slaves.

Departure of the Americans from Algiers.
THE principal part of the Neapolitan slaves were exchanged for Turks at the
time the American captives were ransomed, and embarked with the Americans in
the ship La Fortune, under the command of captain Calder, which was originally
destined for Leghorn.

From the 11th to the 13th of July 1796, they were engaged in making the
necessary preparations for their voyage. The 13th in the evening they hauled
out into the harbor, and on the 14th in the morning they prepared to get under
weigh. At this time a fresh westerly breeze prevailed, and owing to some
neglect in bracing the yards, the ship was very near being driven stern
foremost upon the rocks near Porta Piscou, which obliged them to let go their
anchor immediately; upon which the captain of the port came aboard in a great
rage, and struck captain Calder several blows; called him a sans suff^eda, and
asked him how he dared to get under weigh before he came. The vessel was then
warped up to the mole, and a number of the Moorish guard-boats towed her out of
the harbor.

About two hours after they had hoisted sail, one of the Neapolitans was seized
with the plague, and being apprehensive that the contagion would spread among
the crew, they put about the ship and stood in for Algiers, with an intention
to land the Neapolitan. As soon as they had hoisted a signal a boat came off
and took him ashore; but the vichelhadge would not suffer him to be landed, and
ordered him immediately back to the vessel.

After they had been under weigh about half an hour, the dey, receiving
information of what had passed, ordered a number of the piscorees to go in
pursuit of her, who soon after returned and brought back the sick Neapolitan.

But their misfortune, did not terminate here: for the day after another
Neapolitan was discovered to have the plague, of which, he died shortly after;
and the succeeding day captain Baily was seized with the disorder, and also
died. The forecastle of the vessel was then converted into an hospital, and two
Americans who had had the plague in Algiers were appointed to attend them.
Great precautions were then taken to prevent the contagion from spreading. The
crew kept themselves in constant motion, their clothes were aired and the decks
were kept continually washed, and by these means its progress was effectually
checked.

At this time they resolved to alter their course; and, as they knew they would
not be suffered to enter the port of Leghorn, they stood in for Marseilles,
where they were obliged to ride quarantine for 80 days. As soon as they had
performed quarantine all the Neapolitans who had arrived in La Fortune were
imprisoned, as their nation was then at war with the French republic; but they
were soon after liberated and sent to Naples.

CHAP. VI.
Siccinct account of Algiers in the time of Pinchinin.

THE city of Algiers has undergone considerable alterations in the state of its
fortifications, government, customs, and manners, etc. since the year 1640, the
time of their famous admiral Hal^ Pinchinin.

The ancient wall of the city still remains; but scarcely any visible vestiges
exist of the ditch which extended the whole length of the wall on the land
side. This ditch was about sixteen feet wide, and of a proportionable depth;
and served as a recepticle for the filth of the city. The inhabitants derived
but little advantage from this wall, as no military force was stationed behind
it for the defense of the city.

All the streets were chained up at night; except that which extended the whole
length of the city from the port of Babloet, between the great mosque and the
dey's palace, to the gate of Bubazoon.

The principal part of the garrison was lodged in five large public edifices,
with spacious courts in the middle, which served as armories. Each of these
contained about 600 soldiers, who were supported at the public expense; each of
whom were accommodated with a separate apartment. But many of the principal
Turks were lodged in large houses called Fonducas, which belonged to private
persons.

The castle called Alcazabar was that part of the city which lay to the
southward, divided by a wall which began at the rampart on the east side, and
extended to that on the west.

About three hundred paces from the shore stood a small island, that was joined
to the city by a mole which was finished in the year 1533, and intended for the
protection of vessels. This mole was carried away by a violent tempest in the
beginning of the year 1662, which occasioned immense destruction among the
shipping.

Without the city there were several inconsiderable fortresses; the principal
of which was that built by Hassan Bashaw in the year 1545 at the place where
Charles V. pitched his tent in 1541. This fortress is still in existence, and
is called the imperial castle.

The inhabitants amounted to about 100,000; of which 12,000 were Turkish
soldiers, 30,000 slaves of various nations, and the remainder citizens of
Algiers, who consisted of Moors, Morescos, Jews, and some Christian merchants.

The supreme authority was, as at present, vested in the dey, or, as he was
then called, the bashaw, who was frequently honored with the appellation of
Sultan, with which he was highly pleased.

His situation appears to have been more precarious then than at present, and
he was in continual apprehension of mutiny among the Turkish soldiers;
especially if their monthly wages were withheld. His principal study,
therefore, was to make punctual payments at every new moon, and if he delayed
these payments three hours after they were due, he was in great danger either
of being murdered or imprisoned.

The dey was obliged to be very circumspect in taking no more than his due
proportion of all prizes; for otherwise he was in danger of immediate execution
by an incensed soldiery; as happened in September 1661, when Ramadan Bashaw,
who then presided, adjudged to himself a greater proportion of prize-wheat than
was his due. This proceeding caused an immediate insurrection of the soldiers,
who cut his throat, and massacred twenty-eight of the divan, whose bodies were
thrown to the dogs in the streets. The rest were obliged to make their escape
in a fishing boat, to avoid the fury of the soldiers, in which they were
afterward captured by the Maltese and made slaves.

After the death of Ramadan, another Bashaw, whom they had imprisoned some
years before for neglect in making punctual payments, was brought out and
elected to the sovereignty of Algiers, whom they exhorted to a more virtuous
conduct in administration.

But within three days after, he forgot their injunctions, and meditated
nothing but the destruction of an aga, who had been accessory to his
imprisonment. In the execution of this design he promised 10,000 patacoons The
patacoon is a Spanish coin about 84 cents in value.
to two soldiers if they would murder him. With this intention they went to the
aga's house, and requested to speak with him. But the slave who came out,
suspecting their intentions by their countenances, answered that his master was
not at home.

When intelligence was announced to the aga of the dey's designs, he urged a
complaint to the soldiers, who seized him and threw him into a dark dungeon,
where he received his food through a small hole, and only had room enough to
sit down.

The necessity of punctual payment, often obliged the dey to procure money by
every sinister means in his power: even by the violation or misconstruction of
treaties. And this imperious necessity induced him to risk a rupture with Great
Britain in 1661, by making prize (contrary to their treaty of peace) of the
property and persons of foreigners that had been shipped on board of British
vessels. In consequence of this infraction of the treaty, the earl of Sandwick
was dispatched to Algiers, with a fleet of eighteen sail of the line, to demand
restitution. The admiral entered the harbor the 22d of August, and dispatched
his lieutenant with his credentials on shore to demand satisfaction, which the
dey and divan were not disposed to grant. In consequence, the British consul
was brought on board the fleet, and the admiral, after pouring a volley of
grape shot into the city, and battering down several houses, took his departure.

The principal study of the dey was the constant practice of imposition upon
nations with whom he was in alliance. Their vessels were frequently seized, and
the captains constrained, by corporal punishment, to confess that the property
belonged to other nations. Indeed it was an arduous task for him to avoid
foreign disputes, and at the same time promote harmony at home. He was sensible
that the establishment of peace with other nations would have a tendency to
abridge his perquisites, and a want of finances to discharge the necessary
demands, would expose him to the fury of a mutinous soldiery. Treaties of peace
were therefore necessarily violated, and as he derived the principal part of
his revenue from captured vessels, he was seldom at peace with any nation.

The 12,000 men that constituted his ordinary forces, consisted chiefly of the
refuse of Turkey, and of renegados who had fled for refuge from Europe; for
Algiers was such a perfect asylum for villainy, that even those who had offended
the Grand Signior himself found protection upon their arrival there, as was the
case in 1640.

One Sigala, the son of a Genoese renegado a famous admiral of the same name,
had been appointed to the command of a squadron of galleys belonging to the
Grand Signior Morad IV. which brought home the annual tribute of Egypt. Sigala
on his return anchored his fleet in some of the ports of Greece, where he went
on shore to devote part of his time to the women. While he was here indulging
himself in every gratification, the Maltese ran into the port, and captured the
vessel which was freighted with the treasure. Sigala, to avoid the bow string,
set sail immediately with his galley to Algiers, where he subsisted by piracy
till he was pardoned by Ibrahim the successor of Morad.

Algiers was at this time a kind of military republic, and the dey was so
perfectly under the control of the soldiery, that without their concurrence he
could do nothing. If they approved of his orders they were executed, and if
not, the dey was compelled to relinquish them.

In the year 1642, a tributory king, refusing to pay tribute, appeared with an
army to shake off the Algerine yoke. Yusef, the reigning dey, desirous of being
exempted from the command of the expedition, pretended indisposition. But the
soldiers were not disposed to receive his excuse, and compelled him to embark
in one of his galleys; and lest he should desert them, he was escorted by
another other galley, and was obliged to submit to being disembarked with his
army at the place appointed.

At this time there were, according to some accounts, about three thousand
French renegados in Algiers. Before this time the renegados were prohibited
from serving in the capacity of Turkish soldiers; but Mahomet Bashaw first
allowed them to be incorporated with the Turks in 1568.

The pay of each soldier was eight Moresco doubles This double is about 25
cents in value.
a month; but their pay was enhanced upon extraordinary emergencies, and in
proportion to the number of years they had served. Whenever the Sultaness was
delivered of a son, or they had any remarkable engagement with the Arabs, or
any soldier had killed his enemy in an engagement and brought away his head,
their pay was augmented a double a month: provided the number of doubles did
not exceed forty.

The unmarried soldiers enjoyed greater privileges than those who were married.
To the former were distributed four loaves of bread a day, but to the latter
none.

The soldiers kept no guard in the city; but a watch called Mesuart, consisting
of twenty-five persons, paraded the streets. In the summer the city was nearly
destitute of a garrison, as the army was then dispersed into various parts of
the country to enforce the payment of taxes.

The divan were convened twice a week in a gallery of the palace, and consisted
of 40 persons. All matters were decided here by a majority; but what was
remarkable, the votes were collected before the debate was closed. All causes
between the soldiers were decided in this council, but those between the
citizens were determined before the chiah, who was the dey's lieutenant.

Though their fortifications were then, as at present, very inconsiderable, yet
they were a terror to the Europeans; and, according to some computations, above
600,000 slaves died in Algiers with the severity of their treatment between the
years 1536 and 1640.

Though the Algerines were greatly elated (...) the signal disaster of Charles
(...) they durst not attribute (...) own valor. Their (...) a marabout or
santon who resided near (...) city, produced the tempest that proved the
destruction of the Spanish fleet, by beating the sea with his wand. To the
memory of this marabout they (...) a mosque near the gate of Babloet, where he
was interred. The Turks had a great veneration for this place, and pretended
that if a Christian army should ever besiege Algiers again, they would raise
the most tremendous tempest ever known by casting the bones of this marabout
into the sea.

CHAP. VII.
A compendium of the adventures of Emanuel D'Aranda, containing an account of
the treatment of the Algerine slaves in the time of Pinchinin.

EMANUEL D'ARANDA was a native of Dunkirk i^ Flanders, and was a slave in
Algiers for the (...) of two years. On the first of August 1640, he left
Madrid, and proceeded by land to St. Sebastian, where he embarked on board an
English vessel, in order to return to his own country, after having visited
various parts of Spain. After being at sea a (...) days, they discovered a
large ship bearing down upon them, which proved to be a caravel. The master of
the English vessel immediately ordered his sails to be furled up, and alleged
for a reason that it was not customary for an English vessel to run away at
sea. The caravel soon came within gun shot, but without hoisting her colors;
whereupon it was concluded that she was a pirate.

But night coming on both vessels lay to, waiting the events that were to take
place the next morning. The passengers of the English vessel used every
argument in their power to induce the captain to make his escape; but he was
inflexibly determined to maintain his station. About ten o'clock next morning
two Turkish vessels hove in sight, and were soon within gun shot. In this
situation resistance was vain. One of the Turkish vessels hailed her, and
ordered her to strike her colors; upon which a boat's crew was sent out, who
immediately took possession of the English vessel, and her crew were sent on
board of one of the Turkish ships, which immediately after stood for Algiers.

On the eleventh day after their capture, they passed the streights of
Gibralter, where the Turks, as they passed, observed many superstitious
ceremonies. Among a variety the following was observed; they cast a vessel of
oil into the sea, which they imagined swam to a mountain called La montagne des
Signs, where a great santon or saint resided, who subsisted upon the oil, and
in consequence of this gift dispensed various blessings to them. During the
passage of the oil, lighted candles were placed upon the great guns (a ceremony
that was particularly observed by vessels that passed the streights in the
night) which burnt for the purpose of affording light to the oil in its
passage. All these ceremonies were performed with prayers and great devotion.

The third day after passing the streights, they anchored opposite the city of
Algiers; the guns of the vessel were fired, and their report brought a large
concourse of people to the shore. D'Aranda with the rest of the crew were now
freed from their chains, and taken to the market where the Christian slaves
were sold, in order to see if any of them were known; from thence they were
conducted to the palace of the dey, (who was entitled to every eighth prisoner)
that he might make his choice out of the number of captives.

He was seated in his hall of audience, and sat cross-l^gged on an elegant
seat, covered with blue tapestry, holding in his hand a number of plumes,
resembling a fan. His dress was a long gown of red silk, and a turban neatly
interwoven.

After the dey had made choice of his share of the captives, the remainder were
taken to the house of one of the Turks whose vessel had taken the prize. As
D'Aranda was going into the house, the Turk asked him in Italian, if he was
hungry, he answered in the affirmative; whereupon a Christian slave brought the
prisoners some bread and a basket of grapes, with which they regaled
themselves. The house was built in the Italian manner; the galleries were
formed of white marble, and the pavement, the pillars and the arches were well
proportioned, according to the laws of architecture. They were confined in this
house, where they were obliged to sleep on the floor in the galleries, and were
not permitted to leave the house till they were sold.

After they had been confined here seven days, they were visited by Pinchinin
and some of the richest Turks, who came with an intention to purchase slaves.
They asked the prisoners whether they were able to pay the price of their
ransom; but they answered in the negative, and in consequence no purchase was
made. They were afterward brought to the market, where an old man, with a
staff in his hand, took D'Aranda by the arm, and led him several times round
the marketplace. A number of persons, desirous of purchasing, appeared, who
asked D'Aranda his profession and the place of his nativity. They took him by
the hand to examine if it was hard; and ordered him to open his mouth, to see
whether his teeth were sufficiently good for chewing hard biskets on board the
galleys. They were then all ordered to be seated in a row. The old man took the
first in order and led him three or four times round the market, crying
arrache, arrache, who offers most? After the sale he was placed upon the other
side of the market, and in the same manner all the others were sold. D'Aranda
was purchased by a renegado named Saban Gallan, who gave 200 patacoons for him.

The dey being entitled to any slave at the price offered for him in the
market, they were in consequence once more taken to the palace: each one having
in his hat a piece of paper, on which was written the price at which he was
sold. The dey thought proper to purchase D'Aranda, and Cal^en and Saldens two
of his companions; telling ^^em that he had heard they were persons of quality,
and that he expected a large sum for their ransom. He then ordered them to the
stables of the palace, where they found 250 other slaves intended as a supply
to the galleys. In these stables they were confined one and twenty days, and
their daily allowance here was two small loaves of bread a-piece.

Toward the end of September, when their galleys make their last cruise, these
slaves began to prepare for sea. To each one was distributed, by the dey's
order, some coarse cloth, for the purpose of making them such clothes as were
worn in the galleys. On the day appointed for the slaves to go on board, a
number of barbers attended the stables, and shaved the heads and beards of
those who were intended as rowers. After they were shaved, the dey's steward,
and the captain of one of the galleys entered the stables, and ordered the
slaves into an adjoining court, where each one had his office and station
assigned him. After this there remained twenty slaves more than sufficient to
man the galleys. D'Aranda was among this number, and the captain of the galley
said to the steward as he passed them, We will leave these rascals on shore,
for they are savages yet.

They were then ordered back to the dey's stables, and the same day four
galleys thus manned, left the harbor. The dey finding D'Aranda and his
companions neither rich nor persons of quality, ordered them to be brought into
his presence in the hall of audience, where they found Pinchinin, who said to
them, Christians I have bought you of the dey, but at a very great price. He
then sent them to his house, where they found twenty female slaves who attended
his wife, besides twelve male slaves, and a seraglio of forty young boys
between nine and fifteen years of age.

From Pinchinin's house they were sent to his bagnio, the place appointed for
such of his slaves as were intended for the galleys. This bangio was a street
or large entry i^ his house, where pirates and Turkish soldiers resorted, who
spent their time in drinking, and the commission of the most unnatural crimes.
D'Aranda not being acquainted with any one in this seminary of virtue, was
obliged to sleep the first night upon the terrace of the bagnio, and the next
morning when he rose he saw an Italian slave bringing in a great variety of
articles and household stuff, and crying arrache, arrache. D'Aranda enquired of
a certain knight of Malta with whom he had become acquainted, what the Italian
meant. "As our master Pinchinin," replied the knight, allows his slaves nothing
for their subsistence, the greatest part of them live upon stealing, and the
booty of the preceding day is every morning thus sold for their support.

The next morning before sunrise the guardian coming into the bagnio, saluted
D'Aranda and his companions with Sursa cani, abaso canalla, get up you dogs,
come down you scoundrels. After this coarse salutation, he ^^^ducted them to
Babloet, in the suburbs of the city, where they were employed in a large
rope-walk. D'Aranda and Saldens were appointed to turn a large wheel. Upon
their turning the wheel too swiftly, their guardian cried out to them in Lingua
Franca, forti, forti, which signifies gently; but they misunderstanding the
term, turned the wheel with all their might, which so exasperated their
guardian, that he ran up to them in a rage, and with a huge cudgel taught them
the signification of forti.

After they were thus initiated into the knowledge or rope making, they were
compelled to pound wheat in a mortar; a much more laborious employment, in
which D'Aranda acquitted himself but very indifferently; upon which his
guardian said to him, give over that work you dog, you are too savage yet. In
putting the wheat into bags after it had been pounded, a little happened to be
spilt on the ground; whereupon their guardian said, Pilla esse cani, take that
up you dog: but D'Aranda not understanding him, his keeper gave him a most
unmerciful blow over the back with a billet of wood, which gave him a dangerous
wound, from which a copious stream of blood issued.

A very heavy bag of wheat was then placed upon each one's shoulder, which they
had to carry a considerable distance, and D'Aranda's strength failing him after
he had gone a few paces, the bag began to slide down his back; upon which his
keeper struck him in the face several times with his fist, and the blood
streamed plentifully from his mouth and nose; which compelled him to greater
exertions, and he staggered under the load till he arrived at Pinchinin's
house, where he fell down, perfectly exhausted with the burden. But the most
arduous part of their labor was yet to be performed. They were under the
necessity of carrying these bags up into a granary forty feet high; ae task
which D'Aranda would have found totally impracticable, had not his companion
Saldens, who was much stronger, compassionately carried it up for him, while he
lay upon the ground besmeared with sweat, dust and blood, and still
unmercifully pounded by his keeper, who threatened to murder him. In this
lamentable condition he returned to the bagnio.

In the mean time Caloen, his other companion, had been employed in leading a
mule, laden with biscuit, from Pinchinin's house to the water side. In
consequence of the narrowness of the streets, it was a custom in Algiers, when
one led a loaded mule or camel, to cry Belec, take care there. But our new
mule-driver, ignorant of the custom, gave no warning of his approach, and in
passing, threw a Turk into the mud. The Turk getting up in a great rage, drew
his knife, (which they carried about them instead of a sword) and would have
murdered Caloen, had he not been prevented by some other Turks, who hallowed
out to him, don't you see that Christian is a savage yet, and don't understand
the custom; the word SAVAGE being a term of reproach which was given him
because he was dressed in a Christian habit.

While they were in a state of the most extreme indigence, expecting nothing
from Pinchinin, and not versed in the art of stealing, the common profession in
the bagnio, they had the good fortune to borrow seventy-five patacoons from an
Italian merchant in Algiers, to whom they became jointly bound for the payment
of a hundred at Antwerp.

Their next employment was in a vineyard belonging to one of Pinchinin's
country-houses, where very laborious tasks were assigned them; for which
D'Aranda, being but indifferently qualified, agreed with his guardian to allow
him four rials a month if he would give him a more easy employment: and in
consequence his next business was to carry some large pots of water to the
lodgings of the chief guardian. D'Aranda now fared pretty well, and was much
pleased with his new employment; but a trivial occurrence shortly after
excluded him from this business; for as he was pouring a pot of water one day
into the Tin^ga, or great cistern, he accosted a Turkish woman who entered the
house, and asked her if she would drink a glass of sack. This question being
overheard, he was dismissed from his employment, and compelled the next day to
work with some other slaves in attending masons.

This happened in the month of December, when the corsairs cruised along the
coast of Andalusia, in order to capture English vessels laden with wine and
fruits. These corsairs had taken a frigate of Dunkirk, in which there was a
young man who was sold to Pinchinin, with whom D'Aranda had been formerly
acquainted. This young man shortly after had an interview with D'Aranda, and
being moved at the recital of his misfortunes, gave him some jewels, which he
pawned for ten crowns. This was a very seasonable supply, as his seventy-five
patacoons were by this time spent, and his credit was in consequence very much
raised at the bagnio, which was more than usually crowded at this time by great
numbers of Turks and Christian slaves who came to drink sack, a cargo of which
had been lately taken in one their prizes. About thirty slaves were taken in
this frigate who were employed in unloading her. Some of th^se had the good
fortune to be afterward employed as tavern keepers, a business which was
prohibited to Turks; others of the crew were consigned to the galleys, where
they were chained to the outermost oar, men whom the Algerines called
Bogavands. These slaves consisted of Spanards, Italians and Russians, and being
a little intoxicated one night a quarrel ensued between some of them, which
made a great uproar in the bagnio. Whereupon a priest came into the room with a
wax candle in his hand, and quelled the disturbance. The news of this riot soon
came to the ears of the patron of the bagnio, who came attended by several
persons with cresset lights and lanthrons, and armed with cudgels. They all
fled at the approach of the patron; but one of the rioters was seized, stripped
naked, and held by the hands and feet by four slaves with his belly on the
floor, where he received a hundred blows on the back with a cudgel.

D'Aranda had now resided six months in Algiers, at which time he and his
companions went to Pinchinin, and kissing his robe and the sleeve of his inner
garment, the Turkish mode of paying homage, they told him they had come to
agree with him about the price of their ransom. After some conversation
Pinchinin told them he was then going out of town with some slaves to fell
timber for a new frigate which was building, and that he would talk further
with them upon the subject at his return.

In the mean time D'Aranda was employed at a new house belonging to Pinchinin
in the upper part of the city, where he was obiged to carry materials on his
back up a steep hill where mules and camels could not be used. While he was at
work two Turks came to the bagnio and enquired for D'Aranda, Caloen, and
Saldens; but as they had changed their names, nobody could give any account of
them. The Turks then applied to a Brabant slave called Francis the student, to
examine some papers which were written in Latin, giving some account of the
slaves. Francis, upon examination, concluded that D'Aranda and his companions
were the persons they were enquiring for, and told them he knew the slaves very
well. Whereupon he went with them to the bagnio, where they found D'Aranda and
his companions, whom they informed they were no longer slaves; at which the
were greatly overjoyed.

The next day a Jew came to the bagnio, and by order of Pinchinin's wife, told
D'Aranda and his companions that the dey wished to speak to them. When they
were brought before him, he commanded them to go into a small drawing room of
the palace, where they continued about three hours with some young Christian
slaves. At length the steward made his appearance with a cudgel, and said to
them, You dogs which of you wrote home to be exchanged for Turks? They all
excused themselves; but the steward not much disposed to receive their excuses,
gave them all a severe beating, and told them he would come again at night and
cut off their ears and noses. They were here confined in this small apartment
in extreme misery for eighteen days; during which time they were frequently
visited by the steward, who always carried his cudgel in his hand, and
sometimes beat them for his diversion. The Turks now waited upon Pinchinin, who
had returned, and told him they had engaged to procure an exchange of D'Aranda
and his companions for seven of their Turkish friends, who were prisoners in
Flanders, and offered him by way of ransom the same sum he had given for them.
But Pinchinin told them these slaves were persons of quality, for each of whom
he demanded 6000 patacoons as the price of ransom.

While the Turks were endeavoring to effect an exchange of prisoners nine
weeks passed away, during which time D'Aranda and his companions were confined
in the dey's palace. After much delay the Turks agreed with Pinchinin upon the
price of their ransom; upon which they were released from confinement, and
lodged in the house of Cataborn Mustapha, one of the Turks, who became their
new patron. Caloen was soon after sent in a vessel bound to Leghorn, in order
to procure the liberty of the Turkish prisoners in exchange, according to the
agreement made between these Turks and the friends of D'Aranda and his
companions, who detained the Turkish prisoners in Flanders.

D'Aranda still continued with Mustapha, but his residence here was of short
duration; for Mustapha getting drunk one day quarrelled with a Bulcebas, a
captain of foot, whom he called a Christian. For this offense Mustapha suffered
imprisonment, and by order of the divan received a hundred blows on the back
with a cudgel; after which he was compelled to serve six months in the field
against king Bennali.

After the departure of Mustapha, D'Aranda was received into the family of
Mahomet Celibi Oiga, where he was employed in the capacity of a servant. Here
he soon became very intimate with his new mistress who granted him many
liberties, and permitted him to attend public worship every day at Pinchinin's
bagnio.

In the mean time Caloen, who was not so fortunate, was imprisoned in the house
of (...) grandmother, where he was confined (...) apartment with nearly 80
weight of iron about his legs, and frequently sent into the country, where his
keepers were instructed to torture him with the most oppressive hunger in order
to expedite the payment of his ransom.

At the expiration of six months after D'Aranda had resided at Oiga's house, he
received a letter from Saldens, dated at Ceuta, who requested his immediate
attendance at Tetuan in the kingdom of Fez, according to contract with the two
Turks. This letter contained information that Caloen's father had absolutely
refused to pay the 700 patacoons that were demanded for his ransom, but made no
particular mention of the five Turks who were to be given in exchange for
D'Aranda and his companions.

In consequence of this information Mustapha's grandmother immediately ordered
Caloen to be confined with a hundred weight of iron about his legs, in a small
cellar, where D'Aranda frequently visited him; and one day while he was with
him, the old woman entered the cellar, and asked Caloen if he was willing yet
to pay the 700 patacoons. He made no answer, but laughed at her; which so
greatly enraged the old lady, that she ordered D'Aranda to be seized and loaded
with irons in the same cell, because she had imputed Caloen's conduct entirely
to his advice. Here they remained till the time fixed for the departure of a
vessel destined for Tetuan, when, by the intercession of three Christian slaves
who intended to embark in this vessel, they were released upon a promise that
her grandson Mustapha, who was at Ceuta, should be liberated in exchange.

About this time (which was the first of January 164^) terminated the fast of
Ramadan, which continued for a month, during which time they were prohibited
from eating or drinking in the day; and those who were detected in violating
this law were compelled to swallow melted lead. About the time of sunset the
people were permitted to eat, and drums were beaten as a signal to cease from
fasting.

To this fast succeeded the festival or Easter of Ramadan, which continued for
eight days, and was celebrated with great pomp and festivity. Cavalcades were
formed without the city, and feats of horsemanship were displayed. The Turkish
children were drawn in small triumphal chariots, to which Christian slaves were
harnassed. The principal amusement was wrestling, at which the Moors were very
expert. The prohibitions of the Alcoran seemed very little regarded at this
time, and wine and brandy were drank in the greatest excess. In the time of
this festival gifts were distributed to the slaves, and for the three or four
first days they were exempted from every kind of labor.

On the 14th of January D'Aranda and Caloen, after settling all preliminaries,
embarked with a number of Turks and Christian slaves on board the vessel bound
for Tetuan. On the eighth day after they arrived at Oran, which is about forty
leagues from Algiers, and on the twelfth at Tremesen, where they lay at anchor
three days, and discharged part of their Moorish crew.

Tremesen was formerly a powerful kingdom, to which the dey of Algiers was
tributory. It is situated at the extremity of the Grand Signior's dominions,
and is bounded by the empire of Morocco and Fez, with which the Grand Signior
is in alliance; but notwithstanding this empire is often at war with the
Algerines, and this happens without any violation to the confederacy. The same
is the case with Tunis, which is included in the Grand Signior's dominions; but
he does not concern himself with the affairs of the bashaws, and they are not
considered at war till some place of importance is taken.

From Tremesen they set sail upon their voyage, and shortly after, in
consequence of the discharge of a number of Moors, a conspiracy was formed
among the Christian slaves to murder all the Turks on board, and to render
themselves master of the vessel. But the whole design miscarried in consequence
of the timidity of a Spaniard, who was the principal in the conspiracy, and
neglected to give the signal of onset, as had been previously concerted.

On the twelfth of February in the evening they cast anchor in a bay within
half a league of Tetuan, and the next day a violent east wind arose which
subjected them to imminent danger. The Turks terrified at the storm began to
say their sala or prayers, and promised to distribute alms as soon as they were
on shore. But the tempest still increased in violence, and the vessel was every
moment in danger of being driven upon the rocks. In this extremity the Turks
resolved to offer a sacrifice to Mahomet as their last resource; a number of
sheep being always taken on board the Turkish vessels for this purpose. They
cut one of these sheep into four parts, and with a variety of ridiculous
ceremonies they cast the parts into the sea on different quarters of the vessel.

The tempest continued to increase till midnight, at which time the vessel
began to drag her anchors. The Turks all assembled at the stern in the utmost
consternation, and implored the assistance of Mahomet with the loudest
lamentations. The vessel continued to drag her anchors, and soon after she was
wrecked upon the shore, but the principal part of the crew were saved.

D'Aranda and Caloen were greatly overjoyed at their deliverance, and the next
morning they set out for Tetuan, where they arrived about noon. While they
continued here they received a letter from Don Martin de Pegnaloso a Spanish
merchant at Ceuta, who informed them that Saldens had gone to Gibraltar, and
had left orders with him to furnish them with every thing necessary.

In the mean time the Turkish prisoners who had been detained at Flanders had
arrived at Ceuta. Mustapha Ingles one of the prisoners, imagining that Saldens
had returned to Flanders, wrote to Tetuan to the Turk who had charge of
D'Aranda and Caloen, that Saldens had promised when he was in Flanders to pay
700 patacoons toward the ransom which his relations had paid for Caloen, and
that he should put them in the Masmora. The person who concerted this business
was Abraham Arrais one of the Turkish prisoners, who reported at Ceuta that
D'Aranda and Caloen had promised 700 patacoons before their departure from
Algiers.

In consequence of this letter they were put into the Masmora, which was a
large vault about thirty feet under ground, where 170 Christian slaves were
confined. While they were in this situation D'Aranda wrote to Saldens, who
returned to Ceuta, and by his intercession they were liberated from
confinement, and soon after took their departure for their native country.

FINIS.
Subscriber's Names.
A
REV. John Armstrong, Philadelphia Capt. Thomas Anderson, do Mr. Thomas Aikman,
Trenton Thomas Adams, Esquire. Burlington William Allingham, Philadelphia Frederick
Asher, do Andrew Allen, jun. do Nathaniel Andruss, Newark
B
General Joseph Bloomfield, Burlington Messrs. Budd and Bartram, Philadelphia
Mr. Samuel Benezet, Esquire. Bensalem John Barclay, Montgomery county Joseph
Baldwin, Neshamany Richard Bidgood, Bristol -- Bailey, do Furman Black,
Philadelphia James Baird, do Peter Borger, do James Baily, do John Burnside, do
J. B. Bond, do 2 copies James Bell, do William Brown, do Edward Brailsford,
South Carolina Charles Bessonett, Bristol Peter Brown, Esquire. Kensington John
Brown, Bristol James Brown, Newark Nathaniel Beach, do Joseph Beach, do
C
Mr. Benjamin C. Calhoon, Philadelphia Charles Christie, do Anderson Cochran,
do Archibald Craig, do Daniel Clark, do Thomas Carpenter, do Joshua B.
Clibborn, do George Curwin, do Joseph Crukshank, do Benjamin Col, Newark Israel
Curny, do Jno. Carson, Northumb. county
D
Hon. Jonathan Dayton, New Jersey Miss Eliza Delzell, Philadelphia Mr. John
Davis, do Samuel Dierman, do Jonathan D. Woodruff, do Andrew Duffy, do William
P. Dobel, Bristol John Diber
E
Mrs. Anne Engles, Philadelphia Mr. Thomas Eastwick, do Joseph L. Engles do
Owen Evans, do James Ellison, do Thomas Eden, Harrisburgh Joseph Erwin, Newton
E
Miss Eliza Fisher, Philadelphia Mr. Robert Field, New Jersey
G
Miss Jean Gribbon, Philadelphia Mr. Arthur Gilmor, do William Gardner, do
Henry Gordon, do George Guyger, do John Goseline, Bristol Jabez Greger, Newark
H
Mr. John Houston, Germantown, 6 copies John Hutchinson, jun. Bristol Joseph
Hutchinson, do Lewis Howard, do James Van Heart, do Peter Hunt, New Jersey
William Holmes, Philadelphia Robert Houston, Carlisle John Hawkins, Bordenton
Joseph Hopkinson, Esquire. Philadelphia Moses Heddin, Newark -- Hawk, Red Lion, 10
copies John Hoff, Philadelphia
I
Jared Ingersol, Esquire. Philadelphia Mrs. Elizabeth Jarvis, Philadelphia Mr.
Andrew Johnston, York Town, 10 copies William Jones, Philadelphia, 6 copies
K
Mr. Harman Kinsey, Bristol Charles Kirkham, Philadelphia Henry Kammerer, jun.
do
L
Mr. Richard Lloyd, Bristol James Lawrie, Philadelphia Samuel Longcope, do John
Loraine, jun. do Abraham A. Lot, New York Joseph (...), Germantown Thomas
Langworth, Newark Anthony Lapre
M
Robert D. Murray, Esquire. Newton Mr. Archibald M'Elroy, Bristol, 10 copies John
M'Elroy, Dunkiss-Ferry, 10 copies Robert Morris, jun. Morrisville, 2 copies
John Martin, Philadelphia James M'Glassin, do George Washington M'Elroy, do S.
M'Farlane, New York Mr. William M'Glathery, Montgomery county James M'Dowell,
do John M'Kean, Bristol Timothy Merrick, do Joseph Minnick, do John Murray, do
Henry Muhlenberg, Philadelphia John M'Ara, do James M'Glathery, do Benjamin
M'Dowell, do William Morris, do William P. Meeker, do James Magoffin, do
Alexander Mitchell do Barnabas M'Shane, do William Mott, do Samuel R. Marshall,
Barbados George Myers, Germantown B. Moore, Philadelphia John Mease, jun. do
John Massey, do Robert Mease, do
N
Mr. John Neilson, Philadelphia William Nigley, do George Nisbett, do Winnard
Nice, Germantown Robert Newlin, Morrisville David Nichols, Newark Samuel
Nichols, do
O
Mr. James O'Donnell, Philadelphia David Olden, Princeton Aaron Ogden, Newark
P
Mrs. Pancake, Germantown Mrs. Mary Anne Parkinson, Philadelphia Mr. Titian R.
Peale, do Z. Philips, do Mr. George Pain, New Mills George Pain^er, Burlington
Jonathan Pursell, Bristol Thomas Pearson, Darby Peter Payan, Trenton Thomas
Porter, Richland Samuel Pleasants, jun. Philadelphia Richard Parkinson, do
Ralph Philips, New Jersey
R
Mr. Charles Redifer, Montgomery county Job Roberts, Esquire. do William Rodman,
Bensalem Gilbert Rodman, do Samuel Richards, Bristol Edward Rawley,
Philadelphia Robert Ralston, jun. do John Roney, do Gabriel Ralston do John
Rodes, do William Ross, do John Ralston, do Ralph Rutledge, do Joseph Reed,
Esquire. do Jonathan Rhea, Esquire. Trenton
S
Mrs. Prudence Sleter, Lancaster Mrs. Elizabeth Scaife, Philadelphia Rev.
Abraham Supplee, Montgom. county Mr. Peter Supplee, do Henry Scheetz, do Justus
Scheetz, do George Stockham, Bristol James Scanlan, Philadelphia Samuel Sansom,
jun. do Samuel Sears, do John Smith, do Robert Stinhouse, do William Sergeant,
do Mr. Jno. Scott, Bedford county Thomas Sealy, Barbados William Sims, New
Jersey Benjamin Stevens, Philadelphia William Smith, do William Sansom, do
T
Mr. Hugh Tomb, Bristol John Thomas, Montgomery county George Tailor,
Philadelphia William Traylor, do Charles Teas, do Peter Thomson do Thomas
Thursby, do Isaac Thomas, do Jonathan Tyson, do John Thomson, do George Tailor,
do Thomas Twigey, New Jersey, 2 copies
U
Mr. Benjamin Volentine, Philadelphia Peter Weise, Montgomery county Robert
Webb, Philadelphia -- Weston, do 10 copies John Willis, do Jonathan D.
Woodruff, do Charles White, do Peter Walters, do James C. Williamson, do.
Josiah West, do Augustus Willit, Bensalem Benjamin Walton, Bristol B. Wouters
Christopher Wertz, sen. Bucks county Anthony W. White, Brunswick Kearney
Wharton, Philadelphia H. W. Weston, do
Z
Mr. Jacob Zeller, Philadelphia 10 copies
As there are several subscription lists not yet received, such subscribers
whose names may be omitted will please to excuse the editors, as these lists
could not be procured without retarding the publication of the work.

IN THE PRESS, HALYBURTON's ENQUIRY INTO THE PRINCIPLES OF THE MODERN DEISTS.
Corrected by the Rev. Dr. CHARLES NISBET, President of Dickinson College.
The seasonableness of this publication must be evident, -- when the Deistical
writings of Thomas Pain, and others, have obtained such a universal circulation
in the United States. Answers to these writings have been numerous, and some of
them justly celebrated; such as Bishop Watson's, and some others. But neither
Bishop Watson nor any other writer has treated this controversy in the manner
Mr. Halyburton has done. He has taken the Deists upon their own ground, and
resting the matter chief^y on the internal evidence of the holy scriptures,
proving their divine original from their (...) upon the ^^a^ts and consciences
of men, and (...) the utter insufficiency of nature's light to lead mankind to
happiness, has ^ut every fiber by which the arguments of ^^^tical writers are
supported. -- It is hoped the friends of Divine Revelation will cheerfully
grant their support to a work so much calculated for the benefit of the present
and rising generations.

Subscriptions received by John Montgomery, merchant, Carlisle; James Short,
merchant, York Borough; Alexander Cunningham, store-keeper, Washington; J.
Hepburn, J. Cowden, and A. M'Donald, Northumberland; George Gosman, in
Cortlandt street, and James Young, schoolmaster, New York; Dr. Stillman,
Boston; John M'Culloch, No. 1, North Third-street, and by the Publishers, in
George-street third door below South-street, Philadelphia.

Lately Published, And for sale by JOHN M'CULLOCH, No. 1, North Third-street,
and by the publishers, (Price 60 Cents) MEMOIRS OF MR. HALYBURTON. With a
recommendatory Preface by Dr. WATTS.


