EXPOSTULATORY LETTER TO GEORGE WASHINGTON, OF MOUNT VERNON, ON HIS CONTINUING
TO BE A HOLDER OF SLAVES.

By Edward Rushton.

Oh! reflect -- that your rights are the rights of Mankind,
That to all they were bounteously given,
And that he who in chains would his fellow-man bind
Uplifts his proud arm against HEAVEN.
LEXINGTON: Printed by JOHN BRADFORD, on Main Street, 1797.

IN July last, the following letter was transmitted to the person to whom it is
addressed, and a few weeks ago it was returned under cover, without a syllable
in reply. As children that are crammed with confectionary, have no relish for
plain and wholesome food; so men in power, who are seldom addressed but in the
sweet tones of adulation, are apt to be disgusted with the plain and salutary
language of truth. To offend was not the intention of the writer: yet the
President has evidently been irritated; this however, is not a bad symptom, for
irritation causelessly excited, will frequently subside into shame, and to use
the language of the moralist, "Where there is yet shame, there may in time be
virtue --."

Liverpool, February 20, 1797.
EXPOSTULATORY LETTER TO GEORGE WASHINGTON.
IT will generally be admitted, Sir, and perhaps with justice, that the great
family of mankind were never more benefited by the military abilities of any
individual than by those which you displayed during the memorable American
contest. Your country was injured, your services were called for, you
immediately arose and after performing the most conspicuous part in that
bloodstained tragedy, you again became a private citizen, and unambitiously
retired to your farm -- I here was more of true greatness in this procedure,
than the modern world, at least, had ever beheld; and while public virtue is
venerated by your countrymen, a conduct so exalted, will not be forgotten. --
The effects which your revolution will have upon the world are incalculable. By
the flame which you have kindled, every oppressed nation will be enabled to
perceive its fetters; and when man once knows that he is enslaved, the business
of emancipation is half performed -- France has already burst her shackles,
neighboring nations will in time prepare, and another half century may behold
the present besotted Europe, without a Peer, without a Hierarchy, and without a
Despot. If men were enlightened, revolutions would be bloodless; but how are
men to be enlightened, when it is the interest of governors to keep the
governed in ignorance? "To enlighten men," says your old correspondent, Arthur
Young "is to make them bad subjects." Hurricanes spread devastation: yet
hurricanes are not only transient, but gives salubrity to the torrid regions,
and are quickly followed by azure skies, and calm sunshine. Revolutions too,
for a time, may produce turbulence; yet revolutions clear the political
atmosphere and contribute greatly to the comfort and happiness of the human
race. What you yourself have lived to witness in the United States is
sufficient to elucidate my position. In your rides along the banks of your
favorite Potowmack, in your frequent excursions through your own extensive
grounds, how gratifying must be your sensation on beholding the animated
scenery around you, and how pleasurable must be your feelings, on reflecting
that your country is now an asylum for mankind; that her commerce, her
agriculture, and her population are greater than at any former period, and that
this prosperity is the natural result of those rights which you defended
against an abandoned cabinet, with all that ability which men, who unsheath the
sword in the cause of human nature will, I trust, ever display. Where liberty
is, there man walks erect and puts forth all his powers; while slavery, like a
torpedo, benumbs the finest energies of his soul.

But it is not to the commander in chief of the American forces, nor to the
President of the United States, that I have aught to address; my business is
with George Washington, of Mount Vernon, in Virginia, a man who,
notwithstanding his hatred of oppression and his ardent love of liberty, holds
at this moment hundreds of his fellow beings in a state of abject bondage. --
Yes! you, who conquered under the banners of freedom -- you, who are now the
first magistrate of a free people, are, (strange to relate) a slave-holder.
That a Liverpool merchant should endeavor to enrich himself by such a business
is not a matter of surprise, but that you, an enlightened character, strongly
enamored of your own freedom; you who, if the British forces had succeeded in
the Eastern states, would have retired with a few congenial spirits to the rude
fastnesses of the Western wilderness, there to have enjoyed that blessing,
without which a paradise would be disgusting, and with which the most savage
region is not without its charms; that you, I say, should continue to be a
slave holder, a proprietor of human flesh and blood, creates in many of your
British friends both astonishment and regret.

You are a Republican, and an advocate for the dissemination of knowledge and
for universal justice -- where then are the arguments by which this shameless
dereliction of principle can be supported? Your friend Jefferson Besides those
of color, figure and hair, there are other physical distinctions, proving a
difference of race. They have less hair on their face and body. They secret
less by the kidneys, and more by the glands of the skin, which gives them a
very strong disagreeable odor. This greater degree of transpiration renders
them more tolerent of heat, and less so of cold, than the whites. Perhaps too a
difference of structure in the pulmonary aparatus, which a late ingenious
experimentelist Crawford, Stockdale, London.
has discovered to be the principal regulator of animal heat, may have disabled
them from extricating, in the act of inspiration, so much of that fluid from
the outer air, or obliged them in expiration, to part with more of it. They
seem to require less sleep. A black, after hard labor through the day, will be
induced by the slightest amusements to sit up till midnight, or later, though
knowing he must be out by the first dawn of the morning. They are at least as
brave, and more adventuresome. But this perhaps may proceed from a want of
forethought, which prevents their seeing a danger till it be present. When
present, they do not go through it with more coolness or steadiness than the
whites. They are more ardent after their females; but love seems with them to
be more an eager desire, than a tender delicate mixture of sentiment and
sensation. Their griefs are transient. Those numberless afflictions, which
render it doubtful whether Heaven has given life to us in mercy or in wrath,
are less felt, and sooner forgotten with them. In general, their existence
appears to participate more of sensation than reflection. To this must be
ascribed their disposition to sleep, when abstracted from their diversions, and
unemployed in labor. An animal whose body is at rest, and who does not reflect,
must be disposed to sleep of course. Comparing them by their faculties of
memory, reason and imagination it appears to me, that in memory they are equal
to the whites; in reason much inferior, as I think one could scarcely be found
capable of tracing and comprehending the investigations of Eucl^d; and that in
imagination they are dull, tasteless, and anomalous.

See Jefferson's notes on Virginia, page 230.


has endeavored to show that the negroes are an inferior order of being; but
surely you will not have recourse to such a subterfuge. Your slaves, it may be
urged, are well treated -- That I deny. Man never can be well treated who is
deprived of his rights. They are well clothed, well fed, well lodged, etc.
Feed me with ambrosia, and wash it down with nectar, yet, what are these, if
liberty be wanting? You took arms in defense of the Rights of Man -- Your
negroes are men -- Where then are the rights of your negroes,? They have been
innured to slavery, and are not fit for freedom. Thus it was said of the
French; but where is the man of unbiassed common sense who will assert that the
French Republicans of the present day, are not fit for freedom? It has been
said too by your apologists, that your feelings are inimical to slavery, and
that you are induced to acquiesce in it at present merely from motives of
policy; the only true policy is justice, and he who regards the consequences of
an act rather than the justice of it, gives no very exalted proof of the
greatness of his character.

But if your feelings be actually repugnant to slavery, then are you more
culpable than the callous hearted planter, who laughs at what he calls the
pitiful whining of the Abolitionists, because he believes slavery to be
justifiable, while you persevere in a system which your conscience tells you to
be wrong. If we call the man obdurate who cannot perceive the attrociousness of
slavery, what epithets does he deserve who, while he does perceive its
attrociousness, continues to be a proprietor of slaves. Nor is it likely that
your own unfortunate negroes are the only sufferers by your adhereing to this
nefarious business; consider the force of an example like yours, consider
howmany of the sable race may now be pining in bondage merely forsooth, because
the President of the United States, who has the character of a wise and good
man, does not see cause to discontinue the long established practice. Of all
the slave holders under Heaven, those of the United States appear to me the
most reprehensible; for man never is so truly odious as when he inflicts upon
others that which he himself abominates. When the cup of slavery was presented
to your countrymen, they rejected it with disdain, and appealed to the world in
justification of their conduct; yet, such is the inconsistency of man, that
thousands upon thousands of those very people, with yourself amongst the
number, are now sedulously employed in holding the self-same bitter draught to
the lips of their sable brethren. From men who are strongly attached to their
own rights, and who have suffered much in their defense, one might have
expected a scrupulous attention to the rights of others; did not experience
show, that when we ourselves are oppressed, we perceive it with a Lynx's eye;
but when we become the oppressors, no noontide bats are blinder. Prosperity
perhaps may make nations as well as individuals forget the distresses of other
times; yet surely the citizens of America cannot so soon have forgotten the
variety and extent of their own sufferings. When your country lay bruised by
the iron hand of despotism, and you were compelled to retreat through the
Jerseys with a handful of half naked followers; when the bayonet of the
mercenary glistened at your back, and liberty seemed about to expire, when your
farms were laid waste, your towns reduced to ashes, and your plains and woods
were strewed with the mangled bodies of your brave defenders; when these events
were taking place, every breast could feel, and every tongue could execrate the
sanguinary proceedings of Britain; yet what the British were at that period;
you are in a great degree at this -- you are boastful of your own rights -- you
are violators of the rights of others, and you are stimulated by an insatiable
rapacity, to a cruel and relentless oppression. If the wrongs which you now
inflict be not so severe as those which were inflicted upon you, it is not
because you are less inhuman than the British, but because the unhappy objects
of your tyranny have not the power of resistance. In defending your own
liberties you undoubtedly suffered much; yet if your negroes, emulating the
spirited example of their masters, were to throw off the galling yoke, and
retiring peaceably to some uninhabited part of the western region, were to
resolve on liberty or death, what would be the conduct of the southern planters
on such an occasion? Nay, what would be your conduct? You who were born in a
land of liberty, who, early learned its value, you, who engaged in a perilous
conflict to defend it, you who, in a word, devoted the best years of your life
to secure its permanent establishment in your own country, and whose anxious
recollection, whose sympathetic feelings and whose best wishes are irresistibly
excited, whenever in any country you see an oppressed nation unfurl the
banners of freedom. See the answer of the president of the United States to the
address of minister, plenipotentiary of the French Republic, on his presenting
the colors of France to the United States.
Possessed of these energetic sentiments, what would be your conduct? Would you
have the virtue to applaud so just and animating a movement as the revolt of
your southern negroes!

No! I fear both you and your countrymen would rather imitate the cold blooded
British cabinet, and, to gratify your own fordid views would scatter among an
unoffending people, terror, desolation and death. Harsh as this conclusion may
appear, yet it is warranted by your present practice; for the man who can boast
of his own rights, and yet holds two or three hundred of his fellow beings in
slavery, would not hesitate in case of a revolt to employ the most sanguinary
means in his power, rather than forego that which the truly republican laws of
his country are pleased to call his property. Shame! Shame! That man should be
deemed the property of man, or that the name of WASHINGTON should be found
among the list of such proprietors!

Should these strictures be deemed severe or unmerited on your part, how comes
it that while in the northern and middle states, the exertions of the virtuous
Quakers and all other philanthropists, have produced such regulations as must
speedily eradicate every trace of slavery in that quarter; how comes it, that
from you these humane efforts have never received the least countenance? If
your mind has not sufficient firmness to do away that which is wrong the moment
you perceive it to be such, one might have expected, that a plan for
ameliorating the evil would have met with your warmest support; but no such
thing. The just example of a majority of the State has made no visible effect
upon you; and as to the men of Maryland, of Virginia, of the two Carolinas, of
Georgia, and of Kentucky, they smile contemptuously at the idea of negro
emancipation, and, with the State Constitution in one hand, and the cow-skin in
the other exhibit to the world such a spectacle, as every real friend to
liberty must from his soul abominate.

Then what is man, and what man seeing this,
And having human feelings, does not blush
And hang his head to think himself a man.
The hypocritical bawd who preaches chastity, yet lives by the violation of it,
is not more truly disgusting, than one of your slave-holding gentry bellowing
in favor of democracy. Man does not readily perceive defects in what he has
been accustomed to venerate; hence it is that you have escaped those
animadversions which your slave proprietorship has so long merited. For seven
years you bravely fought the battles of your country, and contributed greatly
to the establishment of her liberties; yet you are a slave-holder! You have
been raised by your fellow-citizens to one of the most exalted situations upon
earth, the first magistrate of a free people; yet you are a slave-holder! A
majority of your countrymen have recently discovered that slavery is unjust and
are gradually abolishing the wrong, yet you continue to be a slave-holder! You
are a firm believer too, and your letters and speeches are replete with pious
reflections on the Divine Being, Providence, etc. yet you are a slave-holder!
Oh! Washington. 'Ages to come will read with astonishment' that the man who was
foremost to wrench the rights of America from the tyrannical grasp of Britain,
was amongst the last to relinquish his own oppressive hold of poor and
unoffending negroes! In the name of justice, what can induce you thus to
tarnish your own well earned celebrity and to impair the fair features of
American liberty with so foul and indelible a blot? Avarice is said to be the
vice of age. Your slaves, old and young, male and female, father, mother and
child, might, in the estimation of a Virginian planter, be worth from fifteen
to twenty thousand pounds. Now, sir, are you sure that the unwillingness which
you have shown to liberate your negroes, does not proceed from some lurking
pecuniary consideration? If this be the case, and there are those who firmly
believe it is, then there is no flesh left in your heart; and present
reputation, future fame, and all that is estimable among the virtuous, are, for
a few thousand pieces of paltry yellow dirt, irremedibly renounced.

EDWARD RUSHTON.


