THREE SERMONS PREACHED At the Meeting House of the People commonly called
QUAKERS, In HOUNSDITCH, On TUESDAY Evening, JULY 19, 1796. THE TWO FIRST BY
WILLIAM SAVERY, AND THE LAST BY GEORGE DILLWYN, OF NORTH AMERICA.

TAKEN IN SHORTHAND BY JOB SIBLY.

THE THIRD EDITION.

LONDON, PRINTED; AND NEW YORK, Reprinted and sold by ISAAC COLLINS, NO. 189,
PEARL-STREET. 1797.

I therefore, Prisoner of the Lord, beseech you, that ye walk worthy of the
vocation wherewith ye are called: with all lowliness and meekness, with long
suffering, forbearing one another in love. Endeavoring to keep the unity of
the spirit in the bond of peace. There is one body, and one spirit, even as ye
are called in one hope of your calling; One Lord, one faith, one baptism: One
God and Father of all: who is above all, and through all, and in you all.
Ephesians. iv. 1 -- 6.

THESE words, or nearly these, were the expressions of one of the Apostles,
which have taken hold of my mind since I last sat down, and they have brought
with them the remembrance of the unwearied labors of the primitive believers
for the preservation of the unity of spirit in the bond of peace; that there
might be no rents or schisms found among us, and that being called with the
same hope as they were called, we all might be found one in him in whom they
have believed. And I believe, my friends, that it ought to be the concern of
every Gospel Minister this day. Indeed I can say when my mind is most
encouraged with hopes; the most ardent desire that I feel is, that
notwithstanding there have many divisions taken place, yet the Lord may again
so reveal himself to his professing visible Church, as to bring us all back
into Unity of Spirit in the bonds of unspeakable peace. And I have no doubt at
all in my mind, but that every jot and tittle of the prophetic declaration of
the Lord's Servant will in due time be fulfilled; that the Church will at
length be one, and her name one; they will all speak the same language, and the
watchmen will all see eye to eye.

And it may, my friends, be brought about by a variety of circumstances,
unfathomable to human wisdom; for indeed all human wisdom is confounded in
searching the things of God. But the glorious dispensation wherein we live,
whenever and wherever it is submitted to, produces the same effect as it did in
the beginning, it confounds the wisdom of the wise; it brings to naught the
understanding of the prudent; so that no flesh shall glory in the Lord's
presence; that no man might say that others teach him; but that, by God's holy
spirit, he was enabled to search the deep things of the mystery of his glorious
kingdom.

This is my faith; and it remains to be very evidently so. Human wisdom is
sufficient in many respect for our accommodations through this temporary abode;
it may keep us in some degree of rectitude; and amongst men it may also conduce
greatly to the happiness of individuals; and if closely attended to, it may be
of service to nations and kingdoms. But when we speak of it, as fathoming the
everlasting mystery of God's kingdom, I believe we shall always be short.

It is not -- it cannot be, that through the fallen wisdom of man, he can take
in the knowledge of things divine and spiritual. It was not so in the primitive
Church, though Paul was a great man, who was brought up at the feet of
Gamaliel; and was skilful in all the learning of his times; it was not this
learning that made him a minister of the Gospel; for by this, and while he
continued merely subject to, and under the dominion of this wisdom, he was a
persecutor of those that preached, and lived in the faith, as it is in Jesus
Christ. And what made him a minister then? Why; when it pleased GOD, said he,
in revealing his Son, Jesus Christ, he was not disobedient, he was not
gainsaying to the will of God; but when he believed himself called in this
manner, he went forth, but not with the enticing words of man's wisdom; but in
the foolishness of the Cross. For though he was a great and learned man, he was
first, before he could be a great man in the promoting of the truth of the
gospel upon earth, he was first to be reduced, he was first alarmed; and the
first lesson which all ought to learn is, If any man will be wise, let him
first become a fool. If any man believe, or say, that he knows any thing, he
knows nothing as he ought to know; for so says the Apostle.

Now, my friends, it may appear very extraordinary doctrine, at this time of
day, but it was such as the apostles preached, such as they had approved, and
by means of which they obtained the ministry of reconciliation, which they had
received, and first were taught; that no man could know of the things that God
had sent, but by the spirit of God, who revealed it to them; this was the
foundation of their learning in the School of Christ, and other foundation can
no man lay than that which has been already laid. This I am persuaded of in my
own mind, that we must all, not only the ministers, but all those that would
have a part in Christ, that would indeed enjoy an inheritance with him -- they
must all be taught of him and learn of him; they must lean upon his arm, the
glorious and blessed deliverer of his people; they must have their exalted
imaginations cast down; they must know and feel the power of his word, to bring
them into humility, that they may be taught of him. And I believe there is an
assent to the truth of this in many solid seeking minds that are now present.
Though human learning and science in itself, when properly applied for the
purposes which it is fitted and designed for, are by no means to be despised;
nay when those who are qualified with what is called a liberal education, are,
by the influence of the spirit of Jesus Christ, brought down into a true
Christian state, they may be eminently qualified for the promoting of truth and
righteousness in their day. So that I would not have you mistake. We make a
distinction it is true: but when the Lord unites them, when he lays his hand
upon those that have many advantages in the world, he may make them greater
instruments in his hand. But I may also say, that some of the greatest
ornaments that ever I have known in the church of Christ, who I believe were
qualified for the preaching of the gospel in the demonstration of the spirit
and of power, have been even among those that have had little advantages of
this kind. As it was in the beginning, the same eternal power reigns; the God
that commanded light to shine out of darkness having shone in their hearts,
they dwelled and abode in those vocations wherewith they were called, and they
have become ornaments in the church, and dignified ministers of Christ. But, my
friends, what I most want is, to see the people brought back again in essential
matters; (I believe that many of all denominations believe in the revelation of
the spirit of the God of peace) and to instruct them in the way to everlasting
peace, and to wait for it, and to receive it. There are many sheep, as Christ
said, who hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, though they may
be little known of the world. "My sheep they hear my voice, and I know them,
and they follow me; and I will give them eternal life, and none shall be able
to pluck them out of my hands. My father who gave them to me, is greater than
all, and none shall be able to pluck them out of my heavenly father's hands."
O! that you my dear fellow pilgrims and christians of every rank, and of every
name, may experimentally know that you have need of Christ, then though you may
be hidden from the world, yet the Lord knows, the Lord hears your prayers,
the Lord will magnify his power for your redemption and deliverance; and no
other arm can deliver you from the power of death and hell. This I believe: and
let us, my friends, be laying aside all controversies about those things which
have so long oppressed Christianity by contention, needless and unprofitable
contention. I think you will unite with me in saying this has been the case. O!
how much needless and unprofitable contention there has been in the church of
Christ, in the professing church of Christ; for if it had been true and solid
-- the foundation in Christ -- there would have been no such contention; this
is my faith; they would have been united in the bonds of peace and union for
ever; they would have harmonized; the same divine spirit would have spoken
nearly the same language in all; there would have been no room for contention;
there would have been no necessity for contention, if the Church of Christ had
kept hold of the foundation which God laid in Sion; and if they had remembered
the rock upon which he declared he would build his Church, there would have
been a different appearance. Now I believe the same divine Lord is offering, in
everlasting mercy to all men, to bring them back again into this bond of
fellowship, to put an end to all rents and divisions, to all contradiction, and
persecutions to the end of the world. And what I desire very much, is, that all
people may have faith in God, and in the revelation of his spirit, so as not to
let us depart from the ancient doctrine. It is here the Church of Christ has
been erring; by departing from this ancient doctrine which never was, by all
that we can find in the whole New Testament, designed to be changed. There
never was to be another way, nor another dispensation to after ages, than was
granted and given to the primitive believers. This I am bold to declare.

There was to be no new way into the sheepfold, but that way Christ himself
declared. "I am the door into the sheepfold. By me, if any man enter, he shall
go in and out and find pasture." Well then, it is for this we sit down and wait
in silence, that we may know the promises which are yea and amen for ever; that
we may know the fulfilling of that which Christ has promised; to be with his
church to the end of the world. "Lo I am with you always -- to the end of the
world." And for the fulfillment of this promise there are many, I am persuaded,
that not only wait seriously in silence, but are waiting and meditating upon
God, and that be of the same opinion that I am, it being the way, the most
effectual way, to be taught of this glorious mystery, which God, in the riches
of his mercy, teaches to all those that love him. But men are carried away too
much with practices they have been long accustomed to; we are more filled with
prejudices; and we have a great deal less charity about us than some would
suppose themselves to have. We do not judge with that candor and impartiality
we ought; nor think of things even of the highest importance as we ought to do;
as wise men and wise women, as heirs of immortality and eternal life. Now I
believe here is a large number present, who really are enquiring after the
truth, and who are solicitous that they may know the truth and be established
in it, more than they are to be of any names or forms.

Well, I believe there are those who are God's favorite children, under a
variety of forms and observations, that I for my own part feel by no means to
be essentially necessary to believe of any importance, nor positively commanded
to be continued. For when the soul is in love with God, has found the living
and eternal substance of all the shadows, and all the figures that ever were in
the world, it has no need of elementary things; why, my friends, there were
many types and figures in former dispensations that were commanded for a time,
and they are said to be a schoolmaster to bring to Christ, who nailed the
handwriting of ordinances to the Cross.

But let every man be persuaded in his own mind; let every man attend to the
light of Christ in his conscience; and follow the dictates of it fully and
faithfully. If thou believe with all thine heart that it is thy duty in the
sight of GOD to be plunged into water in the name of the Father, Son and holy
Ghost, according to thy faith so be it to thee, let no man condemn thee.
Nevertheless, I believe that when the substance of all types is fully found and
felt, when he reigns in his kingdom of the heart, when he seats himself there,
and when we have to partake of that bread which came down from heaven, we have
no need of elementary things; for that is sufficient for the soul to nourish it
up to eternal life.

There were in the beginning many of the primitive believers who continued for
a season in abundance of observations; they were even loath to renounce the
dispensations that were passed away by the coming of Christ; and even when
Christ's Kingdom was come into the hearts of them that received it, and when he
had finished his work his Father had given him to do, and brought in the
glorious dispensation, by which men might draw nigh to God; even then, there
were some of the Apostles that thought it was necessary to use circumcision;
they could not leave off education, they could not leave all at once those
forms they had been accustomed to. Not so when it was brought to the Council at
Jerusalem; they, according as they felt and understood matters, reasoned
concerning them; they heard one another in the great council of Jerusalem. But
what was the result of this council? why it clearly came to almost an end of
all these things; and the day of Christ, it appeared, was advanced; they did
not think these things necessary. They said, it seems good to lay upon you no
greater burden than that ye abstain from fornication, from things offered to
idols, from things strangled, and from blood; these were all the council at
Jerusalem laid upon believers -- to observe no greater burden; and some of
which at this day are not accounted to be any more necessary than the washing
of one another's feet was; though our Savior did do this to manifest though he
was Lord of all, he was even in the form of a Servant of all, and condescended
in the depth of humility to wash his disciples feet. Here was a great example
and pattern. "And he commanded them strictly (if we literally take the
expressions of Scripture,) as I your Lord and Master have washed your feet, so
wash ye one another's feet."

Nevertheless, I believe these were outward signs, and manifested Christ's
humility, which he wished them to pattern after in the whole of their conduct,
and tenor of their lives; not confined to washing of feet only, but that they
might be servants one to another. "Let him that will be great amongst you be
the servant of all." O that ye, my friends, may set aside all the contentions
concerning these things; let every man be persuaded in his own mind. But let us
come to essential things, those things without which no man can be saved; let
us search more after things that are certain, great, and fundamental points of
doctrine, which I believe not only those that profess a faith in Christ, but
that all men, of all nations, of every kingdom, tongue, and people -- people
that have the fewest advantages amongst the race of (...), yet they have had
this one advantage. The Lord has written his Law in their hearts, he has
fulfilled his promise that he declared to his prophet, "I will write my law in
their hearts, I will place it in their inward parts;" so that when we talk of
men as of different nations, we shall find that they all agree, if they are men
really seeking after the truth, and after that foundation which will bear them
out when they come to put off mortality.

All men will acknowledge that the work of righteousness is peace, and the
effect of righteousness, is quietness to the soul, and assurance for ever. All
men acknowledge this. I have been amongst some men that have been called the
most barbarous names, as savages. I have spent a great deal of time with them;
aye, some months, and I found they had not been instructed, they had not had
the great advantage that we have. The preaching of the Gospel was little known
amongst them; yet clear outlines of what the Gospel of Jesus Christ requires,
were written upon their hearts; they could say in terms of equal importance,
verily there is a reward to the righteous, verily there is a God that judges
in the earth, verily we are accountable beings, verily there is a state of
immortality; there is a blessed and happy one for those that, according to the
best of their knowledge, serve the great Spirit in this world; who do no wrong
to their neighbor, who live in God's fear, who lift up their hearts to him and
implore his assistance. These are the sentiments the wild inhabitants of
America are taught, whom we are pleased to call barbarians: so that (I believe)
if men would keep to the foundation, if they would not scatter hither and
thither after a variety of non-essential things, they would sooner be brought
into greater harmony and union. For there is but one GOD over all, who is above
all, and through all, and in you all? Aye, may some say, is he in us all? Why,
there is nothing more continually enforced upon us, in all the Doctrine of the
New Testament than God and Christ in us the hope of Glory; and I believe this
is not a time for those who have the benefit of reading the Scriptures to deny
this; it is a great benefit, a peculiar advantage which God has favored us
with, who profess the name of Christ; it would be a great advantage to some of
you, my young friends, were you more acquainted therewith, if there was more
delight in reading the Scriptures than there is in the present generation, and
less delight in reading those things that make a jest of heaven and hell, of
GOD, and all things serious; I believe it would be a great advantage to many of
the rising youth.

I know that I for many years so abused my time in reading novels, romances,
plays, and a variety of trumpery of this kind, that I had no relish for the
Scriptures; and when I was brought to read the words, they were a sealed book
to me; I saw nothing in them, I had no delight in them; I would take them up
and lay them down, and knew nothing of their value. -- So it is with many; it
it so with an abundance, both in Europe and America; much time is spent upon
trifles; upon those things that, instead of giving any real solid enjoyment,
only tend to banish all those rational and well-founded pleasures and
enjoyments which the Christian experiences.

This is my testimony, because I know what I say. I was for a number of years a
slave to them: I know where they led me to, and I know where they led me from.
But thanks be to God, there is something which all men may experience, that
will set their souls at rest; that will relieve them from an anxiety after
every burden of the passing hour.

A man that loves to contemplate, (and it is truly consistent with the dignity
of a rational being, that is here for a few years, and presently makes his exit
and is seen no more) a man that can devote his leisure hours, to contemplate
the nobility of his rank in creation, the majesty and greatness of that
adorable Being who created all things by the word of his power, and who can
contemplate that glorious scene that awaits the righteous, has more real
enjoyment than all the pleasures ushered into the world. And this I am
persuaded of, that a private sober meditation, and an evening's walk of a wise
man, thus informed, is indeed the highest gratification that noble and rational
beings, as we are, can enjoy. And that in wherein I want you, my young friends,
to set out right. In the early part of your youth, Search the Scriptures; they
are books of inestimable value. One of the great men of this nation, who some
ages ago was preparing to die, when he came to lay down his head upon his bed
of sickness, and saw the awful hour of death was come -- What were his
lamentations and expressions? Why he said, O! that I had served my GOD as
faithful as I have served my king; it would have been better for me now! He had
been a great and famous statesman. Now, my friends, this was his experience,
and it may not be incompatible with the Christian. Another of the same kind,
whom I do not now recollect, but it was another man of eminence, that said, if
he had his time to go over again in this world, he would spend much of it in
reading David's Psalms and Paul's Epistles. And I wish you, my young friends,
in this employ. Then you would find for yourselves that the doctrine therein
contained would lead you to God's kingdom. You would find indeed that God was
nigh unto you. He is not, "says Paul, afar off from any one of you, for in him
ye move and have your being." This was their constant testimony. Nay, before
the coming of Jesus Christ, they acknowledged his divinity. And shall we go
back and say it is no such thing? -- Did not Socrates and Seneca, and many
others, acknowledge the divinity was he that led them, that showed them that
they were immortal, and caused them to aspire after those things that would
recommend them to the notice of God, and to great and everlasting peace? O! my
friends, there are a cloud of witnesses from generation to generation that the
Lord has raised up in this manner to declare to the people, that He it was, and
He it is, who is the true teacher of all wisdom, of all that wisdom which
comes down from him, which is pure, peaceable, gentle, and easy to be
entreated, full of mercy, full of good fruit; and it is by this wisdom that we
should be brought into the harmony that I have been speaking of. O! that men
would wait for it, that they would ask for it, and that there were more who
practiced retirement in the world, and more sincerity of heart even in our
prayers! for what is it to be saying, "Lord, Lord," from the cradle to the
grave? If we are not desirous to be taught of him, and to do his will, what
will it signify? Many in the hurry of life do not consider him sufficiently,
but when they are brought to lay down upon a sick bed; O! how changed do things
appear, in how different a point of view. I have been before many at death; I
have visited the chambers of those that have been penitent; I have heard their
expressions; many a time have I seen the work of the Lord upon them: How it
has changed them! One of the brightest young men that ever I knew, I may say,
the delight of his acquaintance; yea the pride of all gay company, who was the
life, or as some say, the soul of every place he visited; for his gaiety,
humor, and wit -- O! the Lord in his wisdom did not suffer him to remain in
this way, but laid his hand upon him; and laid him upon a sick bed, and when he
was there, such was the state of this bright young man, that, when he was
brought to see that he had not many days to continue in this stage, he required
to see some whom he thought were Religious, and when he saw them, O! how his
heart was tortured! and what were his expressions? why upon this wise, "I,
(says he) have seen abundance; I know men and things, I have passed through and
been at different Courts, I have tasted a great deal of what the world calls
enjoyments in this earth; I have been educated in some religious principles;
but I saw that they were too narrow for me, they confined me too much, there
was not room and liberty enough for me; I read BOLINGBROKE, HUME, and PAIN,
and I had almost encouraged myself therein. But now it has pleased the Lord to
bring me upon this bed of sickness; I know I have a Physician, but no medical
aid can help me now, my friends." I went to him, I found him wet with tears; he
told me his former companions neglected him; and he said, if they had not
neglected me, they would have yielded me no comfort; they would have been
stings to my conscience, and as daggers to my heart, because I have been in
their state. Now, said he, what would you have me do in this situation? O, said
he, I want to believe, but I have been so dark, and encouraged these principles
so long, that I cannot believe as I ought to do. Well, this was truly a
sorrowful and affecting scene to me, and so it would have been to many if they
had been present. The Lord, no doubt, is rich in mercy, and I trust he visited
his soul, even the last few days of his life; and to him I commit it. I cannot
say that infinite Love did not even at that late hour accept him. But O! my
friends, let us, while we have strength and liberty, let us with all our hearts
apply them to those things which will be something to lean upon in such an
hour! For this indeed is the end of all Religion, talk of it as long as we may;
so to live as not to be afraid to die; that we may so die when it shall please
the Lord to separate us from this body that we may live before him for ever!

The second Discourse of W. Savery.
There are certain obligations that are the same in all Nations and Countries;
and I would not have you believe, my friends, that when I spoke of the outward
and typical things, such as washing, such as abstaining from blood and things
strangled, which are not observed in the present day by a large number of
Christians, that I meant to censure any part of the moral Law. No: I believe it
never can be dispensed with; but the whole of those things that the councils of
Jerusalem forbad, are forbidden in all nations as an eternal decree. I thought
I might so far explain upon this head, as I do not know, my dear friends, when
it may please the Lord to bring me with you again. I feel my heart bound in
affection to many of the Citizens of London, I wish their everlasting welfare;
I seek not you, nor any thing that is yours to myself; but all men and my own
soul also, to God; that we may with reverence of soul seek him if happily we
may find him; that those that are convinced by the light of Christ in their
consciences, of what their duty is to God, may, with child-like submission and
obedience to his holy will, conform to it in all things; for if it has pleased
God to enlighten thee in any matter or thing, as soon as he is pleased to show
thee what thou ought to do, and thou neglectest thy duty therein, then thou
becomest condemnable before him; no man will be condemned for that which God
has not shown him; but I believe it is possible for men to neglect the means
of obtaining the knowledge of the will of God. Not being serious enough, not
seeking it in the way it is to be found. Not asking wisdom of him who gives
liberally to all men and upbraideth none. Our all is at stake. If I am an
enthusiast in these things, the Lord preserve me an enthusiast to the end of my
days. I believe that the whole world, and all the advantages that any can
obtain, will be indeed as the smallest dust in the balance against the
salvation of the immortal foul: therefore it is that I am serious, and
concerned for my own soul and for those of others. And I believe that if those
who are convinced of the ways of Truth and Righteousness, if they with
simplicity of soul acknowledge the truth, and live in the truth of the divine
law, they will not only have a gladdening hope of a glorious immortality in the
world to come; but they will also be favored with an hundred fold of peace and
joy in this life. I think I know it from some degree of experience, I never
knew what true and real enjoyment was in the Lord's temporal blessings, till it
pleased him to touch my heart and bring me to a sense of my state, and of
obedience to him. I am firmly persuaded that the way the Lord Jesus Christ has
cast up for those that will finally be heirs of his kingdom, is neither gloomy,
nor improper for a reasonable, sensible, dignified mind to walk in; there is
liberty enough, there is room enough; we do not want to rob you of any thing;
neither did your Redeemer and Savior, that was truly valuable even in the
enjoyment of the present world, not of any temporal blessing which God has
granted; the true and solid enjoyment of them is found only by a truly
religious mind. O! the glorious liberty there is in the truth as it is in
Jesus! What are all the opinions of men in comparison of it? how trifling, how
light, their senseless contradictions; they are ever changing! There is, my
friends, a glorious and blessed liberty in the truth as it is in Jesus, that I
would to God all men might enjoy; that so his Church might once more put on her
beautiful garments: that all those uncharitable dispositions which are
harbored by some, though I hope in this enlightened day, not by a great many,
may be removed; God is doing them away, seeking thus his own work; he is
abolishing those things which kept us so long at a distance secretly, and will
bring them to naught; this is my opinion; and more and more charity will
prevail: let us cherish, let us with one accord be willing to live in it, and
to die in it; then indeed shall we embrace one another as brethren. There will
be no such thing as hurting, or doing one another an injury: the peaceable
kingdom of Jesus Christ our Savior, being established and set up in the hearts
of men, would put an end to WAR, and all the horrors appending to it in the
world. O! that men might once more embrace one another as brethren, and enjoy
the glorious liberty of children of one common family.

GEORGE DILLWYN.
I hope it will not lessen the Solemnity, which is manifest in this meeting, by
expressing the desire which attends my mind upon the behalf of visited minds
that are present; which is, that they may bear in remembrance the declaration
of an experienced servant of Christ; that, that which is to be known of God, is
manifested in man; for God has showed it unto him. Now this, according to my
apprehension, points to the necessity of withdrawing our dependence from all
inferior objects, and waiting upon God, that we also may attain to the
experience of being instructed by him. And the more we become instructed of
him; the more we shall be guarded against those, and looking after those,
against whom our blessed Lord formerly cautioned his visited followers; when he
declares that many would come in his name, calling their attention outward;
"lo, (says he) I have told you before, many should come in my name, and say, lo
here is Christ: and others, lo there is Christ: but I say unto you, Go not
forth after them." Here is doctrine, my friends, do not look out for that which
is to be known within. "Go not forth after them;" for, (says he) "the kingdom
of God is within you." Now here is a number present, I have no doubt, who are
often addressing him in words, and repeating over and over again, "Thy kingdom
come:" -- But where are we, my dear friends, looking for his kingdom? Cannot
you believe him who has thus declared, "The Kingdom of God is within you?" It
consists in the government of his Spirit. And therefore when ye say, "Thy
kingdom come, Thy will be done upon earth, as it is in heaven," are ye
sincerely desirous of having your minds and affections brought under the
government of his holy Spirit? Do not you remember, when he was about to be
taken away from his disciples and followers, in the time of his outward
appearance, where he says, "If I go not away the comforter will not come; but
if I go away, I pray unto the Father, and he shall send another comforter, even
the spirit of Truth. And when that spirit shall come, he shall reprove the
world of sin, and of righteousness and of judgment." Now this is what we wait
for in our times of retirement, "When he the spirit of truth shall come, he
shall bring all things that I have told you to your remembrance; and will lead
you and guide you into all truth." Now my dear friends, look at these things,
and bear them in remembrance in your hours of retirement, when separated one
from another. Do not look outward: remember that which is to be known of God is
manifested in man: for there God will reveal it to you in his own way and in
his own time. And let your obedience keep pace with your knowledge; for the
kingdom of God consists not in meats and drinks, and in outward ordinances, but
in righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost; for the work of
righteousness is peace, and the effect of it will be at last quietness and
assurance with God for ever.

THE END.
A SERMON PREACHED AT THE MEETING HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE CALLED QUAKERS, PETER's
COURT, St. MARTIN's-LANE, On the LORD's DAY-EVENING, July 25th, 1796. By
WILLIAM SAVERY, OF NORTH AMERICA.

TAKEN IN SHORTHAND BY JOB SIBLY.

LONDON, PRINTED; AND NEW YORK, Reprinted and sold by ISAAC COLLINS, NO. 189,
PEARL-STREET. 1797.

THE present is an age of many uncommon events, and the curious observer will
not be inattentive to what they tend; and indeed many are filled with
conjectures where these things will end. It is a day also, wherein men of
science have been exceedingly curious in their researches; they have brought up
some new and before unheard of things to view: and probably some of them may be
turned to advantage to their country, in ages to come, though they are not now
altogether usefully employed in the world.

But I have been thinking, my friends, of one Science worth them all; for if
men were even to possess the power of counting all the luminaries of heaven,
and to measure the magnitude of all the heavenly bodies, even of those that lay
beyond the reach of the present observers; if they knew all the hidden arcana
of nature, what would it avail, if they were destitute of the knowledge of God
and themselves?

Know ye not your own selves 2 Corinthians, xiii. 5.
? So said the Apostle. A great lesson: One of a later time had this reflection
upon it, "Man know thyself, enough for man to know."

Now I conceive, my friends, here is a wide field unexplained by many; and
wherein I am convinced the richest treasure is to be found; the most worthy of
all knowledge; viz. the knowledge of God and ourselves. Yea "to know Thee the
only true God and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, is life eternal." Jesus the
Son and Sent of GOD. Well, my friends, there is no doubt but that there are a
number present, who at times have been employed in this most important and
serious enquiry. But there are many men who can spend day after day, and year
after year, in labor and search almost indefatigable, without being weary, in
things that concern only this short and uncertain state of being; who are not
patient enough, to devote the same time, the same attention, the same
dedication of their faculties and powers which God has given them to the most
important and enriching of all sciences.

And this is, my friends, what I have been lamenting both in my own country and
in this. For I believe, as surely as the great Creator and Ruler of the
universe has granted us powers and talents for the most glorious and dignified
purposes, so, I believe, that one day all men will be brought to an account of
their stewardship. The infidel in time of health smiles at this! "But, (this I
acknowledge) though men may live fools, yet fools they cannot die." Men, while
they are diverting themselves, in the passing enjoyments of the present life,
however vain and little, and below the dignity of their nature, may be so
amused, and suffer them so to take up their faculties and powers, that they may
never be in a capacity to think and feel sufficiently after the most solid and
important thing. Certainly, my friends, this is a cause of sorrow to every
thinking mind; and I know that it is, and ever must be, a cause of real
affliction to every gospel minister; who believes in the sacred and
unchangeable truths which have every confirmation, that reasonable minds could
dare to ask, or that was necessary for the wise and beneficent GOD to give.
(this is my faith) Thus ministers, I am persuaded, under every name, professing
Christianity, must behold with sorrow their fellow pilgrims traveling toward
an endless eternity; involved in things below, and unfit for those that they
ought to be employed in, laying up a foundation against the time to come; that
so they may lay hold of eternal Life. For I conceive there are very few,
perhaps none at all, that could entertain a belief that they are not immortal.
"If Man is not immortal, GOD'S unjust," so said one, a pious writer, "to send
him in this world in the condition that we see him, even in his best estate."
For verily, as said one of the ancient Scripture writers, "Every man in his
best estate is vanity," take him in whatsoever condition of life you may. Those
that are in the enjoyment of so much of this world's goods that they can
compass every pleasure (falsely so called) that the world and all its
auxiliaries can give, know they no moments of sadness? my persuasion is they
have many. A man of pleasure is a man of pain: this may appear a paradox, but
it is no more than true. Those that are lovers of pleasure, more than lovers of
God, are in every condition of human life, men of pain. The infirmity of a
man's body the spirit of a man can bear, but a wounded spirit who can bear?
There are many who can support with much fortitude and patience, lingering pain
of body; they can meet death with some apparent degree of composure and
fortitude, provided always that the sting of death be drawn, not else; if a man
is in his rational understanding. For the common infirmities of a man, the
spirit of a man can bear; but a wounded spirit who can bear?

Well, my friends, it is in great mercy that the Lord wounds us: it is not thou
that woundest thyself. An house divided against itself can never stand. Do
thou thine own self condemn thyself? No: it is as clear as any axiom in Euclid;
it cannot be, it is impossible; an house divided against itself can never
stand. What is it that condemns, what is it that disquiets, what is it that
unsettles and confuses the mind of those that have been guilty of enormous
crimes? What is it that causes the murderer to fly from country to country, and
find no resting place for the sole of his feet; no bed soft enough for him to
repose upon? I say it is Conscience. What is CONSCIENCE? The voice of GOD, I
say, in thy soul: this is conscience. -- The same voice that called to Adam,
when he had transgressed the commandment of his Creator; "Adam, where art
thou?" Adam was weak enough to conceive he could conceal himself from Him that
had even made the earth, the sea, and the fountains of waters! "Adam, where art
thou?" Why be knew that he had transgressed the command of God, and he was
afraid: "I heard thy voice, and was afraid." Well, so may every sinner, great
or little; and know this is the cause of their fears: "I heard thy voice and
was afraid." It is in vain, I conceive, for men to talk of the principles of
their education; those things are as women's tales; they are old as the
creation of the world we live in; and will remain, I believe, until the
firmament shall be dissolved as with fervent heat, and earth and all that are
therein again dissolve. This is my faith: and all the wise and all the good
have borne testimony similar to this; that have written, and that have spoken
in the various ages of mankind; they have borne testimony to the Law of God
written in their hearts. How futile, how weak for men to talk of divisions and
subdivisions in these things! to speak of natural conscience; and the same
futility in their arguments, in their lessons, and in those convulsions that
there are when we see the great, awful and tremendous works of God that appear
in the earth; to say it is Nature! --

How futile, for men not to look up through nature to nature's GOD, to confuse
and confound themselves and one another. This is my faith, and I do not want
you to receive it any further than it may coincide with the best light and
knowledge which God in his mercy has granted you. I do not want you to pin your
faith upon mine. No: we seek not man's silver, nor gold, nor applause, nor any
thing that is their's: we call not the people together to amuse them with fine
words, and fine speeches, but with that philanthrophy which ever ought and ever
must accompany the mind of a true gospel minister; and will induce him (if he
has really been benefited by the knowledge of GOD himself) to desire with
ardour of soul that all men may come to the same experience. I have reason to
say, God be thanked, for me who was in darkness as thick as any of my
contemporaries, concerning God, and the things of God, swallowed up in enticing
pleasures, and vanities of this life, as much as many of you, and perhaps most
of you, and as far from the knowledge of that peace which passes all natural
reason and understanding of men, as any could be. Thanks be to God, who is
wise, who never leaves any of us in this state, without compunction of soul,
from season to season: who follows us in the night revels, who follows us into
the halls of licentiousness, who follows us in the midst of our gay career with
our companions, and wounds our most joyful scenes -- this I am clear of: so
that in the midst of laughter I can freely acknowledge, I have been still sad
-- because my heart was sad. "I heard thy voice and was afraid."

Well, my friends, there is a great deal said about religion in the world; men
have (shall I say) hewn out a variety of systems, that have been strong in
their inventions, and various in the powers which God has given them, to reason
upon, each one upon their own system. It is not systems nor opinions -- It is
neither high church nor low church that I am speaking about now. There is but
one true and living church, the whole world over. Men may call themselves what
they please: the world calls me a Quaker -- and thee a Dissenter in another
form -- and thee a member of the Established Church -- But what is all this? My
friends, these are names, they are distinctions amongst men: but are they
distinctions with God? Does he know high church, and low church? Does he
descend to inquire whether thou art a methodist or a presbyterian, thou a
baptist, thou a roman catholic? No: But is thy heart right? Art thou sincere in
thy desires to know him and to serve him? This is the great point: to know him,
and to know thine ownself; the situation in which he has placed thee, who is
the Author of thy being; the reason he has given to thee that Being, and the
glory which he proposes to crown it with, if thou will, with simplicity of
heart, live in his counsel, and in his fear, and avoid those things that are
repugnant to God's purity, with a pure and truly enlightened mind. Men have too
long been tossed about those things, I am persuaded of it; and a day, I am glad
to hope, is speedily advancing, when there shall be little heard of it in the
world. The sword of persecution is in a great measure (through the Lord's
mercy) staid; and yet there is room for it to be more closely sheathed. I
believe men are coming back to think for themselves; to feel for themselves as
they ought to do; to inquire after the truth; not of leaders of sects or
parties, and of men appointed for to lead them in a certain way -- but to
inquire after it wisely -- independent one upon another -- and dependant only,
in this point, upon God, the fountain of all wisdom and knowledge. (This is my
belief.)

So that, my friends, as I said before, I am not come among you to gather you
to my party; but that all men may become so inquisitive for themselves, that
they may be joined to GOD and CHRIST in their part. For there are, I am
persuaded in my own experience, men that I have found both in this country and
in my own country, (where all men are free to possess and believe whatever they
please, as to opinions of religion) I say there are those among the various
professors, whom I can embrace as children of one great and universal Parent,
in the truth, as it is in Jesus.

So that it cannot be -- it would be contrary to charity that I should seem to
be bigoted to any party upon earth; but I want that all men should search and
see for themselves! "Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh unto you as he did
in the primitive ages to the primitive believers. He was known of the
patriarchs; He was known of the prophets; He was known of the apostles; they
knew that He was in them; they knew His power created all things; they knew He
filled all things; "He is not far (says the learned Paul) from any of you, for
in Him ye live, move, and have your being." But He perceived the learned
Athenians, who were exceeding wise in their day, he perceived that when he
passed by their altar how dark they were in the most essential of all sciences.
"For (says he) I perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious:" for as
I passed by your altar, I saw this inscription upon it -- "TO THE UNKNOWN GOD"
-- and "that God, whom ye ignorantly worship, declare I unto you." This was the
business of the apostle amongst both Jew and Gentile; they were not ashamed to
confess their opinion, yea even in the Athenian courts among the great
philosophers. Yea many philosophers, even before the coming of Jesus Christ in
the world, declared to the same divine principle, that I believe would unite
all men in the ground and bottom of one substantial ever-enduring felicity. --
They declared (we may read diverse of them) -- they spoke of the Divinity that
there was ONE that enlightened their minds to know good from evil, and that
inspired them to do things that were worthy of their dignity as men and
immortals. -- They frequently testified to that holy principle, which, after
all, is the groundwork of all religion in every sort of people; even in
idolatrous nations. For JESUS CHRIST came not partially to enlighten one, and
no other part: He was "The Word that was in the beginning; that was with God,
and that was God" -- and that was afterward made flesh, according to the will
of the father, who could as easily have sent him in that body to every corner
of the world (we may readily suppose) and a thousand times more so to natural
conceptions, for all things are easy to him as the Creator of the world, and
all things that are therein. But I say he came to enlighten the world with a
greater degree of light than ever was before -- to bring light and immortality
more abundantly to life in the world. And a great and especial favor I account
it to be. And I believe the more we are acquainted with the Scriptures, the
more we shall all be made to acknowledge, they are a special favor of God to
mankind: containing, in the simplicity of their doctrine, the most deep and
heavenly mysteries; and sublime beyond all the writings of any philosophers in
the world, be they ever so great; or any that are called divines: yea, they are
simply, and virtually in their doctrines, truly sublime beyond all the soaring
opinions of men! I want the present generation therefore to read for
themselves. Search the Scriptures for yourselves: let no man come unto you, and
say, "I have studied them for many years -- I have seen them in many languages
-- and I can instruct you better than you can be otherwise instructed;" for
depend upon it, they have some end to answer, let them come and say what they
may. Because the same eternal Spirit that gave all the mysteries that ever were
revealed to mankind, to the prophets or the apostles, or any of the ministers
whatever, remains to be resorted to this day, the same as in that day; and the
same eternal Spirit must open the Scriptures that gave them: for nothing
inferior to the power that gave the glorious and blessed doctrine of the New
Testament, can reveal and open them to thy understanding and mine; not all the
men of science in the world, I am persuaded: for we see it really and truly
fulfilled, the Lord has confounded the wisdom of the wise, and brought to
naught the understanding of the prudent, when they have meddled with these
things. One saying, this is the true interpretation; and another saying, that
is the true interpretation; and another saying as it were, I am wiser than
thou. Oh, what confusion has happened amongst the poor professors of
Christianity, wherever this has been the case! Now here are some with the
Scriptures in their hands (and, indeed, there is one got over into my nation,
where I live, that is leading the people by the ear, with the Scripture in his
hand, endeavoring to prove things diametrically inconsistent with the very
book that he holds forth!) My friends, how is it, or where shall we find TRUTH?
I see the people are scattered exceedingly by it; some run for a season after
one man, and they say, "This is the man; and now (say they) I have found him; I
never heard one before like this man:" and in a few months (they being unstable
as water) they are cast another way: -- and then another comes and says
abundance of fine things, who is very learned and very elegant, and they say,
"This man is come to this place, we will go and hear him." Alas, alas! how this
is descending from the dignity in which we were created, and from the resource
which God has granted; for "God is Light, and in him is no darkness at all;" he
is the light of the world, and the life of men; the light that has enlightened,
and will enlighten, every man and woman that comes into the world." So that
the prophets before the coming of Jesus Christ, could say in confidence,
beholding the glorious days in which we live, and which some of them desired to
see, for many prophets and righteous men have desired to see one of these days
which ye see, but could not; yet with an eye of faith they beheld it afar off:
"Abraham saw my day (says Christ) and rejoiced:" Why, how could Abraham see his
day, but through the inshining of that glorious light which gave him to see the
things which God, in the riches of his mercy and wisdom, was designing to do in
the earth? This is the spirit of prophecy.

Well, my friends, have we all received a measure of this light? "If any man
says that he has not the spirit of Christ, then he is none of his. That which
is to be known of God is manifested in man," says the apostle.

How plain, how simple are these doctrines! Is it any wonder that the prophets
and the apostles, who were inspired of God, should speak in this manner of the
gospel day: That we have no need that any man teach us -- that "we have no need
that any man should say to his brother, or to his neighbor, know thou the
Lord; for all men shall know HIM from the least to the greatest of them." For
"I will write my law in their hearts, I will place it in their inward parts;
they shall be my people, and I will be their GOD."

Now this is the doctrine, my friends, which the apostles preached -- and it is
the faith which we contend for. We have no new doctrine to preach unto the
world, but the same that has passed the test of many ages, the same that the
holy men of God continued to declare both before and after the apostles, and
that has been confirmed throughout all the Scripture. This is the faith that
the apostle spoke of, when he made mention what faith it was that he contended
for. He said he had no need to say, "who shall ascend up into heaven, that is,
to bring Christ down from thence, or who shall descend into the depth, that is,
to bring up Christ again from the dead. The word is nigh thee, even in thy
mouth, and in thy heart: and this is the word of faith that we preach;" and no
other word of faith can ever be preached consistent with the gospel of Christ;
and this adhered to, my friends, would be sufficient to reconcile all the
contradictory differences that are in the world. They would be taught one and
the same thing -- it would put an end to all evil censuring one another. It
would put an end to all persecutions; to all prejudices one against another; to
all boasting one against another, as though I was more holy than thou; as if my
system was better than thine, and I was nearer the kingdom of heaven than thou
art -- all being taught of this divine, eternal, all-sufficient WORD. The
people would speak the same language: this I am persuaded of. But while they
remain to be in the manner that many are, saying, "I am for Paul, I am for
Apollos, and I am for Cephas," and are not willing to be gathered to be of
Christ -- for, as said the apostle, "Was Paul crucified for you? -- Is Christ
divided?" Can there be any divisions in his church? No; I conceive not. There
can be no rents and schisms; Christ and his church being united, they are one
in him. And where they are one in him, a glorious and blessed unity will
subsist, for "one is your master, and all ye are brethren." -- Then there would
be no contention for superiority in the church: no such thing; it would be
impossible. For if any one of you would be the greatest of all, let him become
the servant of all. This would be the way to be great in the church of Christ.
For it remains to be the same now that it was in the days of Christ's flesh;
the way to be the greatest is to be the most humble; to be the most virtuous;
to be full of love and charity toward our fellow creatures and our
fellow-probationers. I say, this is the only true way to seek dignity in the
Church. There would be no aspiring after great places and employments in it.
Though I have charity to believe that even some who have been called
dignitaries of the Church (for indeed the Lord bears with many of our
weaknesses and infirmities) have been zealous and honest contenders for the
Faith, as far as it pleased HIM to enlighten them. But I am confident of this
in my mind, that the day is hastening, wherein there will be one Shepherd, and
one Sheepfold, the whole world over. For this is the true nature of the gospel
dispensation. But, oh, alas! what does it appear to be in this day? -- How
different from the primitive state, when it was declared, that, "By this shall
all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another." Well,
look over Christendom at this day: Does the Mohammedan behold our light as it
shines? When they take the Testament in their own hands, they are as wise to
discern as we are; they are men of the same powers, and possess the same
faculties to compare things as we do. Well, what would an honest Mohammedan say?
"Thou endeavourest to convert me to be a Christian: but for what purpose? Are
the Christians wiser -- Are they better -- Are they more virtuous than an
honest Mussulman? Give me an instance of it. Do they love one another better
than the Mahometans?"

Well, my friends, do not be afraid of this inquiry, it is the way to truth; it
is the way we must examine things; and, as I said before, it is a day of
inquiry: let us not be afraid of inquiry. Men have been afraid of bringing
things to the test. But I believe it will not be sufficient to think so long:
and I invite you that are men of freedom, of independent minds, search for the
truth for yourselves. Let no man lead you in those things which God is
sufficient to direct and lead you into himself, who is the Fountain of all
wisdom and knowledge; who has given thee powers and faculties to discern thy
way, and to judge what he has called thee into existence for; what is thy
business in thy passing through the present transient state of being, so that
thou may inherit eternal life.

O Christendom! thou ought to be a light to enlighten the Heathen, and a
glory; aye, the glory of GOD, to the ends of the earth! How they must look upon
us! For even the Mahometans, having the New Testament in their hands, how must
they stand amazed, when they come to compare these things with that our great
Leader said: "By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, because ye
love one another." And are there any people more at discord? -- Are there any
more at variance either in a private or in a public national capacity? -- O!
how this has wounded me! -- bear with me, my friends, I do not wish to hurt any
mind present by any means whatever. If thou think not as I think, thou will
not be judged by my conscience; but by the light thou have received thyself.
And if thine heart condemn thee not, then will thou have faith and hope toward
God; and I condemn thee not neither: but while we are endeavoring to seek
after truth, do not let us be afraid of coming to the knowledge of it.

But, my friends, let us see whereabouts we are -- If the foundation of God
stands where it used to be; whether we are really upon the same unchangeable
foundation which the apostles were? And if we are, then we may be in the same
glorious and holy confidence which they were; we may rejoice with a hope that
will not fail us in the hour of death; and that we shall receive a crown of
immortality, if we are building as they built; and if we are adhering to the
same ground of faith which they did. Well then, some may say, they have
examined these things. It will not do us any hurt to examine them over and over
again. TRUTH is precious, and no matter how much time is spent in investigating
of it. For, sure I am, if the gospel spirit had been continued to this day,
thousands and ten thousands that have fell in the field of battle would not
have died in that way, and the carnage and devastation that desolated so many
parts of Europe would have been prevented. O the cry of the widows and the
tender orphans in the several countries of Europe! Ought this to have been? Or
would it ever have been, if men had kept to the principle which taught them not
only to love their brethren, but to love their enemies; to do good to them that
persecuted them, and that despitefully used them; that so they might be the
children of their heavenly Father, who causes the rain to descend, and the sun
to shine, both upon the just and the unjust.

"Why (some may say) Do not talk of things impossible. Is it possible for a man
to be brought into such a condition as not to revenge injuries and insults?" I
believe it is; and that it is the disposition that every Christian ought to be
brought into -- not to revenge injuries and insults, but to bear them with
patience.

Some may here say, "What would thou have us to be cowards?" No; but heroes
in the LAMB'S army. And who is there that needs be ashamed to be in the LAMB'S
army, to gain the victory? It would be a thousand times more magnanimous indeed
to put up with little injuries, one with another, than to resent them in anger;
it shows a low and little mind to do that; great minds are above it. And the
Christian sees a state exalted far beyond this, and that we are even called to
it, the very form of our prayer testifies: "If thou forgivest not those that
trespass against thee, (our blessed Lord said) neither will thy Father which is
in heaven forgive thee." These are solid and unshaken Truths, that all the
sophistry of men will never be able to invalidate. -- "Forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us" -- Who then can say
this prayer, and still continue in a spirit of revenge; and say to his brother,
an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth; thou have injured me, and I will
injure thee? Well, then those ought to be careful upon what terms they lay
their salvation; for the Lord is here prescribing the very terms in his
excellent prayer, "Forgive us our trespasses, only as we forgive them that
trespass against us: this is the true meaning of the prayer. No further prayest
thou when thou usest the prayer given by our blessed Lord himself. But, my
friends, though I do not want to enlarge a great deal, I want to see the
peaceable standard of righteousness exalted, both in this nation and in all the
nations of the earth; and that the spirit of persecution and destroying of one
another might be entirely done away, by all being brought down into the meek
spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ; and be, in some measure, as he was, when he
was persecuted even to death on the cross. (O how meekly he bore it for our
sake! -- And shall we not bear with one another? I trust all will confess we
ought to do.) He said in the depth of his agony, "Father forgive them:" though
he could have called down legions of Angels to those corrupt and wicked men;
yet he said in meekness (which I believe many have partook of, in a measure,
since this day) "Father forgive them, for they know not what they do." And the
next martyr, Stephen, when he was brought to the gates of the city, and was
stoned to death, he followed his Lord in the same disposition; he kneeled down
when in the midst of them, and said, "Lord lay not this sin to their charge."
Having lifted up his eyes to heaven, and petitioned his Savior to receive his
soul, he at last said, "Lord lay not this sin to their charge:" and so saying,
he fell asleep in the arms, no doubt, of his glorious Lord and Master, whom he
followed even to death.

Now, my friends, there is no new law; there is no new dispensation. Many of
the martyrs were of the same faith, which they had attained through God's
mercy, and the influence of his Spirit upon theirs; and the same disposition of
mind also. So that when they were led forth in the days of persecution, which
the church was persecuted with, O how meek did some of them deliver up their
souls to God, and their bodies into the hands of their wretched persecutors!
There were some hundreds of them fell a sacrifice for their faith and belief in
God. How pious, how calm did they go out of the world! Not reviling because
they were reviled: By no means. Not giving abuse for abuse, but contrariwise,
blessing their persecutors. This was the condition of those, knowing (as the
apostle said) they were thereunto called, that they might also inherit a
blessing.

Well, my friends, these are so many monuments of God's adorable mercy and
power: and the same God reigns over all in this day; and he is as able to
support us in the faith once delivered to the Saints, as he was in that day:
and I trust those that are earnestly concerned to inquire after it, will know
it to their comfort, without the aid or assistance of any man whatever. GOD is
as sufficient for these things now as he was in all the generations that are
past. It only wants application of mind -- Serious solemn meditation, and
contemplation upon the things of God; then all would know the Truth, and
abiding in it, they would all be made preachers of Righteousness in their
several situations in the world. Aye, one of those that was persecuted, when
she was brought before her persecutors to answer for her faith, was
nevertheless furnished with that wisdom which confounded the wisdom of the wise
that was amongst her persecutors; so that they thought she had answered wiser
than them all. And a certain little maid, when many were brought forth to the
stake, was brought before her persecutors, they said to her, "And what can you
say, my little maid, for your faith?" Why, said she, "I am not able to contend
for CHRIST; but I am able to do more: I am able to suffer for Christ." Now, my
friends, I am persuaded this would be the condition of all of us; by inward,
solid, reverent inquiry after it. Then you would not be astonished to see
people sit down in silence, either in their own houses, or in the Assembly of
God's people; so that God would condescend to be with them, and enlighten their
minds. For "if any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives liberally,
and upbraideth none." O may the God of all mercy, wisdom, and power, hasten
this day; enlarge the love of professors of Christianity one toward another:
throw down all the walls of opposition, which were built up in the day of
departure from the fountain of living water; and bring us again to drink at
Shiloh's stream; that all the heritage may drink at the fountain itself; and
the world once more rejoice in knowing him to reign and to rule over all; whose
right it is, and ever will remain.

THE END.
A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE THE PEOPLE COMMONLY CALLED QUAKERS, AT THE BOROUGH
NEW MARKET, ON THE LORD'S-DAY-EVENING, JULY 31st, 1796. With the Prayer before
the Sermon; BY WILLIAM SAVERY, OF NORTH AMERICA

TAKEN IN SHORTHAND BY JOB SIBLY.

LONDON, PRINTED; AND NEW YORK, Reprinted and sold by ISAAC COLLINS, NO. 189,
PEARL-STREET. 1797.

The Prayer before the Sermon.
O THOU great adorable Being, who art exalted in Goodness, and Majesty, and in
Power, beyond all finite comprehension, who dwell in the light whereunto
none can approach thee, but as thou art pleased in thine adorable mercy to open
an access to us; and though Heaven is thy Throne, O God, and Earth is thy
footstool, yet we remember that thou have promised that thou will condescend to
look down upon the poor, and upon the contrite, and those that tremble at thy
word.

O Thou, unsearchable in holiness, and glorious in power, we pray thee to look
down upon the present congregation this evening, with an eye of compassion and
divine pity. Thou beholdest all men wheresoever they are scattered upon the
face of the whole earth, with an equal eye of mercy, and thou hear the
prayers of all those who draw nigh unto thee with sincerity. Be pleased, O God,
to cause thy animating presence to be with us, to bring the minds of all the
people into an holy solemnity before thee. We know, O God, that no man can
promote thy glorious Cause of Truth and Righteousness in the earth, but as thou
art pleased to be with him, and to furnish him with the necessary
qualifications for the great and important work whereunto thou art calling thy
servants and ministers. O blessed Father, forsake them not, but be pleased, as
in generations that are past, to pour forth thy Spirit upon thy ministers,
that, in that wisdom which thou art pleased to grant from season to season,
they may go forth in thy name, with the Word of Reconciliation and Faith.

O Lord, Thou have many souls that are wandering up and down this great and
populous country, who are seeking after thy glorious and blessed rest, which
thou alone can lead them into the enjoyment of. We humbly and reverently pray
thee, O God, to draw the minds of the people more and more off from thy
ministers to thyself. O gracious God, unseal the fountain whereat thy prophets,
thy apostles, thy servants, in all generations, have so freely drank and been
filled. Cause those that hunger and thirst after righteousness to be more and
more filled at thy bountiful table; that so, Father, there may be among all
ranks of the people more of the knowledge of thee, and more of an increase in
following after thee in the way to everlasting rest.

O God, thou see how weak we are; how surrounded with infirmities, how
blinded with prejudices, how turned aside by a variety of fluctuating opinions;
cause, we pray thee, thy holy uniting Word to be read more and more in the
hearts of the people. Sound the alarm, we pray thee, yet louder and louder to
them that are at ease and forgetful of thee: that so, Father, there may be many
more brought to drink at the fountain of thy Goodness and Mercy, and with
reverence of soul to acknowledge that thou art good, and worthy to be
worshipped here, and to be obeyed and served by all the workmanship of thy
hands. O gracious Father, proclaim a sign in this assembly, while with one
accord, in humility of soul, which thou have granted us, we may draw nigh unto
thee, and offer up at this time for all thy former mercies, and for thy present
mercies; and gather us together in this manner, O Father, ascribing unto thee
glory and honor, thanksgiving and praise, which are thy due, both now and for
evermore.

THERE are some weighty and interesting expressions which we find in the
Revelation of John Revelations xiv. 7, 8.
, that appear to be my duty, since I last took my seat, to mention in this
assembly.

And I (John) saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the
everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every
nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice, "Fear
GOD and give glory to Him; for the hour of His judgment is come; and worship
Him that made heaven and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters.

Now John, we find, calls this the everlasting gospel; which seems to be
comprised in a very short and compendious manner; which no man in all this
congregation, I trust, can be at a loss to understand. And though, my friends,
we may he something various in our opinions concerning modes, manner and forms
of worship, yet I believe there are very few of God's rational creation any
where, either amongst those who are professing the name of Jesus Christ, or
those that have not been favored to be acquainted with the gospel as we are,
but are sensible that To God belongs glory, honor, and worship; who behold him
as the great and universal parent, the glorious, blessed and all-wise Architect
of the universe, and all things that are therein, and that sustains all things
by the word of his invincible power; for the same almighty creating word that
brought all things into the glorious order in which we see them, that said, let
there be light, and there was light -- No man can dispute but he at his
pleasure also could again say, let there be darkness, and there would have been
darkness: Again, let the heavenly luminaries depart from their appointed
spheres, and let all things resort to their primitive rest, and it would
undoubtedly have been done. So that he is not only the cause of all things, but
the gracious supporter, daily and hourly sustainer of all that he has made,
without whose blessed providence there is not an ear of corn or blade of grass
could possibly be produced. So that, my friends, a daily dependence upon that
GOD who created us -- all his creation calls for, and with every solid and
reflecting mind it will naturally produce, an offering of worship, adoration,
and praise; and I am glad in believing, my friends, that here are in this large
multitude a considerable number who worship GOD in spirit and in truth; though
differently educated, and of various opinions in things of little importance,
but in the great, important, and essential point of every man's duty, speak the
same language; and I believe, my friends, this is the case both with the
nations that are called refined, and with those that are termed barbarians. GOD
has placed his law in the hearts of all men; he has written there the great and
essential duty which he requires at our hands, and under every name and in
every nation "they that fear God and work righteousness (so said the apostle)
are accepted of him." So that, my friends, he makes no such distinctions as
many of us poor, finite and weak creatures are apt to make; he does not confine
acceptable worship to this nation, to this particular sect or opinion, nor to
this particular Island: but I believe there are prayers ascend to him as sweet
incense before his Holy Altar, both in the wilderness of America, and in the
dark abodes of Africa, and in all the corners of the earth, wherever there are
sincere and upright souls.

Well, my friends, this must certainly arise from some extensively and
universally diffused principle in the souls of men, that with one common
consent they agree in the great fundamentals of all Religion; this must be
something more -- even the infidel, if he considers, must allow it is something
more -- than human policy. Well, what is it then? What is it that prepares the
heart thus acceptably to offer unto GOD! -- What is it that teaches all men
that HE ought to be worshipped? Why, it is nothing more, nor any thing less
than the same eternal all-creating word, who fills all things, and is as
intimately near to and independent of us as the very air we breathe; "for,
(said the apostle) He is not far off any one of you; neither can he be; for in
him we live, move, and have our being." Therefore it was that he exhorted them
to "seek the Lord, if happily they might find him." Well, my friends, this is the
great business of every Gospel minister; to labor to bring people here -- to
seek for themselves; to seek the Lord, if happily they may find HIM -- Who is not
far off any one of you; who is both with you, and in you, and without whose
animating power thou could not exist one moment; neither could any man think
a good thought or do a good action, except the Lord be with him. This is my
faith. So that, my friends, it has taught me to get rid of all those narrow
distinctions which many have been making, and which some are yet industriously
endeavoring to build up between even the followers of the blessed Jesus; who
ought always to be united -- always in harmony -- always ONE, IN HIM. But, for
my own part, having now for a number of years endeavored to seek the Lord
impartially for myself, I have known him in this way; I have learned the Gospel
in this way. For I have been clear in my opinion that all the inventions and
works of men, by their fallen wisdom, have only scattered the spiritual sheep
in Jacob and divided them in Israel; and have split the christian church into
so great a variety of names, and so great a variety of forms. For indeed we
find many of them are rooted in prejudice one against another, Therefore the
inquiry of this day seems to be, not so much, is it THE TRUTH that these men
hold; but is he of my name? -- or what name does he hold? this seems to be the
foolish inquiry of many who can accept little or nothing except it comes from
those who are established in the same opinion, and within the bounds which they
have built, and called after their own name among men. But, my friends, my
belief is, that the Lord is arising in the earth to put an end to these
divisions and distractions in his church; to bring down all those who have been
exalted in their imaginations in supposing that they only were the people of
GOD, in their form and in their manner, and reject all others.

O! how far off from that benevolence of soul which the christian religion
inspires, appears faith of this kind! -- And yet there are some remaining even
in this enlightened day, who suppose and believe that without the pale of their
particular church there can no man be saved.

But whence come these opinions? why I believe the Lord originally sowed good
feed in his church, but while men have slept in carnal ease and security, an
enemy has entered, scattered and divided them; and sown tares among them. Now,
for my own part, it appears to me to be the great work of every diligent
shepsherd of our Lord Jesus Christ to labor to bring all men back to the
foundation -- to the one true and overlasting fold. To remove all those
opinions that have kept the world at variance so long -- even in those that
have loved God with sincerity of heart in their different professions among
christians. O! how shy they have been of one another -- how afraid of coming
into the company of one another -- how they have shunned one another! Aye, my
friends, can this be agreeable to the glorious and dignified gospel of Jesus
Christ that we profess? No: I trust no man will believe it can. Well then, the
great inquiry ought to be, is there not one universal guide -- one holy,
divine, and unchangeable principle, by which we may all again be gathered into
unity? Is there no such thing as TRUTH in the earth? I believe there is; and
that all men may find it too, who are studiously desirous so to do -- who
prefer the knowledge of the truth to all things else -- who are making every
secondary consideration give way to their obtaining it; and when they have
found it, to live in obedience to it. This is the sincere heart's enquiry among
all the various names; that GOD will be pleased to teach them the way of TRUTH,
and establish them in it. So that they shall all speak the fame language, that
there may be no diversity of opinion in the ground and foundation of their
belief. For this holy principle is one -- it teaches plain, simple, and easy
doctrine; comprised within a narrow compass, it does not confound and confuse
the world with variety of mystical opinions, which are hard, or which if is
impossible to comprehend. But the TRUTH upon which glory, immortality, and
eternal life depend, is plain, free, and simple: "To know THEE the only true
God, and JESUS CHRIST whom thou have sent, is life eternal."

Well, my friends, how shall we know this? -- where shall we find it? -- how
shall we be assured that we are really in this knowledge -- and in this faith?
why, I think, if men -- I speak now in much charity, for I do not boast of my
own seize, but what I feel and believe to be true from my own experience,
and which appears to me to be consistent with the doctrines both of the Old and
New Testament, that I am not ashamed to declare, though it were to thousands
and ten thousands; for I say from the very beginning there was an ETERNAL
PRINCIPLE -- there was an holy unflattering and unchangeable GUIDE placed in
the souls of men, which if they had attended to, all men would have been led
safe. "It is shown to thee, (says the prophet) O man, what thou should do,
and what the Lord thy God requires at thy hands; to do justice, to love mercy,
and to walk humbly with thy God." -- It is shown to thee what is good. -- These
are the forcible expressions -- to "DO JUSTICE, to LOVE MARCY, to WALK HUMBLY
WITH THE GOD."

And here I believe is the ground work and foundation of all religion. Can any
man say it is not shown to him, without the assistance of ministers, or any
human learning, without the assistance of men learned in the schools, men of
science, men of many languages, or men of profound education -- we can attain
the knowledge of these saving truths, which are so essential for us to know,
believe and practice? So that no man has any occasion, by any means whatever,
to go inquire of his neighbor, or of his brother, concerning these things. So
that, my friends, though indeed we have invited you here, and are glad of your
company to sit down in this manner, we seek not any thing that is yours, but
you only; to GOD, not to ourselves -- not to this and that opinion; but that
all men may come to the divine, eternal, and unchangeable principle in
themselves, that would teach us in all things, the same that is spoken of in a
variety of passages in Scripture; and yet in this day so much neglected; the
same that our Savior promised should be with his followers to the end of the
world; even his own eternal Spirit, the Spirit of GOD and of CHRIST. This is
the Ruler, the Director, the glorious and blessed Regulator of all things.
Without it the Scriptures could never have been given. Because by it all the
men of God were inspired to behold the light God had granted them concerning
the things thereof; and by it all men are enlightened, more or less. For JESUS
CHRIST is "the true LIGHT that enlighteneth," not only those that have read the
history of his life, death, and sufferings; his glorious and unparallelled
Miracles and divine doctrines; but also those that have never heard of the name
of CHRIST.

So enlarged is my opinion concerning the equality of God's ways. And the
Scripture amply and fully justifies this opinion; for Christ is called, not
only the light of his own followers who believed on him, but the true "light,
that enlighteneth every man that comes into the world;" be they of what name,
of what distinction, or nation they may. And this light, (says the Evangelist
John) is come into the world: But the reason why men continue under
condemnation is this, (says he) "light is come into the world, but men love
darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil:" they are not willing
to bring their deeds to this glorious touchstone, this test that would try all
manner of actions -- Christ IN you, the hope of everlasting glory; in which the
primitive believers were settled, and found here their rest.

Here, from the beginning, the Church of Christ was built; upon this Holy of
Holies, and everlasting word of Christ and of God; speaking, directing,
teaching, and leading them, wheresoever they should go. And if men had abode
under this, it would have taught them all the same thing; it would have
preserved those that have called themselves Christians, as well as all other
men, in harmony and unity. It could have made neither rents nor divisions. No;
no such thing: It would not have told thee one thing, and me another. By no
means. But this is the language it would have proclaimed in thy heart and in
mine, that "The work of Righteousness is peace, and the effect thereof is
quietness and assurance for ever." Now is not this written upon every man's
conscience? Yes, I am persuaded it is. And I have heard the wild inhabitants of
America declare this was the truth; and they found it inscribed upon their
hearts (according to their own expressions) by the finger of God's spirit
himself, namely, that the work of Righteousness is peace, and the way to be
happy in this present life, and to be eternally happy in the world to come, is,
to obey his voice; to work Righteousness; to be upright in heart; to do those
things which, by his law written in them, he had made known to them they ought
to do: and this divine principle I want more to come unto. But men have been
too long bewildered in following one another in darkness and confusion: this is
my faith, and I believe no man among us can say but this is the case.

We must (if ever we are brought back) come to the foundation and cornerstone
whereon the first Church was built. We must go to Christ; we must leave our
dependence upon man, and come to the Fountain. For the same declaration may
indeed be put to thee, and the expression will hold good with respect to far
too many in this day, that was expressed concerning the Jews, -- "My people
have committed two great evils, they have forsaken me the fountain of living
waters, and they have hewn out to themselves broken cisterns that can hold no
water." Well, my friends, I am assured that many of you assent to this, that of
all the systems and inventions of men, be they ever so specious, or maintained
with ever so much pomp or eloquence, these do not nor cannot bring one soul to
Christ. It must be something beyond all the powers of men; it must be by his
own eternal power, if ever we are brought to experience the glorious and
blessed rest prepared for those that love him. For no man can come to the
Father but by Christ; and "no man (said he) can come to me except my Father
draw him." If Noah, Job, and Daniel were here, they could save neither son nor
daughter's life; they could only, through God's grace, and attention to his
inspeaking word, be instrumental to save their own souls.

For no man can either do the work for another, or by any means direct him
after safety, but this holy, internal, unchangeable guide alone. Are there any
persons present who say, "this is strange doctrine?" Well, my friends, if it is
strange doctrine, it has this to recommend it at least, that it is not new; it
is as old as the Apostles days, and as old as the Prophets days, in former
dispensations. But I believe life and immortality were in a more mavelous
manner brought to light by the revelation of God, through Jesus Christ.
Therefore we need go no further back than the New Testament; for by the
doctrine therein contained, we hope and believe we are to be saved. Is not this
the case? Yes, I believe it is. Well then, my friends, let us see whether we
live up to this doctrine. Let us see whether we really are what the primitive
churches were. Let us find whether our belief is rightly founded, or whether we
depend merely upon hearsay. It Is not upon the hearsay opinions of men; it is
not from the works of the learned, nor from the speeches of eloquence, but upon
something that we feel within. For I believe this must finally be the case, if
ever we are prepared to join the host of heaven, the redeemed and saved of God.
We must know the truth in ourselves. Christ is the way, the truth, and the
life; and he told us this before he left the world. He told us plainly that he
that is with you shall be in you. Is there any doctrine more clear than this.
"He that is with you shall be in you: and lo I am with you to the end of the
world. And if I go away, I will pray the Father, and he shall send another
comforter:" that is, in another form, He shall send the Spirit of Truth, who
shall lead and guide you into all truth. Well, here is a safe direction, and an
unchangeable directory too. He shall send you another comforter, even the
spirit of truth; who shall lead and guide you into all truth; who shall take
from me, and show it to you, and shall bring all things to your remembrance.
Can there be any plainer doctrine than this? I believe many of you, my friends,
assent to the truth of this, and that this is the way in which we ought to
inquire after the Truth as it is in Jesus; we ought to come to Him himself: we
ought to retire to that holy uniting Word which we have received: (for as said
the Apostle) ye have no need that any man teach you. Why then are there so many
teachers in the world; and maintained at so vast an expense? Why do so many
take so much pains to qualify themselves to be teachers of the flock of Christ,
if this is really the case? And I trust, my friends, you will be candid enough
to say, Certainly it is. You have no need that any man teach you, but as this
same uniting Word teaches you, which is truth. I trust I am surrounded with
many tender hearts, and many charitable Christians, who have been seeking the
truth for many years; why then, my friends, you must come to this divine
teacher before ever you can be favored with the knowledge of the truth.

I verily believe no man will ever come to the knowledge of the truth in any
other way. Thou may explore volumes after volumes, and spend much time in
reading of many pious books, and experiences of many favorite men of God. I do
not despise inferior helps. The Scriptures are excellent: they are much more
so, and worthier to be held in greater estimation than all the books in the
world. But the Scriptures point only to that holy all-powerful Word which
indeed gave all the Scripture. The whole tenor of the Gospel doctrine is to
bring men there -- to settle them upon that foundation; where they may build
with safety -- to the teachings of the holy and blessed spirit of God within
them. I know this is a doctrine too much exploded. How unjust! how derogatory
to the goodness and mercy of God, to send thousands and millions of thousands
into this world, with powers and faculties to conceive that there is
immortality, and to believe that there are glorious rewards in the world to
come, if he had left us no other guide to go by.

Now some will say, "We have the Scriptures to go by." Do we not see enough of
this? Truly the Scriptures do direct us to this glorious principle within us,
yet how do men turn them to every purpose! one learned man starts up in one
quarter of the nation, and he says, "here is a portion of Scripture, and I
assure you it means so and so;" -- and another declares with equal learning,
with a great deal of study, and with abundance of eloquence, "my friends, it is
so and so, this way you must believe:" and there is one even gone over to the
country of my nativity, who with the New Testament in his hands, is laying the
axe by his arguments as much as is in his power to the very root of the
Christian Religion. This is my faith, that he is destroying the foundation
whereon it is built, and yet pretending to bring his doctrine from the
Scripture. But what will not sophistry do? -- What has it not done? -- O! the
evils it has produced in the world. But I trust neither this man, leaned and
wise as he may be in the world's estimation, nor any other, will ever be able
to sap that foundation which God has laid in Sion, nor to rob you or my own
soul of that glorious hope and blessed consolation in the redemption and
mediation of our dear Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, -- God forbid it should:
and I trust it will not. -- The Lord will by his own light and power dispel
every cloud and darkness that shall arise to cast up a mist before the eyes of
the professors of Christianity.

But to return. I want you, my friends, it is my most earnest labor
wheresoever it may please God to take me, throughout his vineyard, to get
people if possible to build upon a foundation that those various opinions of
men will not be able to shake. I know that there is a foundation where all
those various and contradictory opinions of men may butt against the honest and
sincere-hearted pilgrim's dwelling, and not be able to shake it. This I am
persuaded of. Verily there is a Rest for the people of God; there is something
whereon we may build safe; that is, in Christ: "CHRIST IN YOU the hope of
glory." O! that you may seek to him! God is no respecter of persons: He will
teach all men himself; he will manifest his mercy equally to all men: he
rejects none: he makes none of the distinctions of high and low, rich and poor,
that we poor weak beings do. No: he is equal in his ways and just in all his
doings: and those that come to him he will in no wise cast out. For "there is
no difference (says the Apostle) between the Jew and Greek; for one God over
all, is rich unto all that come unto him;" rich to all that seek him; and so he
remains to be.

O my friends, were you to adhere to these plain and simple truths, it would
prevent a great deal of confusion in the world; it would bring about a
different face and appearance among the professors of christianity, from what
we now behold in Europe; it would put an end to all dissensions; it would put
an end to all envying one another; to all false, to all evil speaking, and even
evil thinking one of another. This I am confident of, if it was adhered to. For
Christ and his glorious dispensation, is not a dispensation of strife and
dispute: for when he came, there was even uttered by the Songs of Angels,
"Peace on Earth, and Good Will to Men." And he declared that, "By this should
all men know that ye are my disciples -- if ye love one another." And so we may
as reasonably conclude, that by this shall all men know that ye are not
Christ's disciples, ye if hate, devour, and destroy one another. It is as clear
to me as the Sun that shines in the firmament. He was the Prince of Peace; of
whose Government the Prophet Isaiah declares there never should be an end. O my
fellow Christians, let us with all our souls draw nigh unto, and seek for his
holy power to influence our hearts; that he may bring us into the bond of
christian charity, and of holy and blessed union one with another; that He may
destroy all that seeks to blow up nations and kingdoms into confusion -- and
that seeks to bring distress upon individuals, nations and countries! Do not we
behold the ravages of WAR? what has it done even in this nation, where the
sound of WAR has only been heard, how many weeping widows? how many tender
parents has it lately deprived of their support. It never would have been so, I
am persuaded, if the professors of christianity had kept to their first
principle. No man can believe it, I think, with the Bible in his hand: which
forbids in our Lord's express words our saying in this glorious day, "An eye
for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth." Yet alas! Is it not the language too much
used among us? -- "Thou have injured me and therefore I will injure thee: --
thou have spoken evil of me and I will speak evil also of thee." But ought it
to be so? -- Ought we not rather to suffer injuries, as the primitive believers
did, without murmuring; without complaining? They received them all with
meekness, as their holy and blessed Redeemer did before them; who even when he
was about to quit the body by the hands of cruel men, did not he set us a
glorious example, even toward his last moments, "Father, forgive them, says
he, for they know not what they do!" He that had power to call legions of
angels at his command, meekly in this manner addressed his father."

"Well: (but some may say) Is it really possible to come into this spirit of
forgiving of injuries -- to bear insults, without even returning and retorting
again?" Why yes: I verily believe the Gospel Spirit would lead us into all
this. "Why then, (some may say) Would thou have men to be cowards?" No, by no
means. Cowards where they ought to be cowards, to be sure -- afraid to do evil;
but magnanimous heroes, under the service and in the service of the glorious
King, the Lord Jesus Christ! Because the LAMB and his followers will finally
obtain the victory. O then, my friends, let us with one accord add to our
faith, works. It is a glorious and blessed faith: But if thou add not to thy
faith, works, is there a probability that thou will reap the glorious reward? O
what is it that our blessed Lord pronounced to those that distinguished
themselves with works of mercy, with works of benevolence, and works of peace,
who lived in the peace of his divine and holy religion, which he had given them
to observe, "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for
you before the foundation of the world. I was sick, and in prison, and ye
visited me. I was hungry, and ye fed me. I was naked, and ye clothed me. I was
a stranger, and ye took me in, to comfort me. Come, ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world."

Now it is this kingdom that I want you, my friends, all to inherit. To be so
prepared against the awful summons, which is approaching to us all, that we may
look forward without dismay; that we may be favored with that hope, which will
be as an anchor to the soul, both sure and steadfast, for whatever we may have
promised to ourselves, in a moment that thou know not, "the Son of man
comes;" thy days here may be few; "dust thou art, and to dust thou shall
return!"

Earth's highest station ends in, "here he lies:"
And, "dust to dust" concludes her noblest song.
The Second Discourse of W. Savery.
MY Religion teaches me this -- and it is the grand ruling and fundamental
point upon which I desire to rest my salvation: that is, to endeavor to have
"a conscience void of offense, both toward God and Man."

I desire not to offend any of my fellow-travellers in the way to the kingdom;
far be it from me. I know that there is great indulgence necessary one toward
another. We have been variously educated, we have had various prejudices in our
minds, and nothing but the divine illuminating power can make them subside so
as we might have charity one toward another. I believe there are some of the
Lord's true Church in every name and among every nation; and that there are not
only these who are professing the same faith with me, and who worship God in
silence as I do, but also in other professions there are those who in sincerity
of soul offer up their prayers to God. This I desire to believe wherever I may
be.

I am here in this Island at present: but am going to the continent of Europe.
I seek not my own, the Lord knows; nor the applause of men, nor any thing
that they can give; but a quiet and peaceful conscience: and that I may be made
in some small degree instrumental to induce some to enter into that holy bond
of everlasting union and harmony which shall go with us beyond the grave. This
is the great and most important work that I have now to do among you -- aye, it
is all -- and for which I have left my peaceful home, and my endeared
connections -- that so if possible I might be an instrument of uniting my
fellow professors. O! then, that we may look upon one another with that charity
which ever ought to distinguish all the followers of Christ: for I believe
there may be followers of HIM in many forms that I have not particularly heard
of at present. But through the divine mercy I believe I have found him who was
typified by all the types and figures that went before HIM, Jesus Christ, the
Son and Sent of God: and that all men may find him to their comfort here, their
peace, their settlement of mind, and their everlasting rejoicing in the world
to come.

Seek him then my friends impartially: enter into your closets: do as the noble
Bereans did, when they heard the doctrine which the servant of Jesus Christ
delivered to them, they searched the Scriptures diligently to see whether these
things were so; and the apostle said "these were more noble than those of
Thessalonica, because when they heard the truths of the Gospel they searched
diligently;" they did not let them pass by unnoticed, as it were in at one ear
and out of the other, but searched diligently to see whether these things were
so.

I believe that if this were the case with some that are now present, they
would indeed be made wiser than some of their teachers: though I believe I have
fellow laborers in the gospel of Jesus Christ, among the various professors,
under every christian name, yet I believe, and with all the charity I can
attain, that there are far too many who have entered into Christ's church with
sinister views; that are making it a living and a competency for support in
this life, more than preaching the Gospel for Jesus Christ's sake. Yet I say, I
believe I have some faithful brethren in the ministry, who labor with all
their powers to exalt the glory of God upon the earth; and to bring people into
that condition whereon they may lay hold of the kingdom of God.

Therefore, my friends, let no man judge me as a sectarian. I wish your
everlasting happiness: I wish all our increase in that wisdom which is from
above; that so as we advance in years and the time draws nigh wherein we must
lay down this mortal and perishing body, we may through the mercy of God be
gathered to himself, and through his love which is unspeakable, be with the
Saints and Angels, glorifying and praising his Name, for ever and ever, world
without end.

FINIS.

