Journal OF THE LIFE, TRAVELS AND GOSPEL LABORS OF THAT FAITHFUL SERVANT AND
MINISTER OF CHRIST, JOB SCOTT.

NEW YORK. PRINTED AND SOLD BY Isaac Collins, NO. 189, PEARL-STREET, 1797.

A TESTIMONY FROM THE MONTHLY MEETING OF PROVIDENCE CONCERNING JOB SCOTT.
OUR beloved friend Job Scott was born in Providence the 18th of 10th month
1751, new style, in that part of it now North-Providence. His parents were John
and Lydia Scott, who gave him such opportunities as, through his turn for
literary improvement, he acquired both a competent share of common school
learning, and made some progress in some other branches of literature.

In his young years it appears, that by disregarding the reproofs of
instruction, manifested in his own mind, he was drawn into vanity, dissipation
and folly. Repeated and great were his conflicts between his depraved
propensities and the convictions of truth, but the latter humbling and melting
his heart into contrition, he was graciously favored to see the evil of his
ways, and the destruction which awaited him if he did not reject the Tempter,
forsake his wicked companions, and turn to the Lord, in obedience to his holy
law written in his heart; until at length he so learned obedience by the things
which he suffered, that he gave up to the operations of the spirit of Christ
upon him, in the faith of its divine, restraining, preserving and sanctifying
power, and therein experienced the consolation of his heavenly Father's love.

Being thus humbled under the various turnings of the Lord's hand upon him, and
clearly convinced of the power and efficacy of the distinguishing principle of
our holy profession, viz. the light of Christ within man, as God's gift for his
salvation; he requested the care, and became a member, of the monthly meeting
of Smithfield, then extending to Providence; and being of strong and ready
abilities, and his mind improved and enlarged by the sanctifying power of
Truth, he was enabled and zealously and very usefully disposed for the
promotion of the cause of righteousness in which he was engaged.

Having in the school of Christ measurably learned the mystery of the fall and
restoration of man, and to understand the scriptures and pertinently to apply
them, he was brought under the preparing hand of the Lord for the work of the
ministry, under which dispensation his soul was deeply baptized and brought
under great sympathy with seeking souls, who were travailing in birth that
Christ might be formed in them, to whom he was at times and seasons enabled
powerfully to administer encouragement and consolation. Thus for several years,
as well as by letters and epistles, for which he was eminently gifted with
instructive and edifying talents, he labored for the promotion of the cause of
truth, now become precious in his sight; and about the 23d year of his age he
appeared in the ministry at a public meeting in Providence, expressive of the
desire of his soul, that 'Sion might arise and shake herself from the dust of
the earth, and put on her beautiful garments.' The gravity in which he
appeared, the sympathy which was felt, and the solemnity of that season, are
refreshingly remembered by some to the present day.

At this time he taught a school in Providence, in which employ he continued
for several years, and afterward in Smithfield, much to the satisfaction of
his employers, and the children and youth under his care, whose confidence and
affections he very generally gained and preserved, to some of whom his memory
is yet precious. In his attendance of all our religious meetings, and in the
various duties of private life, as well as in the relations of son, husband,
parent and neighbor, he was truly exemplary. His appearance in the ministry
was not very frequent when at home, and he was frequently led into an example
of silence when abroad, circumspect not to minister without fresh anointing,
and careful in attending closely to the turnings of the key of David; well
knowing when that shuts none can open, and therefore, when he perceived his
subject to close and the life withdraw, however clear his opening, and free the
spring of life had been at his beginning, he would suddenly sit down, however
in the cross; for he had a testimony to bear against all superficial and
lifeless ministry, and very exemplarily avoided it.

His first visit abroad was to the northerly parts of the yearly meeting of
New York, which proved a season of close, probation and conflict of mind, yet
endeavoring to attend to the pointings of duty from place to place, he was, as
appears by his certificates, favored to return with the approbation of those
he visited; and by a prospect which it appears he had as he was returning home,
not wholly unlike the apostle Paul's, 2 Cor. xii. he was strengthened to
perseverance in a dedication of heart to the Lord; for, in this luminous and
extatic prospect, it appeared to him, that all his corruptions and spots were
made clean before the Lamb, and he made to partake of the consolations and joys
of the heavenly host; yet like the apostle, he had soon to experience a thorn
in the flesh, lest he should be exalted above measure, and even the messenger
of Satan was permitted to buffet him; but he besought the Lord for his
preservation, and received the consoling answer of 'my grace is sufficient for
thee; for my strength is made perfect in weakness.' Thus buffeted, tried and
tempted, he had to tread in the steps of the great apostle and his dear Lord
and Master, and thereby became more perfected through sufferings.

He afterward visited New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania twice, and once
the Southern states as far as Georgia, returning certificates of the
approbation of those he visited, among whom we have good reason to believe he
has left many seals of his gospel ministry, and impressions of near and dear
unity and fellowship with him as a brother beloved, as well as in these and
other parts of our own yearly meeting. He also visited some part of the state
of Connecticut, and had meetings among those not of our society. Soon after
which a prospect, that for some years before had opened to his view, of
visiting Great Britain and Ireland, had so opened on his mind, as to induce him
to open the same to his friends for their concurrence and certificate. In the
ninth month, 1792, he received one from this monthly meeting, and also one in
the tenth month from our quarterly meeting for Rhode Island. On the 26th of the
11th month he took a solemn leave of his family and friends at home, and sailed
from Boston the 5th of the 12th month, for Dunkirk in France. On the passage
the ship sprung a leak, and had a severe gale of wind; but it appears this our
friend was preserved, 'resigned and stayed through all,' while the mariners on
board were tossed with amazement and terror; corresponding with a prospect
which he received and recorded, in his journal left at home, about twelve
months before he sailed, on a view of which a striking evidence is thereby
raised that prophecy or communication to the mind of future events has not
ceased; but that the Lord still continues graciously to open his visions of
light to his devoted servants by way of pointing to duty, forewarning of
events, and guiding the mind through them, in confirmation of divine
superintendance, and their faith in his gracious appearance.

He arrived at Dunkirk the 5th of the 1st month, and after tarrying there about
ten days, much to his own and friends satisfaction, he proceeded to England,
taking some meetings in Kent, went to London, attended the different meetings
in that city, then into Wales, and attended the several monthly and quarterly
meetings and the yearly meeting at Carmathan, thence to Bristol, and, returning
to London, attended the yearly meeting there, who, in their epistle to ours,
speak of him in a very satisfactory manner. He then went to Liverpool, taking
meetings in his way, and so passed over to Ireland, and visited all the
meetings of Friends and some of other societies there; attended the national
half-year's meeting in Dublin; and, while visiting a few meetings a second
time, he was taken ill of the smallpox, at the house of our friend Elizabeth
Shackleton, in Ballitore, from whence he dictated a letter on the 14th of the
11th month, to his relations and Friends; out of which, and an account taken by
the Friends who attended him, we extract the following: he says, I am now
twenty-eight Irish miles from Dublin, entered five days into the smallpox; I
feel easiest to address you principally, that you may know my mind enjoys that
which removes beyond all sorrow. Of his children he says, I wish them to get a
little more learning than some of them are at present in the way of; and
although I do not wish much of the world's polish, yet it is, at this awful
moment, my desire that they may not be brought up with much rusticity, for this
I believe has not very often contributed either to civil or religious
usefulness. My desire for my children's substantial growth in the truth, and
strict adherence to all its discoveries to the close of their days, is by far
my principal wish for them. Out of the enjoyment of a good degree of this
precious inheritance, I know of nothing in this world worth living for. Ye that
know it, suffer nothing, I most cordially beseech you, ever to divert your
minds from an increasing and fervent pursuit after the fullness of it; even unto
the measure and stature of the fullness of Christ. At another time he said, My
spirits are under little or no depression; perhaps I never saw a time before,
when all things not criminal were so nearly alike to me in point of any
disturbance to the mind. When I verge a little toward sleep, I am all afloat,
from the state of my nerves, and forced immediately from beginning repose; but
through all, the soul seems deeply anchored in God: -- adding, My heart seems
melted within me in retrospective view; all the former conflicts, however
grievous in their time, are lighter now than vanity, except as they are clearly
seen to have contributed largely to the sanctification of the soul; as they are
remembered with awfulness and gratitude before Him who has not been wanting to
preserve through them all; and as they seem likely to introduce, before long,
an exceeding and eternal weight of glory. At another time he said, It is the
Lord that enables to coincide with his will, and say amen to all the trials and
conflicts he permits to attend us. My mind is centred in that which brings into
perfect acquiescence. There is nothing in this world worth being enjoyed out of
the divine will.

He gave directions, that if he should go hence, every thing about his
interment should be plain and simple; expressed his entire resignation to
divine disposal; and that he found nothing to stand between him and the
Fountain of everlasting love. At another time said, I have no fear, for perfect
love casts out all fear, and he that fears is not perfected in love. His
stomach refusing all nourishment, and a hiccough coming on, he said, Do not
force nature, let me pass quietly away to the eternal inheritance. Soon after
said, I am waiting patiently to see the salvation of God -- do you wait
patiently with me -- I have no desire, nor the shadow of a desire, to be
restored -- I hope the doctors will soon find that they have done their part.
To one he said, Thy being here has been an inexpressible satisfaction to me.
Afterward said, I have known something of that law of love whereby all
boasting is entirely excluded; but I may say, through that which has supported
me under all the trials and conflicts which have attended my passage through
life, to you my beloved friends, as to dear children, Follow me as I have
endeavored to follow Christ Jesus, the Lord of life and glory, and the Rock of
my eternal salvation. We omit many other weighty and instructive expressions of
our beloved friend, which he uttered during his illness and till near his
close, lest this testimony should extend beyond its proper limits. He quietly
departed this life the 22d of the 11th mo. 1793, at the house of our aforesaid
friend Elizabeth Shackleton, in Ballitore, in Ireland; and we doubt not
finished his course with joy, and is entered into the place of his rest, where
the righteous shine forth as the sun, in the kingdom of their Father.

Signed in and on behalf of said monthly meeting by JOHN HOLDEN, LYDIA ARNOLD,
Clerks.

A Testimony from the national half-year's meeting of Friends in Ireland
concerning Job Scott, late of Providence, in the state of Rhode Island, etc. in
America.
IT having pleased the Almighty to call, from works to rewards, this our
beloved friend, we feel our minds engaged to give forth a testimony concerning
him.

From genuine marks evinced in the course of his religious services, we believe
him to have been an instrument fitted and prepared by the great Master, through
deep and repeated baptism, for use and service in his church militant; called
and sent forth by the immediate influences of his spirit to publish the gospel;
and being preserved in an eminent degree, carefully attentive to the leadings
thereof, the word of the Lord through him was often as a fire and as a hammer
to break the rock in pieces. Many were the bitter cups allotted him, in the
dispensations of unerring wisdom, which though hard to flesh and blood, yet he
appeared not to shrink therefrom; but in resignation to the divine will, and a
surrender of his own, he was concerned to follow the Captain of his salvation,
who was made perfect through suffering; -- and thus by abiding under the power
of the cross, he might well have adopted the language of the apostle, by the
grace of God I am what I am, and his grace which was bestowed on me was not in
vain; but I labored abundantly, yet not I, but the grace of God which was with
me.

He was a diligent waiter to experience renewed qualification for service
before he attempted to move either in the ministry or in the transactions of
the discipline; as well knowing that without a fresh anointing, any endeavors
to act must prove ineffectual, and tend to center in lifeless formality,
against which he was zealously concerned to bear testimony.

His conversation was coupled with fear, as well as seasoned with grace; and
being deep in heavenly mysteries, he was cautious of squandering the same, yet,
when at liberty for conversation, his communications were agreeable, and
remarkably instructive.

He visited the meetings of Friends in this nation -- also had much religious
service among those not in profession with us, and was a sharp threshing
instrument in the Lord's hand, against all who preached for hire and divined
for money, being earnestly concerned to call the people off from dead works,
that they might be brought to experience the efficacy of true religion in the
newness of life.

In his last illness, at the house of our friend Elizabeth Shackleton, of
Ballitore, he was much resigned, although the disorder, which proved the
smallpox, lay heavy on him. He spoke of the things of God, and those that
appertain to his kingdom, yet was very modest and diffident of his labors to
promote them in the hearts of the people; but gave evident marks of his peace
of mind, and assurance that he had no doubt of a mansion of rest prepared for
him, where the wicked cease from troubling, and where the weary be at rest,
experiencing great serenity and composure even as a morning without clouds.

He departed this life the 22d of 11th mo. 1793, aged upwards of forty-two
years, and has left an example which speaks loudly to us his survivors, 'follow
me, as I have followed Christ.'

Signed in, by order, and on behalf of our half-year's meeting for the nation
of Ireland, held in Dublin, the 1st of 5th mo. 1794, by

JAMES FISHER, Clerk to the men's meeting. ANNA SHANNON, Clerk to the women's
meeting.


CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. His birth and parentage. The early impressions of truth on his mind.
On children in general. A series of visitations of divine love. His frequent
transgression, trials about water baptism, predestination, etc. Page 1 CHAP.
II. His exercises continued, and particularly about using the plain scripture
language. Of Israel's wilderness travel, and the forerunner. Reference to the
seasons and book of Job. On humility, and his entrance into the work of the
ministry, and considerations thereon. 29 CHAP. III. His exercises continued.
Passes through some discouragements. A word of encouragement to the exercised
traveller. A view of God's goodness, and anciently with Noah, Abraham, etc.
Trials about the war, paper currency and taxes. An address to Zion. His
sickness, and other trials. Waits in silence, etc. 48 CHAP. IV. On taxes for
war. Visit to some families in Dartmouth, and to Moses Farnum in his last
sickness. His marriage. Visit on Rhode Island. Concerning spirituous liquors.
On procuring this world's goods. Thanksgiving, a poem. Family visit in his own
monthly meeting. 71 CHAP. V. His removal to Gloucester. His sister Sarah's
death. On silent waiting in families. Visit to the quarterly and monthly
meetings. On strict plainness and simplicity of living. Visits families at
Richmond. The true light, sun, moon and stars alluded to. On the six and seven
days. On the seven seals. 87 CHAP. VI. The folly of self-importance. The
author's concern, that himself and others may experience an entire reduction of
self, and perfect resignation to the divine will. His visit to Friends of
Oblong and Nine-Partners, in the state of New York. 118 CHAP. VII. Prospect of
visiting Friends of Pennsylvania and New Jersey. Exercises and sickness
preceding his journey, and occurrences therein. 131 CHAP. VIII. Trials and
exercises he passed through. Exhortations. A prospect of visiting the southern
states. Preparatory exercises -- proceeds in the visit. 191 CHAP. IX. An
account of his wife's last sickness and death -- some of her dying sayings, and
his peculiar exercises and trials at that time, and especially on that
occasion. 271 CHAP. X. Extracts from his diary, and an account of his visit
into Connecticut. 277 CHAP. XI. Account of his voyage to Europe. 300
JOURNAL OF THE LIFE AND TRAVELS OF JOB SCOTT.
CHAP. I. His birth and parentage. The early impressions of truth on his mind.
On children in general. A series of visitations of divine love. His frequent
transgression, trials about water baptism, predestination, etc.
FORASMUCH as it has pleased divine wisdom to lead and conduct my soul through
many, various and afflictive dispensations; as well as through some very
comfortable enjoyments; giving me to partake largely of afflictions; bearing up
my mind through them; bringing me forth again and again rejoicing, after scenes
of deep distress; and wonderfully preserving me through some very deep, and
perhaps somewhat unusual probations, in my travel toward the land of rest: I
feel, and often have felt, an engagement of mind to leave behind me some
memorandums in commemoration of his gracious dealings with me from my youth.

I was born, according to the best account I could obtain, and according to the
present or new style, on the 18th day of the 10th month 1751* in the township
of Providence, now North-Providence, in the colony (now state) of Rhode Island
and Providence Plantations* in New England. My parents names were John and
Lydia Scott; who were accounted honest people, though my father made but little
profession of religion. My mother was more zealous, and attended Friends
meetings when she conveniently could, taking me diverse times with her, and I
think a few times another or two of the children; though we were all but young,
for I being the eldest was but ten years old when she died. I can well remember
the serious impressions and contemplations which, at that early period of life,
and for some years before my mother's decease, attended my mind as I sat in
meeting with her, and on the way home. I even had longing desires to become
truly religious, and to serve and fear God as Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, did and
others that I read or heard of. My mother endeavored much to restrain us from
being in the company of rude and vicious children, and would sometimes call us
together, and labor to have us sit in silence with her, which we did: and
though I then understood but little of the intent of it, it has since afforded
me a degree of solid satisfaction, in believing the Lord had given her to know
and partake of the sublime enjoyments and substantial benefits of true, inward,
christian silence, and waiting upon God; and that she was desirous we her
children might, in our tender years, be made acquainted with at least some
secret touches of that divine favor which I doubt not she felt and experienced
in such seasons of retirement: and though, as I observed, I understood but
little about it then; yet I have since had reason to believe it was a real
advantage to me; and that it has often been remembered since to my benefit.

I am fully persuaded of the great advantage and spiritual usefulness to
children and others, resulting from frequent silent waiting on the Lord. I have
seen lively and convincing evidence of it, even in children very young in
years; and fully believe the impressions of divine goodness have been such to
their minds at some such seasons, even when there has not been a word uttered
vocally, as have lastingly remained, and powerfully tended to beget the true
fear and love of God in their young and tender hearts. And O! that parents were
more generally concerned to do all they could toward leading their tender
offspring into an early acquaintance with, and relish of divine things: best
learned, and most livingly, and experimentally sealed upon the soul, in a state
of silent introversion, and feeling after God.

I was told by some of my kindred who were present at my mother's death (for it
being night I was not present myself) that her departure was joyful and
glorious; and that very near her last breath was spent in fervent supplication
to the Lord her God.

And now, not at all doubting but her immortal spirit is at rest in Jesus, I
leave her, and proceed to a further relation of the exercise of my own mind,
having this testimony to bear, that almost as early as I can remember any
thing, I can well remember the Lord's secret workings in my heart, by his grace
or holy spirit; very sensibly bringing me under condemnation for my evil
thoughts and actions, as rudeness and bad words, (though not frequent in the
use of them) disobedience to parents; inwardly wishing, in moments of anger,
some evil to such as offended me; and such like childish and corrupt
dispositions and practices, which over and beyond all outward instruction I was
made sensible were evil, and sprang from a real root of evil in me. And I am in
a full belief, that in every quarter of the globe, children, at an early age,
have good and evil set before them, in the shinings of the light of Christ in
their hearts, with clearness and evidence sufficient to ascertain to them their
duty, if they honestly attend to it. And though I am deeply sensible of the
necessity and utility of much careful guardianship, cultivation and
instruction, in order to guard children against the corrupting influence of
example, invitation, and perverse inclination, which abundantly and prevalently
surround them; yet I fear a great part of the tuition, which too many children
receive, tends rather to blunt the true sense and evidence of divine truths
upon the mind, and to substitute notions and systems instead thereof, than to
encourage an honest attention to the teachings which lead into all truth. I am
satisfied, if the teachings of men were never to thwart the teachings of the
holy spirit, many things would fix on the minds of children to be evils which
they are now instructed and persuaded are innocent and commendable. Indeed it
is mournful to observe how many of them are bolstered up in pride, vanity and
revenge; taught to plume themselves upon their supposed superiority of parts
and seize; nursed up in the ideas of grandeur and worldly honor; yea,
inspired with exalted notions of the merit of valor, heroism, and human
slaughter. -- Thus the very image of God, which more or less shines in the
countenance, and in the tender sensibilities and compassionate commiserating
feelings of an innocent child, is defaced or obscured.

Observe an innocent child attentively, and though anger, passion and revenge,
are very obvious features of the first nature, and show plainly that there is
much to be subdued in them; yet it will be found, they feel nearly and tenderly
for the distress of others; their little bosoms beat with compassion; and if
they see cruelty exercised, by one upon another, they will often, in the best
manner they can, manifest their abhorrence of the cruelty, and dislike of the
cruel. There is in them that which, as attended to, will restrain the violence
of nature, and by degrees bind the strong man, and cast him out, spoiling all
his goods. It is no substantial objection to the discernment given to children
by the holy light which shines in all, either that they evidently know but very
little, for they have to act in but few and very small matters, and their
discernment is proportionate; or that the seeds of evil, and propensities to
evil actions, are some of the first things evident in them.

I am not insensible of the volumes of controversy about necessity and free
will, fate and choice; but I have no mind now to meddle with any of the common
arguments pro or con respecting them. Men muffle and blind their own
understandings by running into abstruse and metaphysical inquiries, wherein
they are scarce ever the better satisfied for their nicest investigations, or
keenest discussions. God has made mankind universally sensible (in degrees
sufficient for their various circumstances and allotments in life) of their
duty, and enabled them to perform it, so far as they improve the means afforded
them.

Adam was as certainly (so it stands in my mind) made able to obey or conform
to the divine will, so far as revealed to him, as God is perfect goodness; and
so I am persuaded are all his offspring. I have no more belief that God's
revealed will required any thing of our first parents, beyond ability to
perform, than I have that God is cruel or perverse; and as little do I believe
that any infant on earth comes into the world under a moral impossibility of
conformity to the divine will, so far as by any means whatever made manifest,
which I call revealed. Man is here, upon practical principles: nothing is or
can be a law to him, further than it is some way or other discovered; and that
which ultimately assures and seals it to him as God's law, whatever outward
manifestation may be made, is the Holy Spirit, that bears witness with his
spirit, settling and satisfying his mind sufficiently what is good, and what is
evil. And I firmly believe, if children would be as strictly and steadily
conformable as they might be, to the divine will, so far as from time to time
it is gradually opened and made known, (and there is always power with the
opening) they would soon acquire a good degree of dominion, in the strength of
divine life, over the strength of evil inclinations in them.

Our state in this life is a state of probation. Such was the state of man
originally, and such it is now. And in order that man at first, or ever after,
might be able to conquer, or be justly punishable for desertion or defeat, he
was, is, and must be, armed with armor invincible against all the powers that
were or are suffered to assail him. This is just our ground, our state and
situation. Subject to vanity, or to many and various temptations; yet being
inwardly armed with the Spirit of Omnipotence, so far as we stand faithful, and
fight valiantly in the strength afforded us, we are sure of victory. Our
strength or help is only in God; but then it is near us, it is in us -- a force
superior to all possible opposition -- a force that never was nor can be
foiled. We are free to stand in this unconquerable ability, and defeat the
powers of darkness; or to turn from it, and be foiled and overcome. When we
stand, we know it is God alone upholds us; and when we fall, we feel that our
fall or destruction is of ourselves.

Many there are who put light for darkness, and darkness for light; bitter for
sweet, and sweet for bitter. They call the divine light, which lighteneth every
man that comes into the world, John i. 9.
a natural light, an ignis fatuus, or by some other ignominious epithet; though
the scripture declares it the very life of the holy word, that was in the
beginning with God, and truly was God. There are many of them, who, under a
notion of advocating the true cause and doctrine of Christ, strike violently
against the very life of it; and will not allow that the manifestation of the
spirit is given to every man to profit withal, 1 Cor. xii. 7.
though the scriptures expressly assert it, and experience confirms it to those
who rightly profit by the measure received. Many who have, from tradition and
education, for a season believed the Holy Spirit, graciously vouchsafed them,
was some very inferior thing to the true Spirit of the everlasting and most
holy God, have at length, by yielding to its dictates, and taking it for their
leader, grown wiser than their teachers, and been indubitably instructed and
assured that it was indeed the eternal Spirit, that, from their infantile days,
strove with them, for their reconciliation with God, the eternal source of it;
as it did with the old world, for their recovery from their corrupted,
alienated state.

We find that when the earth was corrupt before God, and filled with violence;
when God looked upon the earth, and behold it was corrupt, for all flesh had
corrupted his way upon the earth, Genesis vi. 11, 12; when God saw that the
wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the
thoughts of his heart was only evil continually, ver. 5; when it repented the
Lord that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart, 6: at
that most totally abandoned and depraved period and state of mankind, when God
was just about extirpating from the face of the earth the whole wretched race
of man, a few individuals excepted: at such a season as this, the Lord said, My
Spirit shall not always strive with man, ver. 3. Surely if his Spirit had
striven with them until that time, until they were so desperately wicked, and
wholly corrupted, that not only some but every imagination of their hearts was
evil, yea, only evil, and that continually; we may well believe the express
scripture assertion, that a manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man
to profit withal.

If God's love is such to men, that he follows them by the strivings of his own
Spirit, and spares them, until, by disobedience they become abandoned and
corrupted, what greater evidence can we desire of the universality of his love,
the long-suffering of his patience and impartial vouchsafement of his Holy
Spirit, not to a few to the exclusion of the rest, but to all mankind the world
over. And what more than reasoning confirms it to be so, is, the absolute truth
of the fact in the individual experience of all. It is true many deny it. The
Jews also denied Christ to be the Son of God. They did not know who, and what
he was; and their insulting query, 'Whom make thou thy-self?' John viii. 53.
was just as natural to proceed from them in their dark and carnal state, as is
the confidence wherewith thousands, high in profession of godliness, now
utterly disallow the Holy Spirit that is given to all, to be the Holy Spirit.
But this consolation have all Wisdom's children, that 'Wisdom Luke vii. 35.
is justified of them all;' and that the unbelief of others can never make void
their faith: they are taught of God, and great is their peace.

In regard to my own early acquaintance with the Holy Spirit's operation,
though I then knew not what it was. I have now no more doubt about it than I
have about the existence and omnipresence of God. It is sealed upon my heart,
with as much clearness and certainty, that it is the Spirit of the living God,
and that it visits, woos, invites, and strives with all, at least for a season,
as it is, that God is no respecter of persons. And I as fully believe no man
can have any clear knowledge of God, or of his own religious duty, without the
Holy Spirit's influence, as I believe the wisdom of this world is foolishness
with God, and that the world by wisdom know him not. Yea, so quick and
powerful, so discerning the thoughts and intents of the heart; and so just and
distinguishing, in approving and condemning them, according as they are good or
bad, is this spirit, word, and witness in man; that not only without the aid of
human injunction or information; but in direct dissent from, and disapprobation
of, the sentiments, advice, and pressing invitations and persuasions of my
play-mates, and those much older than myself, and who confidently and
repeatedly declared to me, that such and such things were innocent, and not at
all wicked, and that nobody thought them so but myself; the testimony of truth
would and did arise and live in my heart when very young, through the shining
of divine light or influence of the Holy Spirit; that those things were evil,
were wicked; and I thought, notwithstanding all those young persons could say
to the contrary, that all good people would think as I did -- and believe they
would be generally so accounted, if all men kept strictly to the Holy Spirit's
teachings. But violence being done to clear conviction in the mind, death takes
place, as on Adam in the day he ate forbidden fruit. And in this state of
death, the truth is not so easily distinguished from error, or good from evil,
as before transgression. Evil habits gain strength; darkness covers the mind;
temptation is renewed, and though the Spirit again in some degree premonisheth,
and bids beware, the mind, habituated to the stifling of conviction, too
commonly again rushes forward, and becomes more and more hardened and darkened,
until what was at first plainly condemned as evil, by the unflattering witness
in the mind, is at length maintained to be innocent and sinless. This is the
too usual course of poor mankind.

Before I was ten years old, the workings of truth grew so powerful in my mind
at times, that I took up several resolutions (or at several times resolved) to
amend my ways, and live a serious and religious life, though I was not one of
the most vicious of my years; yet enough so to be made very sensible of the
Lord's controversy with me, on account of the evil of my ways. My mind became
exceedingly disquieted, when I went contrary to divine manifestation; though I
had not yet a clear sense that it was the very Power and Spirit of God upon me
that so condemned and distressed me for sin, and strove to redeem my soul from
the bondage of corruption.

I now began to take notice of what I heard read and conversed of respecting
religion; and among other things* I heard frequent mention in books and
conversation of the Spirit of God; and that good people in former times had it
in them; and by it learned the will of God, and were enabled to perform it. I
perceived it was often spoken of in both the Old and New Testament, and many
other writings. I understood that true converts in these days also have it.
But, like many others, I overlooked its lively checks and calls in myself; had
no idea that I had ever known any thing of it; longed to be favored with it;
but supposed it was some extraordinary appearance, different far from any thing
I ever yet had been acquainted with.

Thus the Jews, even while they were expecting Christ's coming, knew him not
when he came. They overlooked and despised his mean and ordinary appearance;
thought he was Joseph's son and born among them, and so rejected, abused and
finally put him to death. But they were mistaken in his pedigree: his descent
was from heaven; and God, not Joseph, was his father. Just so are thousands now
mistaken, as to the dignity and origin of God's Spirit in them; they think it
is of man, a part of his nature and being; whereas it is of the very life,
power and substance of God. Its descent is as truly from heaven, as was that of
the Lord Jesus. He came in that low, mean and ordinary appearance as to outward
show and accommodations, teaching us thereby not to despise the day of small
things, nor overlook the littleness of the motions of divine life in our own
souls. And when he compares the kingdom of Heaven, which he expressly says is
within, to outward things, he very instructively inculcates to us, that the
beginnings of it are small, 'a little leaven' -- 'a little seed' -- 'a grain of
mustard seed' -- 'the least of all seeds.' Matt. xiii. 31 32.
-- This is true in the inward, whatever it be in the outward; for the seed of
the kingdom is 'the least of all the seeds' in the field or garden of the
heart. Other seeds sprout, spring up, and take the attention, while the
incorruptible seed, the word of God in the heart, is overlooked, trampled under
and despised.

O! that children and all people would be careful in their very early years,
and as they grow up and advance in life, to mind the 'reproofs of instruction'
in their own breasts; they are known to be 'the way of life,' Prove. vi. 23.
divine life to the soul. This something, though they know not what it is, that
checks them in secret for evil, both before and after they yield to the
temptation, warning them beforehand not to touch or taste, and afterward
condemning them if they do so; and inwardly inclining them to a life of
religion and virtue -- this is the very thing, dear young people, whereby God
works in you, to will and to do; and by which he will, if you cleave to it,
and work with it, enable you to work out your own salvation with fear and
trembling before him. Despise it not, do no violence to its motions; love it,
cherish it, reverence it; hearken to its pleadings with you; give up without
delay to its requirings, and obey its teachings. It is God's messenger for good
to thy immortal soul: its voice in thy streets is truly the voice of the living
God: its call is a kind invitation to thee from the throne of grace. Hear it,
and it will lead thee; obey it, and it will save thee: it will save thee from
the power of sin and Satan: it will finally lead thee to an inheritance
incorruptible in the mansions of rest, the house not made with hands, eternal
in the heavens.

I entreat you, as you love your own souls, and prize an everlasting salvation;
I warn you by the dreadful fruits of disobedience, by the pangs, remorse and
sufferings of my own soul for sin and transgression. Had I steadily obeyed the
truth in my inward parts; had I attended singly and faithfully to this divine
monitor, my portion had been peace; my cup, a cup of consolation. I might have
rejoiced and sung, whereas I have had to mourn and weep. For as I grew to
fifteen and upwards, in violation to clear inward convictions, in opposition to
the dictates of the Holy Spirit, I began to run into company, learned to dance
and play cards, and took great delight therein. I was often deeply condemned,
and often strove to stifle the witness, and persuade myself there was no harm
in any of these things.

My father sometimes reproved me in those days for my conduct; but sinning
against divine light and visitation, hardened me against his advice. I grew
more and more vain, proud, airy and wanton. I put myself in the way of much
evil communication; and it mournfully corrupted good manners. My taste for
pleasure and amusement grew keen, my spirits were low and languid when alone,
and I rushed into company and merriment for alleviation.

Thus I went on frolicking and gaming, and spending my precious time in vanity.
Often at night, or in the night, and sometimes near break of day, I have
returned home from my merry meetings grievously condemned, distressed and
ashamed; wishing I had not gone into such company, and resolving to do so no
more; but soon my resolutions failed me, and away I went again and again, and
thus continued making still greater strides in folly than before. The Lord
followed me close, in mercy, and often brake in powerfully upon me, turning all
my mirth into mourning; yet I still got over the holy witness, did despite to
the spirit of grace, and repaired again to my haunts of diversion and
merriment. Sometimes when I have stood upon the floor to dance, with a partner
by the hand, before all were quite ready, God has arisen in judgment, and
smitten me to the very heart. -- Oh! I still feelingly remember his appearance
within me, when none knew the agony of my soul. I felt ready to sink under the
weight of condemnation and anguish; but resolutely mustering all the stoutness
I was master of, I brazened it out, until the music called me to the dance,
and then I soon drowned the voice of conviction, became merry, and caroused
among my companions in dissipation, until time urged a dismission of our jovial
assembly, and called me to return, often lonely, to my father's house, my
outward habitation. Oh! me, how fared it with me then? I assure thee, reader, I
have not forgotten those sad and mournful walks at the conclusion of my
midnight revellings. I have been broken down in deep abasement and
self-abhorrence; have come to a full stand, stopped and sat down on a stump,
stone or log, by the way; wrung my hands, strewed my tears before the Lord, in
sorrow and extremity of anguish, bordering almost on desperation. I have begged
forgiveness; implored assistance; vowed amendment; obtained some relief; and
returned home in hope of reformation. But alas, alas.! my resolutions were
written as it were in sand; the power of habit had enslaved me; and almost the
next invitation of my associates, overcame all my engagements; the eagerness of
desires for divertisements and pastime, brake through all the sanctions of
vows; and violated the solemnity of sacred promises to my God. I rushed again
into transgression, as an horse rushes into the battle; again and again I took
my swing, and drank my fill; and again and again remorse and compunction seized
upon me. Adored for ever be the name of the Lord, he forsook me not; but
followed me still closer and closer, and sounded the alarm louder and louder in
mine ears. There was in me an immortal part, which his love was toward; the
recovery of which, from the thraldom of sin and corruption, his goodness
engaged him to seek by mercy and by judgment; frowns and smiles; chastisements
and endearments; and all in love inexpressible.

Thus dealt he with me. When I turned at his reproofs, he smiled upon me, and
relieved my soul's anxiety; but when I again revolted, his rod was lifted up in
fatherly correction. The still small voice was uttered in my dwelling, as in
the cool of the day, when a little retired from noise and commotion, Adam,
where art thou? There was no hiding from him, whose penetrating eye no secret
can escape; and whose aim in reproving was only to save. He still reproved my
wanderings, and pointed out the right way, according to scripture declaration,
thou shall hear a voice behind thee, saying, this is the way, walk in it.
Indeed the way was shown me; it was often plainly cast up before me; but I
would not walk in it. I knew my Lord's will, but did it not; mine own, I still
delighted in the indulgence of. O! that others may escape my load of guilt, and
may I say, my bed of hell, or inward tormenting agony, by a timely submission
to the reproofs of instruction.

Sometimes I spent near all the first day of the week, when I should have been
at meeting, in playing cards, idle, if not dissolute conversation, and other
vain amusements; returning home at night in condemnation, and sometimes sighing
and crying, and yet through all this the Lord preserved me from hard drinking,
though often in the way of temptation and solicitation to it. Swearing I also
mostly refrained from. Jesting, joking and vain conversation I went
considerable lengths in; and sometimes joined the foremost in filthy and
obscene discourses. Then again great shame and self-abhorrence would overwhelm
me; again I vowed, promised and renewed my covenant; but all in vain; I had not
got deep enough; nor were my covenants made or renewed in the right ability;
but too much in my own strength and creaturely resolutions; so they were soon
broken. Sometimes I held out a week or two; other times only a day or two. Thus
time passed on; and, with an increase of years, I found an increasing
propensity to wantonness and dissipation. But blessed be the God of my
salvation, he proportionately increased my sense of guilt and condemnation.

I had seasons of very serious consideration upon religion. What instructions I
had outwardly received, were mostly in the way of Friends; but when I came near
to man's estate, falling in company with some of the Baptist society, I was
drawn to attend their meetings in Providence. Friends meetings were oftener
held in silence than suited my itching ear. I loved to hear words, began to
grow inquisitive, and to search pretty deeply into doctrines and tenets of
religion; and the Baptist preachers filled my ears with words, and my head with
arguments and distinctions; but my heart was little or not at all improved by
them. I almost forsook the meetings of Friends, except yearly meetings, and
meetings appointed by travelers in the service of the gospel. But when I went
to these, O! how livingly I still remember the heavenly and heart-tendering
impressions I sometimes received under the animating testimonies delivered in
the life of the gospel. Here my heart was helped, though my head was less
amused than among the Baptists: however, as I knew not clearly what caused the
difference; as Friends meetings remained still often silent; and as I still
wished the gratification of argumentative, systematic discourses; I still
pretty diligently attended the Baptist meeting; and, in my most religious
seasons, I began to think of being baptized in water. For the head-work so far
outrun the heart-work, during my attendance of these meetings, that I became
convinced in speculation, that that outward performance was an ordinance of
Christ; though I have since seen, that it never was ordained by Jesus; but was
a forerunning, preparatory and decreasing institution, and has long since done
its office, and ceased in the church in point of obligation; and that there is
now to the true church but one Lord, one faith, and one baptism, that of the
Holy Ghost, which only can purify and make clean the inside. Oh! my heart, my
very soul is fully satisfied in this matter; having felt the living efficacy of
this one saving baptism, and known its full sufficiency, without any other.

What first turned my mind to believe the outward a christian ordinance was
this one argument of the Baptists -- Christ commanded his disciples to baptize:
No man can baptize with the Holy Ghost; therefore the baptism he commanded was
not that of the Holy Ghost, but that of water. This then appeared to me
conclusive, and unanswerable. But it was my ignorance of that baptizing power
which attends all true gospel ministry, that made me assent to this false
position, 'no man can baptize with the Holy Ghost.' Man himself, in his own
mere ability, I know cannot; but I also know, that of himself he cannot preach
the gospel. This assertion, no man can preach the gospel, is just as true as
that 'no man can baptize with the Holy Ghost.' As man merely, he can do nothing
at all of either; but it still stands true, man can, through divine assistance,
do both. The real gospel was never yet preached, but 'with the Holy Ghost sent
down from heaven.' 1 Pet. i. 12.
Thus the apostles preached it, and thus alone it is still preached -- and so
preaching it, it was a baptizing ministry. As they spoke, the Holy Ghost fell
on them that heard them; that is, where faith wrought in the hearts of the
hearers, and the living eternal word preached, through the power of the Holy
Ghost, was mixed with faith in them that heard it; the Holy Ghost fell on them,
baptizing them into a living soul-saving sense of the 'power of God to
salvation,' Romans i. 16.
which is the true life of the gospel. Thus the apostles fulfilled the
commission. They taught baptizingly. The commission is not 'teach, and then
baptize,' as two separate acts. It is 'teach, baptizing,' -- and those who
livingly witness the gospel, the power of God to salvation, preached unto them,
they feel it, and receive it in, and only in the Holy Ghost sent down from
heaven, they are taught baptizingly, in the demonstration of the spirit and of
power. 1 Cor. ii. 4.
And no preaching has a whit more of the gospel in it, than it has of the Holy
Ghost, the alone true baptizing power. I don't marvel that the letter-learned
teachers of our day who run unsent, who are always ready, are ignorant that a
true gospel minister is clothed with baptizing authority from on high. -- I may
not now go much further into the discussion of the subject of baptism, though I
scarce know how to dismiss it, so many things occur in evidence that there is
and can be but one in the gospel, and that this is and must be spiritual.

I had not yet fully given up to the motions of divine life in my own heart. My
mind was too much turned outward; and the preaching of those I sometimes went
to hear, who preached in their own time, had a powerful tendency to keep it
outward. In this state of outward attention and inquiry, I found nothing that
could give me power over sin and corruption; but notwithstanding all my serious
thoughtfulness, and frequent and ardent desires to become truly religious, I
still, once in a while, brake loose, and launched forth into as great degrees
of vanity and wickedness as ever: and then again a turn of seriousness would
come over me. One time under deep exercise, after reasoning and hesitating
great part of a day, whether I had best give up with full purpose of heart, to
lead a religious life or not; at length I gave up, and entered once more into
solemn covenant, to serve God, and deny myself, according to the best of my
understanding. Almost as soon as I had thus given up, and come to this good
conclusion, in stepped the grand adversary, and blundered and distressed my
mind exceedingly with the doctrine of predestination; powerfully insinuating
that a certain number were infallibly ordained to eternal salvation, the rest
to inevitable destruction; and that not all the religious exercises of my mind
could possibly make any alteration in my final destination and allotment. If
God had damned me from all eternity, I must be damned for ever; if he had
chosen me to eternal salvation, I might set my heart at rest, and live just
such a life as would most gratify my natural inclinations; for what advantage
could there be in religion, and self-denial, if an eternal, unalterable decree
secured my final end. I felt willing to hope I was a chosen vessel; and for a
short time these ideas so crowded into my mind, that I was even ready to
conclude a God all goodness had doomed the far greater part of mankind to
never-ending misery, without any provocation on their part. I now view the
doctrine of unconditional election to eternal life, and reprobation to eternal
destruction, with abhorrence. I almost marvel, that under a cloud of darkness,
my rational faculties could ever be so imposed upon, as to assent to so
erroneous a sentiment. I know of no doctrine in the world that more shockingly
reflects on the character of the Deity.

I did not indeed so drink down this false doctrine as to relinquish my purpose
of amendment all at once; I held out a few weeks; when, mournful to relate, the
influence of young company, and my vehement desires for creaturely indulgence,
through the tolerating influence of the aforesaid insinuations, brake through
all my most solemn engagements, threw down the walls and fortifications, and
exposed me an easy prey to the grand enemy of my soul's salvation. Again I took
my swing in vanity, amusements and dissipation. This, however, was but a short
race. The Lord, in loving kindness, followed me with his judgments, inwardly
revealed against sin. The prince of darkness also followed me, with temptation
upon temptation to evil; and with various subtle insinuations, and dark notions
to rid me of all fear, restraint or tenderness of conscience. At length,
notwithstanding all I had felt of the power of God upon me, in reproof for sin,
and invitation to holiness; yea, though I had had some true relish of divine
good, the holy witness became so stifled, that I began to conclude there was no
God; that all things came by chance, by nature, by the fortuitous jumble and
concourse of atoms, without any designing cause, or intelligent arrangement;
that it was idle, chimerical and delusive, to think of serving or fearing a
being who had no existence but in imagination. -- Here let it be well
considered what a powerful influence the admission of one false doctrine, and
the violation of divine manifestation and conviction, has in paving the way for
other false doctrines. Not much sooner had I received and cherished one of the
grand falsehoods of the father of lies, the doctrine of irresistible necessity,
and predestination, than in the mists of darkness which spread over my mind,
under the baleful influence thereof, I even dared to deny the eternal deity;
and, horrible to the last degree to think of, I began to rejoice in the idea of
unbounded, unrestrained licentiousness and carnality; and that I was
unaccountable for my conduct, not considering that, on my atheistical scheme, I
was unprotected, and had no more to hope than to fear; none to look up to for
defense and succor; but must be left a prey to violence, and all kinds of
adversity attendant on this life.

(...) as well as of understanding, which I was plunged into! I went on a few
months after this, much in the same manner; my days I spent in vanity and
rebellion; my nights frequently in horror and distress! Many a night I scarce
durst enter my chamber, or lay me down in bed. -- I have the most unshaken
ground to believe it was the immediate power of God upon me, that thus
terrified my guilty soul; and that in the most fatherly goodness, condescension
and mercy, in order to prevent my going on to endless perdition, to which I
seemed to be swiftly posting. -- Day after day, and night after night, I was
distressed! -- the Lord setting my sins in order before me, and pleading with
me to return unto him and live. At last I fled again to religious engagement
for relief, betook myself to prayer, and cried to the Lord, in the bitterness
of my spirit. Sometimes I begged and interceded for mercy, and power to make a
stand and overcome sin, with such vehemence as if my very heart would break! --
Tears gushed from my eyes! My soul was overwhelmed with anguish! O! young man
whoever thou art, that read these lines, I warn thee, I beseech thee, shun
such misery, by obedience; such unutterable anxiety, by cleaving to the Lord.
Yet after all this, young company, music, gaming, pleasure, again rallied
their forces, and had such influence over my resolutions, as evidenced them
written as in dust, though mingled with tears, with wormwood and gall, and
(...) the pleasures of sin for a season. But God, rich in mercy, and
long-suffering kindness, still interrupted my career, disturbed my carnal
satisfaction, and blasted all my joys. Once more a sense of just and holy
indignation kindled up in my breast for transgression and grievous revolt.
Awfulness took hold on me; amazement swallowed me up. I knew not which way to
turn. The wrath of an offended long-suffering God seemed closing upon me on
every side. -- I felt myself in thraldom, and almost without hope. I knew
myself a prisoner, and yet I hugged my chains.

CHAP. II. His exercises continued, and particularly about using the plain
scripture language. Of Israel's wilderness travel, and the forerunner.
Reference to the seasons and book of Job. On humility, and his entrance into
the work of the ministry, and considerations thereon.
1770.
THUS I continued still in vanity, and folly, with intervals of deep distress
and mourning, a short space longer, that is, until about nineteen years old,
when I became more fully and clearly convinced, and that very much by the
immediate operations, illuminations, and openings of divine light in my own
mind, that this inward something, which had been thus long and powerfully
striving with me, disturbing my every false rest, confuting every false and
sin-flattering imagination of flesh and blood, or of the grand adversary, and
enjoining it upon me to give up all, and walk in the ways of virtue and true
self-denial, was the true and living spirit and power of the eternal God; the
very same that strove with the old world, influenced the patriarchs, prophets
and apostles; and visits, strives with, and at seasons more or less influences,
the hearts of all mankind. I now saw this the only principle of all true
conversion and salvation; that so long as this was resisted and rejected,
separation must infallibly remain between God and the soul; but that, whenever
this is received and in all things thoroughly submitted to, a thorough
reconciliation takes place.

Some may think this doctrine robs Christ of the honor of our redemption and
reconciliation; but I apprehend none can think so who understand the doctrine
of salvation by Jesus. It was through the eternal Spirit, this very Spirit that
visits and strives with all, that Christ offered up that prepared body. It is
through, and only through, the influence of the same Holy Spirit, that any soul
was ever converted to God, or savingly benefited by the redemption that is in
Jesus. Whatever way, O soul, or by whatever means thou art benefited in a
spiritual sense, it is by this Holy Spirit, that is the immediate operative
power and principle within thee.

Having thus at length become livingly convinced that it was nothing short of
the eternal Power and Spirit of God that so forcibly wrought in me, in order
for my deliverance from the power of darkness and seduction, I gave up to the
holy requirings of God, as inwardly made known to me -- and clearly known were
many things thus made. Nothing else could ever so have opened my mind, and made
known my duty to me. The Scriptures, other good books, religious conversation,
contemplation upon the works of creation and providence; all these are very
good means of information; but none of them, nor even all of them, without the
Holy Spirit's sealing operation and evidence upon the mind, can ever make a man
sure of his duty to God in any one thing. He may reason, and set up many rules,
measures and standards of duty and morality; but certainly he never will arrive
thereat, without the help of that which in itself is certain. It may be said
the scriptures are certain. Very well, but what certifies thee that they are
certain, or that thou know their meaning? Do not the professed masters in
reasoning widely differ upon many passages in the sacred writings? they all say
they have reason on their side. But believe them not: nor believe that any
thing is or can be certainly known to man of the divine authority of the
scriptures, without the light and evidence of the Holy Spirit.

But to proceed: -- I gave up very fully to serve the Lord in the way of his
leadings; I forsook rude and vicious company, withdrew into retirement,
attended the meetings of Friends, and often sought the Lord, and waited upon
him, in solemn, reverential silence alone, for his counsel, direction and
preservation; and he was graciously pleased to point out and cast up the way
for me, one thing after another, with sufficiency of clearness. First, he
showed me negatively, what I ought not to do, in various particulars, breaking
me off from my vicious practices and associations. This was forsaking evil. And
then he taught and enjoined me the practice of several things positively,
wherein he engaged me to choose and cleave unto that which is good. I saw
clearly it was his will, and my indispensible duty reverently to assemble for
divine worship, and therein to wait upon him, draw inwardly near unto him, and,
according to the apostle's language, feel after him, in order to find and enjoy
him. I also found it my duty often to wait upon him alone, in awful, silent
retirement, not approaching him in supplication, but when he influenced my
heart thereto, with the true spirit of prayer and intercession. He also showed
me, that religion was an internal life in the soul; that great attention,
sincerity and punctuality was necessary to the growth and prosperity of it:
that I must not be content with attending meetings, and sitting in silence,
though ever so reverently and properly; I must live continually in an inward
watchfulness and dedication of heart; watch all my thoughts, words and actions,
and know all brought to judgment; and allow nothing to pass unexamined, nor
willingly unapproved: that I must observe the most upright honesty and
sincerity in my dealings among men as in the presence of God. He taught me that
men generally rely too much on external performances; and thus guarding my mind
against thinking too much of any thing outward. He opened my understanding to
behold my duty, in regard to outward plainness; that a plain, decent, and not
costly dress and way of living, in all things, was most agreeable to true
christian gravity and self-denial: that rich, showy or gaudy dress, house, food
or furniture, fed and fostered pride and ostentation; robbed the poor, pleased
the vain, and led into a great deal of unnecessary care, toil and solicitude,
to obtain the means of this way of life and appearance: that it could not
afford any true and solid satisfaction; but must unavoidably divert the mind
from inward feeling watchfulness; retard the work of mortification and true
self-denial; and facilitate unprofitable association and acquaintance with such
as would rather alienate the affections from God, than unite the soul to him.

Thus instructed, I bowed in reverence; and as it became from time to time
necessary to procure new clothing, I endeavored to conform my outward
appearance in this respect to the dictates of truth, in which I found true
peace and satisfaction. Also he instructed me to use the plain scripture
language, THOU to one, and YOU to more than one. The cross greatly offended me
in regard to these things. This of language in particular, looked so trifling
and foolish to the worldly wise part in me, and the fear of 'the world's dread
laugh,' so powerfully opposed it, that it was very hard and trying to my
natural will to give up to this duty. I thought if my right hand would excuse
my compliance, I would gladly sacrifice it, or yield it up, rather than give up
to use such a despised language, and submit to be laughed at, as viewing
religion concerned in such things as these. This may seem incredible to some,
but it is true, and as fresh with me as almost any past exercise. This exercise
beset me day and night for some time, during which I had many sorrowful and
bitter tears, plead many excuses, and greatly wished some substitute might be
accepted instead of the thing called for; but he who called me into the
performance of these foolish things, (to this world's wisdom) was graciously
pleased to show me with indubitable clearness, that he would choose his
sacrifice himself; and that neither a right hand nor a right eye, neither
thousands of rams, nor ten thousands of rivers of oil, would by any means
answer instead of his requirings. If he called for so weak or foolish a thing
as the words thou and thee to a single person, instead of you, nothing else of
my substituting would do instead of it; for the foolishness of God is wiser
than men. 1 Cor. i. 25.
Let none dispute the ground with Omnipotence, nor confer with flesh and blood;
lest therein, despising the day of small things, they fall by little and little.

For be assured, O! thou called of the Lord, thou can never become his
chosen, unless thou obey his call, and come out of all he calls thee from. If
thou art not faithful in the little, thou will not be made ruler over much.
Perhaps few will believe the fullness of heavenly joy which sprang in my bosom,
as a wellspring of living waters, after my giving up in faithfulness to this
requisition. And yet this flow of divine consolation lasted not long at this
time; for though I gave up to whatever the Lord required of me, yet as I had so
long and so stubbornly rebelled against him, he saw meet, in his infinite
wisdom, soon to hide his face from me again, and close me up in almost utter
darkness, which rendered my days truly tedious, and my nights wearisome to my
soul. I was fully convinced that God was to be known inwardly in power and
great glory, by those who obey him, and wait upon him. My heart was inflamed
with love toward him. I had seen a little of his comeliness -- He had become
the beloved of my soul, the chiefest among ten thousands; therefore I often
retired alone and in profound reverential silence, sought after him, and
pressingly solicited a nearer acquaintance with him. But he knowing what was
best for me, graciously hid his presence from me. And though this was a painful
suspension, yet I could not be easy to give over seeking him; I still continued
my ardent silent approaches, or waitings. I waited indeed, with all the
reverence, humility, and solicitude that my soul was capable of; but all seemed
in vain. Oh! the mourning and lamentation, the distress and bitter weeping,
that almost continually overwhelmed me for several months together, for the
want of the soul-enlivening presence of my God. Oh! said I in my heart, will he
never arise for my help and deliverance? Well, be it as it may, I will seek him
until my dying day; my soul cannot live without him; and it may be, if he hide
his face from me until my last moments, he may own me at that solemn period,
and receive me to a mansion of glory. This was often, very often, the language
of my heart; and under this resolution I pressed forward. I trust the wormwood
and the gall; the sorrow and the sighing; the days and nights of anguish; will
scarcely be forgotten. It seems to me that certain spots of earth, some
particular fields and groves, will ever, while life and sensibility remain,
continue to have a moving and affecting influence on my mind, as often as I
pass by and see them, or call them to remembrance. I think they must remain
peculiarly distinguished to me by the tears and the groans, the sighs and
solicitations, which they have been the silent witnesses of.

Oh! my God, thou leddest me through the desert, thou weanedst me from the
world, and alluredst me into the wilderness; there thou did hide thy face
from me for a season; until the longings of my soul after thee, were intensely
kindled: then liftedst thou up my head, and spoke comfortably to me; blessed be
thy holy name for ever!

At length the Father of mercies having thus tried me, he graciously cast an
eye of compassion upon me, hearkened to the voice of my distress, made bare his
everlasting Arm for my deliverance, gradually unvailed his presence to me, and
opened my heart to understand why he led me through so trying a dispensation. I
now began to discern the mystery of what I read in the history of Israel's
forty years travel in the wilderness, as also the voice of one crying in the
wilderness: I began to see the necessity of the Lord's sending his forerunner,
that the way might be prepared, and the paths made straight. I perceived much
roughness, unevenness and crookedness had been in the way. I began to know and
in degree to love the rod, and him who had appointed it; and as the Master
manifested himself more and more, I understood more and more of the mysterious
ways of his working.

After some time I had many clear openings respecting the many trials,
experiences, jeopardies and deliverances of his followers in days past; and a
hope was kindled in me, that now I should go forward without meeting with such
besetments, and withdrawings of light, as heretofore: for though the Lord still
at times withdrew from me; yet as his return was not long after, and as his
presence was much more constantly with me, I was ready to conclude it would
continue with increasing brightness, until I should be wholly and continually
swallowed up in his love: for, as such a state was sometimes permitted me, I
not clearly understanding the counsel of his divine will, was apt to wish it
for my constant condition; not then seeing, as I have since seen, that it was
far from being best for me to enjoy a constancy of sunshine and fair weather;
even the outward order and economy of divine providence affords instruction,
which often beautifully applies to our inward experiences. It is not all calm
and sunshine; the divine wisdom orders many and great vicissitudes and changes
in the natural world; insomuch that, perhaps in the most pleasant and
flourishing season in the whole year, after a few days of clear shining and
tranquillity, there arises a most terrible storm, with wind, lightening and
tremendous thunder; and it may be with hailstones scattered abroad upon the
face of the earth. At other times will high and rushing winds succeed the
calmest day; or pinching droughts the most fruitful season. Even the settled
order and succession of seasons is a continual revolution of day and night,
summer and winter, seed-time and harvest. We have cold as well as heat;
darkness as well as light; and cutting frosts as well as most refreshing dews;
and a variety of other changes. All this is in infinite wisdom and goodness;
and displays to the discerning eye the providential power and glory of the
great Superintendent. My soul has sometimes been enraptured whilst I have
viewed and contemplated the operations of his hand in these things; together
with the situation of places; rocks and lofty mountains, sturdy oaks and tall
cedars; rivers, lakes and oceans; meadows, fields and forests; deserts and vast
howling wildernesses; with the various inhabitants of both land and water. And
over and above all these, the sun, moon and stars in their courses; and
constellations of heaven! All these things (though far short of being
sufficient food for immortal souls, and perhaps not best to dwell much upon)
have nevertheless animatingly affected my mind in the contemplation of them;
and raised my soul in adoration to him who is the former of all things; and
who, when he was pleased to answer out of the whirlwind and awfully to
interrogate his servant Job, for his instruction, was pleased to make the
wonderful works of his hand, and the excellent order of his government, the
subjects of his demands. And who among the sons of men can read the solemn
queries then uttered by the Divine Majesty, and not feel some tender emotions
of soul; as Have thou commanded the morning since thy days, and caused the
dayspring to know his place? Job xxxviii. 12.
is one among the many solemn and sublime interrogatives, by the wisdom of an
all-knowing God, demanded of his servant; sufficiently declaring, beyond all
hesitation, how infinitely exalted above all human comprehension, he is in
wisdom, power and glory; as well as amply setting forth his goodness to the
sons of men, in causing the regular returns of day and night, and other
wonderful successions and revolutions, for the benefit and comfort of his
dependant creatures. Bow, O my soul, adore and worship the God of thy life, who
is the length of thy days and thy portion for ever. His works are wondrous,
past finding out, mavelous, and beyond thy comprehension. Thou see in part
the multitude and magnitude of his wonderful works; thou beholdest a small part
of the changes and vicissitudes attending them: and yet through all, what
excellent order, harmony and regularity is preserved. Surely nothing less than
his Omnipotence and Omniscience could possibly effect or produce all this. Thou
see he is faithful in performing his ancient gracious promise. Day and night,
seed-time and harvest, etc. fail not. He said not unto the seed of Jacob, seek
ye my face in vain. Isai. xlv. 19.
Nay verily; the language of his compassionate regard on the contrary, is, Fear
not, worm Jacob, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee: when thou go
through the water, it shall not overwhelm thee; or when through the fire, it
shall not kindle upon thee. It is as much in wisdom and goodness that he
sometimes as it were withdraws, hides from and leaves his children, and then
again returns gloriously for their unspeakable consolation, as is the
succession of darkness and light, cold and warm seasons, in the outward.

Many and varied afflictions are necessary to our refinement. Hence the place
of this refinement is called, 'the furnace of affliction.' Isai. xlviii. 10.
Through the purifying operations of these fiery trials, the soul is gradually
redeemed from the pit of pollution. It is a precious work of divine power, to
hide pride from man. And he who becomes thoroughly acquainted with the
corruptions of human nature, in its alienation from God, will find, if ever
true humiliation and renovation is effected in him, that nothing short of the
baptism of fire can rightly cleanse the corrupt, and humble the proud heart of
fallen man. Indeed it is a sealed truth, that they who are without chastisement
are bastards, and not sons. All that the Father loves, he chasteneth; and
scourges every one that he receives. My soul rejoiceth and gives God thanks,
for deep probations and withdrawings of his presence; as well as for the
sensible incomes of his love, and arisings of the light of his countenance upon
me. I see and own it needful to my growth in the divine life, as well as in
order to my complete emancipation from the servitude of sin, that he should
deal thus with me: and it has afforded instruction to my mind, that he is
called in scripture by the name of the Lord that hides his face from the house
of Jacob. Isai. viii. 17.
Oh! what panting of soul, what anxious solicitude for his return, takes place
in all the true travelers, when he vails his holy presence; and how joyful is
the lifting up of his countenance, after these seasons, upon the drooping mind,
thus prepared for the comfortable returns thereof. It is like the returns of
clear shining after rain. Under the refining hand of God's power, whereby he
thus humbled and abased my soul, I was given clearly to see the need I should
have of this excellent qualification, humility, in my further progress in
religious life. I saw pretty clearly, in the midst of my deepest depression,
that if I should be favored with unremitted tranquillity and divine enjoyment,
I should be in danger of spiritual pride and exaltation. Blessed be the name of
the Lord for this among his many other favors, that he taught me the necessity
of humility, and forewarned, and therein forearmed me against the wiles of
Satan, which I afterward became more fully acquainted with. Oh! with what
ardency of desire did my prayers ascend before him, that he would rebuke the
proud luciferian spirit, and appoint my dwelling in the low valley, where the
grass is green, and where the fragrant flowers give forth a pleasant smell. I
saw that on the lofty mountains often reigns barrenness and desolation. My mind
was almost constantly impressed in those days with the love and desire of deep
humility. I saw something of its real beauty; and craved it as one of the
greatest blessings. O! said I, that I may put it on as a garment, and wear it
for ever: yea even appear in it before my Judge, in the assembly of saints and
angels in a future state. Oh! Lord, my God, (was then my language, and my heart
now joins it) suffer me never to forget my tribulations, nor to cease my
supplications to thee, for the continuance of this precious blessing, let it be
the first and the last in the catalogue of my requests.

Thus the great Leader of Israel led me on from step to step, not by any means
through a constant and uninterrupted enjoyment of his presence; but which for
me has been far better, by frequent withdrawings, strippings, and deep-felt
emptiness, poverty and want; and that again and again repeated, even after
large overflowings of his love in my soul, as a river overflowing all its
banks. Had he not, after such seasons of rejoicing, veiled his presence, and
clothed my soul with mourning, I might, like ancient Israel, have sang his
praise, and soon forgot his works. Psalm. cvi. 12 13.
But now through the many tribulations, and wise turnings of his holy hand upon
me, my soul remains bowed, and to this day sensible of the tendering
impressions of his love and goodness. The savor of life is still fresh within
me. He has led me about and instructed me, and (with reverence I speak it) has
kept and preserved me. May I still be preserved, and henceforth for ever kept
safe under his all-powerful protection; walking worthy of the same to the end
of my days. Amen.

During a great part of the foregoing exercises, I had frequent openings, and
lively prospects respecting the christian warfare, and the mysteries of the
kingdom of heaven. I often believed, in the openings of divine light, that, if
I stood faithful, it would be required of me to declare to others what the Lord
had done for me, and given me an understanding of, and to entreat my
fellow creatures to seek an habitation in that kingdom that cannot be shaken or
fade away. -- This concern began now to grow upon me considerably, even to that
degree, that I felt at times in meetings a living engagement to communicate
somewhat to the people; but, fearing I should begin in that great work before
the right time, I kept back; and even diverse times, when I was almost ready to
stand up, I have concluded I would keep silence this once more; considering
within myself, that if my so doing should be displeasing to the Lord, he would
manifest his displeasure to me; but if I should presume to speak a word in his
name, and it should prove to be without his holy requirings, or too soon, I
should not only displease him, but also burden his people; and perhaps get into
and become entangled in a way of speaking from too small motions or impressions
felt, or mournfully mistake the sparks of my own kindling for divine
impressions; which might, in consequence of my giving way thereunto, be
suffered to increase upon me to my great loss in the substantial and divine
life, if not to my utter ruin. In this guarded frame of mind I passed on for
some time, often seeking to the Lord for counsel and direction in this and
other concerns of importance. And though I believe I might have publicly borne
testimony in the name, power and approbation of the Lord, rather sooner than I
did; yet as I was not obstinately, but carefully backward, I seldom felt much
condemnation for withholding: however, I did a few times find some real
uneasiness on that account. -- But he who laid the concern upon me, well
knowing the integrity of my heart, and that I was bent faithfully to serve him,
without going too fast, or yet tarrying behind my guide, dealt graciously with
me, passed by my little withholdings, favored with fresh and increasing
incomes of his love, and from time to time, cast up my way with still greater
clearness; and at length in a manner so clear, and confirming, as erased doubt
and hesitation from my mind. In the fresh authority whereof I uttered a few
words in our meeting at Providence, on the first day of the week, and 10th of
the 4th month 1774, to my own and I believe my friends satisfaction. I felt the
returns of peace in my own bosom, as a river of life, for a considerable time
afterward, sweetly comforting my mind, and confirming me in this solemn
undertaking.

After some time of heavenly rejoicing, I began again to be tried with various
exercises and conflicts of mind, though still frequently favored with the
flowings of divine love, in a very comfortable and soul-satisfying manner. At
diverse times I had lively impressions to say a few words more, in public
testimony; but still waited to be well assured. The unspeakable consolation
which I found, on my first uttering a few words, and that after a considerable
time of rather holding back, than hasty procedure, had fully confirmed me that
there is greater safety in turning the fleece, and well proving it, both wet
and dry, than in rushing forward in the first operations or openings. The
beasts, allowed in sacrifice, were to chew the cud and divide the hoof. Chewing
the cud is a deliberate act: they chew and swallow, and chew and swallow again.
The division of the hoof being on the stepping member, shows the danger of
taking a single step in divine services, without a clear division of things,
and the way cast up in the mind. -- As I thus waited for clearness, not being
by once succeeding encouraged to run too fast, I was favored to know the fire
of the Lord rightly kindled upon his altar; and to witness an offering of his
own preparing. And I am well assured that such, and such only are the offerings
which will find acceptance with him. He never will reject these, any more than
accept those of human obtruding.

My second public appearance in the ministry was at the lower meeting house in
Smithfield, the 19th of the 10th month 1774, when I found a living concern to
encourage a careful engagement before the Lord, out of meetings; and to press
it upon Friends to draw nigh unto him from day to day, that strength may be
renewed, and the divine savor of life retained, lest we lose the living sense
of what we often graciously enjoy in our religious meetings. Life, divine life,
attended me in this little testimony, as in the former. And after meeting I
enjoyed the sweet influence of him who is the God of my salvation, in a degree
that was greatly to my confirmation and encouragement. After this I still
continued seeking unto and waiting upon God for counsel and direction; in which
frame of mind I was favored to renew and increase a living acquaintance with
him; and witnessed fresh instruction to my mind. I appeared but seldom in
public testimony, and mostly in a few words at a time, and yet I have some few
times been made sensible of saying too much; and for which I have felt more
pain of mind than I have often felt, if ever, for withholding. However, through
merciful preservation, I have seldom to my knowledge appeared oftener or said
more than has tended to my own relief and satisfaction, and, for ought I know,
to the satisfaction of my brethren: blessed be the name of the Lord my God. I
bow awfully before him, for his directing and preserving presence, through many
deep probations. He has been with me in the heights and in the depths; has
strung my bow and covered my head in the day of battle. May I serve him
faithfully all the days of my stay here, until I go hence and be seen of men no
more.

CHAP. III. His exercises continued. Passes through some discouragements. A
word of encouragement to the exercised traveller. A view of God's goodness, and
anciently with Noah, Abraham, etc. Trials about the war, paper currency and
taxes. An address to Zion. His sickness, and other trials. Waits in silence,
etc.
AT this time I kept a school for Friends children in the town of Providence;
and having for several years past believed at times, that it might be best to
preserve some account of my pilgrimage through the wilderness of this world, I
now began a more regular and constant journal of my exercises, and the Lord's
gracious dealings with me, than I had heretofore preserved. I had before made a
few minutes of some remarkable occurrences, which (together with what was fresh
in my memory, and so recorded there as not likely soon if ever to be
obliterated) enabled me to write the foregoing account; and thus to bring it
forward to this time.

On the first day of the week, the 1st of the 1st month 1775, I fell and
received a small wound which was attended with considerable soreness and pain;
and next day having in addition to this a turn of the nervous or sick headache,
I was confined to the house: and hope these light afflictions were not wholly
useless to me, in regard to my best interest. O! that every trial may help to
refine and prepare my soul for the city of my God.

Fourth-day 11th, went to quarterly meeting at New-Port; it held two days, not
very lively; yet a remnant were concerned to labor for the welfare of Sion.

1775. About these days I went through great discouragements and heavy
exercises; but was mostly enabled to hope and believe it was all for my good,
and would tend, if rightly endured, to my furtherance and enlargement in divine
things; and, blessed be the name of him who led and supported me through them;
he did indeed arise for my help and consolation, even with healing in his
wings; and that too, when I was almost ready to faint, and despair of his help;
which made me hope I should trust in him, and rely upon him, for the future;
even in and through all trying dispensations. Indeed it is easy to hope and
believe we shall trust in the Lord, when he shines upon us, and sheds abroad
his love in our hearts, making us livingly to joy and rejoice in his presence,
which was now graciously my happy experience; but alas! when we have again and
again to pass through the valley and shadow of death, it is not so easy to
stand firm, keep the faith, and trust in God.

My exercised soul has had large experience of these heights and depths; and
knows that nothing but divine power can uphold us in times of deep probation
which we must pass through in our travels toward the land of rest. And O! that
none may give out in such seasons, or faint in their minds; it is no new thing;
it is the beaten path, and all the Lord's ransomed must become acquainted with
it, and travel in it, not taking their flight in the winter; and as they thus
stand firm, they will joyfully witness, in the Lord's time, the winter to be
over, the summer to advance, the time of the singing of birds to be come, and
the voice of the turtle to be heard in their land. Oh! the pangs and sufferings
through which some have waited again and again for the return of these blessed
enjoyments, these moments of refreshment from the presence of the Lord; but
none have ever rightly waited on the Lord in vain. Therefore trust in him, O my
soul for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength.

Fourth-day 25th, I attended our monthly meeting at Smithfield, upper
meeting house; found some dear friends sympathized with me in my deep
probations: and was particularly comforted by a letter from a dearly beloved
friend, written in a manner well suited to assist and encourage my drooping
mind -- May I ever walk worthy the remembrance, sympathy and prayers of my
friends.

Fifth-day, 2d of 2d month. In time of silence and retirement in family
devotion, wherein we were engaged to wait upon the Lord, for the renewal of
strength together, my mind was livingly opened into a fresh and humbling sense
of the unspeakable love and goodness of God to poor, frail, finite man in
ancient days -- particularly I was bowed in consideration of his wonderful
dealings with Noah; and how he was with him in the ark; and how he taught him
to prepare it for his own and family's preservation: how he was with Abraham
when he left his father's house at his command, and went forth not knowing
whither he was to go: also how he was with Israel in Egypt, through the Red
sea, the wilderness, and Jordan; with David, when he fled from Saul, being
hunted as a partridge upon the mountains; with Jonah, in the whale's belly;
with Daniel, in the lion's den; and the three children, in the fiery furnace;
with his own well beloved son, in the great trials and temptations which he was
led through in the wilderness and among men: also how he was with the apostles,
and supported them when men rose up against them; and through all their perils
by sea and land, and by and among false brethren. What shall I say? he has
ever been a sanctuary and safe hiding place for the righteous in all ages, and
remains to be so still; and as truly and powerfully so now as ever. -- And as
my mind was thus led and opened, earnest breathings were begotten in me, that
we of the present generation, who have known his loving kindness, may walk
worthy of the continuance thereof, and never distrust his care and providence;
assuredly believing, that he who has been with us in six troubles will not
leave us in the seventh, if we firmly trust in, and steadfastly follow him. But
if we should draw back, his soul would then have no pleasure in us. -- Oh!
therefore, says my soul, that we may be vigilant, knowing that our adversary
the devil, like a roaring lion, goes about continually, seeking whom he may
devour.

In the sixth month I attended our yearly meeting on Rhode Island. John Hunt
and Nicholas Waln from Philadelphia, and William Jones and Benjamin Sweat from
New Jersey, attended said meeting -- It held a number of days, the several
sittings thereof being times of divine favor; the souls of some painful
travelers Zion-ward were greatly encouraged and rejoiced in the Lord. Dear
John Hunt was livingly opened in gospel love and authority diverse times among
us in these meetings.

On first day the 18th of 6th month, a paper was sent from our deputy governor
to the Friends of our meeting, requesting that such as had small arms would
produce them at the courthouse next day, in order that the guns in the
government might be known, and an account thereof sent to the continental
congress. After mature consideration, a paper was signed by such male members
of our society as lived within the town, in answer to said request, informing
that our religious principles and conscientious persuasion did not admit of a
compliance. This was carried to the deputy governor, who received it kindly,
and seemed satisfied, saying he believed liberty of conscience was the natural
right of all mankind. Thus the Lord made way for us, blessed be his holy name
for ever.

Much close exercise of mind I had for a considerable length of time, on
account of some particular scruples which from time to time revived with
weight, and so pressingly accompanied me, that I could not get rid of them. It
being a time of war, and preparations for war between Great Britain and
America, and the rulers of America having made a paper currency professedly for
the special purpose of promoting or maintaining said war; and it being expected
that Friends would be tried by requisitions for taxes, principally for the
support of war; I was greatly exercised in spirit, both on the account of
taking and passing said money, and in regard to the payment of such taxes,
neither of which felt easy to my mind. I believed a time would come when
christians would not so far contribute to the encouragement and support of war
and fightings as voluntarily to pay taxes that were mainly, or even in
considerable proportion, for defraying the expenses thereof; and it was also
impressed upon my mind, that if I took and passed the money that I knew was
made on purpose to uphold war, I should not bear a testimony against war, that,
for me as an individual, would be a faithful one. I knew the people's minds
were in a rage against such as, from any motive whatever, said or acted any
thing tending to discountenance the war. I was sensible that refusing to pay
the taxes, or to take the currency, would immediately be construed as a pointed
opposition to the present war in particular, as even our refusing to bear arms
was, notwithstanding our long and well known testimony against it. I had
abundant reason to expect great censure and some suffering in consequence of my
faithfulness, if I should stand faithful in these things, though I knew that my
scruples were unconnected with any party considerations, and uninfluenced by
any motives but such as respect the propriety of a truly christian conduct in
regard to war at large. I had no desire to promote the opposition to
Great Britain; neither had I any desire on the other hand to promote the
measures or success of Great Britain. I believed it my business not to meddle
with any thing from such views; but to let the potsherds of the earth alone in
their smiting one against another: but I wished to be clear in the sight of
God, and to do all that he might require of me toward the more full
introduction and coming of his peaceable kingdom and government on earth. I
found many well concerned brethren, who seemed to have little or nothing of
these scruples; and some others who were like-minded with me herein. Under all
these considerations the times looked somewhat gloomy; and at seasons great
discouragement spread over my mind. But after some strugglings, and a length of
close exercise attended with much inward looking to the Lord for direction and
support, I was enabled to cast my care upon him, and to risk myself and my all
in his service, come whatever might come, or suffer whatever I might suffer, in
consequence thereof. I was well aware of many arguments and objections against
attending to such scruples; and some seemingly very plausible ones from several
passages of scripture, especially respecting taxes; but I believed I saw them
all to arise from a want of clear understanding respecting the true meaning of
said passages; and I knew I had no wordly interest, ease or honor, to promote
by an honest attention to what I believed were the reproofs and convictions of
divine instruction. I well knew, not only by reading, but experimentally, that
He that doubts is damned (condemned) if he eat; and that what is contrary to
faith and conviction is sin; therefore I chose rather to suffer in this world
than incur the displeasure of him from whom comes all my consolation and
blessings.

In the 9th month this year 1776, in company with my dear friend Moses Farnum,
I visited Friends at Richmond, in New Hampshire government, a branch of our
monthly meeting. We were twice at their meeting, and visited I believe all
their families. It was an exercising time to me; and I was almost wholly silent
both in meetings and families; and even much restrained from conversation. Yet
I had a hope that all was working together for my good; and I endured my trials
with a degree of patience, though I often groaned inwardly for deliverance:
however the Lord brought me through all, and gave me to rejoice in his
salvation.

Fifth of tenth month. Having for nearly a year declined taking the paper
currency, agreeably to the secret persuasion which I had of my duty therein, as
before mentioned: I have now the satisfaction of comparing the different
rewards of obedience and disobedience; for though, from the very first
circulation of said money, I felt uneasy in taking it; yet fears and reasonings
of one kind or another prevailed on me to take it for a season; and then it
became harder to refuse it than it would probably have been at first: but
growing more uneasy and distressed about it, at length I refused it altogether,
since which I have felt great peace and satisfaction of mind therein; which has
in a very confirming manner been increasing from time to time, the longer I
have refused it: and although I get almost no money of any kind, little other
being in circulation, yet I had much rather live and depend on Divine
Providence, for a daily supply, than to increase in the mammon of this world's
goods, by any ways or means inconsistent with the holy will of my heavenly
Father -- and the prayer of my soul to him is, that I and all his children may
be preserved faithful to him in all his requirings, and out of that love of
things here below which alienates from the true love of and communion with him.

In the 11th month this year I visited, in company with a Friend of our monthly
meeting, the meetings and many of the families of Friends on Rhode Island, and
had much satisfaction therein; for though I had hard work in some families, and
passed through some close exercises, yet the Lord was with me and bore me up
through all, opening my way in the spring of divine life, and furnishing with
suitable matter for communication, to the relief and consolation of my own
mind, and I hope to the benefit and comfort of others. And it was remarkable to
me, that in a very short time, indeed not many days after I had thus discharged
my duty, and paid this legacy of love to my dear friends on this island, the
king's troops took possession thereof, whereby the communication was greatly
obstructed for a considerable length of time between Friends there and the
main, that, had I not given up to perform this small service just as I did, and
when the weight of it was livingly upon me, it is probable I might never have
done it at all, or not to much satisfaction. -- A sense of the Lord's goodness
in enabling me to go in the right time, and to find relief and satisfaction in
the visit, bowed my mind and raised desires therein, that I might ever live
like one who knows himself to be but a pilgrim on the earth, and that God alone
can sustain him. Amen.

First Day, 8th of twelfth month. Diverse Friends of our meeting at Providence
became exercised in regard to a commotion that was prevailing among the
inhabitants. It was said, and I suppose was true, that a British fleet with
troops had been seen not far from Rhode Island; and it was supposed they were
aiming to come into New-Port harbor, and probably up the river to this town.
This greatly surprised many of the inhabitants. -- Many moved their goods, and
some their families out of town, in great haste and precipitancy. The town
seemed in an uproar; carts rattling, and teams driving all night; and, among
others, a few Friends in this sudden consternation were induced to move some of
their effects also, and a small matter was done at moving their families: and
this being, in the view of some concerned Friends, a weighty, serious matter, a
conference was held after the afternoon meeting upon the occasion, some Friends
of other meetings also being present, and though nothing censorious or
uncharitable appeared in any respecting the conduct of any, yet it was advised
that Friends should be very careful to act in moderation, and not in the hurry,
but wait for clearness, and for ability to act becoming our holy profession.
Next day this advice was further inculcated by the meeting for sufferings which
sat in town, and which, after solid consideration, advised that Friends keep
still and quiet, and do no more, unless, upon deep and solid consideration, the
way should be clearly seen for any one to move. It was also thought advisable
for Friends in all things to conduct so as not to increase the commotion and
intimidation which was already too prevalent among the people. This advice was
very savoury to some of our minds, whose exercise was great on this occasion;
and whose travail of soul was, that Friends might be preserved in the stability
of the unchangeable truth.

Fifth-day, 12th of 12th month. My mind was impressed so deeply with a lively
sense of the excellency and necessity of true christian charity, that I had to
speak of it in our meeting in the constrainings of the Father's love, laboring
to encourage Friends to cultivate this excellent virtue, in their own minds and
in each other.

First Day, 5th of 1st month 1777. For the want of close attention to the word
of divine life in my own soul, I made a blunder in my public testimony, which
greatly humbled me, and made me very careful and watchful afterward. O! it is
good to trust in the Lord with all our hearts, not leaning to our own
understandings. It was relying too much on my own understanding and memory
which brought this great anxiety upon me. And I record it for future caution,
meanwhile beseeching God Almighty to preserve me, and all his true gospel
ministers in the right line of safety and divine qualification, which is in and
with the opening of the Spirit, and with the understanding also.

Fifth-day, 3d of 4th month. After a few words which I became concerned to
express in our weekday meeting, my mind was so clothed with the spirit of
prayer and supplication, that I was prevailed upon to kneel down and publicly
address the throne of grace. This was the first time I ever appeared in vocal
public supplication; and it was truly much in the cross, as also in great fear
and reverence. It was indeed to me an awful thing publicly to call on the name
of the Lord, and I have been many times sorely grieved at the light, easy and
unfeeling manner in which many do it. A few weeks after this, to wit, the 25th
of the 4th month, in writing a little piece on a special occasion, after
particularly and affectionately mentioning the tender feelings and emotions of
my heart toward several particular friends and acquaintances, my soul seemed
overwhelmed with love and almost unutterable good will to the people of the
Lord, wherever scattered, the world over; in the fresh flowings whereof I
enlarged nearly as follows: But above all, O Sion, thou city of the living God!
what shall I say to thee! all that is alive within me is moved at thy being now
brought into my remembrance! how shall I express the overflowings of that love
I now feel for thee; or that ardently travailing exercise, which in the rolling
of tender bowels engages my soul for thy everlasting welfare! May the Lord of
hosts encamp round about thee, as a wall of fire for thy defense. May thou
know an abiding in thy tents, O Israel! Let not the earth, nor all its
enchantments, entice thee from the cross, O Israel! the Lord alone can keep
thee, and he only is worthy of thy closest attention. Keep near, keep near, O
chosen generation; keep near thy divine teacher, who is graciously vouchsafing
to teach thee himself! Dwell deep, O ye travailing souls, give not back; go on
with him that has called you, although it may be through fire and water;
through frowns and reproaches: the everlasting arm will be underneath to
support you, as you make God your refuge, and continue faithful in the glorious
work of reformation, which he is fitting some of you for. My life in tenderness
runs out toward you: ye are as bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh. Oh! may
the Lord protect and preserve you -- may the blessings of the everlasting hills
rest upon you; and especially upon such of you as have been as it were
separated from your brethren, and devoted to the great work of the Lord in the
earth; and be ye assured, if ye hold fast the beginning of your confidence and
engagement steadfastly to the end, no weapon formed against you shall ever
prosper; the tongue that rises in judgment against you shall be condemned, and
even though Gog and Magog wage war and oppose you, the Lamb and his followers
shall have the victory. -- And as I have good grounds to believe this was
written in the good will of 'him who dwelt in the bush,' I feel easy to
transcribe it here, and give it a place in these memoirs.

Having some time before this dismissed my school at Providence, I opened one
at Smithfield, on the 12th of the 4th month 1778, under the care, inspection
and direction of a solid committee appointed by the monthly meeting for that
purpose. Soon after this, I took several colds one after another, until at
length, on the 26th of the 2d month, leaving our monthly meeting, being quite
unable to sit through it, I went to my sister's, where I was confined several
weeks, brought very low, and at times ready to doubt my recovery. Indeed many
of my friends and relations pretty much gave over expecting it. I was, after a
season of deep exercise and probation, enabled to resign up life and all into
the hands of him who made me, and to say in sincerity, thy will be done in life
or death. And as I lay one night in great distress of body, and deep
thoughtfulness of mind, I was drawn into an awful view of death, eternity and
eternal judgment, in a manner that I never had before; but feeling my mind
perfectly resigned to depart this life and launch into an endless eternity, if
so the Lord my God should please to order it; and finding all pain of body and
anxiety of mind removed, I lay still some time, thinking probably I might ere
long be released from all the pangs and toils of time, into the glorious
rejoicings of eternal life. But, after a considerable length of time had passed
in inward and profound stillness and adoration, large fields of labor were
opened, and I saw that I must travel from place to place in this and distant
lands, in the Lord's commission and service. From this time I never entertained
a doubt of my recovery, although I had afterward a return or two of the
disorder more severe than before; for these openings were in the fresh evidence
of divine life, which never deceived me. A flow of divine favor, in the
sheddings abroad of the love of God in my heart, remained fresh and living with
me through most of the remaining time of my illness. After a few days I began
to recover, and pretty soon got a little about again, and before a great while
attained my usual state of health: may thanksgiving and glory and honor be
ever ascribed by my soul to him who has been with me in sickness and in health,
supporting and preserving me in both, and enabling me to resign to his divine
disposal. May I ever live answerable to such regard of the Highest to me a poor
worm of the dust. My soul has been bowed, self has been abased; and through
deep prostration I have been made to joy in the Lord, and rejoice in the
salvation of my God and Savior.

About the latter end of the sixth month this year, an old acquaintance of
mine, being now collector of rates, came and demanded one of me. I asked him
what it was for? He said, to sink the paper money. I told him, as that money
was made expressly for the purpose of carrying on war, I had refused to take
it; and for the same reason could not pay a tax to sink it, believing it my
duty to bear testimony against war and fighting. I informed him that for diverse
years past, even diverse years before the war began, and when I had no
expectation of ever being tried in this way, it had been a settled belief with
me that it was not right to pay such taxes; at least not right for me, nor in
my apprehension, right in itself; though many sincere brethren may not at
present see its repugnancy to the pure and peaceable spirit of the gospel. I
let him know I did not wish to put him to any trouble, but would be glad to pay
it if I could consistently with my persuasion. He appeared moderate, thoughtful
and rather tender; and after a time of free and pretty full conversation upon
the subject, went away in a pleasant disposition of mind, I being truly glad to
see him so. Diverse such demands were made of me in those troublesome times for
diverse years: I ever found it best to be very calm and candid; and to open, as
I was from time to time enabled, the genuine grounds of my refusal; and that if
possible, so as to reach the understandings of those who made the demand.

The Lord, who is ever attentive to the good of souls and the exaltation of his
kingdom, is on his way, and truth will more fully break forth; righteousness
will come into dominion; the mountain of the Lord's house will surely be
established above all the other mountains; but many of the called, through want
of faithful attention to the call, may never become the chosen, and so never
come forth valiantly in the testimony, nor stand immovable, nor triumph
victoriously, in the Lamb's warfare.

I think I have seen in the light, that too many that have come forth in a
degree of true heavenly beauty, and through the furnace, being in some degree
refined, have afterward loved this present world, delighted in its friendship,
rejoiced in earthly accumulations, and let go their hold on heavenly good.
Alas, for these! if they were but as diligent, watchful and solicitous for
Sion's welfare, and to lay up treasures in heaven, as they are to gather
something on earth, they would be sure to grow rich in faith and good works,
and become heirs of the heavenly kingdom. These can never, so long as their
rejoicings are so much in earth's enchanting pursuits and acquisitions, rightly
bear truth's holy testimony, or lift up its standard to the nations. Nay, nay:
this state prepares them at least to bear a superficial lifeless testimony; but
very commonly to reason, argue and dispute, and that too, as they think very
wisely, against the rising, spreading and increase of the testimony and
government of the prince of peace. If there is not a diligent waiting at
wisdom's gate and in the valley of humiliation, in the true faith and patience
of the saints, the sense of divine things is gradually lessened and lost; and
instead thereof, a kind of reasoning takes place, wherein the divine life and
its blessed testimony is stifled and rejected; and those who stand faithful
therein are censured and condemned. And, O thou exercised travailing soul,
whoever thou art, hold on thy way; hold fast thine integrity; be not
discouraged at the lukewarmness or want of true judgment and discerning in
others; but be thou valiant for the cause of truth in thy day; and then
notwithstanding all the opposition thou may meet with, within or without,
the Lord will be thy shepherd; the holy One of Israel will watch over, protect
and defend thee; and as thou leanest wholly to the arm of his help, and
trustest steadfastly in his divine light for thy leader, he will surely uphold
and sustain thee through all thy combats and fiery trials in this militant
state; and when thy faithful warfare here below is fully accomplished, he will
receive thee into his glorious church triumphant, there for ever to join the
shouts and hallelujahs of saints and angels in a glorious and unspeakable
participation and fruition of perfect blessedness.

8th month 4th. I have now freedom to commit to writing a little of what I have
thought of the custom among many Friends of calling one another friend, instead
of calling them by their proper given names, which I think deserves serious
consideration, why this way of speaking, to those whose names we are acquainted
with, is continued in. Is it not to shun the cross? or because calling persons
by their names John, James, Peter, Paul, etc. sounds too unmodish, or as some
may think, disrespectful? Is there nothing of the spirit of the world in thus
flinching from strict plainness and simplicity? If I am not mistaken, we shall,
whenever we arrive to the blessed estate the apostle mentions, of having every
thought brought into captivity to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. x. 5.
be willing to deny ourselves and take up the cross, even in things that appear
to be foolishness itself to this world's wisdom, for it is in such things that
God in his wisdom is often pleased to exercise and prove the integrity of his
children, in order to confirm and establish their humiliation and subjection of
will to him and his holy law. Here pride has no free scope; the spirit and
friendship of the world is carefully renounced; and the cross in all its
necessary operations submitted to and embraced. A plain decent dress, a plain
house, furniture and fare in all things, will become the humble followers of a
meek and humble Savior: plainness and simplicity of language will best adorn a
real christian.

In these days I often renewed covenant with my God -- sat much alone -- kept
silence -- and bore his yoke and rod upon me. Many days I spent nearly, if not
quite, without condemnation; and I believe without sin; though many others were
so spent, as to cause more or less of anxiety and woe: but I even found the
ministration of condemnation was truly glorious, because it prepared my mind
for and led to the more glorious ministration of justification. Fervent was the
engagement of my mind; and often my peace flowed like a river, and Sion's
welfare swallowed up almost all other considerations and concerns. Much travail
did I often feel for the preservation and growth of the Lord's visited
children, I mean those who had become livingly sensible of the operations of
his divine power upon their spirits -- and to some of these I wrote once in a
while an encouraging or persuasive letter, a considerable number of these I
have by me, but, to avoid swelling these memoirs, I omit them here, as also a
great part of the minutes and memorandums which I made of my exercises,
watchings, strivings and trials in those days. -- In the time of waiting on the
Lord in silent retirement alone, which was mostly my daily practice, it
sometimes pleased him to vail his holy presence from me, in order to prove my
patience and steadfast reliance upon him; and sometimes to command a solemn
awful silence in me, wherein he often stood revealed in majestic
all sufficiency before me, in a manner which I have no words to convey a clear
idea of to any who have not experienced the same in themselves. But I am
assured that all, who rightly wait upon him in their own minds, will find him a
God nigh at hand, and graciously disposed to replenish and satisfy the hungry
soul. I do not believe a man can go aside, and sit down alone, to make the
experiment, merely to see what the consequence of sitting in silence will be,
without a real hunger and heartfelt travail; and therein be favored with the
flowings of the holy oil. But none ever wait rightly and perseveringly upon God
in vain. The incomes of his love afford more true joy, than all earth's richest
enjoyments. A feast of fat things, of wines on the lees well refined, Isai.
xxv. 6.
is the comfortable portion of his chosen.

In these awful approaches I beheld at times with clearness the kind hand of
the Lord in leading me through many deep probations. I viewed his overturning
influence among men, in these outwardly troublesome times; and now and then my
prospects were livingly extended in great good will, and rolling of bowels,
toward the church in general, and some places in particular, with a living
evidence sealed on my heart, that, if I abode faithful, I must devote
considerable time in the service of the gospel in my day and generation. My
soul, under the animating influence of these openings and prospects, at
seasons, bowed in reverent prostration before Emmanuel, God with us.

CHAP. IV. On taxes for war. Visit to some families in Dartmouth, and to Moses
Farnum in his last sickness. His marriage. Visit on Rhode Island. Concerning
spirituous liquors. On procuring this world's goods. Thanksgiving, a Poem.
Family visit in his own monthly meeting.
AT our yearly meeting this year 1779, the subject of Friends paying taxes for
war, came under solid consideration. Friends were unanimous, that the testimony
of Truth, and of our society, was clearly against our paying such taxes as were
wholly for war; and many solid Friends manifested a lively testimony against
the payment of those in the mixture; which testimony appeared evidently to me
to be on substantial grounds, arising and spreading in the authority of truth.
It was a time of refreshment to an exercised number, whose spirits I trust were
feelingly relieved, in a joyful sense of the light which then sprung up among
us. On the whole, I am renewedly confirmed, that however the burden-bearers of
the present generation among us may hold on their way, or fall short and give
back, the Lord will raise up a band of faithful followers, who, preferring
Jerusalem's welfare to their chiefest joys, will press through the crowd of
reasonings, and follow the Lamb whithersoever he leads them.

In those days I passed through many trials and exercises, unknown except to
God and my own soul: but he knew my heart, and all my tribulations, and how to
carry me through them; and blessed be his holy name! he supported and bore up
my drooping mind through every probation and besetment. At times I clearly saw
he was refining me in the furnace of affliction; then why should I murmur or
repine? Or why do thou murmur, Oh! afflicted soul, whoever thou art? for
unless thou endure chastisement of the Lord, thou art a bastard and not a son.
By his fatherly chastisements he brings into the obedience and filial
attachment of sons -- he enables to sing of mercy and of judgment; and confirms
his children in a steadfast reliance upon himself, through every storm and
tempest. O! bless his holy name for ever -- exalt and praise him, even for the
turning of his hand in probation; for the exercise of his rod in chastisement.
It is all for good, and will surely work good to all who rightly abide the
trial. Indeed every trial ought to be received with thankfulness, as intended
and working for our good. And seeing afflictions are often the most substantial
blessings to a true christian traveller, let us in true resignation of heart,
under each painful stroke, ascribe goodness to our God, and, in the pathetic
language of Young, render him the tribute of thanksgiving, and say,

'For all I bless thee, most for the severe.'

In the twelfth month this year, in company with my dear friend Elisha
Thornton, I visited several families of Friends at Dartmouth. It was a time of
great trial: I was shut up in silence, pain and poverty of spirit in diverse
families. I felt like a wanderer through a trackless desert; yet, not being
easy to quit the service, I went on, but still for some time found no relief,
more than a consciousness of integrity to my God; but, magnified be his name
for ever, in depth of distress he heard my cry, and arose with healing in his
wings; and was graciously pleased to command deliverance. My tongue again was
loosed; and, with tenderness and contrition, I declared of his dealings; with
gratitude, I sang of his salvation. He clothed me with the spirit of
supplication: I drew near him with renewed confidence, and, after several
seasons of relieving communication, returned home, saying in my heart, 'it is
enough.'

The 31st of the 3d month 1780, I went to see my much beloved friend Moses
Farnum, at Uxbridge, in his last sickness. His disorder was paralitick. He
could not speak so as to communicate much of his mind by words; but the lively
sensibility of his mind, and the tenderness and brokenness of his spirit were
refreshing to my soul. Diverse Friends were present, and nearly all were melted
into tears and heartfelt tenderness. He was just able to make us sensible of
his great peace of mind in his late religious travels; and that the seal and
evidence of divine approbation therein was now impressed on his mind. Light and
life appeared to triumph over all in him. He seemed resigned to every trial; he
also manifested great gladness that in health he had settled and disposed of
his outward affairs to satisfaction. On the 11th of the fifth month he was
decently buried, having gradually declined until death removed him from works
to rewards. I trust he now enjoys a mansion of undisturbed repose in the
paradise of God. He was in the latter part of his life a pillar in the Lord's
house: a faithful watchman on the walls of Sion. And his memory is precious.

On the 1st day of the 6th month this year, 1780, at our meeting in Providence,
I was married to Eunice Anthony, daughter of Daniel and Mary Anthony. -- The
following I wrote her just after my first addresses to her on account of
marriage, viz.

North-Providence, 22d of 1st mo. 1780. Most affectionately beloved,
After reading over several memorandums of the exercises my poor soul has
passed through in my pilgrimage through this vale of tears, my heart salutes
thee in a fresh spring of that love which I feel increasing, and hope may never
wax cold toward thee. And having felt thee abundantly near this evening, I am
free to write what revives for thy perusal, hoping it may be useful toward our
rightly stepping along through time together. And first, dearly beloved, let me
tell thee, that however short I may be of strict adherence to the Light of
Life, yet it is my crown, my chiefest joy to feel the holy, harmonious
influences and inshinings of the love of Jesus my Savior upon my soul; and I
feel that without this I must be miserable indeed. I also believe that the true
enjoyment of the marriage-union consists eminently in both being engaged to
draw near to the Lord, and act in his counsel; which I not only wish, but in a
good degree expect may be our happy case. If it should, though we have as it
were a dry morsel to partake of as to the things of this life, yet we may joy
in the Lord, and rejoice in the God of our salvation. Thou know I have no
great things to invite thee to. -- If we are joined together (the which I trust
we already measurably are) we must not expect the paths of affluence; no no.
'This day be bread and peace our lot,
'All else beneath the sun,
'Thou know if best bestowed or not,
'And let thy will be done.'
This, my dear, our minds must come to, if we intend to be happy; yet this I
know, that one who cannot lie-has promised to add all things necessary to those
who seek first the kingdom of heaven, and in this I confide. Let us therefore
unite in seeking this heavenly kingdom, and that in the first place. And may
we, the remainder of our lives, earnestly press after resignation to the Lord's
will; and, above all things, strive to please him who only can give peace in
whatever circumstances we may be. Then I trust the guardian angel of his holy
presence will encamp around, and his everlasting arms be underneath to support
us. Farewell, my dear, farewell fays thy sure friend

JOB SCOTT.


While I was from home at our quarterly meeting in the 7th month, I wrote as
follows: Lord, when I contemplate on thy wonderful condescension to me a poor
worm of the dust; when I remember thy early and repeated calls and visitations;
and how thou pluckedst my feet out of the mire, and led me into the green
pastures of life, filling my heart with joy and gladness after condemnation for
evil, and chastisement therefore; my soul bows in reverence before thee;
gratitude affects my heart. But alas! when I take a view of my steppings along
since those times; my want of constant stayedness in covenant with thee; the
weakness of my resolutions, and my manifold infirmities; mourning and
lamentation fills my heart; sorrow and distress surround me. Lord, what is man,
that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man that thou visitest him? Were
it not for thy mercies I must often have been rejected; were it not for thy
tender compassions, I must have been shut up in darkness and perplexity. But,
blessed be thy holy name, through judgment and correction thou have, from time
to time, reduced me to that tenderness wherein the flowings of thy love are
felt to be precious.

In the 12th month this year our monthly meeting entered my name as one of a
committee to visit families. My circumstances in life, and a prospect I had of
visiting families on Rhode Island, brought some discouragement over my mind
about this new appointment; but wishing well to the service at home, and
trusting in the Lord, I gave up to it; and, passing on from time to time, I had
some close exercise, and some seasons of solid satisfaction.

In the 1st month 1781, I went to Rhode Island, and having suitable company,
visited about forty-six families, and attended several meetings among Friends
there. In the course of this visit, I passed through a time of painful
stripping for a short season, yet it was a time of great openness and divine
favor through almost all the meetings and sittings. My mind was low, humble
and dependant, almost constantly looking for the way to shut up, as had been my
experience at some other times: but now it pleased the shepherd of Israel to
fit and qualify for service. The holy anointing oil flowed livingly among us.
Truth's testimony was again and again exalted; the Lord's name and goodness
magnified and praised, and the hearts of the true worshippers rejoiced; and the
careless sons and daughters of Sion were admonished and warned. I returned home
with thankful acknowledgments to the author of all consolation for this blessed
season of heavenly enlargement and holy confirmation; I was greatly relieved
from the exercise that had for a considerable time been impressed upon my
spirit, constraining me into this little field of service.

A concern having been growing among Friends for some time past to discourage
the frequent and unnecessary use of spirituous liquors; and also to dissuade
all our members from dealing in them; some labor was bestowed with such as
dealt in them as an article of trade: they appeared well disposed; and the
prospect was encouraging, that Friends would pretty soon clear their hands of
that kind of commerce. And the use of such liquors is much laid aside among
Friends in New England. It was once thought very difficult to do some kinds of
business without them; but now it is found by experience, that business is
better done, and health, strength and harmony, better promoted without them.

31st of 3d month 1781. I have for years felt strong desires to be wholly
redeemed from the improper pursuit of worldly enjoyments, and even from all
desires of wealth beyond what my heavenly Father knows I have need of; as
also from all use of things, the procuring of which would require more of my
time than would be consistent with my religious duty; or which would cause me,
or any under me, to labor beyond the true medium; or beyond the degree which
best promotes health of body and tranquillity of mind. I have mourned to see
the true standard so lamentably departed from in these respects, among all
societies of professing christians. Multitudes are miserably toiling and
drudging, from day to day, and from year to year, scarce allowing themselves
time to assemble for divine worship, nor scarce time to rest and refresh their
bodies. And many, when they do get to their religious meetings, are too often
so exhausted by immoderate fatigue, that they are fitter for sleep than divine
worship. I am fully satisfied if men would keep to that holy principle which
bounds the desires, and gives content in a moderate way of living, they would
enjoy more solid peace and happiness than is often experienced in the
apartments of affluence, or in the walks of magnificence. What is all the
glitter and show of high life in comparison of, 'What nothing earthly gives,
nor can destroy,
'The soul's calm sunshine, and the heartfelt joy.
'True virtue's prize.'


Thousands are anxiously aiming to keep up an appearance, which, though far
behind many, is yet above their real ability to support without injury to their
circumstances; indeed a little straining beyond our circumstances may embarrass
us through life, keep us upon the toil, and discompose our minds, or at least
absorb our attention, so as to embitter our lives, or prevent that true quiet,
wherein we might dwell so inward and resigned as to acquaint ourselves with
God, and be at peace. Moreover, it is too commonly the case that even religious
people, that is, such as have been really so for a season, when they give way
to this dangerous desire of wealth, or of living too much as they see others
live, that they gradually lose ground, until, in their planning and contriving,
they get more or less in a way of overreaching, or at least of crowding too
hard upon those they deal with, bearing them down in their prices, or in some
degree extorting too great a price for things sold them. There are many ways to
oppress a little, take small advantages, and exercise some degree of extortion.
And when the mind becomes habituated and gradually reconciled to a less degree,
the way is too often paved to a greater degree, until many things will go down
pretty easily which would have sat very uneasy upon the mind in days of greater
tenderness and more conscientious exactness and holy fear. I doubt not many
have seen and deplored these things in their early progress, thought they would
not for all earth's glory be overtaken in them, and yet, letting out their
desires after more than is meet for them, have slid gradually into the same
error. I have seen the progress of this spirit with sorrow, and mourned over
some who have been grievously entangled and ensnared in it. -- Oh! thou
traveller Sion-ward, flee, flee for thy life, from all these allurements; take
God for thy portion, and his holy spirit for thy law and limitation. Be content
with what is convenient for thee; there is more true joy therein, than in all
the accumulations of avarice. I believe it will be good for me, and all that
would live godly in Christ Jesus, often to examine impartially, Do I exercise
no degrees of extortion? am I redeemed from the love and friendship of the
world? do I not give way to desires of living above what truth or my
circumstances allow of? am I not in the use of some things which are not
necessary? If thou have this belief, see to it, and endeavor to deny thyself,
and be satisfied with such things, and supplies of them, as thy heavenly Father
knows thou have need of.

At our quarterly meeting in the seventh month, a committee was appointed to
visit the several monthly meetings, and labor, as ability might be given, for
a reformation. -- Some endeavors were used to dissuade Friends from that use
of things which promote not the true harmony of mankind, nor do any essential
good to those who use them. This ought to be a serious consideration with all
christians, they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the
affections and lusts. Gal. v. 24.
-- What then have they to do with care, toil and anxiety, to procure things
needless: with pride, vanity and indulgence, in the use of them? -- All the use
of this world's goods, is but to provide for our outward comfort through this
passage or life, and yet how many make themselves slaves, or at least greatly
lessen or prevent their own comfort in life, by giving way to the influence of
improper desires, and imaginary wants.

11th of 12th month 1781. O! that I may be preserved pressing forward with full
purpose of heart toward a state of perfect freedom from sin. I know well that
no one sin can be mortified and overcome, but through divine assistance; but as
certainly as the power of God upon us can, or ever does, enable us to overcome
any one evil; so certainly it is able to assist us to the complete overcoming
of all; and we may rely upon it he will redeem us from all iniquity, unless the
stubbornness of our wills prevent. If Jerusalem's children had given up their
own wills, Christ would have gathered them. According to his own testimony he
would; but they would not.

4th month 22, 1782. QUIETNESS, as a canopy, covers mine mind.

Great God thy name be blessed,
Thy goodness be adored,
My soul has been distressed,
But thou have peace restored.
A thankful heart I feel,
In peace my mind is staid,
Balsamic ointments heal,
The wounds by sorrow made.
Though elements contend,
Though wind and waters rage,
I Have an unshaken Friend,
Who does my grief assuage.
Though storms without arise,
Emblems of those within,
On Christ my soul relies,
The sacrifice for sin.
Though inward storms prevail,
Afflicting to endure,
I Have help that cannot fail,
In Him that is ever sure.
Though outward war and strife,
Prevail from sea to sea,
I Have peace in inward life,
And that suffices me.
Though clamor rear its head,
And stalk from shore to shore,
My food is angels bread,
What can I covet more?
Though ill reports abound,
Suspicions and surmise,
I find, and often have found,
In death true comfort lies;
That death I mean whereby
Self-love and will are slain,
For these the more they die,
The more the Lamb does reign.
And well assured I am
True peace is only known,
Where he the harmless Lamb
Has made the heart his throne.
Then, then may tempests rage,
Cannon may roar in vain;
The Rock of every age,
The Lamb, the Lamb does reign.
Fifth month 23d. I feel breathings of soul to be set at liberty from the
bondage of earthly cares, that they may have no more share of my attention than
duty requires. I have seen with heartfelt pain the ravages of a worldly
spirit; I have mourned the desolations which the love of gain has made among
many who once in degree renounced it.

O Lord, God Almighty, I pray thee arise for our help; for except thou, O holy
Helper, help, there is no help for us: the people whom thou have called out of
Egyptian darkness will yet perish in the wilderness, and never enter into
possession of the promised land, unless thou, O most merciful, again make bare
thy holy arm for our awakening and furtherance in the way of life.

Our yearly meeting this year was graciously owned, and overshadowed by the
wing of ancient goodness: the Shepherd watered and fed his flock; he sheltered
his lambs, and prepared a banquet for his chosen, and made them sweetly rest as
at noon.

After the meeting was over, the language of my heart, in thankful
acknowledgment, was a language of praise. I knew the blessing was from heaven:
I knew the rain was not at our command; nor was the table spread, and the feast
prepared, but by the bounteous hand of Israel's God. Return, O my soul, to the
place of thy rest, for the Lord thy God has dealt bountifully with thee.

The continuation of divine favor for some little time after this, repeatedly
rejoiced my spirit. At length, through the all-wise overturnings of him who
knew how to lead me on in safety, I was again reduced to want, and had to feel
much inward leanness. In this state I scarce had any thing to rejoice in but
infirmities; but, relying on him whose covenant is as sure with the night as
with the day, and who never forsakes those who do not forsake him, I felt, in
the midst of my strippings, and was therein stayed, that patience in low times
is an excellent anchor, and hope bears up the soul.

Ninth month 23d. In reading the occurrences of Abraham's life in Elwood's
Sacred History, my heart was deeply affected. -- Oh! his faith how firm! his
devotion how lively! See him leave his father's house, his native land, and go
forth at the call of the Lord, not knowing whither he went. See him erecting
his altar to the Most High, and calling on the name of the Lord the everlasting
God. See him on Moriah's mount, resigning his beloved son! What heart unmoved
can view the transactions of such a life, or read with indifference the
dealings of the Almighty with this father of the faithful? -- He was the friend
of God, and God was his friend. O that we, who boast the light of gospel days,
were true successors in the faith of Abraham: a living faith that wrought with
his works, and by his works of righteousness, devotion and true holiness, was
made perfect.

In the 11th month, in company with other Friends, I visited upwards of seventy
families within the verge of our monthly meeting; had great satisfaction in
some places, and suffered deeply in others. The author of all good was with us,
and at times greatly refreshed our spirits. In the course of this visit I had
to view with sadness those who were overcome by the god of this world. Others I
viewed as rising above the world, and laying hold on eternal life. These felt
near my spirit in the invisible relationship, and I rejoiced in their success
in the Lamb's warfare.

CHAP. V. His removal to Gloucester. His sister Sarah's death. On silent
waiting in families. Visit to the quarterly and monthly meetings. On strict
plainness and simplicity of living. Visits families at Richmond. The true
light, sun, moon and stars, alluded to. On the six and seven days. On the seven
seals.
ON the 5th of the 4th month 1782, I moved with my family to Gloucester, within
the limits of the meeting of Uxbridge, a branch of our monthly meeting, having
for some time before believed, under diverse considerations, and of different
kinds, that it might be best for me to spend a portion of my time in that
neighborhood, about eighteen miles from my home in North-Providence. I fully
expected to return again some time or other, but did not know when it might be.
I remembered the movements of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and in the recollection
thereof, a degree of solid satisfaction was afforded me. I had some outward
prospects in removing; but I not only did not aim at wealth, nor expect an
increase of outward substance, but I had other and I trust higher motives in it
than related to my own temporal concerns. And, soon after I became settled
there, I found a field of service opening before me in a religious line, a
sense whereof I had for some time had upon my mind previous to this removal.
There were a few precious souls here deeply and well engaged in the cause of
truth, and with whose spirits I was often livingly united in travail for the
welfare of Sion, and building of her walls. We had times of deep probation;
and, through holy help, many seasons of rejoicing together in the Lord. On the
whole, I had frequent confirmations that my being here was promotive at least
of my own growth in the everlasting truth. Lord God! of all the holy ancient,
be with me I pray thee, and guide me in the way wherein thou would have me
to go, no matter where or when, so that thy never-failing presence goes with me
in all my travels through the wilderness of this world, to a house not made
with hands, eternal in the heavens. Amen.

Very soon after my removal, my dear sister Sarah Hazard died at her home in
South-Kingston. She was a religious woman. She improved much in true christian
resignation, and died in a fresh and living sense of heavenly joy. I attended
her burial, enjoying, in the midst of my mourning, a satisfaction in a full
belief that her removal from a world of anxieties and cares, was a removal to
an inheritance in the mansions of bliss.

I have been renewedly confirmed in the great advantage to families, and even
to small children, that results from sitting down in solemn silence, and
therein waiting upon God. I have seen the children much broken and tendered in
such seasons, so that, even when there has not been a word spoken, the tears
have rolled down their cheeks, and their looks have been evidently expressive
of heartfelt sensations. This practice also learns them silence and subjection;
it curbs their wills and habituates them to restraint, and a patient waiting,
for their parents permission, to engage in their little diversions. The habits
of silence, subjection and patient waiting for permission, are very useful to
children from infancy to mature age, and many suffer much for want of it. I
have also seen much advantage to children, and indeed to whole families, from
the practice of a solemn pause at meals; it learns children stillness, decency
and reverence; and, where it is done in a feeling manner, with minds rightly
turned to feel after God and experience his blessing, and is not practiced in a
slight formal manner, it tends to season and solemnize the minds of young and
old. I have seen it done in a very careless lifeless manner, with scarce any
reverence; diverse of the family conversing not far from the table; and scarce
any sense of the divine presence prevalent in the minds of those around it; and
perhaps the pause scarce long enough to allow of much solid sensibility or
reverential acknowledgment of the favors received from the bounty of a
gracious God in the ample provisions of his providential care for our bodies;
or his continued extension of fatherly regard to our immortal souls. I think
such an undevout appearance can be very little to the divine acceptance; but
where a proper pause is observed, and the Lord is therein seriously sought to,
the mind being feelingly impressed with a sense of his aid and assistance, and
all branches of the family are reverently silent: it is an oblation
well-pleasing in the sight of God, and very useful to such families. I am
morally certain, that I have many a day gone through the cares and concerns of
life with much more composure, stability, satisfaction and propriety for the
strength and assistance I have found in drawing near to God in solemn silence
in my family; and I wish the practice of reverently adoring him in this way,
may increase more and more.

Our yearly meeting this year was a favored season: diverse weighty matters
were transacted in love and christian condescension through the qualifying
influence of the master of our assemblies, who graciously owned this our annual
solemnity by the overshadowing of his love and life-giving presence. Some
suitable advices were sent down to the inferior meetings upon sundry important
subjects.

After this meeting, in company with diverse other Friends, who with myself were
under the yearly meeting's appointment to visit the quarterly and monthly
meetings, I visited Acoakset, Dartmouth, Nantucket, Sandwich and Swanzey
monthly meetings, Sandwich quarterly meeting held at Nantucket, and our own at
Smithfield. We found a want of charity in some few, very strict in outward
plainness, who, from a misguided zeal, held others too much at a distance on
account of their not appearing equally plain with themselves in dress, etc.
which was cause of grief to me, yet I am a hearty well-wisher to plainness: I
grieve to see the sorrowful departure from it into pride and superfluity: I
never saw an instance of any very considerable departure of this kind, but what
I had reason to be convinced that a real loss was sustained by the individuals,
or their best advancement prevented. But I have suffered much deep distress of
soul under a painful and depressing sensibility, of that contracted, illiberal
and harsh spirit, which in some instances has the ascendancy, leading them into
extremes without the life. I know that truth leads into great regularity and
circumspection of life; and I abhor that light chaffy spirit that makes
ridicule of it, and lightly esteems the exemplary appearance and true religious
zeal of the faithful. I doubt not many libertine minds may lay hold of such
remarks as the above to justify their own deviations from the plain path of
truth, the narrow way that leads to life; and think thereby to screen
themselves from the just judgment of truth through the brethren; but this will
not avail them; the way remains, as ever of old, a narrow way, a way of
self-denial, and the daily cross. But Oh unhappy and deluded people whoever
they are, that in their zeal for externals, lose charity. They depart from the
life and lay hold on formality: for all outward things in religion dwindle
unavoidably into formality, in proportion as charity is departed from, and zeal
takes place in things pertaining to the outside of the cup and platter, without
a living fenfe of the inward spring of life which can never be experienced
without living, fervent charity. Therefore let us ever keep steadily to our
plain way of living, in the life of truth: for I am assured, so far as it is
rightly kept to, truth owns and supports it; and its influence on the mind is
very beneficial. But O, that we may ever be preserved from a narrow, rash,
censorious spirit; and from over-rating any outward regularity, or exact
living; lest, as we grow in the form, we dwindle as to the life. Although these
remarks may not have a very extensive influence in rightly guarding others; yet
I must write what I have to write and leave it, hoping divine providence will
yet build up Sion and fortify Jerusalem, directing the course of the
sincere-hearted between all the extremes, in the sure and safe path of virtue,
where a lively active zeal is tempered with liberality of heart and sentiment,
in the flowings of true charity.

We labored in the monthly meetings as ability was afforded, and I trust to
some solid satisfaction. I got home to my dear wife and family the 8th of the
7th month, and, finding them tolerably well, I left home next day to attend our
own quarterly meeting. Here I was rather too active in discipline. -- I have
found it my business sometimes of late to be more inward in travail, and less
active in the exercise of the wholesome rules of society than I once was, and
believe, when I have obeyed the call into this inward, still abode, and there
felt my loins rightly girded, it has contributed much more to the right
exercise of the discipline, than when, through a desire for its proper
administration, I have, by over-acting, seemed to do a good deal for its
execution.

In the night, the 9th of the 8th month, there was a frost which killed some of
the vegetables, even some indian corn. This being so very early in the year,
and coming after a season of many refreshing showers, and at a time of very
fair and promising prospect of plentiful crops, my mind was led into a train of
serious reflections, how the Almighty, who had thus brought forward our fields
and prospects, could cut them all off; and how entirely dependant we are upon
his bounty for every blessing. Were his compassions to fail, his providential
aids to be withdrawn, alas! we, poor frail mortals, should soon perish.

In the 9th month I visited Friends families at Richmond, New Hampshire, a very
distant branch of our monthly meeting. At several of our meetings at Uxbridge,
not long after this, I had livingly to sound an alarm among Friends; and my
soul humbly rejoiced in the relief I obtained in these few favored meetings.

1784, 2d of 2d month. The exercises of my mind have for some time past rather
increased, insomuch that, for a considerable part of the time, I have felt like
being in the furnace, especially in meetings, but much so out of them also.
Indeed it has felt like the power and fire of the Lord laying hold of the
remains of pride and evil in me and burning like an oven; that is, inwardly and
fervently. -- May all be consumed that cannot abide the fiery trial.

And it has been gradually from time to time opened and sealed on my mind, that
a part of the scriptures, which many generally understand to speak only of
outward things, may be understood by the truly enlightened to convey inward and
spiritual instruction. God's design is to confound the wisdom of the wise, and
bring to naught the understanding of the prudent. He has hid and will hide
divine things from the wise and prudent, and reveal them unto babes.

The natural man not only does not, but cannot know them, because they are only
'spiritually discerned.' To this purpose Christ spoke in parables, that such as
had an eye inward to the divine light, which alone gives the true spiritual
discerning, might understand, receive and know the mysteries of his kingdom,
while all the wise and learned could but guess, mistake, stumble and be
confounded. -- So when the disciples asked him why he spoke in parables, he
informed them it was because it was given to them to know these things, but to
others it was not given. It was not given to them, to the exclusion of any in
the same state of inward seeking, docility and child-like simplicity.

God's design was then, and ever will be, to hide these things from all such as
are striving to know them by their own mere natural powers: they may and do
study the scriptures, and reason very copiously upon them, and think they
clearly comprehend their meaning, and yet remain in total darkness, as to the
spiritual import, meaning and mystery of many passages which they are strongly
persuaded they understand rightly.

Before this wisdom and creaturely comprehension the stumbling block is, by
God's determination and counsel, laid; on purpose laid, that man ever may
stumble and fall and be snared and taken, so long as he goes this way to work
to understand divine things; not that God determines any certain number of
persons shall so stumble, and be snared, etc. but all universally on this
ground, and in this wisdom; for through all ages it is true, if any man
thinks that he knows any thing he knows nothing yet as he ought to know.
1 Cor. viii. 2.
Even Paul declares, I know nothing by myself. 1 Cor. iv. 4.


While Paul thought he knew something divine by or of himself, his reasoning
rose against the Messiah, and with all his might he sought against the only
true way of salvation. So, in degree, it will be with all; if they think they
know, even any thing divine of themselves, or by the exercise of their own
creaturely faculties, they have never yet learned any thing as they ought; for
as soon as they know any thing as they ought, they see and know that they knew
nothing by or of themselves; but are altogether beholden to a spiritual
discerning from the divine light shining in their hearts, to give them this
knowledge. Hence says the apostle, God, who commanded the light to shine out of
darkness, has shined (take notice where this shining is) in our hearts, to
give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ. 2 Cor. iv. 6.


Here, first, it is God that has shined; secondly, it is 'in our hearts;'
thirdly, it is to give us what we had not before, and could not have without
this inshining, that is, the light of the knowledge of his own glory; fourthly,
it is 'in the face of Jesus Christ -- ' his inward appearance, whereby he
causes his light to shine upon us in order that we may be saved; that we can
ever see the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, according to the true
saying, In thy light shall we see light. Psalm. xxxvi. 9.
His light shining 'in our hearts,' is the only possible medium wherein and
whereby we can see God, or clearly discern his glory: for it is an eternal
truth, 'whatsoever does make manifest is light,' Ephesians. v. 13.
Natural light manifests natural things, and spiritual and divine light,
spiritual and divine things. As water rises but to the height of the fountain
head; and as effects cannot exceed their cause; so nothing short of divine
light can ever fully manifest him to the mind of man.

The scriptures will ever remain in great degree a sealed book to the mere
natural understandings of the wisest of men. Volume after volume of
commentaries have been written upon them, which, I have no doubt, have often
served, as a certain author has advanced, to entomb, rather than enshrine them;
or to darken, rather than explain their genuine meaning. Thousands pass the
time of their sojourning here below, hoodwinked and muffled up in darkness,
under the baleful influence of this kind of theological or systematical
knowledge or speculation, falsely called divinity. But in the midst of all this
learned ignorance, and, in degree, acquired blindness, which overruns the
nations; the God of grace is not wanting in the extension of his own immediate
rays upon the minds of men; those who turn from, disregard and rebel against
the light, are justly left in darkness, for being, as those in Job's days, of
them who rebel against the light, they know not the ways thereof, nor abide in
the paths thereof. Job xxiv. 13.
But those who, while they 'have light, believe in the light,' and walk in it,
'they become the children of it,' John xii. 36.
and are led into all truth.

I may now proceed with my own exercises and openings. It was clearly given me
to behold many deep things in the visions of God; things which the wisdom of
the natural man, though high in profession of divine knowledge, would probably
laugh at and despise, and me for my weakness, were I to unfold them. But though
I may not at present be permitted to unfold much, I may say I have seen clearly
to my full satisfaction, that Moses, in writing of creation, of the fall of
man, and of things in the upright and in the fallen state, wrote in the pure
openings of divine light, though very little understood by men in the first
nature and state. It is also plain and evident to my mind, in the light, that
the prophets saw things in the holy light of Jesus, and spoke of them in very
instructive metaphors and expressions, though hid from and unperceived by the
wise and learned.

Many a sermon has been preached by those who call themselves ministers of
Christ, upon parts of passages out of the prophets, and the rest of the
scriptures; many heads of doctrine raised from them; many divisions and
sub-divisions made; much explanation attempted; and much art and oratory
displayed; and yet the life, marrow and main importance of the passage entirely
unseen and untouched by the speaker, and little or no instruction conveyed to
the hearers; and all for want of a spiritual discerning of the true intent and
meaning of the scriptures.

Thus also the doctrines of Christ and his apostles, as to their most lively
and spiritual signification, are to this day hid from the wise and prudent, and
sealed up with seven seals to all who witness not their opening By the lion of
the tribe of Judah, who alone unseals them. To these they are gradually opened,
not all at once. I have many things, says this wonderful counselor and opener,
to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. John xvi. 12.
So he opens progressively, as we are able to receive, one seal after another.
There are seven seals, because none can ever come to the full understanding of
the whole mystery, and have all the book of life laid open, until they rest,
and cease wholly from man, from themselves, and all their own workings,
guessings and conceivings, which ever will attend them more or less through the
six working days, until they come to the complete sabbath of rest on the
seventh day, wherein they rest from their own works as God did from his. Heb.
iv. 10.
Here God becomes their all in all, their whole dependence for opening and
illumination; and therefore here the seventh seal is opened, and the heavenly
mystery disclosed.

And now, in confirmation that this is the meaning of the number seven, as
comprehensive of all the seals that can possibly seal up divine truth from man,
-- let us observe, that when John calls upon him that has wisdom, (divine
wisdom, for all else ever fails) to count the number of the beast, or the
number of his name, which he expressly says 'is the number of a man,' Rev.
xiii. 18.
he plainly shows us that the whole, the utmost number of a man, and of all his
workings, buildings, comprehendings and conceivings, which make up the whole
life, power, policy, religion and worship of the beast, is comprehended in
sixes -- and that there is not one seven in it all. For, says he, his number is
six hundred threescore and six, that is, 666. Here we see, that although the
workings of a man may be multiplied to ten times, and even an hundred times of
the six working days, wherein he rests not from his own works nor comes to the
true sabbath (wherein no creaturely work is done, not even a fire of his own
sparks or creaturely animation and warmth kindled) it is all but the number of
the beast or false worship, and man-made creeds and systems. On the real
Sabbath, wherein the true rest from every thing creaturely is witnessed, and
God is all in all, the worship is divine; the seals are opened even to the
seventh; the mystery is seen; God stands revealed to the soul; his works are
known; and in the true knowledge of him, the beginning of eternal life is
enjoyed even here on earth, for it is the real knowledge of God, not the ideal
conceivings, that is the eternal life of immortal spirits. And until this is
attained, do as much as we will in the sixes, there is the one thing needful
wanting, which, while it is wanting, cannot be numbered; for indeed we can
never number or perceive it clearly, truly and fully, so long as the seventh
seal remains unopened to us. For until they are all opened, we shall ever be
liable to be guessing, contriving, inventing and hewing out broken cisterns to
ourselves. Many may and do suppose the opening of the seals is only hereafter;
but those to whom they are opening and opened, know they have their opening
here in time progressively: but this is only as God is waited upon. For unless
we wait upon him for the opening, we are ever liable to obscure our own minds
and cloud our understandings by our own busy workings and speculations: And
therefore at the opening of the seals, chap. vi. the call, 'come and see,' was
diverse times repeated; intimating that we must come quite away from our own
notions and imaginations, keep a single eye to the light of life, waiting upon
God in and through the diverse openings. -- In this attentive, single, waiting
state, deep mysteries are opened. But instead of peace to the carnal mind, the
openings begin with the voice of thunder. For when the lamb opened the first
seal, John 'heard as it were the voice of thunder,' ver. 1. For terrible things
in judgment accompany that abasement of creaturely pride and comprehension
through which the vail is rent, and the seals that have shut up the
understanding opened. Sion shall be redeemed with judgment. Isai. i. 27.


In this work of redemption, renovation and removal of the seals, (for it goes
on gradually together) the Lord who is light in himself, and ever dwells in the
light, that is, in his own essence, appears to our minds as breaking through
the clouds. The clouds are in us and not in him; and in dispelling them, that
so the seals may be opened, he appears in ways of terror and amazement to the
creature, represented by the 'noise of thunder.' Thus we read in another place,
'Clouds and darkness are round about him,' Psalm. xcvii. 2.
and 'with God is terrible majesty.' Job xxxvii. 22.
And experience abundantly confirms, that, in dispersion of the clouds, he
often appears in terrible majesty indeed; causing the thunders, and indeed
before the whole mystery is disclosed, even seven thunders to utter their
voices. Hence we find, chap. x. 1. John saw a 'mighty angel come down from
heaven,' and though a rainbow was upon his head, and his face was as it were
the sun, and his feet as pillars of fire, yet (Oh! divine instruction) he was
'clothed with a cloud.' This cloud must be removed before the whole mystery
could be revealed; and in order to it, he cried with a loud voice, as when a
lion roareth; and when he had cried, seven thunders (note their number) uttered
their voices. Less than seven would have been short of the complete rest,
wherein the whole mystery is completed, But in the days of the voice of the
seventh angel, when he shall begin to sound, the mystery of God should be
finished, said the holy angel, as he has declared to his servants the
prophets, see ver. 7. But John was commanded to seal up those things which the
seven thunders had uttered, and write them not, ver. 4. This I believe is often
the case for a season. Some hints are allowed to be given; but as to the full
declaration of divine things, it is often with the servants as with the master,
Mine hour is not yet come. John ii. 4.
For though the time is to come, when that which 'is spoken in the ear,' shall
be 'declared on the housetop;' Luke xii. 3.
yet it is not always and at all times so to be -- for it can never be with the
divinely girded, limited and directed servants of God, as with the
letter-learned scribes and pharisees, whose 'time is always ready.' John vii. 6.


At the opening of the second seal, the call 'come and see,' as at the opening
of the first, is heard; for the waiting frame, the single eye, is still
necessary: and now a 'great sword' is given to him that sat on the red horse;
and also power was given him to take peace from the earth, ver. 4. Some may
suppose the meaning of this opening by the red horse confined so entirely to
outward blood and bloody persecution, as to have no relation to the state of
their minds who experience the opening of the seals; but it is obvious to the
enlightened mind, that many passages in scripture have both an outward or
literal, and an inward and mystical meaning; and there really is a sword known,
and peace taken from the earthly man in the rending of the vail and opening of
the seals: a sore trial indeed to such as have not yet fully submitted to have
their carnal peace in the earthly natural state broken and destroyed. But there
is this comfort, that however peace is taken from this state, yet at the
opening of the third seal, a charge is given, ver. 6. not to hurt the oil nor
the wine. The precious things are safe through every tumult and trial, to all
who rightly endure them. But though a little hope and consolation is received
now and then by such manifestations of divine care and protection; yet new
tribulations soon plunge the baptized soul into fresh and often times greater
consternation.

Thus at the opening of the next seal, his name, who rides the pale horse, is
death; and hell followed with him, ver. 8. Oh! this death, this dying to the
first nature and will; to the life of self, and all corrupt and selfish desires
and gratifications; it must be known and endured, that so the life, which is
hid with Christ in God, may be enjoyed, which never was nor can ever be without
dying with him; and here the very pains and power of hell is felt, and takes
hold of the soul.

Thus, under the operation of this necessary death, hell follows with it; so
that the distressed creature, like Jonah, cries out of the belly of hell. And
though I cannot believe or conceive it probable, or even consistent with the
truth of God or of the very mystery of divine things, that Christ, after his
crucifixion, descended into hell; yet I have no doubt that, in the course of
his sufferings and agony, he really did feel, endure, and also conquer the
force and power and pains of hell; and so must every soul in which the
sufferings of Christ that remain behind are thoroughly filled up: and until
this is witnessed, there is never a thorough rising with him in the newness of
life: but through death and burial with him, his resurrection is known, and in
the opening of this seal there is known, and painfully endured a killing, by
various means, as the sword, hunger, death, and even the beasts of the earth.

Oh! what is it that does not rise up to torment the poor soul! but all works
together for the good of the faithful; no matter by what the necessary death is
effected, nor by how many kinds of distress; the Lord it gracious through it
all, and wounds to heal, yea, kills to make alive. Under the operations of
these various modes, or messengers of death, the language often is, Oh!
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death. Romans
vii. 24.
It is painful enduring the sword to wound and slay; with pinching hunger, and
famishing want, and sore afflictions from the bestial part, which rages the
more it is disturbed by that which comes to take away its life, until the
strength of its wild nature is weakened and broken.

After these sore trials are in a good degree endured, the fifth seal opens,
and brings to view the persevering follower of the Lamb, the holy altar, and
under it the souls of those that were slain for the word of God, and the
testimony which they held, ver. 9. Here the state of sufferings and
persecutions, endured by the righteous, is seen, and also the state of
rejoicing and triumph which follows after; for here they are heard, availingly
calling on the Almighty God, holy and true, for judgment, and seen clothed in
white robes, even 'every one of them.'

What an encouraging prospect is this when opened in the true light, by the
alone opener of the seals, the lion of Judah's princely tribe! How does it
reanimate the mind to persevere through all tribulations, dangers and death,
until the crown immortal is enjoyed!

Oh! the mystery of godliness; it is great indeed, and never rightly understood
by the carnal mind. To these the book is ever sealed, and none but he who has
the key can open the seals. Carnal minded men may read of holy souls under the
altar, and of their white robes, etc. but to understand it, the inward eye must
be opened, and the book unsealed -- then the right understanding is received,
and therein divine encouragement is felt, to stand firm in the testimony of
Jesus, even though they should be joined to the number of those fellow servants
and brethren that should be killed, ver. 11. Therefore the poor pilgrim
journeys on, strengthened and revived; and is thus enabled to endure the
remaining tribulations which are necessary for a full refinement, and in order
to the removal of all that can be shaken, that that alone which cannot be
shaken, may remain. -- In order whereunto, he who knows how to carry on the
work, dispensing the several parts and portions of probationary exercise in
infinite wisdom, and as they can be borne, soon brings on the fiery ordeal or
purifying trial, to complete the emancipation of his tribulated seed, and bring
out the prisoner with shouts of joy. For now the sixth seal is opened, which
leads through renewed works of wonder and amazement, terror and abasement, even
to the stripping off of almost all that ever was attained: for now the earth is
made to quake, the sun itself is darkened, the moon becomes as blood, the stars
fall from heaven, yea, the heaven departs as a scroll, and every mountain and
island is removed -- there seems nothing to depend upon, not so much as an
island in the midst of the boisterous ocean, to set the sole of the foot upon.
-- The drooping soul, notwithstanding its late animating prospects, now almost
sinks into despair; nor sun nor moon nor stars shine in their usual luster.

This state is like that of the bridegroom of souls, when he cried out, My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? Matt. xxvii. 46.
and the very same in degree that he then endured, when total darkness covered
all the land from the sixth hour unto the ninth, must all the seed endure. --
The eternal light of heaven, the emanations of the divinity, are now obscured
by fogs and clouds that intervene, and blackness or darkness overwhelms the
mind. The fainter light of reason, the moon, affords no aid, nor scarcely
shines, or shines dimly, as we see the outward moon through fogs and vapors,
red almost as blood: for the weighed down mind is so distressed, tossed up and
down, that distraction or a cessation of intellectual arrangement seems almost
ready to overspread the whole man. And moreover the example of the saints, the
stars of past and present times, which in serener moments, greatly stayed the
mind, and spread reviving light around, (for says Christ, ye are the light or
lights of the world) yet now this is all hid, that there is scarce any thing
that looks like light from any quarter. -- This is truly in a sense, the great
day of God's wrath upon all in man that is not to dwell with him for ever.

Now the very kings, the great, the rich, the mighty; the bond and the free,
are ready to hide in dens, or wish to be covered by the mountains, from the
face of the all-searching God. A time of trial, a season of anxiety indeed,
well known in the experience of the Lord's sanctified servants.

The more extensive and general signification and meaning of these mysterious
metaphors, I am not at present to enter upon here; nor indeed is it very much
our business as individuals to inquire. Suffice it to know pride hid from us,
the haughtiness of man laid low, and every exalted imagination brought
thoroughly down. O! blessed, though for the present painful reduction! Rejoice,
O! christian traveller, when thou art so happy as to know the stronger bind the
strong and mighty in thee; yea, rejoice in the very pangs and probations
through which all his goods and riches in thee are spoiled, -- and be cast out,
with all his pomp, magnificence and merchandise for ever. -- For nothing shall
be able to stand or abide his coming, but what cannot be shaken. The pure gold
endures the fire, and is not hurt or lessened in its brightness, worth or
weight. -- The redeemed soul that has endured the saving, cleansing baptism of
Jesus, is by him made free; and these, and only these, are free indeed; and
having endured the great day of wrath and judgment for sin in themselves, their
works are gone beforehand to judgment; and they are not afraid of the day or
wrath to the wicked; for perfect love casts out all such fear; they are heirs
of God, and joint-heirs with Christ; they have part in the first resurrection,
and the second death has no power over them. And now, having passed through
the very hour and power of darkness; endured the fiery trial; drank the cup the
crucified Savior drank of, and being baptized with his baptism, they come to
witness, as he did after his temptations, the ministration of holy angels.
Indeed he has promised all those who continue with him in his temptations, a
place in his kingdom; and as the angels ministered to him in the days of his
flesh, immediately after his sore temptation and trials, so is it in his
brethren's experience; for after their deep abasement and fiery baptism in the
afflictive dispensation of the sixth seal, their prospects open into a
discovery of the powers or ministering spirits that stand on and over all that
is earthly; as John saw the four angels standing on the four corners of the
earth. Now the four corners seem to comprehend the whole earth; and indeed it
must all be shaken in us, if ever we know the new heavens and new earth,
wherein dwells righteousness: to these four angels it was given to hurt the
earth and the sea; not only all that is of earth or earthly, but also all that
is of an unstable nature, is liable to the stroke and must be chastised and
subdued. But in the midst of all this destruction to the earth and sea, another
holy angel appears, ascending from the east, (that is, from where the sun of
righteousness ever arises with healing in his wings) and Oh! the unspeakable
joy and consolation which now springs and overflows the soul. For sing, O ye
heavens! ye ransomed of the Lord on earth, rejoice and praise the Lord, for
this is the angel that has the seal of the living God. And now, after your many
deep probations and seasons of discouragements and distress, you are remembered
in the very moment of renewed trial, and of total destruction to all that can
be shaken and removed; yea, the sealing angel is now, at the very juncture of
dismay, sent forth, commissioned from on high, to stay the hurting of the earth
and sea, until he seals you in your foreheads -- even with a loud voice he
cries to the four angels, saying, hurt not the earth, neither the sea nor the
trees, until we have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads. Rev.
vii. 3.
And now, O ravishing consideration! not one of all the true Israelitish tribes
is overlooked or forgotten; but each has its twelve thousand sealed! If thou
art but one of wrestling Jacob's spiritual offspring, and wrestlest rightly for
the blessing until the break of day, in that which as a prince prevails, and
has power both with God and men, thou shall surely, with Jacob thy father,
obtain the name of Israel: and notwithstanding all thy painful fiery trials,
the power thou have with God will enable thee to go on conquering and to
conquer all thy soul's enemies; and the holy angel of the divine presence shall
seal thee with the seal of the living God; for thou belongest to the number of
the hundred and forty and four thousand, which were sealed of all the tribes of
the children of Israel; or to the great multitude which no man could number, of
all nations, kindreds, people and tongues, which stood before the throne and
before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands. And thou
shall, when the day of indignation is over, even in this life, and also in
endless fruition, join their songs of praise with a loud voice, saying,
salvation to our God, which sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb: yea, thou
shall join the angels holy anthem; with them worshipping before God, and
saying, Amen: blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor,
and power, and might, be unto our God, for ever and ever. Amen. Rev. vii. 12.


It is worthy of special notice, that in the midst of all this triumph and
adoration, it is not forgotten that a path of suffering and self-denial was the
way that led to these seraphic enjoyments; for a question being asked, what are
these which are arrayed in white robes? and whence came they? the answer was,
These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their
robes, and made them white, in the blood of the Lamb; therefore are they before
the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple; and he that
sits on the throne shall dwell among them. They shall hunger no more;
neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat: for the Lamb, which is in
the midst of them, shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains
of waters; and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. Rev. vii. 14 15
16 17.
Now, having passed the fiery furnace; come through the great tribulations;
washed their garments, and received the seal of the living God; the mind is
prepared for the opening of the seventh and last seal, which leads into
profound silence. And when he had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in
heaven for the space of half an hour. Rev. viii. 1.
Here all the powers of the soul are silenced; every faculty of the creature,
and all creaturely activity, is restrained! all vocal songs of praise, and
hallelujahs, cease! the angelic chorus of holy, holy, holy, is suspended! and
God is worshipped in inward, awful adoration and reverential, solemn silence.
-- Rapturous devotion, superior to the use of words, superceding vocal sounds,
and which language, in its utmost sublimity, can scarce ever describe; but
which may be felt and experienced by the sanctified soul, in an heavenly,
extatic enjoyment, unknown to all the sons of Adam in the fall: an enjoyment
and adoration, a transporting felicity and fruition, even in this life in
degree, which a full idea of can never be conveyed to an unregenerate soul, by
all the arts of description -- all the powers of rhetoric or elocution -- and
which the carnal mind can never conceive an adequate idea of by all the
reasonings of flesh and blood, or penetrations of human wisdom. -- The wise,
the scribe, the disputer of this world, may imagine and contend in ignorance
and darkness; but can never in that state have the living knowledge and
experience of these things; while they that endure the day of trial, continue
with Christ in his temptations, drink his cup, and abide his baptisms, his
agonies and death, thus resting from all their own works, come to the true
christian sabbath, and therein worship God in spirit and in truth, in the pure
living experience of that sacred, awful, reverential silence which is known in
heaven. These know what is meant by the smoke of the incense which continually
ascends up before God, from the angel's hand, and from the golden altar, for
ever; and are in good preparation to witness and understand the remaining
wonders -- the soundings of the angels -- the measure of the temple -- the
leaving out of the outward court -- the woman clothed with the sun -- the
dragon's tail, and many other deep mysteries, which are never clearly
understood, but as he that has the key of David opens them. But as far as
needful he fails not to open them to all who follow him in the regeneration,
wheresoever he leads them; who are redeemed from the earth, and from among
men. These shall stand with him on Mount Sion, and having their Father's name
written in their foreheads, shall sing the new song, receive the blessing of
those who obey his commands, have a right to the tree of life, and enter in
through the gates into the City. -- They shall rest from their labors, and
their works shall follow them.

Great part of the Revelations, as well as other mysterious scriptures, is
livingly known in the work and progress of regeneration, and therein found very
pertinent and descriptive, in regard to the many exercises, pangs, probations
and deliverances, which attend the soul in its seasons of refinement, and
gradual renovation. -- And all this hinders not, but well consists, with the
more outward meaning and fulfillment of such parts of sacred record, so far as
they really respect things outward: but I am firm in the faith, that many are
musing and gazing after outward fulfilments, to the very great and sometimes
injurious diversion of their minds from the only work, and fulfillment of many
passages, which they may ever properly expect to experience. The scripture is a
sealed book; it is abundantly wrapped up in parable, metaphor and mystery --
yea many, very many things in it, which men whose minds are outward will read
and understand of outward things, are mainly meant of internal operations,
discoveries and overturnings, which God in his dealings with the soul, leads it
along through. -- He that has an ear, let him hear, -- is a very proper
intimation, and is therefore often repeated, that the mind may be directed to
an inward hearkening, in order to a right understanding: for many have eyes,
but see not; and ears, but hear not. The eye and ear that sees and hears divine
things rightly, must be divinely opened. Many are blind because they think they
see; and deaf, by reason of their confidence that they hear. Christ's coming
was and is, that those who see and hear may be made blind and deaf; and that
the blind and deaf may see and hear; and blessed are these who are made blind
and deaf by him; for it is as needful to true seeing and hearing, to be first
made blind and deaf, as wounding is necessary to healing, and killing to being
made alive. He that will be wise, must first become a fool that he may be wise,
and he that will see and hear, must first become blind and deaf.

O, it is a great thing to know that eye and ear closed, that ever sees and
hears amiss, and to keep them steadily shut up; and the single eye and ear
properly open. Keep to that in thee, O inward traveller, that shuts the wrong
eye and ear, and opens the right; then will thou be in the number of such as
our Lord pronounces blessed, saying, blessed are your eyes, for they see, and
your ears, for they hear. Matt. xiii. 16.


CHAP. VI. The folly of self-importance. The author's concern, that himself and
others may experience an entire reduction of self, and perfect resignation to
the divine will. His visit to Friends of Oblong and Nine-Partners, in the state
of New York.
6th mo. 12. 1784.
I Have diverse times lately very clearly seen the great folly of thinking
ourselves of much importance, either in religious society, or in the world. O
may my soul dwell ever in true abasement; for blessed and happy is he that
knows a being brought down, yea, down low, and there abiding; for until all
self-exaltation is entirely rooted out of our minds, we are not what God would
have us to be; and his turning and overturning in us, is in order, if not
resisted, thus to make us; and until we do, from the center of our soul, give
him all the glory, there remains in us a source of unhappiness, disorder and
confusion. -- O man! how great is the work of thy salvation; how many deaths
thou have to die, before that comes to reign in thee which lives for ever; --
for know thou, that thou can never fully enjoy that life which is hid with
Christ in God, until thou die to thy own selfish life. It is he that loses
his life for Christ's sake, that shall find it; yea, our blessed Savior
declares, if any man hate not his own life, he cannot be my disciple Luke xiv.
26.
-- and at this juncture of time I sincerely think I do so. -- Lord God
Almighty, carry on thy great work in my soul, bow every exalted imagination,
and lay all that is not of thy own immediate begettings in me, level with the
dust, that I may altogether, and at all times, hate my own life, with perfect
hatred, until I come livingly to know that it is thy only begotten, in whom
thou art well pleased, and with no man further than he dies to himself, and
lives, in the son of thy love, a life unknown to the benighted sons of Adam in
the fall; and only faintly conceived of by thousands that have known a degree
of renovation. Lord! when it shall please thee, awake them, arouse and alarm
them, that they may arise from their lethargy, and be enabled to look and
behold Jerusalem a quiet habitation, and be admitted, pure and perfect, into
the communion and fellowship of her ransomed sons -- where thou, O most holy,
rulest God over all, and self-exaltation finds no admittance.

Having for some time past, felt drawings in my mind to pay a religious visit
to Friends of Oblong and Nine-Partners quarterly meetings, and perceiving a
like concern in my friend Daniel Aldrich, of our monthly meeting of Uxbridge,
we laid our prospects before our brethren at home, and obtaining their
certificates of concurrence from our monthly and quarterly meetings, I left my
dear wife and family in much heartfelt tenderness and affection, the 19th of
the 7th month 1784, and rode that night to my said friend Daniel's house about
nine miles; and next morning, taking our solid leave of his family, we got on
our way between forty and fifty miles to Coventry, in Connecticut. 21st, we got
to Litchfield, near fifty miles, and next day the 22d got to Friends fifth-day
meeting at New-Milford, upwards of twenty miles, though we knew not that there
was a meeting there of course that day, but the probability made us press on a
little, so that we reached it seasonably; it was very small and silent. I
suppose it not far from one hundred and thirty miles from my home to this
meeting, and near all the way among Presbyterians, who used us civilly; and I
have reason to believe there is much more openness and charity in many of their
minds toward Friends than formerly.

Next day, 23d, had a meeting at Oblong. This meeting was open and favored --
I felt engaged to encourage some who I believe had felt something of the
operation of the fiery furnace, to keep in it, and not give back, until it had
purified and refined them.

On the 24th of 7th month 1784, we were at the valley meeting. I suffered the
meeting through, under a close exercise, but could not find a way sufficiently
open to attempt to clear my mind by public testimony; thence we rode to my
dear uncle Thomas Comstock's, and next day being first day the 25th, were at
Peachpond meeting. After meeting we dined at a Friend's house, and had a
favored opportunity in the family among a number of young and a few elderly
persons.

Second-day 26th, Rode to Andrew Merritt's, where Friends hold a meeting for
worship. Here we had an open meeting, wherein they were tenderly entreated to
more ardency of engagement in the things that belong to their peace, and warned
of the danger of loving any thing more than Christ; and we parted with them in
great good will, they having been mostly reached and tendered, under a sense of
the ownings of the great Shepherd and Bishop of souls. We then attended the
meeting at Shappaqua, which was a memorable time -- may we never forget the
loving kindness of him without whom we can do nothing. -- He it is that opens
the sealed book, and gives ability to dip into the states of meetings, and drop
a word suitably thereto. -- O, that our dependence may ever be upon him, for,
as it is, we shall witness the insufficiency of human greatness, worldly
wisdom, self-importance or creaturely contrivance, and I have reason to believe
that, as it was our engagement this day, thus to bow before him, wait upon him,
and move in his movings, we were made instrumental to reach the pure witness in
many hearts; and to leave impressions on them that will not soon be forgotten.
-- After meeting we had a family sitting nearly in silence. I felt great
caution not to move in words, unless a fresh opening induced me, fearing I
might be carried too far in the fullness of this day's favor, as I believe I
have seen some who have kept running on in the strength of what was at first a
true opening, until they have bewildered their own minds, and brought sorrow
and confusion upon themselves. Oh! how strict a watch is necessary lest we take
our flight upon the sabbath day. -- Lord preserve us in a constant dependence
upon thee, and the openings of thy holy Spirit!

7th month 28th and 29th. We attended the select quarterly meeting at the
Purchase, and their quarterly meeting for worship and discipline; in which my
tongue, as it were, clave to the roof of my mouth; yet was enabled to keep in a
good degree in the patience. -- After which we attended meetings at Mamaroneck,
West-Chester, Purchase, Ammawalk, New-Cornwall, New-Marlborough, Crum-Elbow,
Nine-Partners, at the Creek and Little Nine-Partners, some of which were
painful exercising seasons; but in others we experienced a good degree of the
dominion of truth over all, particularly at the last meeting, where the love of
truth was felt sweetly to flow toward a pretty large gathering, mostly not of
our society, and the doctrines thereof were opened among them in a good degree
of life and demonstration.

Third-day 10th of 8th month. We went to the select preparative meeting at
Nine-Partners, composed of the ministers and elders of the two monthly meetings
of Creek and Nine-Partners. The affairs of this meeting were conducted in a
degree of the savor of truth.

Fourth-day 11th, attended the select quarterly meeting to pretty good
satisfaction. I felt truth's dominion over all in my mind, and rejoiced in the
loving kindness of the Lord.

5th-day 12th, attended the quarterly meeting for worship and discipline at the
same place where the two foregoing select meetings were held. The 13th, a
meeting was appointed for us at Oswego, which was a pretty full meeting, in
which the current of gospel love, power and utterance, flowed freely and
refreshingly; it was indeed a precious opportunity, and ought to be remembered
with thankfulness to the great Opener and Leader, who out of weakness makes
strong -- Blessed be the Lord. The next day were at a meeting at Appoughquague,
and 15th, being first day, we were again at meeting at Peachpond, on second-day
at the valley, and third-day at one called the upper meeting held at Isaiah
Hoag's, which was a very exercising meeting; but, after deep travail, we were
assisted and enabled to sound an alarm among them in a degree of gospel
authority; and though I believe we felt truth and the seed of life under
oppression; yet as we lay low with it, and were made willing to suffer with it,
we were enabled to witness it to reign in dominion over all.

Fourth-day 18th. Were at the monthly meeting at Nine-Partners; some close
exercise attended the fore part of this meeting in silent suffering with the
suffering seed, but Truth rose into dominion to the joy of our souls, wherein
we had to call the people to an inward, awful stillness and attention, lest
they be disappointed as to meeting with the master of our assemblies, and also
as to being benefited with or by the true gospel ministry; for those who can
only run when the Lord sends them, are often closed up in profound silence by
the outward expectations of the people, not having liberty, as they keep to the
openings and shuttings of him who has the key of David, to gratify those
itching ears. -- This and considerable more they were reminded of. In the
meeting for discipline, both men's and women's, (for we were concerned to go
into theirs) they were advised to keep to their own gifts, and not depend upon
one another, to the neglect of occupying their own talents, lest they as
individuals, and the meeting at large, suffer loss thereby, and some forward
spirits be pushed forward into too great activity in a formal manner by the
backwardness and withholding of others. Friends were advised to be no longer
grasping after things unnecessary; for the procuring of them leads us into much
care, cumber and expense of time, thereby encroaching upon the time we ought to
spend at meetings, visiting the sick, etc. and cuts us off from sufficient time
for inward retirement in our families, as well as taking care of the affairs of
the church. Now all these services, when rightly engaged in, greatly tend to
our growth and refinement, and real comfort and happiness in this life and
hereafter; as also to the promotion of the cause of truth in the earth. Oh! how
mortals grovel here in earth and earth's perplexing cares, to their great loss
of more substantial enjoyments; whereas, if willing to be bounded by the girdle
of truth, we might have plenty of time for all our religious duties, and have
sufficient to spare to educate our children. We were also concerned to caution
against keeping superfluities and gay things to sell to others.

Fifth-day 19th. Attended the adjournment of said meeting to pretty good
satisfaction. -- 20th, attended the Creek monthly meeting, after which we
attended meetings at Cloverick, Coeman's Patent, New-Britain, East-Hoosack,
White Creek, Saratoga, and at a Place called Pitts-Town, where there is no
settled meeting, which ended to good satisfaction.

On first day the 5th of 9th month, we attended meeting at Danby, where I
thought truth triumphed and had the dominion; many minds were reached and
tendered. -- 2d-day 6th, we appointed a meeting at a place called Durham, about
twelve miles northward of Danby, of which notice was given, and we attended it
accordingly, and had satisfactory service therein, though among a people not
much acquainted with Friends, and exceedingly outward in their expectations,
and unacquainted with the advantages of inward waiting in solemn silence upon
God.

Fifth-day 9th. Attended the preparative meeting at Danby, at the close of
which we sat a few minutes, the men and women together; this was a little,
comfortable season, diverse minds being refreshed in this our parting
opportunity. 6th-day, 10th of 9th month, we took our affectionate leave of our
dear friends, and set forward for home, accompanied by our beloved friend E. S.
My mind was much affected at and after parting with Friends, with great
tenderness and tears of joy, which, for a considerable space of time, flowed
copiously from mine eyes. My mind was carried back to view the places where we
had visited, and my soul was melted into ardent mental supplication for the
preservation of Friends in general, and many individuals in particular;
attended with such endeared affection and brokenness of spirit, as has rarely
been my lot to witness for so long a time together. Oh! with what heartfelt
fervency did I intercede for the help and preservation of the little flock and
family up and down in the world! the earnest requests that I was enabled to put
up for the instruction and divine assistance of the many messengers of the Lord
which are running to and fro in the earth among the people, that their labors
may prove successful, and benefit the souls of mankind: indeed the language of
solemn supplication ran powerfully through my mind with a melting sensibility
for all; that the dead might be raised, quickened and made alive, in that life
which is hid with Christ in God. Many individuals of my acquaintance, both in
places where I had visited abroad, and also at home in our own and neighboring
monthly meetings, came fresh into my remembrance with such ardency of desire,
and breathings of soul, for their growth, preservation and improvement, as will
not readily be conceived by such as have not felt the same. Yea, my desires for
them were conceived in intelligent language in the secret of my soul, in a
number of little, short, though sweet and melting requests for one after
another, as the Father of Spirits brought them to my remembrance. O! how often
did it flow through me as a stream of life on this wise: O most mighty and
omnipotent Lord God, commissionate thine holy angels to attend and guard thy
exercised pilgrims through this vale of tears: let cherubims and seraphims
encamp about and surround the little host of militants, thy wrestling seed
while here on earth and for evermore. O! how did my bosom heave with swelling
tides of joy and divine delight! yea, all that was in me moved! -- my head, my
heart, yea, my whole man seemed encircled round with spiritual attendants!
whose melodious and extatic songs of praise enraptured my soul, and lifted me
above all earth's tumultuous cares and all its fading joys! and in the midst of
this triumphant adoration, my eyes were opened to see and view the depths of
sufferings and abasement which my soul had passed through in my visit; then did
I see that the true wrestling seed of Jacob can never rejoice, but through
sufferings; abound, but through abasement; nor live and reign with the Lamb
that was dead and is alive, but through death. I then was given to behold as it
were around me, as I rode on the way, an innumerable multitude of glorified
spirits; and it was said in the center of my soul, these are they which came
out of great tribulation, have washed their robes, and made them white, in the
blood of the Lamb, Rev. vii. 14.
their ever-living Redeemer. I saw that I must yet longer endure the cup of
sufferings in this house of clay, if I would join the songs of those ransomed
souls in never-ending anthems of praise; to which I bowed my head and heart,
saying, Lord, let not thine eye pity, nor thy hand spare, until thou have done
away all that offends in me, and brought forth judgment unto victory in my
soul: and when I had thus submitted and offered up body, soul and spirit, into
his holy hands, a willing sacrifice, it was showed me how good it had been for
me that I had so deeply suffered; and that, had it been otherwise, I should
have missed of this feast of fat things. Next it was showed me, that though I
had not altogether done the best that I might have done while on this visit,
yet that I had been preserved in the meekness, littleness and humility; and, to
my inexpressible satisfaction, I was also showed, and made to see, feel and
know, that nothing was laid to my charge as an offense to stand against me; but
feeling there was now no condemnation to my soul, I was made to join the
heavenly harmony; and, in that angelic spring of adoration which I felt, my
soul within me leapt for joy, and, at the end of this transporting chorus, my
inmost language was -- sing praises, sing praises, sing praises, Amen, Amen,
hallelujah! At which it seemed as if the whole expanse of heaven rang with
acclamations of joy, thanksgiving and praise! After which I again had freedom
to enter into innocent and pleasant conversation with my two friends, which I
had not done for miles before as we rode on the way; but I kept the vision
pretty much to myself, save what of its effects they discovered in my
countenance, and the tears I had shed, which I had not power to restrain. --
Lord, never suffer me to forget thy favors and divine communications -- but as
thou have begun to clothe my mind with humility, be pleased more and more to
center me deep into it; that I may wear it as a garment for ever.

We rode over the green mountain this day, in the state of Vermont, through
which it runs, takes its name from it, importing a green mount; it is called
about thirty miles over. -- Lodged in Townsend. -- 7th-day 11th, we rode near
forty miles to Richmond. -- 1st-day 12th, we attended Friends meeting at
Richmond. -- 2d-day 13th, we rode forty-five miles, and on 3d-day 14th of 9th
month, home. Was thankfully rejoiced to find my dear wife and family well,
having been from home eight weeks yesterday, rode about eight hundred miles,
and attended religious meetings forty days.

CHAP. VII. Prospect of visiting Friends of Pennsylvania and New Jersey.
Exercises and sickness preceding his journey, and occurrences therein.
AFTER my return from the foregoing visit to Friends of Oblong and
Nine-Partners quarterly meetings, I had to pass through much probationary
leanness and inward want, and at times through deep and various exercises; but
I had not been long at home, before a concern began to revive and spread in my
mind, which I had had some view of for several years, to wit, to make a visit
to Friends of Pennsylvania and New Jersey; and at times it was fresh with me,
but without a clear prospect of the time when. Thus time passed on; and in some
of our meetings for worship, the weight of the service would rest on me as
something almost too great for my weak state: but I was mostly favored to see
that ability for such services was not in the creature, but in God; and then I
could cast my care on him alone, and give up; and thus submitting, I felt or
saw but little about it for some length of time; but about the 4th, 5th and 6th
months 1785, it was much with me; but yet I could not see clearly about the
time when to proceed. And at our yearly meeting at Newport, in the 6th month,
as I sat in a meeting for worship one day, it revived with the most clearness
that I had ever seen it, insomuch that I had a query in my mind, whether it
would not be ripe to proceed to the yearly meeting at Philadelphia in the ninth
month following, but this passing off, I thought I would not yet open it to any
person. But after this meeting my dear friend Joseph Mitchell asked me if I had
not some thoughts of going to Pennsylvania, etc. on a religious visit. I
answered him, I have had such thoughts, but believe nobody would yet have known
any thing of it, had not the question been put to me. He told me he felt such
an engagement to ask me, that he believed it was right for him so to do, and
then he opened his prospect of such a visit, which agreed with mine; and told
me it had been with him in the meeting we had just sat in more feelingly than
at almost any other time. So we concluded to keep our prospects very much in
our own bosoms; and after a few days we had a few words more together, when I
found he had felt but little of it since we conversed about it; but before our
yearly meeting ended, I had some fresh revivals of it again.

About this time I had some trying exercises in the course of my practice of
physic; but I found patience was good in these cases, and that divine wisdom
was profitable to direct therein. I think I may also mention, that, after all
my past experience of heavenly good and divine favor, I had to encounter some
of the most trying and potently pressing temptations of my soul's enemy that
ever I endured; even so that I often for months almost despaired of overcoming.
Let him that thinks he stands. be not high-minded; but fear. Let none think
themselves safe off the watch, because of any degree of attainment and favor.
The watchtower remains to be our place of safety; neither let any honest mind
be too much disheartened at the assaults of Satan. -- There is a power above
him, and he that cleaves close to it shall know a victory over all the powers
of darkness, and therein witness that there is no enchantment against the
rightly wrestling Jacob, nor divination against God's faithful dependant,
persevering Israel. -- This I think my soul has a right to set its seal to, as
I have ever come off victorious, when I have not turned my back upon the light,
our divine Leader. Sing, O ye heavens! and O ye pilgrims on the earth rejoice
and triumph! for strong and invincible is the God of our salvation; and
abundantly sufficient for our help is the grace afforded us! -- let all but
keep to it, and then safe are their steppings, and sure their preservation --
for, however severe their trials, the Lord will be near them; and indeed in the
midst of temptation he will often lift up a standard that will vanquish all the
influence of every evil spirit, and set the soul on the everlasting foundations
that cannot be shaken. -- O, how often did the unslumbering Shepherd of Israel,
the great Bishop of souls, arise for my deliverance, when I seemed to myself
just ready to fall a victim to the grand adversary! how did he not only give
power of resistance; but fill my soul with the overflowing of his love beyond
all expression! worthy for ever to be waited for, worshipped and obeyed, is the
Lord, the God of Israel; the mighty Friend of the faithful!

My prospects of a visit to Pennsylvania, etc. continuing, and the time to
proceed therein appearing to me to be some time preceding the yearly meeting at
Philadelphia 1786, I endeavored to be given up to it; but the thoughts of
parting with my dear wife, and tender little children, wrought so upon me that
I seemed to hold back again, after giving up several times, until in the winter
preceding said yearly meeting, I was visited with severe sickness for a month,
insomuch that many thought I should not recover. In the time of this illness I
intelligibly heard in the secret of my soul, in silence and stillness, this
awful language, set thine house in order, for thou shall die and not live. 2
Kings xx. 1.
This, though plain and alarming, did not at all strike my mind with a belief
that I was soon to leave the body; but two things seemed specially to be set
before me: 1st, Though I had a written will by me, very nearly agreeable to my
mind, yet as it was not quite so, one sense of the word, set thine house in
order, was to me as much as make thy will; whereupon I sent for a Friend, who
by my desire, and according to my direction, wrote another for me, which was
soon signed and witnessed to my satisfaction. 2d. I was fully satisfied that it
was the Lord's will that I should be given up to the visit mentioned above, and
that I should set my house in such order as to leave my family and affairs.
Upon this I gave up fully to the heavenly vision, and never afterward turned
my back upon it, nor dared to depart from my covenant, that if he would be my
God, be with me, and preserve me and mine, I would be his servant and follow
him whithersoever he pleased to lead me. However, though I durst not refuse to
go on his errand, I often had low times, wherein I almost lost sight of the
once clear prospect; yet it would again and again revive in such a manner as
convinced me that my peace was in it, and even that my livelihood, spiritually,
as much consisted in faithfully laboring for daily bread, and that in the way
of truth's requirings, as my outward living or support depended on an honest
industry. For if we will not improve our strength and abilities to this
purpose, then the sluggard that will not plow, shall beg in harvest, and have
nothing; Prove. xx. 4.
and on the other hand, though we labor ever so earnestly, if the Lord
withholds his blessing, how fruitless are all our labors! -- so in spirituals
-- the man is not without the woman, nor the woman without the man in the Lord;
1. Cor. xi. 11.
i. e. Christ is not without the church, nor the church without him in the work
of religion; nor indeed is any individual soul without him, nor he without that
individual, in the work of salvation; but he works in the soul, and through
him the soul works out its own salvation. Here is a blessed cooperation; and
the very reason why the creature can and does, in a sense, work out his own
salvation, is because God works in him, begetting the will, and giving
ability to do the deed; but if after all he will not, it will fare with him as
with Jerusalem, who might often have been gathered, but they would not;
wherefore their house was left unto them desolate, and the things that belonged
to their peace hid from their eyes.

Now, after passing through various exercises, and finally witnessing a full
submission to the divine will, in regard to giving up all to follow him in this
religious visit, and obtaining the approbation of our monthly and quarterly
meetings. I took leave of my dear wife and tender little children, in the fear
of the Lord, and in fullness of endeared natural affection, on the 21st of the
7th month 1786, and rode to Providence, thence next day to South-Kingston, next
day, being first of the week, I met my beloved friend Joseph Mitchell, and,
after meeting, we rode on to Stoningtown in the state of Connecticut, and next
day to New London, -- and thence by water to Southold on Long Island, next day
rode about fifty miles, and toward noon the day following, got to Bethpage,
and on the morrow, attended a meeting appointed for us there. Joseph had good
service -- I was shut up as to words, but had clear openings. It is sometimes
wisely ordered, that precious and divine openings are treasured up in the
Lord's treasury; but how dangerous would it be to squander them away, and
lavish them out among people, only because we are favored with the openings,
however clear and even instructive, without the word of command, and the divine
necessity, to deliver them to the people.

Next day we got to Westbury quarterly meeting; on 6th-day Joseph said a little
to good purpose among them in the meeting for discipline, and a few words at
the adjournment of the select meeting; but I was silent through all the
meetings. -- 7th-day we had a meeting at Oyster-Bay, and another at Matinicock
in the afternoon -- the first was heavy, but Matinicock was more favorable,
and I believe we both had some favorable service there, to the lukewarm and
careless, and in the way of encouragement to a few sincere-hearted worshippers.

First Day we were at Westbury, to good satisfaction; called many to a deeper
exercise, and feelingly invited the youth to a life of religion. -- 2nd-day we
had a meeting at Cow-Neck, a pretty favored time, though we both had to search
Jerusalem, as it were with candles, and to drop things very close and urgent;
yet we also had the comfortable language of invitation and encouragement to the
dear youth, some of whom seemed tenderly affected. Before this meeting we had a
family opportunity in the morning at a Friend's house, and had to labor
against a spirit of grandeur, and high-mindedness, and felt great peace in the
faithful discharge of our duty, and especially in a spring of living
encouragement to a steady perseverance in true humility and meekness, which
flowed fresh and lively to a few present, who we felt to be already in a good
degree enamoured with a prospect thereof. Third-day we had a meeting at the
widow Mott's, an elderly Friend. Fifth-day, being the 3d of the 8th month, we
attended Flushing monthly meeting; a mournful time it was to me, though Joseph
had to sound a little alarm among them. We went the next day to Newtown, where
a meeting was appointed for us. Few Friends live here. -- I thought, as I was
speaking, according to clear openings, the matter was too deep for most
present; and therefore as if I, poor weak worm, could steer my own course
better than the great Pilot, or better suit my subject to the states of the
people, I stepped aside from the opening, and with a view to condescend to the
people's conditions, struck upon more familiar and more common matters, in
illustrating truth's gradual teachings; but alas! I found Jer. x. 23.
it is truly not in man that walks to direct his own steps in this great
work, for instead of instructing the people in it, I soon dried up the spring
of life I felt before; and I sat down in a degree of shame and confusion, being
taught thereby to trust in the Lord with all my heart, and lean not to my own
understanding.

After this went to New York, it being seventh-day, and Friends holding two
meetings there of course on first day, staid until then, at both which Joseph
had pretty good service, but I was entirely shut up in silence. Third-day 8th,
had a meeting at Rahway -- my dear companion was favored in a close searching
testimony to some, and comfortable encouragement to others. A wide field of
doctrine was opened before me, wherein, for some time, I expected it would be
my lot to labor; but as I waited, not willing to proceed in the opening,
however clear, without the word of command, it closed again; so I was silent,
save that I just informed the meeting how it had been with me. 4th-day 9th, we
attended Friends preparative meeting at Plainfield; my mouth was opened in an
alarming testimony among them in the meeting for worship -- and Joseph's in
solemn supplication, that the last days of such as had long been gathering
rust, might, by the fire and the hammer, be their best days. 6th-day 11th, had
an exercising meeting at Shrewsbury. Seventh-day 12th, we had a meeting at
Squancum.

First Day 13th. We were at Squan meeting; it was a very stripping time to me.
-- 3d-day 15th, had a very laborious meeting at Barnagat, though a few
exercised Friends belong there. 4th-day 16th, another such at Little
Egg-Harbour -- here we saw our ancient worthy friend Ann Guant, who had twice
visited New England in the work of the ministry -- she seemed lively in old
age, and her company was pleasant. Fifth-day 17th, we attended their mid-week
meeting at Great Egg-Harbour, where Joseph had good service. Sixth-day 18th,
had a meeting at the other meeting house in Great Egg-Harbour -- here it was my
lot to have a good open time both in testimony and supplication. 7th-day 19th,
had another open meeting at Cape-May in the morning to pretty good
satisfaction. Hence we rode to Mark Reeve's in Cohansey. We found him
recovering from great bodily illness, and in a sweet disposition of mind. He
was one of the first travelers whose ministry was powerfully reaching to my
mind, when he was in our parts many years past on a religious visit with
Stephen Comfort. It was very comfortable to be a little in company and sweet
conversation with the only one of the two now living.

First Day 20th.. We attended their meeting held at Greenwich. -- 2d day 21st,
we had a meeting at Alloways-Creek. The state of such as thought themselves
rich and increased in goods, etc. and yet had too much neglected to buy 'gold
tried in the fire,' that they might be rich, and 'white raiment,' that they
might be clothed, sprang fresh in my mind; yet I believe there is a remnant
among them, who are in a good degree alive in the truth -- may these be
strengthened, and their number increased. This meeting, though very painful and
dull in the fore part, was comfortably refreshing in the conclusion. -- 3d-day
22d, we had a blessed, heavenly meeting at Salem, though my dear companion was
quite shut up; but my mind was much opened and enlarged; and much I had to do
among them in the flowings of divine favor -- Blessed be the great helper.
4th-day 23d, we had another favored meeting at Piles-Grove, -- at least my own
way seemed very open, and my mind favored in a comfortable degree, after some
time of exercise in silence: but Joseph was still shut up -- 5th day 24th, had
a good open meeting at Upper-Greenwich where truth favored with matter and
utterance, to pretty good satisfaction. -- 6th-day 25th, we had another pretty
good meeting at Woodbury, though I did not feel quite so well satisfied with my
own testimony as at some other times; yet I had a degree of peace -- 7th-day
26th, we attended the select quarterly meeting at Burlington. -- First Day
27th, attended the sore and afternoon meeting for worship, suffering great
inward want and distress: but through a degree of patience was enabled to
endure it. Joseph seemed comfortable, had a little to do in the meeting, and
could converse pleasantly with his friends after it; while I was so shut up
that, though some of them felt near to me, I could scarce use any freedom with
any of them; indeed I feared they would think my reserve was affected: but
truly it was not; I tried diverse times to use a little pleasant freedom; but
the more I tried, the more reserved and shut up I felt, and even seemed to
myself to act like a fool when I attempted to use freedom; therefore I gave up
to be as I could be, and to endure this shutting up with all the patience I
possibly could, as from the hand of God, for what purpose I knew not.

Second-day 28th. Attended the quarterly meeting, going into it under great
weakness and want; but soon after sitting down, the power of the word of life
arose, in freshness and dominion, with an opening clear and living; wherein I
felt a necessity to stand up and proclaim the word of the Lord among them. But
it being a very large meeting, and several great and eminent ministers of the
gospel present, it was no small cross to me to appear among them; however I was
pretty soon made willing to yield to the pressing motions of truth, and therein
standing up, was favored to speak closely to the states of such as had not
been faithful to divine manifestations, and even some who had known their heads
to be crowned as it were with crowns of gold, and yet had so fallen short that,
if they did not arise and trim their lamps, I believed the kingdom would be
rent from them, their crowns taken from their heads, and given to others that
were better than they; but I had also a comfortable prospect of many truly
tender religious minds present, and hopeful young people a valuable number; and
it opened in me to say, I believed the children were already born who would
live to see a better day, and enjoy the overspreading canopy of divine love in
a more eminent degree, through faithfulness, than what many now do. It was a
precious and heavenly opportunity, and diverse living testimonies were borne by
brethren present, to the rejoicing of many hearts.

Third-day 29th. We attended the youths meeting at this place -- a large,
comfortable, instructive meeting it was. We were both silent; but truths
testimony was livingly declared by two or three gospel ministers of this land,
or of Pennsylvania: after which we attended the adjournment of the select
meeting to a good degree of satisfaction -- 4th-day 30th, were at the select
quarterly meeting at the Falls, for Bucks County in Pennsylvania, where we had
some close hints to drop; but hope there is a living remnant among them. --
5th-day 31st, attended their quarterly meeting, where my mind was favored in
testimony to the glorious gospel of Christ, as effectually witnessed in and by
many in our and our forefathers days; and which, as I believe, will yet more
abundantly be witnessed among the nations; for I do believe the Lord is arising
to shake terribly the earth, and that multitudes will be brought to the inward
knowledge of this glorious truth, Christ in you, the hope of glory. Colos. i.
27.
Joseph was silent in the meeting for public worship; but our dear friend John
Lloyd bore a living testimony among us, and a good time it was.

Sixth-day, 9th month 1st. Attended the youths meeting here -- a pretty
favored time on the whole. Joseph had good service in lively testimony among
them. I was quite calm and easy, without a word in that way. After this we
attended the adjournment of the select meeting to pretty good satisfaction. --
7th day, 2d of the month, we had a meeting at Makefield, where, after deep
exercise, truth rose at length into great dominion, and diverse living
testimonies were borne to the great tendering of many minds, especially among
the youth, -- many of whom were present, and pressingly and powerfully
persuaded to choose the Lord for their portion. Indeed it was a precious time
to them, and a large number of them were very much reached and broken -- may
they live under a sense of it. Backsliders were also pressingly warned, and
truth was over all -- blessed be the powerful helper of the truly dependant,
for he is their only hope, and their rock of defense in all their exercises;
and they learn and know, from multiplied experience, that without him they can
do nothing in a religious line, that will either please him or profit the
people or their own souls. But O, the wonderful and inexpressible light, life,
power and dominion, wherein he arises at times for the help, comfort and
encouragement of his faithful servants! Words fall short in expression thereof,
and language cannot reach it! therefore bow, O my soul, in silent, humble
prostration, and reverential gratitude and awe before him the Lord God
omnipotent that reigns; bless him, praise him, and adore him for ever; for he
is worthy to be sought unto, trusted in, worshipped and obeyed, and that by the
whole house of Israel, can my soul, in feeling thankfulness and awful
sensibility, at this time testify and declare! Amen.

First Day 3d. At a meeting at Plumstead we suffered long; but at length we
felt relieved, the unfaithful were admonished, the youth invited, and the
heavy-hearted encouraged: it was a heavenly time; light and life was felt
triumphing over death and darkness! -- what shall we render unto the Lord for
all his benefits? Let us lie low before him, feel our dependancy upon him, and
never presume to move in his great work without his assistance.

Second-day 4th, I went with my companion to the monthly meeting at Buckingham,
but he being much unwell with a fever, which had been preceded with an aguish
paroxysm, left the meeting soon after our sitting down: my mind was shut up,
and that too, under great exercise; but after long waiting, I had some pretty
bright openings, wherein I found strength to stand up, and was richly favored
with Truth's help, and I hope to some real usefulness to the Friends and people
present. In the meeting for business I found much to do among them; though I
was very sensible of a living concerned remnant there.

Third-day 5th of 9th mo. I left my dear companion at our friend Thomas
Smith's, unable to ride much, and went to the monthly meeting at Wrights-town,
where Truth, after a time of humble waiting, rose into good authority, wherein
I rejoiced to feel the great Master still owning us to be his people, and
favoring us with his heart-cheering presence. I was considerably drawn out in
testimony and ardent supplication among them at this meeting; and in the
meeting for church discipline, had to labor a little to promote plainness, and
good order in some other respects, and had peace in my labors.

Fourth-day 6th. Without my companion, he being still unwell, I attended the
Falls monthly meeting, to pretty good satisfaction, though I had close
searching labor with them, and in the meeting for business also. -- 5th-day
7th, I attended Middletown monthly meeting to pretty good satisfaction. --
6th-day 8th, went back to see my dear companion, found him better, and was
rejoiced to see him -- 7th-day 9th, I had a meeting at Bristol, was shut up in
silence, except just to tell them of their want of inward gathering.

First Day 10th, I went, accompanied by my dear friends James Moon and James
Simpson, to Trenton, in West Jersey, where a pretty large number of people, not
of our society, attended the meeting; they sat very attentive and quiet, and I
was largely opened among them in the doctrines of truth. The people seemed
somewhat reached: I trust it was a good meeting to many; however, I did not
feel truth to reign in dominion over all, as at some other times; therefore,
finding the truth of the scripture assertion, ye have need of patience, that,
after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise. Heb. x. 36.


2d-day 11th, I had a pretty good meeting at a place called Stony-brook; and
though it was long silent, yet at length, through deep exercise, truth arose
and brought comfort to some of our minds.

Third-day 12th, Had a little meeting at Upper-Freehold, called Robins's
meeting. Our labor was hard in silence, but in the conclusion a little life
spread over us, and a number were pretty much reached, and broken into
tenderness and contrition.

Fourth-day 13th. Had a very heavenly meeting at a school-house,
Upper-Freehold, which was a great comfort to my mind, and I trust to many more;
for truth was over all, praised be the name of the Lord! In the afternoon we
had another meeting at a place called Arney's-town, in which we sat long in
silence; but near the close I stood up and expressed a few words, pointing the
people to Christ in spirit, after which my friend James Simpson had
considerable to say, and I trust the meeting ended well.

Fifth-day 14th. We had a meeting at Chesterfield, called also Crosswicks. I
sat long in silence -- many presentations attended my mind, but as I waited for
the word of life, I saw there were many subjects on which a man might either
muse or speak, -- diverse fields of doctrine, -- a large scope for choice -- but
alas! we cannot choose aright for ourselves, any more than we know what to pray
for without assistance. So I was made willing to reject all these false
openings however beautiful; and sinking down into the silence of all flesh, it
was freshly brought to mind, ever remember, when thou approachest before thy
God in order to worship him, that of thyself thou can do nothing; that thy
business is to wait in true silence, breathing to him for help and instruction,
not presuming to stir him up, or awake him before he please, nor to form unto
thyself a graven image, or warm thyself by the sparks of thy own kindling, lest
thou lie down in sorrow. If thou feel thy mind ever so empty and barren,
keep in true resignation, keep the word of his patience, and he will keep thee
in the hour of temptation. Watch and pray continually, and trust in the Lord
with all thine heart, and lean not to thine own understanding. After sitting
some time under the fresh revival of these things in the meeting this day, I
stood up and declared how it had been with me in this meeting. -- This
afternoon we had a very painful meeting at Bordentown, in which we labored and
had peace.

Sixth-day 15th, Had a meeting at Mansfield-Neck. Here the seed was under
sufferings; too many present sat idle, and lived too careless and unconcerned
lives; and, after a season of suffering in silence, truth triumphed over all,
and God gave us the dominion, the victory and rejoicing; -- a heavenly time it
was indeed; the faithful were comforted and encouraged; the lukewarm warned,
and called to awake and arise from their beds of ease, that Christ might give
them light; and the dear youth movingly persuaded to forsake all* and come and
follow Jesus; come taste and see that the Lord is good. Many minds were much
reached, tendered and encouraged -- O, my soul, remember and adore him for all
his favors, and for every such watering and dew-descending season.

Seventh-day 16th. An exercising meeting at Mansfield. -- 1st-day 17th, I
attended the meeting at Upper-Springfield, which, though through some exercise
in the beginning, was a good comfortable meeting, truth reigning over all. In
the afternoon I had a silent meeting at a place called the Mount, it was pretty
large and scarce any exercise appeared to rest on the minds of the people. --
2d-day 18th, I had a painful, yet, in the end, a comfortable meeting at
Old-Springfield, where met me my dear friend John Simpson, to join me a little
in the weighty service before me, in the absence of my much beloved companion,
who, he informed me, was very ill; and James, the brother of John, having left
me, it was truly acceptable to be joined by so united a brother. In the
afternoon we had a meeting at Burlington. I was shut up in silence, which is
the third silent meeting I have attended with Friends of that place, but dear
John had good service, of which I was glad.

Third-day 19th. We were favored with a blessed, yea, an exceeding heavenly
and watering opportunity at the house and in the family of my dear friend John
Hoskins, among his children. Advice and supplication flowed freely and
powerfully to our great consolation together. After this we went to
Mount-Holly, and attended a meeting that had been appointed there for me: it
was indeed a most melting favored time; exhortation and prayer were both
eminently attended with life and divine authority. A more evident fullness of
divine sufficiency in solemn supplication perhaps I never knew; for which my
heart was and is awfully bowed to the God and Father of all our mercies, to
whom I bend the knee reverently, and acknowledge him as my only helper, and all
sufficient support -- however, I had to see that things were much out of order
at this place; and was divinely enabled to point out and speak to several
conditions, believing spiritual blindness had at least in part overtaken some
who had once seen clearer -- some were lame, some were halting, some I thought
were greatly withered, and some I thought resembled the dry bones, concerning
which it was queried, 'can these dry bones live.' -- To all these states I had
to speak a word of reproof, of lamentation -- and also of encouragement yet to
hope; to wait for and seek after strength, and therein to arise and press
forward: for even the dry bones did live: but above all, the animating word of
persuasion and encouragement flowed powerfully to the tender youth, like a
river of living water through my soul to them! -- blessed be the Lord for every
favor.

After meeting we made a comfortable visit to our dear ancient friend, the
widow of that worthy, self-denying valiant of the Lord, John Woolman, and to
their daughter, with her husband and children. The widow was in a meek, humble,
loving frame of mind: I think the Lord is with her, and believe he will be with
her.

Fourth-day 20th. We had a meeting at Vincent-Town, and after long silence, I
had to weep a little as between the porch and the altar, and called those met
with us to do the like -- for I feared the heritage would be given to reproach,
the heathen rule over them, and say among the people, where is their God. John
joined me in sounding an alarm; and they were called to mourning, and to teach
their children lamentation! After meeting I rode back to Mount-Holly, then to
Burlington, so crossed the Delaware to Bristol, and home with my dear ancient
friend James Moon, who had been so kind as thus far to accompany me.

Next day the 21st, the good old man accompanied me to see my companion, whose
life we had lately been informed was quite despaired of; we found him very ill
indeed, but yet I had a degree of hope. -- 6th-day 22d. Dear Joseph is yet very
dangerously sick, though we hope a little alteration for the better. -- 7th-day
23d, I left him, and rode to Philadelphia to the select yearly meeting, which
was very large.

First Day 24th, I attended the three meetings: The first at Pine-Street
meeting house, where the Lord, being graciously with me, opened my mouth in
testimony and solemn supplication; many hearts were tendered, and my soul
rejoiced -- the Lord have all the glory. Our friend James Thornton was
eminently favored in a powerful testimony, as also in the afternoon at the
Bank meeting; and our dear friend Samuel Emlen had a lively time in a short
testimony after James. In the evening attended Market-Street meeting, where our
worthy friend John Storer, from Old-England, appeared with instructive
clearness and sensibility, both in prayer and testimony.

Second-day 25th, and 3d-day 26th. Attended several sittings of the yearly
meeting for business, and one sitting of the select meeting, to pretty good
satisfaction.

Fourth-day 27th. Word came of my dear companion, by two physicians who had
been up to visit him by mine and my friend's request, that he departed this
life about an hour past midnight this morning. This caused indeed a close
exercise, and brought me to an examination whether I had done right in leaving
him; but on mature consideration, I found peace in having so done: and diverse
valuable Friends accompanying me, who felt engaged to leave the yearly meeting
on the occasion, I went up to Buckingham in order to attend the funeral.

Fifth-day 28th. We attended accordingly, and had, after the interment of the
body, a large, heavenly meeting, diverse living testimonies being borne to the
power and efficacy of truth, and something by one or two of his acquaintance
respecting the gravity, circumspection and usefulness of our dear deceased
friend in his day and generation. I trust it was a time that will not be soon
forgotten by diverse present, whose hearts were melted and tendered together.
After the meeting we returned to Philadelphia in order to attend the remaining
sittings of the yearly meeting.

29th and 30th. Attended several sittings of the yearly meeting for business,
had some little services therein to a good degree of satisfaction; the meetings
being owned and crowned by the presence of the Lord of life and glory.

10th month 1st, and first day of the week. Attended a sitting of the select
yearly meeting, and the three meetings for worship -- Pine-Street in the
morning -- Market-Street afternoon -- Bank in the evening -- in all which truth
was in good dominion, under the assisting influence whereof my way was open in
gospel labors at each place, I hope to the rousing of some, and strengthening
of the hearts of others.

2d day of the week, and 2d of 10th month. The last sitting of the select
meeting was this day divinely owned, as were diverse of the preceding, with the
Lord's glory filling the inward temple of the spiritual house in such a manner
as to induce a living remnant to cry in the secret of their souls, blessed is
he that comes in the name of the Lord: Hosanna in the highest. Matt. xxi. 9.
In the course of this yearly meeting my mind was often bowed in a sense of the
Lord's condescending kindness, not only in favoring me with strength and
ability, but also in opening the hearts of many deeply experienced ministers
and elders to receive and sympathize with me in my labors -- for which the
holy Name be praised, and let all ever bow before him.

Third-day 3d. I began to desire my way might open to leave Philadelphia; but I
found no way out -- so went to the Bank weekday meeting, and was there silent.
-- 4th-day, attended the weekday meeting at Pine-Street; had a good open time
in sounding an alarm to the lukewarm, and felt sweet inward peace. 5th-day, was
at Market-Street preparative meeting and was silent, but diverse testimonies
were borne in Truth's authority. 6th-day. I attended their monthly meeting, and
was livingly and very unexpectedly opened in Truth's testimony against the
love, spirit and friendship of the world, and to call Friends into a labor in
their families, and among their dear offspring. This was extensively an
alarming day, and I hope some of them will probably take the alarm. -- My soul
had great peace -- blessed be the holy helper. 7th-day, visited some families.
1st-day 8th, rode to Frankfort meeting, and there suffered deeply in spirit,
but got some relief by a close searching testimony among them; yet remained
uneasy, and returned so to Philadelphia. 2d-day 9th, attended the select
meeting to some good degree of satisfaction. 3d-day 10th, I had a meeting at
Frankfort; was silent until near the close, when I told them I felt something
present which exceedingly obstructed the arising of life in the meeting. In the
afternoon we had a meeting at Fair Hill -- I was silent there. 4th-day 11th,
had a meeting at Germantown, in which my lot was in silence. Fifth-day 12th,
attended the youth's general meeting at Biberry, and suffered still in silence,
feeling myself as a stranger, a pilgrim on the earth: and, in the depth of my
distress, I said in my heart, Lord, why have thou thus forsaken me? thou
know I have given up all that is near and dear to me in this world to follow
thee and thy call into this land; my dear wife and tender offspring I have left
behind me, and come forth thus far into a land I knew not; and I can appeal to
thee, O my God, that it is only in obedience to thy will and requirings -- Why
then am I thus left? why feel I myself so destitute and forsaken of all good?
why see I no way cast up to walk in? Thus, or to this purpose, I bemoaned my
desolate condition, and spread my case before the Lord my God with tears, but
all in a good degree of resignation; and after a little space, being fully
satisfied all would work for good, I was made willing to be as poor, empty and
blind, as the Lord would have me to be, and all centred in this, 'Not my will,
but thine be done.'

Sixth-day 13th. Was at a meeting appointed by two Friends from New York
government at Abington, my own way being entirely shut up, so that I durst not
presume to appoint a meeting, nor yet to return home, though I often looked
toward home, but it looked dark. So I should have quite stopped, had there not
been a meeting for those two Friends, which I thought I might safely attend;
but still silence and suffering was my lot; and yet the Lord was graciously
pleased to preserve my soul in a good degree of patience under all.

Seventh-day 14th. I went to a meeting appointed for the aforesaid Friends at
Horsham, and returned with my friend Joshua Morris to his house at Abington. --
First Day 15th, was at Abington meeting again, and silent in both, feeling
great emptiness. It is the Lord's hand, let him do as he pleases, he will not
do any thing for my harm. 2d-day 16th, stopped traveling, and waited on the Lord
for direction -- toward night a little light arose, and I thought I might go
on in the morning, if the way should continue still to be open. 3d-day 17th I
attended their meeting at Gynnedd, my tongue as it were cleaving to the roof of
my mouth. 4th-day 18th, I had a silent meeting at Plymouth. Fifth-day 19th, was
at the monthly meeting at Richland -- still shut up in silence. Sixth-day 20th,
attended a meeting at the same place for two marriages, still in silence; but I
am learning contentment, and to endure famine, drought and hunger, patiently.
Lord spare not until thy will be accomplished in me, and all that is in me bows
to thy scepter, and yields fully and quietly to thy disposal!

Seventh-day 21st, Had a meeting at Potts-Grove, wherein Truth rose into
dominion, and my faith and assurance of the all sufficiency of Truth's openings
and leadings were greatly increased; for I had sit through eleven meetings in
silence one after another, except a very few words just at the close of the
first of them. Now in all these silent meetings, I could never once, except
those few words, find ability or openness to say a single word, and believe my
silence was wholly ordered of God, though contrary to the desires of many, and
even part of the time very unpleasant to my own mind; but it pleased my great
Master to keep me to it, until I was made to yield and be content with whatever
he pleased to allot unto me in my pilgrimage, however it might induce the
ignorant to gaze upon me as a fool; and after I had thus surrendered up all, he
was pleased to open my mouth in a very comfortable manner to myself, and I
believe to some others. In this meeting I felt the power of the word of life
almost as soon as I sat down in the house, but the opening was on a very
unexpected subject, a disposition striving to comprehend the unfathomable
mysteries of the inscrutable God. This was the subject that opened in the light
and in the life, and as I kept to the opening I had much to say on this and
several other subjects with considerable in a way of comfort and encouragement
to a tried, afflicted state; and being favored with the spirit of
supplication, the meeting ended to good satisfaction. After meeting I was
informed that such an inquisitive, diving disposition after hidden mysteries
was present in that meeting, and also the other state of affliction and
probation -- blessed be the Lord for all his fatherly dispensations, however
disagreeable to my own inclinations.

First Day 22d. I attended (dear John Forman being with me, as he had been for
several days past) the meeting of Friends at Robinson or the Forest, a blessed
time it was. -- 2d-day 23d, we had a meeting at Reading, and next day at Maiden
Creek, both I hope profitable good meetings. -- 4th-day 25th, we were at the
monthly meeting at Exeter; Truth rose into blessed dominion, and reigned over
all in the meeting for public worship, to the reaching and tendering of many
hearts. 5th-day 26th, we had a meeting at Nantmil, to which dear Abel Thomas
accompanied us; my friend John Forman had good service; I was long shut up, but
at length, in the fresh openings of life, I stood up, and expressed a few
words, after which dear John Forman appeared again in a short, lively
testimony; and my spirit being drawn forth in supplication to the Lord, the
meeting ended under a feeling sense of the savor of life.

Sixth-day 27th. We had a good, open meeting this day at Pikeland -- The Lord's
presence was our crown. 7th-day 28th, a silent meeting as to myself at
Providence; but dear John Forman had pretty good service there. First Day 29th,
we were at the Valley meeting, and both had considerable to say, yet found
scarce any relief. 2d-day 30th, I attended Abington monthly meeting, and was
favored in the meeting for public worship with a clear opening, wherein I had
a short testimony to the reaching the witness in many minds, and much to my own
relief, after an exercising time the day before -- the whole revives the case
of those who toiled all night and caught nothing; and yet, by carefully
attending to the Master's directions, they soon after caught a multitude of
fishes.

Third-day 31st. Attended Gynnedd or North Wales monthly meeting, where, after
sitting a while in darkness, light sprang up and brought forth a short,
awakening testimony in close, searching language, very much to the relief of my
own mind. I also had more to do in the meeting for discipline than usual for me
when abroad, as I found my mind engaged and the way opened; for it is my
special care in all these meetings not to move or undertake in any service but
what I find a real engagement to in the openings of life; and on the other
hand, not to omit any thing which is thus clearly pointed out, and my mind thus
engaged in.

11th month 1st, and 4th of the week. I went to the monthly meeting at Horsham,
and, after viewing the camp a while in silence, had to lift up my voice like a
trumpet and sound an alarm among them, wishing them to feel for themselves,
lest ere they were aware, and while sitting carelessly at ease, the enemy
should surround them and lead them captive away.

After this I sat in a low, suffering state through the whole transactions of
their business; but just at the close my trumpet was again prepared to sound;
and feeling strength to arise out of great weakness, and light out of
obscurity, I so renewed the alarm among them, as to feel quite easy and
comfortable in my mind -- blessed be the Lord who helped me; for I sensibly
felt, that, had not his power arose for my deliverance I must have sunk down
under a load of distress, and gone away burdened in spirit, having no might
nor ability to throw my heavy load off myself. Indeed I grow weaker and weaker,
blinder and blinder, in myself: but herein I truly rejoice, for it brings into
the clearness, into deep dependence upon God alone, whereby his grace is felt
to be all-sufficient, and an unshaken evidence, that with the divine Arm there
is no lack.

Many deep lessons of instruction are opened in this dependant state, which had
utterly escaped the penetration of the wise and prudent. Therefore, O Lord!
ever keep me low enough before thee. I have so clearly seen this to be the only
way for divine enlargement and true consolation, that I desire it, I crave it
of thee more earnestly than corn, wine, or oil.

Oh, what numbers miss of the best instruction and the purest joy, by
continuing, even after great mortification, alive in themselves in their
religious performances. These cannot fully say, I live, yet not I, but Christ
lives in me. Gal. ii. 20.
These have in them something of the beast which received the wound by the
sword of the spirit, and yet did live -- the deadly wound being healed; all
these are in imminent danger: and if they are not aware, they will retard the
work of the Lord in themselves and in others, through their busy attempts to
promote it: and yet perhaps they may be pretending to wait for, and giving out
that they feel much divine influence.

Oh, the subtilty of the serpent, especially in his resemblance of an angel of
light! many has he caught, beguiled and ruined; the pure openings of life are
very different, and distinguishable from all his false visions and likenesses;
the deep, humble, careful traveller finds it so to his unspeakable
satisfaction; and yet how many are taking the latter for the former, for want
of depth and patience enough in waiting! -- hereby the innocent, precious life
in them becomes wounded, and the true simplicity betrayed -- for, the
adulteress will hunt, even 'for the precious life,' Prove. vi. 26.
as the wise man testifies; and I believe the truly wise in heart, not in
earthly wisdom, but heavenly, do really find it so; for the life is the very
thing the adversary strikes at, and if he can keep us from the sensible
feelings and openings thereof in our religious engagements, he cares not how
active we are without it, nor how much we pretend to it; for the more of all
this, the securer he has us, and the more we promote his kingdom and interest.
Oh, where will many appear at last, after all the cry of Lord, Lord, have we
not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out devils, and done many
wonderful or mighty works?

This is a subject that greatly engages my attention, in earnest wishes that
thou who read these hints may be preserved out of, and wisely shun the
dreadful snare, and yet have a care of disobedience. But when things open in
the light, give up to the heavenly vision, and confer not with flesh and blood.
The path, though narrow, may yet be traveled in. It is a way wherein all the
true wayfaring men, though fools, may walk and not err; but then they must
carefully attend to the light for the way-marks, as the light, and that only,
makes them manifest, keeping a single eye thereto, never once beginning to
think of taking less heed to it, or that now, after much experience, they can
do pretty well with less clearness and less bright shining thereof than
heretofore. For alas, this is a mistake and dangerous delusion, and he that
continues to give way to it will soon walk in darkness, not knowing whither he
goes: his feet will stumble in the dark until he falls into the bottomless pit
with the beast and false prophet. But thou, whose eye is kept carefully single
and attentive to the light, shall witness thy whole body to be full of light,
and shall journey forward safely, until thou arrivest at that city that needs
not the light of the sun nor the moon, for the Lord God does lighten it, and
the Lamb is the light thereof. Amen.

Fifth-day 2d. After a comfortable family visit where one lay sick, I rode to
Philadelphia, in order to attend the approaching quarterly meeting -- visited a
few families to a good degree of comfort.

Sixth-day 3d. I went to see two or three families, but have felt very
different from that openness, freedom, cheerfulness and satisfaction, which I
felt in a good degree when here before. I thought far less of having sufficient
time now than when I first came; but alas! there is scarce any comparison;
wherever I go my load goes with me, and I cannot yet throw it off. But all
tends to confirm and assure me that it is not of man, nor by man, nor yet by
outward observation. So I wait in patience.

7th-day 4th. I am going presently to the select quarterly meeting. O Lord my
God, be with me; keep me low; keep me humble; keep me also faithful and
attentive to thy divine movings, whether in silence or utterance; for I know
that without thee I can do nothing rightly -- I attended the abovementioned
select meeting, and felt great weight and exercise attend me; but, sinking down
to the pure gift, I was after a little time raised up in Truth's dominion to
ease my mind among my brethren and sisters of this meeting, after which I was
drawn forth in supplication, and the meeting ended to solid satisfaction.

First Day 5th. In the forenoon I attended Market-Street meeting, and soon
feeling a very weighty concern resting on my spirit, I stood up in the fresh
openings of life, and began to express what I had in commission; but keeping
carefully to the divine guide, I soon felt all to be shut up again, whereupon I
immediately sat down, rejoicing that I was preserved from proclaiming without
life, what just before was opened in the life: so I sat quite easy, being
delivered from the great weight and exercise which I had felt, until toward
the end of the meeting, and after another Friend had well declared the truth
among us, when I again stood up and very fully cleared my mind. I left this
meeting in true joy of heart, and rejoiced in the Lord my gracious Preserver,
who is learning me to depend on and attend to his shuttings as well as his
openings: and this is the only way of safety. In the afternoon I went to the
Bank meeting, and had good open service, and though in a short, I hope
comfortable testimony to a living remnant present. I attended the evening at
Market-Street meeting. It is a very large house, and was now greatly crowded:
-- I was quite silent.

Second-day 6th. Attended the quarterly meeting for worship and discipline. In
the first I had a short open testimony, after which our friend John Storer had
a good open time, to our edification and comfort. In the meeting for church
discipline, I was shut up in silence and mourning. There was recommended down
from the yearly meeting, a renewed care and exertion for the preservation and
recovery of the young and rising generation, who are many of them greatly
departed from primitive plainness and simplicity. My spirit was bowed in
sympathy and union with a few tribulated souls who mourn the desolation of
Sion, and use their honest endeavors for her restoration. One remark of dear
John Storer's I cannot well omit to insert nere: He said, in the meeting for
business, that he never knew any one to grow and prosper in religion, who was
negligent as to the attendance of religious meetings. Now I wish this solid
remark, founded on impartial observation, may have its proper effect, to the
quickening of all who heard or who may here read it, to the diligent discharge
of that great and important duty.

Third-day 7th. I had good open service at the youths meeting at Market-Street
house. It was a large solid meeting, and I laid things close home to negligent
parents; but to the honest, faithful laborers, as well as to the tender youth
among them, the language of consolation and encouragement flowed sweetly and
freely. I hope to the refreshment of some of their souls. In the afternoon
there was a meeting for the negroes; it was not to me a very lively meeting,
yet was in degree owned and favored, and several testimonies were borne, among
which I was not wholly excused; and I believe my exercise might be of some
little use to the poor blacks, although I felt very weak, and Truth rose not
into much dominion; but my mind was quiet in the Lord.

Fourth-day 8th. I went to the select quarterly meeting at Abington, and sat
through the same under great exercise, but near the close my way opened, and I
was enabled to discharge myself.

Fifth-day 9th. This day came on the quarterly meeting for worship and
discipline, which was large and livingly favored with the flowings of life in
the ministry, and the labors of some concerned brethren for the good of Sion,
in the meeting for discipline. I had good open service on diverse important
subjects, particularly the guarded education, oversight, and nurture of our
youth.

Sixth-day 10th. Attended the youths meeting; it was large and favored with
the ownings of life, and with diverse living testimonies -- I was silent and
well satisfied.

Seventh-day 11th. I got to the select quarterly meeting at Concord, where, as
at Abington, I was quite shut up, until near the end of this day's sitting of
said meeting; but life then arising, I stood up in the opening thereof, had
great satisfaction in my labors among them, mostly in a way of encouragement,
but not without some cautions and admonitions as things opened.

First Day 12th, I rode to the meeting at Birmingham, through which I sat
silent and resigned. 2d-day 13th, went back to Concord to the quarterly
meeting, and was therein shut up from words through the meetings for worship
and church discipline; as also the next day at the youth's meeting and
adjournment of the select meeting; but our friend John Storer had excellent
service both days.

Fourth-day 15th. I was at Wilmington monthly meeting, and quite silent through
the whole thereof -- it being a low time with me, though diverse Friends seemed
to be favored. Fifth-day 16th, quite silent again at Kennet monthly meeting
until toward the end of their business, when I was concerned to point them to
the life in the transactions of church affairs. Sixth-day 17th, I went to
Bradford monthly meeting held at Caln, and sat silent, except toward the end
of the last meeting, I spoke a few words of the danger of a forward ministry.
7th-day 18th, I attended the select quarterly meeting at London-Grove for the
western quarter. -- Here, through laborious travail in the deeps, life so far
arose as to enable me to ease my mind in degree.

First Day 19th, I was at New-Garden meeting, in which I was silent. After
meeting went home with my dear friend William Jackson, who had, a few years
past, been very acceptably in our country on a religious visit. 2d-day 20th, I
attended the quarterly meeting at London-Grove, being still shut up in silence.
3d-day 21st, attended the youths meeting, the adjournment of the quarterly and
the select meetings, in all which I had not a word to say. Oh! I was now, and
mostly for a week past, abased as in the dust -- I could see no way to go
forward; nor yet could I go homeward -- and though this distressing
dispensation is upon me while I write these lines, yet through the experience I
have already had, my faith fails not; but I have an unshaken confidence that
all does and will work for good, and for my enlargement, in the Lord's time;
but I find patience exceedingly necessary: for thus to be shut up a week or two
weeks at a time, and feel in great degree destitute of divine enjoyment, is
very trying; and to feel it altogether out of our own power to help ourselves
out of this trying state, brings the creature very low and humble; but, blessed
be the Lord, he never has failed to arise in his own time, and to deliver my
soul from all trouble; and I firmly believe he will, if I keep in the patience,
give the new song of praise to his eternal name.

Fourth-day 22d. Attended their mid-week meeting at London-Grove, where my
tongue as it were still clave to the roof of my mouth, while Mary Husbands was
much favored and enabled to lift up her voice like the song of an angel.
Fifth-day 23d, I went to New-Garden meeting, and was still closed up in
silence. 6th-day 24th, I went to Nottingham in Maryland with some Friends who
were appointed by the quarterly meeting. 7th-day 25th, we attended their
monthly meeting, where it was my place to be silent.

First Day 26th. I was still shut up in their meeting for worship. I believe
the Lord has some wise purpose in it. -- I cannot find that I have offended
him, or disobeyed him: I know not that I have run too fast or lag'd behind my
guide: I have ardently endeavored to do his will, and to endure his
dispensations patiently. O that I may be preserved in patience, and yet live to
see his purpose in all these things.

Second-day 27th. -- My way is hedged up -- I see no way to go forward: Who can
comprehend my desolate state? or understand my mournful condition? These
reflections are excited in me. I am a man of sorrow, and acquainted with grief!
the light of God's countenance, which I have often eminently felt, and which I
then prized and now desire above all other joys, seems to be quite withholden
from me, and nothing else in heaven nor in all the earth can satisfy my longing
soul. Lord, strengthen my patience that I murmur not after all that I have
known of thy goodness: for I find daily bread is very desirable: fasting and
hunger is painful to nature; but shall I follow thee for the sake of the
loaves? or will it do to leave thee in times of emptiness and abasement?

I now remember the long fasting of thy beloved Son, and that at length he
hungered. Oh! then came the tempter, but he was defeated; for he found nothing
in that holy Lamb, the Son of thy bosom, that would receive any of his baits. O
my soul, may he find nothing in thee! Thou have often declared to others that
the way to heaven is through tribulation and sufferings; and now when they are
come upon thee, see to it, that thou keep the word of God's patience; let
patience have its perfect work, lest the end of the Lord's thus proving thee be
frustrated; for if all Satan's assaults be rightly resisted, and nothing of his
offered food eaten, thou may find relief and consolation. And though it is
now very distressing to drink thy Savior's cup, and be baptized with his
baptism into suffering, yet it must be endured or thou can never sit with him
in his kingdom -- he has set thee an example that thou should follow his
steps. And as it pleased God, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the
Captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings, Heb. ii. 10.
so will his true followers be made perfect in like manner. Therefore, O my
drooping soul! trust in the Lord, for unto whom else can thou go? He only has
the words of eternal life: and thou must not give back; neither heights nor
depths, things present or trials yet to come, must not separate thee from the
love of God, nor from cleaving unto him, or thou will yet be undone for ever.

This day I rode back to my friend William Jackson's, no way opening to go
forward. 3d-day 28th, no way opens yet; my soul is brought to tenderness and my
eyes to weeping and tears before the Lord. Nature is ready to flinch, but I am
given to believe it is the Lord's will that his servants, after multiplied
experience of his helping and delivering hand, should be so established on the
immovable rock as to be able to endure hardness as good soldiers, to live by
faith, and not by sight for a season, and that as long as he pleases -- and to
say without dissimulation and without reserve, under every trial meted out to
them by his holy hand, It is the Lord: let him do as seems him good. Perhaps
many trials, many deep baptisms yet unproved by me, may be necessary for me to
pass through, before I can come up to and abide steadfastly in this blessed
renunciation of my own will; but this is the mark, the goal at which I aim. And
it is the desire of my soul that the Lord's hand may not spare, nor his eye
have pity, until he brings forth judgment unto perfect victory; until all that
is in me bows to his scepter; until I am perfectly renovated, and can render up
all, body, soul and spirit, as a living and unreserved sacrifice unto the Lord;
and until I can, even when he hides from me, (and to my sensation forsakes me)
with perseverance and unabated confidence cry, 'Abba Father, thy will and not
mine be done.' Even so, O Lord, work in me and for me, to the thorough
completion of thine own will.

4th-day 29th. Attended London-Grove preparative meeting, and was still quite
closed up from any sensible spring of the gospel. -- 5th-day 30th, I attended
New-Garden preparative meeting -- this and London-Grove make one monthly
meeting. Here the power of the word of life was renewed in me, in such a
manner, that I seemed to myself in some sort as if I had risen from the dead! O
how clearly, and beyond all doubt, am I satisfied in my own mind, that it is
nothing else than the power of an endless life that again quickened and raised
me up in a living testimony among my brethren in this meeting. -- For twenty
days past, I have not dared to open my mouth in one of the public meetings for
worship that I have attended -- I have been at fifteen: doubtless, if I would
have been so presumptuous, I could have stood up and delivered words in plenty
at any of them. I felt sensibly that I of myself could no more open any thing
divine, than a corrupt fountain can send forth sweet and wholesome waters. I
found I could not move forward in word and testimony, to any kind of profit to
the people or to my own peace, while the cloud rested on the tabernacle; my
business was to keep silence before the Lord in abasement, and as much as
possible in patience; -- before, all was shut up that none could open; but now
all seems to be so open as that no man can shut: -- glory, honor and praise,
to him who leads me in the path of this blessed experience; I can now bless
his holy hand, both in his shutting and in his opening, and rejoice with joy
unspeakable, that I have learned this experience and this dependence on him
alone.

Twelfth mo. 1st, 6th-day. I rested at a Friend's house and wrote to my dear
wife, for I had been so shut up that I scarce knew how to write before; but now
I wrote with satisfaction and comfort.

Seventh-day 2d. I attended New-Garden monthly meeting; here my way was opened
in an eminent manner -- it was indeed a day to be remembered by many, blessed
for ever be the Lord.

First Day 3d. I was at meeting at Kennet; 2d-day 4th, at Birmingham; 3d-day
5th, at Bradford; 4th-day 6th, at East-Caln; in all which I was silent. 5th-day
7th, I was at West-Caln meeting. 6th-day 8th, no way opens to go forward, we
turned back and rode about twenty-five miles toward Philadelphia, and lodged
at Isaac Thomas's. 1st-day 10th, we were at the meeting at Newtown
school-house. 2d-day 1^th, at Newtown; at both I was still closed up in
silence. Third-day 12th, we were at Haverford, with a little meeting of
Friends, where, blessed be the name of the Lord, he opened the prison door and
sat my soul at liberty -- counsel and doctrine flowed freely -- their hearts
were greatly tendered, and my soul sang praises to the Lord.

Fourth-day 13th. Last evening we reached Philadelphia, and went this day to
Pine-street meeting, it being a good open time, to the rejoicing of our souls.
5th-day 14th, we attended Market-Street meeting in the city, a favored open
time, to he remembered with gratitude. 6th-day 15th, I had a meeting at
Germantown, where I had been shut up before, my mind having often been drawn
that way since my being there. This was, blessed be the God of Israel, a
meeting wherein the gospel was extensively preached. Great indeed was the power
and dominion of truth this day, wherein a close search was made. -- Several
other brethren having living powerful service, and in conclusion my soul was
poured forth in ardent supplication; and light and life triumphed over death
and darkness. -- After this we had a good opportunity in a Friend's family, and
then returned to Philadelphia with gladdened hearts.

Seventh-day 16th. We attended the burial of an ancient Friend at Derby, where
the Lord gave ability to preach the gospel in the evidence and demonstration of
the spirit and with power, to the comfort of many minds, and I hope to the
awakening of some others; after which we had another opportunity in a Friend's
family, in which our souls were rejoiced together in the cementing love of God.

First Day 17th. The way having thus opened for me to go to Germantown, and
then to Derby, as abovementioned, it now seemed clearly to open to go forward
to Chester; where, through deep wading and a living travail of soul, life rose
into good dominion; though I had to labor some time, even after I stood up,
under much depression of mind, looking carefully to see the way and find the
stepping stones; but the meeting ended well and truth reigned, and being
desirous of another meeting in this place, accordingly one was appointed to be
held next day.

Second-day 18th. The meeting was large and highly favored -- and truth was
triumphant. 3d-day 19th, we had a meeting at Chichester, where Truth gave us
the victory. -- There was a little remnant of seeking souls, to whom
encouragement flowed sweetly this day. 4th-day 20th, were at meeting at Center;
the fore part was painfully exercising, but after a time of ardent breathing to
the Lord, I felt a small arising of life, in which I stood up, and as I
advanced forward, at length Truth arose into powerful dominion: it was a
baptizing time. -- We were at Wilmington, where I had been and suffered in
silence some time past. Notice being now given of our intentions of being here,
it was a large crowded meeting, and the doctrines of Truth were opened in my
mind in great clearness, and utterance being graciously afforded, it was indeed
a highly favored day. I could write much of this heavenly meeting, but all
centers in the mercy, favor and loving kindness of the Lord, without whom we
are altogether helpless and cannot move to profit. We had three comfortable
opportunities in Friends families in this place, one of which was with our
ancient friend and elder in the church John Perry, and his daughter, they
living together. He had been in New England, where I saw him, on a religious
visit, (in company with our since deceased friend David Ferris) but now was
very ill, and I thought unlikely to continue long. Truth was in good dominion
while we were together, wherein doctrine and supplication were livingly owned
by the inshinings of the divine presence.

Sixth-day 22d. William Jackson went home, intending to meet me again in a few
days. Hugh Judge and several others from Wilmington attending, we had a
precious meeting at White-Clay Creek; my soul was deep in suffering for a short
time; but the power of him who is the Resurrection and the Life eminently
arising, the gospel was livingly preached in demonstration and clearness; the
youth persuaded; the faithful encouraged; and the lukewarm warned -- many minds
were reached and much tendered; and my own soul comforted and rejoiced. But
here I may note a trial that attended my utterance, very different from that
kind of exercise wherein it seems difficult to find the stepping stones; for
here my heart was so full, and my cup so overflowed, that I could scarce keep
so deliberate as to express myself to my own relief and satisfaction, until,
after standing a short time, I sat down and waited to get more command of
myself; when, standing up again, through a careful stepping along, I had great
peace and consolation in this day's service -- praised be the Lord!

Seventh-day 23d. We had a truly blessed opportunity in a meeting at Okesin,
where Truth eminently favored us, and opened diverse important doctrines and
states, which states were livingly spoken to in Truth's authority, to the
tendering many minds; may it be to their lasting benefit and instruction. These
four last meetings were in the government or state of Delaware, and in the
county of New Castle. After this last meeting we went to see our ancient friend
Thomas Carleton, in his eighty-eighth year, who had been in New England in the
service of the gospel, having been esteemed a living minister of Christ. He
was, though confined at home, in a tolerably comfortable state of health;
cheerful in mind; and seemed to retain a good savor of Truth, -- being glad to
see us and we him.

First Day 24th. We were at meeting at Concord, in Chester county,
Pennsylvania, at which place I had before attended a quarterly meeting, unable
then to open my mouth in a religious meeting; but now the Lord set before me an
open door, which indeed has wonderfully been the case for diverse meetings past,
even the most so I think since my late long spiritual imprisonment, that ever I
witnessed, the enlargement of my mind, clearness of the openings and strength
of utterance, being far beyond my own expectation, and greatly to the
humiliation as well as consolation of my poor exercised soul. -- In this
meeting at Concord, I had some clear openings and was enabled to speak to
several states, among the rest, to a state of great unfaithfulness, even though
great had been the divine favor from time to time extended to them. I had to
sound an alarm indeed to these, and to mention the danger of their house being
left unto them desolate, and the things belonging to their peace being hid from
their eyes for ever; and of that awful declaration being sealed against them,
unless they speedily repent and turn to the Lord, viz. he that is filthy, let
him be filthy still. Rev. xxii. 11.
After which a Friend standing up in the meeting, in a feeling manner called
upon them to suffer the word of exhortation, testifying that such was the state
of some present, and that they had repeatedly been warned, and called upon in a
very pressing, awful manner before now by such as were outwardly utter
strangers to their situation.

Second-day 25th. We were at Chester monthly meeting held at Providence, where,
in the meeting for worship, I had very searching service, yet dropping a word
of comfort and encouragement to an exercised seed among them. It was on the
whole a good meeting. 3d-day 26th, we had a good meeting at Springfield.
4th-day 27th, another at Middleton -- precious also, especially the last,
wherein Truth rose into dominion, and its doctrines were livingly and largely
opened; a sifting time spoken of -- better days or more reformed to succeed --
and a more general spreading of the truth among the nations.

Fifth-day 28th. We had a blessed meeting at Birmingham, where I had been twice
in this journey before, and quite closed up at both times, but was now highly
favored. Here dear Hugh Judge and James Robinson, who had been with me several
days, left me and returned home, my beloved friend William Jackson having met
me again at this meeting, in order to join me for some time longer.

Sixth-day 29th. We had another very precious meeting at Kennet; here I had
also been twice before under deep suffering, my tongue as it were cleaving to
the roof of my mouth; but it was now eminently loosed and Truth reigned
triumphant over all, blessed be the Lord. 7th-day 30th, we had a good meeting
at London-Grove, 1st-day 31st, we had two meetings, the first a sweet and
glorious one at Bradford, where I had been once before, and now doctrine and
advice flowed freely forth, to the great reaching and tendering of the people.
In the afternoon we had a very laborious time in silence at East-Caln where I
had before been twice; but blessed be the Lord who gave us the victory, Truth
at length did arise, and testimony and supplication were evidently felt to be
in that which lives for ever.

1787, 1st mo. 1st, and 2d of the week. -- We had an highly favored meeting at
Uwchlan, wherein Truth prevailed over all, as in several others of our late
eminently baptizing seasons. 3d-day, 1st mo. 2d, we had another favored
meeting at Goshen. The doctrines of Truth distilled as the dew, and dropped as
the gentle rain, to the refreshing of many a tender plant, and I trust to the
opening of many understandings. After the meeting at Goshen, we parted with our
dear friend Edith Sharpless, a living gospel minister, wife of Joshua
Sharpless, she having been with us at diverse of the last meetings; but my
friend William Jackson still continued with me.

Fourth-day 3d. We had a good meeting at Newtown, where I had been before in
silence. Fifth-day 4th, we had a meeting at Radnor, and 6th-day 5th, another at
Merion -- both heavy laborious seasons for some time; but Truth rose into some
dominion, especially in the last, which, on the whole, proved a good and
refreshing season, and ended in the savor of life: the other also ended well.
7th-day 6th, we rode to Philadelphia, and visited diverse families, rather in a
way of innocent sociability, to take our leave of them, expecting soon to
return homeward -- 1st-day 7th, we attended the meeting at Pine-Street, Bank
and Market-Street -- the first, after a time of close exercise, was a good
favored meeting -- the second very dull and painful; though a little life at
length arose, yet I did not get full relief among them -- the third a very
large crowded evening meeting -- and my mind was soon dipped into a close
engagement for their eternal welfare, with an opening to stand up, and I
believe I got through to the good satisfaction of my friends, and somewhat to
the relief of my own mind, as a parting opportunity with many beloved Friends.
Too many in this large city appear in want of true magnanimity in the cause of
Truth. My spirit mourns over them, with ardent wishes that they may lift up
their heads above the world and all its frowns, friendships and entanglements;
and rise into the liberty of the sons of God. May the young and rising
generation shun that rock, the spirit of the world, on which so many have been
shipwrecked. I am clear in it, that there is a precious seed among them, who,
if faithful, will shine forth in greater luster and purity, than many of those
who have gone before them. O Lord, I pray thee, hold them in thy holy hand.

Second-day 8th. We attended the select meeting, where I had some small
service: and after visiting about twenty families to take leave of them, I felt
clear of the city. 9th day of 1st mo. we left Philadelphia, and crossing the
Delaware into West-Jersey, had a meeting at Newtown: it was a painful and very
low time for a season, but ended to a good degree of consolation. Now having
left Philadelphia, I felt such a flow of love and affection toward many there,
as perhaps words are inadequate to the full expression of, with living cries to
the Lord to preserve them, and bring them on the way rejoicing, in the
footsteps of the flock of the faithful companions of Christ Jesus. 4th-day
10th, we had a good meeting at Haddonfield, but close and searching were we led
in testimony, as Truth opened and enabled. Here diverse beloved Friends from
Philadelphia came over and met us at this meeting. -- I was truly glad to see
them.

Fifth-day 11th. We had a meeting at Moores-town, which I am abundantly
convinced would have been more eminently favored, had not my imprudence
prevented; for I felt the arisings of life, and some fresh openings, but felt
with all, that the spirits of the prophets were subject to the prophets, and
that I could not get forward in my openings until some exercised mind or minds
were relieved of their burden; and being too hasty, and fearing a backwardness
would be given way to in some one or other to the hurt of the meeting, I stood
up and expressed how it was with me, as if, because I clearly felt the danger,
I must speak of it! thus I hurt the meeting myself! -- Oh! take heed when the
ark jostles, lest, putting forth thy hand in thine own time, like Uzza, thou
bring death over thy own soul! Great was my distress and humiliation; but the
Lord at length in mercy opened the way again, which had quite closed up on my
unguarded motion. Oh! his mercy endures for ever! how wonderful was his
goodness to Israel, that even when Moses provoked him at the rock, yet for
their sakes he caused the waters to gush forth from the flinty rock at the
smiting thereof. This meeting ended to good satisfaction, though marred by my
own activity and folly. Lord, correct me in mercy; bring down all in me that
can move without a motion from thee; and when thou have fully reduced me, then
in judgment remember mercy, that my soul may praise thee for ever. Here I
parted, in endeared affection, with Friends from Philadelphia, who now went
homeward; the rest we parted with yesterday.

Sixth-day 12th. -- We had a meeting at Upper-Evesham; after some time of
waiting, a little light sprang up, Truth reigned, and we had a baptizing season
together. 7th-day 13th, we had another at Lower-Evesham, to pretty good
satisfaction. 1st-day 14th, we attended fore and afternoon meeting at
Burlington, where, in the first, after a season, ability was given me to sound
a very pressing alarm to some among them, who I found were very much
unaccustomed to the yoke of Christ; which, together with a very open time
wherein I largely cleared my mind in the afternoon, made me quite easy to leave
the place, feeling clear of a burden I had long had to feel at times
respecting Burlington. -- Lord, rouse some there from their beds of ease, and
comfort the honest mourners among them.

Second-day 15th. -- We attended a meeting at Ancocas, appointed for our friend
Thomas Colly, from Old-England. He and my companion W. Jackson had good
service, Truth being in comfortable dominion after a time of close inward
travail; but I sat easy in silence. After meeting we returned to Burlington,
and on 3d-day the 16th, we rode to Stony-brook; thence on 4th-day the 17th, to
William Smith's near Rahway; and 5th-day 18th, were at Rahway monthly meeting;
and being under great weight of exercise in the meeting for worship, and way
not opening to relieve my mind, I requested another meeting, which was
concluded to be held next day. 6th-day 19th, we attended the abovementioned
appointed meeting at the same place; were shut up until time in common for
meeting to end, and feeling some small openness, I dropped some pretty close
hints.

Seventh-day 20th. -- I mourned and left them with a heavy heart, intending for
New York, but often looked back at Rahway, and could not see my way so clear to
go to New York as I wished; but it being homeward, I rode forward to
Elizabeth-Town Point, and there took boat for New York; but providence
prevented us; for soon after we put off, the large cakes of ice, floating with
the tide, shut us in for four hours, that the boatmen were very apprehensive
the boat would be crushed to pieces, and we perish; but my mind was inward and
staid on God, in the hollow of whose eternal hand and power I felt perfectly
safe and easy: faith and confidence in him and in his never-failing providence
were strong and quite unshaken. I had not the least doubt but the winds, waves
and all the elements, were entirely at his command; and though the poor men
kept crying out, the boat would be cut to pieces, and appeared in much anxiety,
I felt a perfect serenity, and had no doubt at all but way would be opened
through the ice, either forward or backward, as the Lord pleased; and I was
quite resigned to its being either way -- but at length, after long looking and
seeing no way, a way was opened, and we landed on the same shore, and rode
contentedly back to Rahway.

First Day 21st. -- We attended their fore and afternoon meetings. I had some
openings in the first, but feeling no command to speak, the opening closed up,
and I suffered among them in silence.

Second-day 22d. -- We had a meeting on Staten-Island, (where only one man
Friend and his family live) among other societies: this meeting was on my
companion W. Jackson's concern, and he had pretty good service among them. I
had only a few words. There is an ear in some there to hear the truth, and I
hope, in some degree, hearts to obey it. 3d-day 23d, we got to New York, and
4th-day 24th, were at their mid-week meeting: silent. 5th-day 25th, we went to
the select quarterly meeting at Westbury, where I was shut up, though William
had good service. 6th-day 26th, came on the quarterly meeting for worship and
discipline, and adjournment of the select meeting, in all which I felt no
strength to open my mouth. Dear William was in some degree favored in
supplication and testimony in the meeting for worship. 7th-day 27th, I being
clear of the parts, and about to return immediately home, we had a precious
parting opportunity at Fry Willis's, wherein I had a few words in much
tenderness to express, and dear William was much favored in fervent
supplication to the Lord for our preservation and persevering integrity to him,
who first gathered our souls to an acquaintance with himself. The presence of
the Most High was livingly felt, and reigned over all, to our unspeakable joy
and consolation, for words are inadequate to the full expression of it! --
magnified and adored for ever be the Lord our God.

Here I parted with my dear companion William Jackson. I have had to mourn in
this journey over the declension from primitive zeal, as also the great
departure from that commendable plainness, etc. which mine eyes have
sorrowfully beheld in some places, especially in Philadelphia, and from thence
too much spread in parts around them; yet the Lord has a chosen remnant there
-- may they ever love and live near him, and the others be brought home to the
fold of rest, and weaned from all their vanities. I rode this day, accompanied
by Jacob Willets, toward the east end of Long Island, and next day, being
1st-day 28th, we rode to Sterling, -- and 2d-day 29th, took boat, and landed in
the afternoon at Grotton in Connecticut, from hence, parting with Jacob, I rode
to Abiel Gardiner's in Stonington. 3d-day 30th, I reached East-Greenwich, and
1st mo. 31st, 1787, and 4th of the week, got well home; and to my joy and great
thankfulness of heart to the Lord, found my dear wife and family in pretty good
health, and much rejoiced to see and receive me again; and I thought we were
renewedly each others joy in the Lord.

I was out in this journey about six months and ten days, and traveled by
computation about two thousand miles.

CHAP. VIII. Trials and exercises he passed through. Exhortations. A prospect
of visiting the southern states. Preparatory exercises -- proceeds in the visit.
AFTER I got home from Pennsylvania, I traveled through many heights and
depths in my own mind, for about two years, and seemed to be the nearest losing
all faith and hope in God, that I ever remembered to have experienced. Oh! none
knows, but the Lord alone, the fullness of that bitterness of soul which I had
to endure! it was beyond all trials I ever had known, and through which I did
not always abide sufficiently on the watchtower, in strict patience,
resignation and confidence in him who never yet has failed me, when I have
rightly trusted in him; but when I have thrown aside my shield, and lost sight
of my armor; Oh, my soul, thou only art fully sensible of the darkness and
desolation into which thou have been plunged! -- but magnified over all, for
ever, be the great name of the Lord! he did not leave me, nor forsake me; but
after pouring out into my cup, large draughts of wormwood mingled with gall,
was graciously pleased (having thus reduced my soul, for the present at least,
to perfect resignation) to lift up the light of his countenance upon me, in a
mavelous and heart-consolating manner. Oh, thou traveller Sion-ward, whenever
thou art tried with a deep and inward sense of God's presence being withdrawn
from thee, have a care, yea, a reverential care on thy spirit, that thou cast
not away thy shield. It is indeed a great thing to keep the faith at such
seasons. -- Paul kept it, and had to rejoice in it, near his final, solemn
close -- I have fought a good fight -- I have kept the faith; 2 Timothy iv. 7.
but had he not kept the faith, he could not have fought the good fight, for it
is only in the faith, that any of our exercises can please God, or benefit our
own souls, or others -- all the willings, runnings and actings out of the true
and living faith, do but run us further from that state wherein alone our true
happiness and advancement consists; that state wherein 'God is all in all,' --
and this state we must come to, sooner or later, or we can never know the
fullness of the true christian life. -- Have a constant watchful care, O
exercised pilgrim, that thou seek not for ease before the Lord's time -- endure
the turnings of his hand upon thee; and if the enemy of thy soul present any
outward delight, or gratification of whatever kind; see that thou embrace not
his temptations, however pleasing, or artfully presented and insinuated -- the
very sting of death is in it, if thou yield unto it; and although thou may,
for thy trial and proving, be left almost destitute of all sense of good, and
have scarce a grain of faith remaining; yet though in this extremely depressed
situation, thou may be ready to believe it will be of little or no advantage
to strive any longer against sin; ready to say it is all in vain, and perhaps
ready to conclude in a dark moment, it will be no evil for thee to give way to
take a degree of delight in forbidden things; yet I warn thee, in the fear and
dread of the living God, touch not with the temptations of the seducer of
souls. Flee, flee for thy life! flee from sin as from a serpent: if thou
tamperest with it, though thou meanest not to yield, thou art in imminent
danger; and if thou listenest, thou may, contrary to thy intentions, go near
to the borders of destruction; and if thou should unhappily yield and
surrender, thy peace with God would be broken, and every evil thing that thus
gets in by consent, must (if ever thou know thy peace again restored) be
cast out, by thy suffering inexpressibly more than all the delight or enjoyment
which such a false gratification can possibly bring with it -- O, therefore,
stand firm, keep on the watchtower, resist unto blood, striving against sin,
and that in the faith, true and living faith, for it is that which gives the
victory; and though it seems almost gone, or appears as small as a grain of
mustard seed, yet if thou cast not away thy confidence, but art rightly engaged
to keep the faith, it will enable thee to 'fight the good fight,' and to say to
these mountains of opposition, temptation and besetment, be removed and cast
into the sea, and it shall be done. Matt. xxi. 21.
Remember Him who endured all Satan's allurements and temptations; who, though
he even fasted forty days in the wilderness, a state of desolation and trial,
yet he stood firm -- he ate nothing; he yielded not to any of the enemy's
proposals, but bravely repulsed him in them all. -- Sing, O ye heavens! -- he
overcame and led captivity captive. And after this dreadful conflict was over,
the holy angels ministered unto him. So it is, has been, and will be, with all
his, as they stand firm in the faith and patience of the saints; eating
nothing, taking in nothing of the enemy's alluring presentations. God's grace
ever was, and ever will be, sufficient for all these under every trial,
temptation and besetment. Let Satan rage, let his messenger, the thorn in the
flesh, (however operating -- in what way or thing soever insinuating) do its
worst; if the soul keeps on its armor and dwells in the patient watch and
warfare, the victory is certain, the holy promise cannot fail. Because thou
have kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of
temptation, that shall come upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon the
earth -- this is thy hour of trial -- the very hour and power of darkness --
but stand still and see the salvation of the Lord: Exodus xiv. 13.
let not in the temptation -- give not way to carnal reasonings, or
consultations with flesh and blood; and, however severe the combat, thou will
indeed be kept, and God will bruise Satan under thee, yea bruise his very head,
and make thee more than a conqueror. The angel of his holy presence will indeed
minister unto thee -- thou shall be greatly strengthened; and verily thou shall
be fed, and that with food convenient for thee. Thy joy shall be full, and no
man, nay nor evil spirit, shall be able to take it from thee, or to pluck thee
out of thy heavenly Father's hand. John x. 29.
O the unspeakable consolation, and fullness of divine confirmation, which my
poor soul has received after seasons of almost inexpressible conflict and
besetment, when I have abode in the true patience, kept the faith, and so
fought the good fight! -- Eye has not seen indeed, nor ear heard, nor the
heart conceived, while in a natural state, the joy and consolation which God
pours into the souls which love him, and, through all tribulations, keep the
word of his patience. O, there is abundant encouragement to stand firm through
all; yea even to press through every crowd of temptation to touch that which
has the healing, saving and preserving virtue in it. -- Trials thou will have,
this hour of temptation will indeed come upon all the world; none ever were
exempt from a season or seasons of probation and conflict -- and it is in order
'to try them that dwell upon the earth.'

O my God, thou have done much for my soul -- thou have redeemed me through
judgment, and brought me forth to see the light rejoicing -- be pleased, if it
be thy holy will, still to carry on thy work in me, until all that is offensive
to the purity of thy holiness be consumed -- until my will becomes wholly
conformable to thy will, even so amen!

1788. Having thus passed through some very trying seasons, the Lord was
pleased to lay it upon me to make a visit to Friends and others in the southern
states, to sympathize with the suffering seed, and endeavor, as ability might
be given, to stir up the pure mind in my fellow men, by persuading them to seek
an increasing acquaintance with God, the only source of all sure consolation.
This brought me under close trial, and at times I had many reasonings and
discouraging considerations, with fears about a subsistence for my family; for
although I could ever say in that respect, as well as in spiritual things,
'hitherto the Lord has helped us,' 1 Samuel vii. 12.
yet it often looked almost impossible to me that they should be in any
comfortable degree provided for if I gave up to be so much from home and out of
business; but the holy injunction was so often, so clearly repeated, that I
dare not refuse obedience to it. So after many and various conflicts, my soul
bowed before him in a view of his omnipotence, omniscience and unbounded
goodness, I was enabled to give up, and casting my care upon him, in regard
both to temporals and spirituals, I said in my heart, 'here am I, send me;'
Isai. vi. 8.
send me, O holy Father, wherever thou please, I refuse not to follow thee
into any corner of the earth -- only do thou but go with me and support me. My
life, my strength, and the length of my days, I devote to thy service -- my
family I resign to thy holy care and keeping -- to thee I dedicate them. O, may
thou watch over and preserve them!

At this surrender of all things, I felt the light of heaven to fill my soul;
it shined in me and round about me, above the brightness of the sun indeed, and
opened my prospects into distant nations, with some belief that the Lord was
opening a large field of labor for me in foreign countries, to be entered into
in his own due season. I said, 'good is thy will, O Lord! -- dispose of me, thy
unworthy servant, as thou please.'

So at a suitable season I opened my concern respecting a visit to the
southward, in a select meeting of ministers and elders, who expressed a good
degree of unity and clearness. After this, believing it best to remove my
family to my old home at North-Providence, and having done it accordingly, I
applied to the preparative meeting at Providence in order that my concern might
get regularly forward to the monthly meeting for a certificate. And having
obtained a certificate of the concurrence of the monthly meeting, it was
carried to the quarterly meeting in the first month 1789; and there the Lord
was pleased to fill my soul with strength, and gave utterance to my weight of
exercise and concern, to the greatly tendering of my own heart, and the hearts
of my brethren and sisters. I opened it both in the men's and women's meeting
-- and received a certificate of their concurrence with my concern: their near
sympathy with me under the exercise attending it, and their prayers for my
preservation through every baptism and trial that I might meet with. Being thus
furnished, and having early had a prospect of being at Philadelphia at the time
of the general spring meeting of ministers and elders to be held there in the
third month 1789, and still feeling bound to endeavor to be at that meeting, I
got ready, and my friend Daniel Aldrich having found a concern upon his mind to
accompany me, and obtained a certificate of concurrence of his friends, we set
forward on the journey the ninth of the third month 1789, having taken an
affectionate and heart-tendering farewell of my dear wife and family,
recommending them to the Lord for preservation, consolation and support, in
full confidence that he would not fail them if their trust continued firmly in
him. We rode several days, passing through the state of Connecticut without
meeting with any of our brethren, except a few in one place, after parting with
my dear father-in-law, my beloved brother-in-law Joseph Anthony, and our kind
young friend Obadiah Brown, who rode part of the first day with us. We met with
very kind treatment among the Presbyterians in Connecticut; and I had to
believe, from the state of mind which many of them appeared to be in, and from
the impression which I had among them, that a time would yet come when the
blessed Truth would have a much freer entrance, operation and acknowledgment
among that people than has yet been evident -- may the Lord hasten his great
work in the earth, and when and so far as he pleases, take unto him his great
power and reign throughout the kingdoms of men. We got to New York on 7th-day,
the 14th of the month, and staid their fore and afternoon meetings on
first day, but were quite shut up therein. Next day went to Rahway in
New Jersey, and so on to Philadelphia, where we arrived on 6th-day the 20th, at
evening, having attended a little meeting by the way at Bordentown in Jersey,
and also the quarterly meeting at Haddonfield. Here the Lord favored us with
his presence, and opened our way to considerable service.

7th-day 21st -- Began the general spring meeting of ministers and elders at
Philadelphia. Truth mercifully owned our solemnity, and wonderfully favored in
the several sittings of the select meeting -- the several meetings for public
worship -- as also in the three monthly meetings in the city, which came on in
course after the general meeting concluded.

We left Philadelphia on 6th-day the 27th, and were next day at a select
meeting at Wilmington, and on 1st and 2d days, at their general meeting for
worship there, where Truth gave us the victory, and afforded ability to exalt
the precious testimony thereof, though through deep sufferings in spirit. After
this we had meetings at Christiana-Bridge, and the Head of Elk, among people
mostly not of our society. But though I felt a strong opposition in some at the
last place, yet Truth gave the victory at both these meetings, the last being
eminently owned by the overshadowing of divine life, in the power and
demonstration whereof the everlasting gospel was preached among them -- may it
fasten as a nail in a sure place.

Fourth mo. 2d, being 5th day of the week, we tried to get to the monthly
meeting at Deer Creek, but could not get over the river Susquehanna until too
late to reach meeting seasonably; but we found we had a service among several
young Friends near the river. After we had cleared our minds to them, the way
soon opened for us to cross the river: so we had a meeting next day at Deer
Creek, in which I was quite closed up.

7th, 1st and 2d days -- We had meetings at the Fawn, Bush River, and Little
Falls. 3d, 4th and 5th, we were at Gunpowder, Patapsco Forest, and Baltimore:
mostly shut up. We staid at Baltimore until after their two meetings on
first day; were shut up, yet favored with faith and patience. On 3d-day the
14th, we had a meeting at Elk Ridge; were shut up, except the expression of a
few words. 4th-day we were at their preparative meeting at Sandy-Spring, a
blessed and highly favored time -- very open; diverse attended the meeting for
worship who were not Friends. Truth's doctrines flowed freely and largely among
them, I trust in a good degree of the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit.

Fifth-day, we attended a preparative meeting at Indian-Spring, and a select
meeting after it, each exercising, though we got a little relief through
attention to that which enabled to labor honestly as ability was afforded.

Sixth-day 17th. Were at their monthly meeting there, before which, in the
morning, we were at the adjournment of their select meeting: it was indeed a
day not to be forgotten, I trust by us, nor by many of them who were present.
In the select meeting truth very unexpectedly opened some important and
instructive (though to the natural man mysterious) doctrines clearly to the
understanding of my mind; and the power of the word of life accompanying, I
opened them, so far as required, to the meeting, to the great relief of my own
mind. The meeting for public worship was eminently owned by the overshadowings
of divine love, under which covering, utterance was largely given, and the
doctrines of the gospel were opened and promulgated this day, to the reaching
and tendering many minds, if not most present -- the doctrine of God's free and
universal grace, and its entire sufficiency for the salvation of all, being
especially illustrated, and at the same time that the work of salvation goes no
further forward in us than we yield to, join in, and cooperate with this
blessed principle.

In the meeting for church discipline, we had large opportunity in the fresh
extendings of gospel love, to clear our minds to both brethren and sisters,
both parents and children, on diverse important branches of our religious
testimony. Our souls were comforted, and the living among them rejoiced with
us. Things are low in this land; but yet we were witnesses that a remnant are
on the right foundation, and engaged to promote the right thing, and we had a
hope that the number would increase, and that a revival might take place in
these parts.

Seventh-day, we rode to a place called the Clifts. This night, as I lay awake
in bed, I was almost overcome with the fresh extendings of the love and
goodness of God to my soul, and seemed swallowed up in the inshinings of his
luminous and glorious presence. In this almost extatic enjoyment, my soul bowed
in awfulness and reverence before him, and the whole man was renewedly offered
up to his service, to be disposed of as he pleased: and after thus continuing
for some time, subjectly given up to his holy will, witnessing his glory to
rest upon me as a royal diadem, and receiving some sweet manifestations or
confirmations of his fatherly care having been day and night extended to and
over me from my youth, for my preservation and advancement in the way of life
and salvation, it pleased his infinite majesty to condescend once more (as at
some few gracious, solemn and peculiar seasons in the course of my pilgrimage
before) as it were to set open the windows of heaven, and spread before the
view of my mind the excellency and glory thereof; and (which above all rejoiced
my soul) he also set open the arms of his mercy; showing me and giving me
feelingly to know that although, at many times in the course of my life, I had
not so kept under a sense of his preserving influence as to shun the snares of
the enemy, but had sometimes been entangled in them, yet there was nothing
retained against me, but that all was freely remitted and washed away in the
blood of the Lamb; and that if I henceforth stood firm in obedience to him, and
in the promotion of his cause, as ability was given, I should reign with him in
glory, world without end. I found myself clothed inwardly as it were with white
linen! I saw that my garments had in days past been much defiled, but were now
washed and made clean. I saw that I had indeed come thus far 'through great
tribulation,' and that, had I not submitted thereto, I must have remained
'filthy still.' My very soul bowed in deepest prostration before the throne of
God -- my cry ascended for future preservation -- and I vowed continued
obedience through his help to the end of my stay here in this vale of tears. My
heart was lifted up in songs of praise for the wonders of his love to me-ward;
and I had to contemplate and adore the unmerited kindness and goodness of his
gracious dealings with me -- I could say he had plucked my feet out of the mire
and clay, and set them upon a rock, in good degree established my goings, and
put a 'new song in my mouth, even praises to my God.' O Lord, hold me fast for
ever -- keep my soul alive to the end -- make of me, and do with me what and as
thou please -- I am thine; this is my rejoicing: I wish ever to remain thine;
and if ever my own will, my own corrupt inclinations, presume to rend me from
thee, O, my gracious Father, be thou pleased to interpose, and to lift a
standard against all that may rise up against me for evil. -- I dare not depend
on my own strength or resolutions, but must look unto thee to strengthen me in
weakness, and to make effectual my strivings, wrestlings and resolutions
against sin. I commit myself wholly to thy care and keeping -- be thou my light
and my leader, and hold me in thy holy hand for ever. Amen.

Next day we had a glorious meeting at this place, at Friends meeting house,
but mostly among such as were not Friends, many of them called Methodists, a
people that abound in this land, and some of their hearts have been touched
with a live coal from the holy altar; but they seem very unsettled, many having
hurried forward into much religious activity, being very noisy, talkative, and
almost, if not quite ranting; yet I hope some of them will come to a settlement
in the truth; but expect many will run quite out, and finally shake off their
religious exercise, this being the natural consequence of making haste into
religious performances without the pure leadings of truth therein. My heart and
mouth were largely opened among them in this and diverse other meetings -- and
this day, in a special manner, the streams of life flowed plentifully and
sweetly, to my great satisfaction and comfort, and to the refreshment of many
minds -- glory to God, who has hitherto helped us! we can do nothing without
his help, but can do all things required of us through his strengthening
influence in and upon us.

2d and 3d of the week. We had precious meetings at Herring-Creek and
Bush-River, mostly among other people, as Methodists, etc. though at Friends
meeting houses; for Friends at these places are few in number; there used to be
many valuable Friends belonging to these meetings. We were very clear in our
judgment, that Friends, having kept such numbers of slaves, did much contribute
to the ruin of their posterity: for the poor negroes were put to do nearly all
the work, while the children of Friends were brought up in pride, fullness of
bread, and abundance of idleness, Ezekiel xvi. 49.
riding about for pleasure, living at ease and in fullness: this was productive
of many evils, and opened a wide door for unprofitable and pernicious intimacy
with hurtful company, until, alas, the youth in some particular places are
almost all departed from the way of truth, and an almost total desolation
reigns in some places in this land. Oh the mischiefs of idleness and
oppression! -- may it be the special care of all religious people strictly to
bring up their children to some honest, industrious and useful employment: I
believe Truth requires it; that a blessing attends it; and that much evil is
prevented by it. My spirit deeply mourns over the sorrowful and dangerous
situation of such who have, as they say, nothing to do -- believing they will
almost certainly 'soon learn to do evil.'

Next day, my companion being unwell, we kept house; and the day following rode
near half the day toward Alexandria, where we staid until first day the 26th,
and were at the fore and afternoon meeting; to both which came many of the
towns people, Methodists, Baptists, Presbyterians, etc. and the Lord was
graciously pleased to give us a good time in both meetings, especially the
last, wherein Truth reigned over all -- blessed be the name of the Lord. This
was the first place we were at meeting in Virginia. Next day we rode forty-five
miles to Stafford, and had a very dull meeting there the day following; it was
silent, except a few words at the close, which I felt easy to drop with my hat
on, informing that the life was so low, and the springs so shut up, that I had
not dared to attempt any thing under pretense of preaching the gospel; but that
I felt a particular freedom to mention something that had turned in my mind to
those not of our society: I told them, a minister of the gospel had nothing of
his own to offer to the people; his whole dependence is on Christ; he must
speak as the oracle of God, and only in the ability that God gives; therefore
is under an absolute necessity to keep silence, unless immediately commissioned
and abilitated from God -- that, for their sakes, through the flowings of the
love which I felt to them, I had rather desired as a creature, that the way
might be opened for communication; but that I found a slow of love and
good will was not a sufficient qualification to preach the gospel -- mentioning
that Readiness forcing himself and offering, through a fear that the people would
be scattered abroad, displeased the Lord, and Samuel his prophet -- that,
therefore I had not dared to attempt to preach the gospel among them, knowing
who it was that said, such as kindle a fire and warm themselves by the sparks
of their own kindling, shall lie down in sorrow.

My beloved companion having been unwell more or less most of the time for
several weeks, now grew worse, so that we were under the necessity to tarry
here at the house of our friend Robert Painter several days; during which time
my said companion came to a conclusion to leave me and return homeward, as he
and I both very much doubted his being able to go through the journey. This was
indeed a trial to me in my deeply exercised state of mind, and gladly could I
have turned with him, but could find no peace of mind in looking that way. So
on 6th-day the 1st of the 5th month, he being a little mended, and feeling easy
in his mind to go homeward, and I not daring to urge him forward, we parted in
much brotherly nearness and affection, having traveled together in true gospel
love and harmony -- he with a pilot or rather a guide, going for Alexandria,
and I with another, rode to a place in Culpepper called Southland meeting,
crossing the river Rapahannock in our way. This was indeed a day of deep
anguish to my soul; I felt unusually disconsolate, and could not refrain from
almost excessive weeping: my heart seemed ready to break, for I was not only
left in a strange land almost without a sympathizing friend, but was inwardly
very much stripped; yet I was favored to be in a good degree resigned under
all, and my cry was fervently to the God of all consolation, that he would keep
me steadfastly given up to do and suffer whatever he in wisdom saw best for me.

Next day had a silent meeting here, except a few words of information after
meeting broke up, or as we parted. The day following, being the first of the
week and 3d of the 5th month, I was at Caroline meeting, silent here also, and
more painful and distressing than any I had been at in this journey before. I
remembered the account of Christ's agony, his sweating as it were drops of
blood, and crying out to his heavenly Father, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me! Matt. xxvii. 46.
I saw the propriety of his passing through this trying scene: and I believed
it necessary for me to go through that portion of sufferings assigned me: and
though he passed through his for our sakes, he being experimentally touched
with a feeling of our infirmities and sufferings -- not but that his
Omniscience as God could see and behold it all without feeling it in a body of
flesh; but as the brethren were partakers of flesh and blood, he willingly took
part of the same, and in ail the sufferings incident to the brethren in this
life, and therein to set us an example of faith, patience and perseverance
through all; and that he might both feel and manifest this resignation in the
most conspicuous manner possible, he was so far stripped as to feel as if he
was forsaken; yet even in this extremity, though as man, he was ready to wish
the cup to pass from him, yet he centred in -- not my will, but thine be done.
Luke xxii. 42.
I saw that there was no way for me to get rightly along, but through the like
submission; and this afternoon every painful impression was removed, and the
light of life shined into my soul with unclouded clearness; I was set at
liberty, and judgment was indeed brought forth unto victory.

Second-day 4th. Had a meeting at Cedar Creek -- not painful, nor yet had I
much enjoyment; but was quite shut up as to words in the ministry; yet had an
engagement to inform the people, at the conclusion of the meeting, of the
sorrow I often had felt, on account of the gross darkness which yet prevails in
regard to what is called preaching the gospel, many engaging therein without
divine authority and influence, who consequently cannot profit the people.

Third-day 5th. Had a meeting at Genito, and one next day at Richmond, among
people mostly not of our society; these were both blessed meetings; Truth's
doctrines were largely opened to my relief, and I trust to the refreshment of
diverse others. 5th-day 7th, had a meeting at the Swamp, and one next day at
Black-Creek, another the day following at Curles -- all dull and almost
lifeless; yet I labored a little in the ministry in all of them in a low
depressed manner, and in the last, though dull in the fore part, yet through an
honest attention, in lowliness and deliberation, to a small motion, I found
much relief. Blessed be the Lord who kept me humble, and careful in utterance.
For I am well satisfied, that if I had presumed with so small a motion to have
risen into much strength of utterance hastily, I should have dried up that
little spring of life which I felt, and so run into a flow of words, to my own
sorrow in the end, and to the preventing that benefit which I hope some
received. And here I have seen that many, who have a real gift in the ministry,
do sometimes greatly hurt themselves, their services and the people, for not
lying low enough, nor taking care enough, to find the safe stepping stones,
from step to step, they run out of the little, though lively gift, into an
hasty elevation of words; not indeed without very considerable degree of warmth
and animation.

First Day 10th. I was at Wayne-Oak meeting, it was dull; yet I did near the
close say something by way of ministry, which afforded me a little relief. I
was hereby renewedly assured that the gospel cannot be preached, but when the
Lord opens the real spring of life in the preacher, I rode after this meeting
ten miles toward another meeting place, expecting to go on thither next day in
order for a meeting; but my way seemed so shut up next morning, that I durst
not proceed; and withal was almost too much unwell to continue riding; yet had
the way been open, I believe I should have gone forward; but believing it
unsafe, both for myself and Friends, to appoint meetings without a sense of
Truth's direction and assistance, I returned to my friend John Crew's at
Wayne-Oak.

On second-day I was reduced to a very destitute condition, wherein all my
former experience seemed to afford little or no satisfaction. This season of
stripping had been coming upon me for several days, and continued for some time
after. But I have not the least expectation of being able, by words or writing,
ever to convey a clear and adequate idea of the darkness, desolation and
distress attending this dispensation, to any who have not in degree experienced
it: those who have may, if they should read these lines when I am in another
state of existence, feel a lively sensibility hereof -- feel as one a little
before them has felt, deeply abased, exercised and heavy laden; like to what
their poor souls may have yet for a season at times to groan under -- and if it
please God to bless this present relation to the benefit of any of his drooping
children, I grudge not my having passed through the sore conflict, nor my pains
in preserving these memoirs of my exercised life.

Third-day 12th -- I attended the weekday meeting of Friends here at
Wayne-Oak, as it came in course -- it was very small -- I was much stripped,
nor had I ability to say any thing in the meeting until near the close of it,
feeling to myself one of the most unworthy creatures; yet after all this I was
made to rejoice, and for this very abasement and reduction of mind; and this
rejoicing increased until I had to express a little of it in the meeting, much
to the tendering a few brokenhearted friends present, though I could not rise
into more life than just in weakness to utter a few expressions; yet therewith
felt easy; but concluded, as I had the day before, that if way did not open
with more clearness for the continuance of my journey after the yearly meeting
then soon coming on at this place, I might return home: fully believing that he
who called me forth into his service in this land, would open the way with
clearness to proceed so far as his will was for me to go; and that as he would
not withhold the necessary openings, I might safely, after waiting a proper
time without obtaining any manifestations to the contrary, return to my family;
yet remained given up to go forward if he should open the way for it.

Fifth-day 14th, In silence and inward poverty I attended the select quarterly
meeting of ministers and elders at White-oak Swamp, and next day the public
quarterly meeting here; out of weakness I was made strong, and many with my own
soul rejoiced in the Lord. 7th-day 16th, began the select yearly meeting, and
this day was held the meeting for sufferings also. Next day two large meetings
for worship, and one the day following; then the church discipline in the
afternoon, and by adjournments until 4th-day the 20th. The meetings for worship
were livingly favored times; those for discipline, for want of deep dwelling
in the life; and more engagement for good order, were not so lively, yet Truth
owned the faithful labors of a remnant, and life sprang up at times to their
refreshment. The meeting for sufferings was also favored: it appeared that the
members thereof had been, and with some success, engaged in support of the
rights of the injured Africans, at which my soul rejoiced; for many of them
groan in cruel bondage in this land. But I believe the Lord will more and more
arise for their deliverance, and work their emancipation; and that through
judgments poured out upon their oppressors, if the hard hearts of those who
make them groan are not softened by milder means. I used among Friends here a
plain honest gospel freedom, which gave me great relief, and tendered many of
their hearts. So after supplication and thanksgiving to God, this yearly
meeting concluded under a fresh sense of his divine goodness.

Fifth-day 21st -- Had a meeting here with the negroes, and though silent
myself, yet my dear friend John Lloyd, from Pennsylvania, had good service
therein. Next day we had a meeting at Tyrees, wherein I was closed up, but my
friend had a pretty open time. -- 7th-day 23d, was at Skemins; and first day
24th, we had a small meeting at Williamsburgh, a town where no Friends live. I
had little to say in these meetings. It is to the poor the gospel is preached
-- even Jesus did not many mighty works in some places because of their
unbelief. It remains true to this day, that unbelief and hardness of heart
shuts out the gospel, or prevents a free entrance thereof among such as have
not a sense of their own necessities, but think themselves rich, full, and to
have need of nothing -- for the word preached cannot profit unless it be mixed
with faith in them that hear it. No wonder therefore that those who run when
the Lord has not sent them, and continue preaching to the people without
feeling, or evidently finding a door of entrance into their hearts, do not
profit them by all their long, laborious and creaturely exercises among them --
for nothing gathers to God but what proceeds from him.

On second-day the 25th. we had a meeting among the Methodists at New-Kent. J.
L. had a little testimony among them; I was quite shut up; yet after meeting
broke up I endeavored to impress them with a sense of the utter uselessness of
all preaching, however much it may warm and move upon the passions, except that
which is from a real spring of divine life in the speaker. -- 3d-day 26th, went
to Wayne-Oak, and 5th-day 28th, I attended Curles meeting; it seemed almost
without light or life until the latter part, when a gleam of true light
appeared; by keeping to which, though in great weakness, victory was obtained,
and the meeting ended to comfort and rejoicing -- though we found it for a long
time almost impossible to sing a song of Sion in a land where the harp was hung
on the willow! for it was truly mournful to see the city sit solitary that was
full of people. Lam. i. 1.
Truth had once prospered here, but now the posterity of faithful Friends were
nearly all carried away captive -- but a little gleam of hope arose in my mind
that there would be a revival in this place.

My way opening with more clearness, I got along with much satisfaction and
fullness of divine joy, having diverse large and blessed meetings -- one at a
Friend's house a few miles from Petersburgh over James River, one at
Gravelly-Run, one at Burleigh, and another at Seacock. -- After that at
Burleigh, we had a good watering time in the evening, at a Friend's house,
among black people and some others, besides a few Friends. Truth reigned over
all in this blessed meeting -- the poor negroes blessing God in accents
bespeaking heartfelt reverence, and deep thankfulness of soul, for this
favored season; one of them in particular, saying, 'O may I ever bless and
praise my great God, for the great good he has this evening done my soul! for
the sweet precious love that I have felt -- I never felt such heavenly love
before -- blessed for ever be the great God!' -- my heart was much affected at
the feeling sensibility which this, and several more of the poor blacks
discovered in their way, of returning thanks to God, both in the evening, and
again next morning; for they seemed full of songs of praise, even in the
morning, for the evening's precious favor -- may the Lord Almighty hold them
in his hand for ever, and may my soul never forget the descendings of heavenly
rain upon and among us at that comfortable season -- for which his holy name be
praised for ever. Amen! And I am renewedly confirmed, that there is a real work
of divine power among many in this land, both white and black; though yet much
unsettled -- may they be brought to witness a greater degree of clearness and
establishment in the everlasting truth!

After these we had meetings at Black-Water, Stanton's, Vick's, Black-Creek,
Johnson's and Summerton -- In the two first of these I was silent; but believe
they were all times of renewing of strength to some who attended them. The
doctrines of the gospel were livingly proclaimed in the authority of truth,
dear John Lloyd's way being opened. -- Next we had a glorious meeting at the
western branch the 9th of the sixth month, wherein there seemed to be no lack
of openness, power and utterance; many were deeply affected, bowed and tendered
-- blessed be the Lord for ever! 10th, we had two dull meetings at Bennet's
Creek, J. L. in the first, and I in the last, got some relief, through a little
honest labor in great weakness among them, 5th-day 11th, we had a
strengthening and refreshing meeting at the widow Bufkin's, where a meeting is
held once a month. I had a good open time -- the doctrines of the gospel were
largely opened, with strength and clearness, to the tendering of many minds.

6th, 7th and 1st days, we had meetings at Norfolk, Portsmouth and Suffolk,
places where no Friends live, except one small family, and a young man in
Suffolk -- the first and last of these meetings were held at the court-houses;
that at Portsmouth in an upper room in the market-house. The people at Norfolk
behaved undevoutly at meeting, kept running out, talking whispering, laughing,
gazing about, etc. I reproved them for their incivility, telling them, that the
most mournful consideration of my mind respecting their behavior, was the
great inexperience of the realities of religion, and the great unacquaintance
with the nature and importance of divine worship, which their conduct had
sorrowfully manifested: and so enlarging a little upon the subject of worship;
and that God, even a present God, is the object thereof, and not any man --
that God, to be worshipped aright, must be felt after, known and reverenced;
with a little more on some other subjects. We left them with heavy hearts,
finding very little open door of utterance, because there was scarce any door
of entrance into their hearts, except in a few; and yet I had a secret hope,
and some belief, that that day's work would not be altogether in vain.

The meetings at Portsmouth and Suffolk were heavenly watering seasons, wherein
Truth reigned over all. Many minds were much reached and tendered, and a
general solemnity was very prevalent. The Lord has a visited seed in this land
up and down in many places. O that they may come to know a greater stability
and settlement. After the meeting at Suffolk on first day, we had a parting
opportunity with many Friends, who attended from different parts of the country
around. This was a most melting and reviving season. The everlasting Arm was
marvellously magnified and made bare! the holy name was livingly exalted and
praised; the souls of the mourners were eminently comforted; and the lukewarm
powerfully warned -- blessed be the name of the Lord for ever and ever, for his
goodness to my poor soul at this precious season -- may I never forget that
fullness of divine light and life, that overflowing cup of sweetness and
consolation, wherewith he enriched my mind in that ever memorable day.

After this heavenly banquet, I parted with my dear friend John Lloyd, who had
for several weeks been agreeably my companion, and with the rest of my friends
of Virginia now present, and set out for North Carolina, accompanied by Robert
Jordan and wife, where I arrived next day at the house of our kind friend
Thomas Newbey. In the course of the six following days, I had or was at eight
meetings at Perquimons and Pascotank counties, at Friends meeting houses, as
follows, viz. 3d-day, 16th of the month, at that called Wellses meeting house.
4th-day, Old Neck -- and in the afternoon at Sutton's Creek. 5th-day, at Little
River. 6th-day, at New-begun Creek -- and in the afternoon at the Narrows of
Pascotank. Seventh-day, monthly meeting at Simmons's Creek -- and 1st-day, at
the Piney-Woods. -- These were all favored open seasons, except that at
Sutton's Creek, and that at the Narrows; in both which I was quite shut up,
save in that at the Narrows I did express a few words at the breaking up of the
meeting, respecting the nature of gospel ministry; as that it never was in
man's power, merely as man, to preach the gospel, etc. Oh! how I then mourned,
and often have mourned, to see the eager expectations of the people so widely
misplaced on the creature instead of the Creator: and this is undeniably the
case with all who expect man to preach to them without divine assistance; for
man is but the creature, and unless immediately filled and qualified with
divine light, life and power, is as destitute of any ability livingly and
profitably to preach that gospel which is the real power of God unto salvation,
as he is of power to cause the outward rain to descend from heaven.

In several of the foregoing meetings Truth eminently favored us together --
the gospel was preached in the life and authority thereof -- many minds were
strengthened and encouraged, and the great name was magnified and praised.
After this I went to Rich-square, and on 4th-day the 24th, was at their meeting
there, where Truth opened the way with strength and clearness to edification
and rejoicing. Next day went to Jack-Swamp, and being joined by my dear friend
James Ladd, from Wayne-Oak in Virginia, who came with a certificate to
accompany me a while in this journey, we had a meeting on 6th-day at this
place: it was an open, good time, Truth was freely declared, and many minds
reached and tendered. 7th-day 27th, we had a blessed meeting at Hallifax, a
small town where there are none of our society. The gospel power was eminently
felt, and, in the evidence and demonstration thereof, the free grace of God to
all men, the necessity of working out our own salvation through the assistance
thereof, and several other important gospel truths were livingly and largely
opened. Next day we had a meeting at Stony-Creek, or Tar-River, as it is
sometimes called. From thence we rode to Contentney, and, first of 7th mo.
attended the preparative meeting of Friends there -- a dull time it was, and
but little openness for gospel communication. After meeting, and the two next
days, we rode to a place called Core-sound; and, on 7th-day attended a monthly
meeting there; it was a low time, yet way opened for Truth's testimony to be in
some degree exalted. Next day we were at their select and public meeting --
the public meeting was eminently overshadowed with divine favor, and made to
be a time of blessed visitation to many souls; praised be the name of the Lord.

Second-day 6th. We had an exercising meeting at Clubfoot-Creek; there was some
openness, so that considerable labor was bestowed, but not to much relief or
satisfaction of our minds -- which was pretty much the case next day also, at a
meeting we had at Newborn. In this town there are no Friends, and the people's
minds very light and unstayed, that it was painful to behold the airiness and
irreverence which prevailed in too many. They got a gentle reproof, and we left
them in sorrow as to our minds, though but little or no true sorrow appeared in
them.

Fourth-day 8th. We had a very heavenly meeting at Friends meeting place on
Trent; and another next day about twenty miles further up the river Trent, at a
place where a meeting was lately settled. Friends appeared pretty well engaged
at these two places, and I hope an increase will be witnessed among them.
7th-day 11th, we attended the monthly meeting at Contentney -- a trying time it
was to my mind; but way opened, after long suffering in silence, to clear my
mind in some good degree. Next day we were at the first day meeting at the same
place -- silent. 3d, 4th and 5th days, we were at meetings at Nues, Bear-Creek
and Turner's Swamp -- all trying times. In the first, the weight I felt seemed
almost insupportable, but at length way opened, and an extraordinary time we
had; diverse states were remarkably opened and spoken to in Truth's searching
authority, and yet with that sympathetic, persuasive energy, that it made way
into almost every heart. It was a tendering time, but, alas! the next day was a
time of difficulty, as well as distress, and no way opened to get much relief
by communication, though I could not well avoid dropping some close expressions
or alarming hints, but I saw little or no prospect of much advantage from them
to those to whom they belonged: they seemed like those who had ears to hear,
but heard not, or as if they had shut their ears, and hardened their hearts. I
felt for them with a heart full of sorrow. The last meeting was more
comfortable, though I was quite shut up. My dear friend James Ladd bore a
lively well-adapted testimony, in which I rejoiced, and found relief of mind.

Sixth-day, I rested at my friend Benjamin Arnold's, being unwell. He and his
wife were very kind, both being well-engaged Friends: the fruits of whose godly
parental care and authority very plainly and agreeably appeared in the
behavior and appearance of their well-ordered offspring. Oh, much lies at
parents doors! much may they do, through divine aid, for their children's good,
by proper, constant care, watchfulness, advice, reproof, restraint, correction
and commands; all in Truth's authority, as occasion requires; and that not
generally so much in the austerity and rigor of compulsory discipline, as in
the meekness and authority of the Lamb, which seldom fails of reaching the
witness in their minds, and more or less to bring them under the government of
Truth. O that many, very many parents now too much at ease, may be aroused to a
due consideration of the trust reposed in them, and see to the discharge of
their duty to the precious souls under their care. Oh, see to it, parents, I
beseech you, for your own and their precious souls sakes! see to it in season,
and unremittingly; great is the care that is necessary, constant the watch that
ought to be maintained. These remarks arose not wholly from the agreeable
prospects I had in and of this family, but have been on my mind for some time,
under a deep and painful sense of deficiency of care among parents very
generally. However, I rejoice in believing, that notwithstanding the so general
neglect, there are many deeply exercised parents who endeavor honestly to
discharge their duty in the sight of God, and I have no doubt but they will
have a rich reward, and many of the dear youth will be greatly benefited
thereby -- that these may be encouraged, and their number greatly increased, is
the fervent wish and prayer of my soul.

7th-day 18th. We were at the select quarterly meeting at Contentney -- next
day at the public meeting there -- and were shut up in silence in both, except
a few words in great depression in the select meeting. -- On 2d-day came on the
business of the quarterly meeting; we were still shut up in silence, until near
the close of the business, when my way unexpectedly opened in a great degree to
clear my mind among them -- though I had an opening in the beginning of this
sitting, and stood up in the opening, expecting to have had utterance therein;
but as I carefully attended to the spring and word of life, I found the
brightness of the opening gradually faded, until all was gone -- so I sat down
without uttering a word, after having stood as a gazing stock among them
perhaps several minutes. I trust some real benefit resulted therefrom, to some
who were too near always ready, as well as to my own soul, in keeping me
subjectly given up to follow faithfully, however greatly in the cross, the
motions, openings and shuttings of life. -- After this we set out for Eno, it
being two days ride, besides what we rode this afternoon.

Fifth-day 23d. We had a good open meeting there, and another on 7th-day at
Spring meeting -- this was painfully exercising, under a sense of backsliding
in too many; but Truth at last reigned over all, to the melting of many hearts!
-- Next day at Cane-Creek -- here again we were filled with mourning and
heaviness, under a sense of unfaithfulness, and consequent dwarfishness; but
after long silence, divine wisdom opened the way! just as I was thinking it
near time to conclude the meeting; and in a close, short, lively manner, we
were enabled to place the burden of our exercise where it belonged, and so
came away rejoicing in God. On the four following days we had four blessed
meetings at Rocky-River, Nathan Dixon's, Piney-Grove and Holly-Spring. Truth
triumphed in these meetings -- its doctrines flowed like oil! the universality
and entire sufficiency of God's grace for the salvation of all, if attended to,
was opened and declared with divine authority; and many minds impressed
therewith. -- Oh my God! thou have given me to see the wonders of thy ways, in
degree, and the strength of thine Arm! thou have led me through the deeps! have
bowed my soul in the deepest prostration! stripped me and emptied me of all
things, and then marvellously displayed, both thy wisdom, thy goodness and thy
power! In lifting me up again from the dust, thou have given me indeed, beauty
for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, and the garment of praise, for the
spirit of heaviness. Isai. lxi. 3.
-- Thou art my God, and through thy aid I will serve thee for ever -- be thou
with me -- go before me and I will follow thee -- for in thy presence there is
life -- at thy right hand a river of pleasure -- therefore to whom could I wish
to go, seeing I know, to my inexpressible consolation, that thou have the words
of eternal life? -- Thou have graciously redeemed my soul, and delivered me as
it were from the den of lions -- to thee, and to thy service, I therefore once
more dedicate the remainder of my days. Draw me and I will run after thee --
command me and I will obey. -- I fear to offend thee, for thou have shown me
thy purity -- I adore thee, for thou have wrought wonders for my soul. -- I
love thee, for thou art my life. -- Hold me fast, O Lord for ever -- keep my
heart clean, by the word of thy power, and never, O never, I pray thee, suffer
my foot to slide! -- continue to fill me with the joy of thy salvation, since
thou have so continually shown it unto me -- Take not thy holy spirit from me
-- guide me by the right hand of thy power -- continue to my soul, the
quickening efficacy of the live coal from thine altar; then will I, at thy
bidding, teach transgressors thy way, and sinners, through the operation of thy
baptizing spirit, shall be converted to thee -- Even so, O Lord, hasten thou
thy great work in the earth -- draw thousands by the cords of thy love, and
tens of thousands by a clear discovery of, and a living desire after, a full
establishment in the beauty of holiness -- till the nations come to serve thee,
and the kingdoms of the earth to bow before thy throne -- till righteousness
cover the earth as waters do the sea -- and light and life reign triumphant
over death and darkness, for ever.

Seventh-day, 1st of 8th mo. we attended the monthly meeting at Cane-Creek, and
next day the public first day meeting there, and their select meeting -- all
these were times of favor and divine openness. The five following days we had
meetings at Sandy-Creek, Providence, Center, Back-Creek, and Marlborough -- the
first was a dull meeting until near the close, when life broke through all
opposition, so that the meeting ended to solid satisfaction -- The next meeting
was also dull, -- the three last were open favored times of refreshment to
many. After these meetings we attended, on 7th-day, the 8th of the 8th month,
the select quarterly meeting at Center; and an open instructive season it was,
as was the large public meeting on first day; Truth's doctrines flowed like
oil, and things were opened in divine authority in both meetings, I trust
suitably to the state of each. Next day the public meeting was very large,
still and solemn, and Truth favored our souls with a baptizing and refreshing
time together. On 3d-day 11th, we had a good meeting, open, and powerfully
tendering to the minds of the people in general, at the widow Hoover's, a
member of our society -- Truth reigned powerfully over all -- blessed be the
holy name of the Lord for ever.

On fifth-day 13th, we had a meeting at Chatham courthouse; but it being
court-time, we could not get the courthouse until between three and four
o'clock in the afternoon, by which time too many of the people appeared to be
so affected with strong drink, as to leave little room in their minds to be
seriously affected with any thing of a religious nature; so that we had a
painful dull time among them -- however, some were attentive and strove to
quiet the rest: and way did open, after a close exercise, for a little
communication, to some solid satisfaction; but our cause for mourning over them
seemed much greater than our cause for joy. 1st-day 16th, we had a dull
distressing meeting at a Friend's house between Chatham and Peedee; we were
shut up in silence. Next day the 2d of the week and 17th of the month, we had a
heavenly, open meeting at Peedee -- blessed be the Lord who helped us! On
5th-day 20th, we had a very small, yet precious meeting at Camden,
South Carolina, where no member of our society lives, except one very ancient
woman; though once there was a settled meeting of Friends there -- this was a
watering time to a few sincere-hearted, whom my soul loved; and an awakening,
and in some degree convincing time, to some who were too much hardened in sin,
and unacquainted with that light and power which is the authority of our
meetings and ministry: this they now felt, so that diverse were constrained to
acknowledge, and bear testimony thereto, in their conversation with one
another. -- And I am on this occasion renewedly confirmed in a sentiment I have
long been settled in, that is, that there never was, and never will be but one
true religion in the world, to wit, 'the work of the spirit of God in the souls
of mankind;' that some of all denominations have something of this true
religion, even though some of these, through the prejudice of education, may
disallow it in profession; and that no man has any real religion, but what he
comes to the knowledge and experience of through the alone influence of this
holy spirit of God. This it is that begins and carries on the work -- this it
is, that, by its own divine influence operating in the minds of mankind,
reveals Christ in them, the hope of glory; or so operates from time to time, on
reading the scriptures or other good books; on hearing the gospel preached; on
meditating on the works of creation and providence; on God's judgments in the
earth; or his dealings with themselves as individuals; or whatever other
occasion, circumstance or thing, is ever made a mean of conviction or
conversion; the holy spirit so operates, I say in all these cases, as to
produce the happy effect -- and without the inward operation thereof, all these
other opportunities and things would be utterly in vain, as to salvation, and
never able to produce the least degree of true religion, or sanctification in
the soul. So that, though there are many opinions, many creeds, professions and
denominations, and some truly religious persons in them all; yet there is and
can be but one true religion; all true religion is of one kind -- all springs
from one source. -- And blessed and adored for ever be the Lord, in order that
all men may, if they will, be benefited experimentally by this one true
religion, 'the manifestation of the spirit is given to every man to profit
withal' 1 Cor. xii. 7.
-- he that rightly profits thereby, and continues so to do, will live in the
exercise of the one true faith; will witness the one true christian baptism;
will know and obey the one living Lord; will, by the Holy Ghost, in word and
deed, acknowledge and call him Lord; and so will be saved with an everlasting
salvation. And on the other hand, seeing a measure of the holy spirit is given
to every man; seeing the grace of God that brings salvation has appeared unto
all men; seeing the light and life of the holy word, which in the beginning was
with God, and was God, has enlightened every man that comes into the world;
and seeing, moreover, Christ Jesus has tasted death for every man; how shall we
escape if we neglect and reject so great salvation? how great must be the
condemnation of every soul, thus highly favored, which yet stands out and
rejects the strivings of the spirit, the teachings of grace, the shinings and
convictions of this divine light! Now this light, grace and spirit of God, is
all one thing, under different appellations -- it is called spirit, because it
is quick, lively and operative, and quickens the soul to a sensibility of its
state and condition -- it is called grace, because it is the free unmerited
gift of God -- and is called light, because it makes manifest -- as,
'whatsoever does make manifest is light,' Ephesians. v. 13.
says the scriptures. And as this grace or light is attended to, it will bring
the soul into a state of grace and favor with God. -- Well, therefore, might
the apostle, with holy reverence, break forth in these expressions, 'thanks be
unto God for his unspeakable gift.' 2 Cor. ix. 15.
And all who obey the light will be brought out of darkness into God's
mavelous light; for though the hearts of fallen men are grossly darkened; yet
the light shines in their dark hearts, and though the darkness comprehend it
not, if it is taken heed to, will shine more and more to the perfect day; even
until the whole body be full of light; but those who rebel against the light,
will grow darker and darker, until they know not the way thereof, nor
understand the paths thereof! and become vain in their imaginations, and their
foolish hearts become wholly darkened! having loved darkness rather than light,
because their deeds were evil.

After the meeting broke up at Camden, before we went away, we felt such an
evident stop in our minds as to pursuing our journey, and such desires to have
another meeting at Camden, that we found peace in submitting to it; and in
order to procure the company of the busy inhabitants of the place, we concluded
to stay until first day, and gave notice accordingly. Then riding to our friend
the widow English's, we rested there the next day; and the day following, that
is, 7th-day, had an open precious meeting at a Baptist meeting house at
Swift-Creek, among Baptists and Methodists, the Lord opening their hearts to
receive our testimony. The doctrines of Truth were livingly declared, most
present were reached and tendered, and our souls relieved -- blessed be the
name of our God, who was eminently present!

Next day we attended the meeting we had appointed at Camden, a pretty many of
the inhabitants were present, and though it appears that there are not many
religious persons in the town, yet it was a day of precious visitation to many
of their souls -- a day to be remembered: Truth's doctrines were largely and
with demonstration opened and declared, making much impression on many minds.
O, the preciousness of Truth! the sufficiency of its aid, and never-failing
victory when abode in! Lie low, O my soul, for ever; trust in the Lord; rely
wholly on him; be nothing without him -- all things in him; be faithful to him,
and thou shall never be confounded. He is a strong rock -- an impregnable
fortress! a sword! a shield! yea, all things necessary to those who faithfully
trust in him -- who abide in the faith and patience of the saints. -- He has
loved me freely, wrought wonders for my soul, made bare his Arm for my
deliverance, forgiven mine offenses, and carried me through manifold trials,
conflicts and afflictions; and is now leading me about, instructing me,
reducing me again and again to the loss of all things, and filling my soul with
the fat things, the rich dainties of his own house! and putting into my heart
and mouth the songs of praise and hallelujahs! Lord, the desire of my soul is
unto thee, Oh, be thou pleased to exercise thy rod and thy staff, yea, all thy
good pleasure in me, until all within me bows to thy righteous scepter, and
every motion of my mind and of my body is in conformity to thy holy will
manifested in me. Therefore go on, O my most merciful God, if it be thy holy
will, not letting thine eye pity, nor thy hand spare, until thou have
thoroughly cleansed the floor of my heart -- until the precious seed be
gathered into thy garner -- until the chaff be burnt up by the baptismal
influence of the Holy Ghost and fire -- and finally, until my soul becomes a
fit temple for thy holy presence, unrivalled and uninterrupted, to dwell in.
Make me a pillar in thy holy temple, that shall go no more out for ever; but,
abiding therein, be engaged in the depth of humility and profound reverence to
return all the praise to thee, who, with thy Son the Lamb, through the eternal
Spirit, art worthy of all honor, adoration and glory, world without end. Amen.

We lodged again after this meeting, at our said friend the widow English's;
and next day, the 24th, took our journey for Charleston, where we arrived the
26th of 8th month, it being one hundred and twenty miles; and on 6th-day the
28th, we had a good little meeting at Friends meeting house with the few
Friends in the city, and a few others that came in, and were tender. Next day
we had a large meeting at the Methodists meeting house; many Methodists, some
Baptists, and others attending; but it was rather a dull time, and, not feeling
our minds clear, we concluded to have another meeting there on first day
afternoon. -- In the forenoon on first day, we had a blessed open time at
Friends meeting house; and in the afternoon another large crowded meeting at
the Methodist meeting house, consisting of a mixed and very unsettled
multitude. We found a pressing engagement to declare the truth among them, but
found them so outward in their minds, and so unstayed, that we got very little
entrance in their minds in general, or relief to our own, though I believe the
Methodists were mostly quiet, and some of them, with a few others, were reached
and tendered.

Second-day 31st, We left the city with heavy hearts, after a solid opportunity
with Friends. This day and next we rode toward Georgia, about fifty-eight
miles; and finding a little meeting of Friends, though not members, yet such as
were convinced of Truth's way and principles; we staid their meeting on
fourth-day -- it was dull at first, but open and much favored toward and in
the conclusion. Several Methodists and Baptists were present, and Truth reached
and tendered most of their minds. These friendly people had, at least part of
them, belonged to the Methodists and Baptists; but their eyes became gradually
opened to see beyond lifeless form and creaturely performances, as prayers in
man's own time and will, etc. and had now gathered into a silent waiting upon
the Lord. May they live near him, love him, and serve him in the beauty of
holiness: then they will not only enjoy great peace in themselves, but be a
blessing to their neighbors.

After meeting we went on for Georgia, and reached Friends monthly meeting at
Wrightsborough in that state, on 7th-day, 5th of 9th mo. It was a painful time;
extreme poverty and inward want bore down our souls. We found a few words to
drop among them, but scarce found any relief. -- On first day the 6th, we had
two favored meetings: one at Wrightsborough, and the other at Friends new
meeting house, four or five miles from the first; and next day were again at
Wrightsborough, not being clear before; it was a precious time indeed, Truth's
testimony flowed with power, many were greatly reached, and some who had much
opposed our principles, acknowledged to the truth with tears, and desired us to
remember them before the throne of grace -- may they be preserved.

Third-day 8th, we had a large meeting at Marmaduke Mendenhall's, among a
religious people, Methodists, Baptists, etc. Truth eminently overshadowed us.
In our first sitting down together, I had very bright openings, and fullness of
light and life; but the meeting was hurt by the right time not being attended
to in standing up, by me or my companion, or both -- my soul was grieved, for
the people were prevented, in degree, enjoying what seemed to be intended for
them; yet many minds were affected, and I trust some good was done. Fourth-day
9th, we had a large meeting at a Friend's house, among Methodists, Baptists and
Friends. There was strength and utterance given, and great indeed appeared to
be the entrance into the people's minds. After this meeting, next day, we left
Georgia, and set out for South Carolina. We got to a meeting among Friends at a
place called Henderson's Settlement, on fifth-day the 11th, and so on to
Mudlick, Bush River, Rocky-spring, Paget's Creek and Cane Creek, having a
meeting at each of these places, and at Bush River two, mostly to a degree of
satisfaction, yet it appeared to be a low time among Friends in these parts;
but dwelling low with the suffering seed, we were made to reign a little with
it at times. The four following days we rode to Deep Creek in North Carolina,
about one hundred and forty-three miles. At this place we had a meeting with
Friends and others, on 3d-day the 22d, and so on, having another at Chestnut
Creek over the mountain in the edge of Virginia -- thence back to -- Freeman's,
(not a Friend) in North Carolina, having a meeting at his house on 7th-day the
27th, and were next day at a Friends meeting at Westfield, called also Tonis
Creek -- all these meetings were attended by Friends, Baptists and Methodists,
and some of them by some others. And through patient waiting for the arisings
of life and openings of light, they were all solid profitable meetings; Truth's
doctrines were largely opened, many minds reached, and the Lord's name exalted
over all. Will Worship, creaturely performances, lifeless prayers at set times,
etc. were much discouraged: for the Lord laid it upon me to expose the
emptiness of these things from place to place, and to show that they never fail
of drying up the springs of life in such, who once having had the fresh
openings thereof in their own souls, will yet go on in religious performances,
without waiting for light and life therein.

After one of these meetings, a Baptist man, somewhat in years, told me he had
tried to keep up family prayers in his house, but found he could have no
satisfaction in it, unless when he felt a divine influence inclining him
thereto, and that he had now omitted it, except when he found himself thus
qualified. Diverse others have confessed, that they had often, in their attempts
to pray at their set times, without waiting for divine help, evidently felt
that their words fell to the ground, were of no avail, and answered no good
purpose. -- O that all may learn the necessity of waiting upon God in the
silence of all flesh, and creaturely motions or performances, that they may
witness that renewal of divine strength, wherein prayer is made with life and
acceptance with the Lord.

I had much service in these South Lands among other societies, particularly
Methodists and Baptists, there being a living birth among many of them; and
this living birth, being in its very infancy in many of both these societies,
was near to my life, and I often breathed to the Lord to preserve it alive; for
I saw it to be in imminent danger of being stifled by a multiplicity of
lifeless performances. But though I was led into service much among other
people, as beforementioned, yet I generally, in the meetings of Friends, had
some clear openings into the state of things among the brethren: for I was kept
very low in my mind, and durst not meddle with things not opened in the light
of life. I was afraid to judge after the sight of the eye, or reprove after the
hearing of the ear; my dependence was on the Lord alone; and in that dependant
state, I often felt as empty of any thing divine, any sight, sense or knowledge
of things, as if I had been totally blind and insensible -- and indeed who is
so blind as the Lord's servant, and so deaf as the messenger whom he sends? And
it is necessary it should be so, in order that his message to the people
through them may be wholly in the fresh openings of divine life, without any
mixture of man's fallen wisdom. This is a great mystery to the world and all
its boasted wisdom, and will remain so for ever, though clearly opened unto
babes and sucklings in Christ. And as my mind abode in this low state, in the
loss of all things, in the subjection of my own creaturely will, wisdom and
workings; I received many fresh openings, and therein was enabled to bring
forth things new and old, to the instruction, and, I hope, lasting benefit of
the brethren and many others from place to place. All glory and praise be
ascribed to him, without whom my poor soul is nothing, knows nothing, and can
do nothing, in things divine. O that all flesh may be abased, and lie low
before him for ever, that his own eternal power may be exalted over all in them.

After this meeting at Westfield, we found a pressure in spirit to have one
next day among some religious Baptists, about six miles off at a Baptist man's
house; it was a precious heavenly meeting, wherein Truth opened many things in
the life and demonstration. And some confessed, they had never known before,
but that John's dispensation of water baptism was part of the gospel
dispensation, and to stand to the end of time; but they seemed now to be much
shaken; for it was opened that John's elementary dispensation was only a
forerunning one, to prepare the way of the Lord. After this meeting we still
found a pressing engagement to have another meeting at Friends meeting house at
Westfield, which was held accordingly the next day, to great satisfaction: many
Baptists and others, as well as many Friends, attended -- Truth reigned over
all, and the doctrines thereof dropped as the rain, to the tendering and
refreshing many seeking souls -- blessed be the Lord for all his favors. We
next had meetings at Blues-Creek, and Muddy-Creek, and on first and second days
the 4th and 5th of the 10th month, were at Deep-River, their large monthly
meeting being held there on second-day -- all these were blessed watering
seasons; the monthly meeting abundantly so, to the bowing my soul in awfulness
and praise. On 3d-day we had an open, refreshing meeting among the Nicholites,
so called. I had a lively evidence that some among them were humbly
endeavoring to serve the Lord; but at the same time I saw clearly that many of
them rested too much in their outside plainness; and valuing themselves upon
that, had stopped short of a more living acquaintance with the wellspring of
eternal life; and this is a snare wherein I fear some of our society are taken,
and detained from greater experience in the real life of religion, without
which all outward things are unavailing, as to the salvation of the soul. I
labored among this people, in the openings of life, and hope according to
their condition -- may it tend to their settlement on the right foundation! --
Then, proceeding on our journey, we had meetings at Friends meeting houses at
Springfield, Bulrun, New-Garden, Lower Reedy-Fork, and Upper Reedy-Fork, all
favored meetings, some of them highly so.

On 4th-day the 14th, we had a meeting at the house of our friend Samuel
Tomlinson, where very few Friends live near, among Baptists, Methodists, some
Friends, etc. We evidently felt that some of them had pitched in battle array
against us in their minds; and for a time the Lord suffered them to shut up the
kingdom of heaven, not entering themselves, nor suffering those that gladly
would have entered. At length a small degree of life arose, and I told them the
battle was the Lord's, and if he suffered them to shut up the kingdom, the loss
would be their own; but that it was likely those formerly, whose unbelief
prevented our Savior's doing many mighty works in certain places, might be
ready to vaunt over him, and to think he could not make his way among them; and
yet I thought their victory, if such they esteemed it, was in no wise glorious;
but greatly to their own loss, or the prevention of much good that they might
otherwise have received. I then acknowledged to them freely, that we had
nothing at our own command to offer for their good; nor any weapons of our own
to oppose their warlike preparations with -- told them I had little thought,
when in the pure constrainings of gospel love and good will, I gave up to have
a meeting with them, that they would have come together prepared for war; but
that I was assured it was so, for I could feel the inward state and opposition
of some of their minds, as plain as I could see their bodies with my outward
eyes. -- Moreover I informed them, that if the Lord engaged me in it, I was not
afraid or ashamed to fight, even upon a retreat, if he did not make way for an
advance -- that I was not at all afraid of my life, how many Goliaths soever
might defy the armies of the living God; for my life I had given up to his
disposal, to be laid down in his cause, if he pleased, in any part of the
globe. -- I came not from my own land, and all my near and dear connections in
life, to do my own will, but his who sent me; and while I stand faithful in his
holy will and counsel, in the openings and leadings of his divine light and
life, I fear no evil, danger or difficulty; nor all the art and malice of men
or devils; though I fully know that of myself I can do nothing. However I told
them, for their own sakes, in order that they might have the full benefit of
the meeting, I desired them to lay aside their warlike weapons, that inward
opposition wherein they stood against the inward life of all true religion, and
the doctrines of the everlasting gospel; and as they knew themselves guilty of
an inward opposition to us and our message, it began to work conviction in
them: they wondered how I knew it; but seeing I did know it, and was enabled so
plainly to tell them the inward state, and thoughts of their own hearts, it won
upon them, drew their attention, removed their prejudices, and softened their
hearts toward us and our testimony -- and when I found they had given up, and
dropped their warlike weapons and intentions, I improved the opportunity, as
Truth opened the way, and told them, I perceived they began to incline toward
a capitulation, and willingness to sign articles of peace -- this they also
knew was true of the inward alteration of their minds; and so it greatly tended
still further to gain their love and attention, until at length (though the
work, or rather warfare, was very hard for some time) we had an heavenly
baptizing time together -- Truth reigned over all, and therein our souls
triumphed over all opposition, in the strength and power of an endless life!
wherein diverse doctrines of the gospel were livingly opened and enlarged upon,
in demonstration of the spirit and divine authority! yea, that was felt and
acknowledged to be so, by many whose hearts were greatly tendered and
refreshed, after all the opposition they had at first felt against us. Thus the
Lord wrought for us, and taught our hands to war, and our fingers to fight --
Glory be to his great name for ever! for hitherto he has marvellously helped
us; and we know that without him we must have turned our backs in this and many
other days of battle.

Next day we had a heavenly open meeting at a Baptist meeting house on Abbit's
Creek, about ten miles from the last meeting -- diverse of their members, and
one of their teachers urgingly desiring us to have a meeting with them there,
they being much reached at the other meeting. We had had thoughts of having a
meeting there before this invitation, and, the way now looking very open, we
embraced it, and had one accordingly. And as soon as I sat down in the meeting,
I felt as evidently as I ever felt any thing with my outward fingers, that they
were now come without their weapons, in a state of mind directly reverse to
what they or some of them felt in the fore part of the meeting yesterday; their
hearts were open, and our way was also soon opened into a living enlargement in
the doctrines of Truth, I trust to our and their mutual satisfaction and
consolation of soul, though their outward performances and lifeless devotions
were largely and livingly testified against. -- Our next meeting was on the day
following at Randolph Courthouse, among people of various professions; and,
magnified for ever be the name of the Lord, our leader and director, he was
graciously pleased to break in upon us in a wonderful manner; light shined
superior to the shining of the sun in the outward firmament, that divine light,
the fame that enlighteneth every man that comes into the world: but in the
wicked it often shines as in a dark place, and the darkness comprehends it not
-- many whose hearts have become darkened, reject, despise and trample it under
foot; but in those who obey it, love it, walk in it, and bring their deeds to
it, it will shine more and more to the perfect day, as the wise man says the
path of the just man does, declaring this path of the just to be a shining
light: indeed it is so, for Christ within, the just man's light and hope of
glory, is also his path, his only true and living way, as said Christ himself,
I am the way, and the truth, and the life; John xiv. 6.
and surely the just man's way is his path: seeing Christ then, the inward
divine light of men, is the just man's path or way, well may it be declared to
be a shining light: and experience has abundantly confirmed it to the souls of
all that have truly loved and faithfully walked in this light, that it really
does shine brighter and brighter: and in all that continue so walking, it will
more and more, even to the perfect day -- they will not only witness the day to
dawn, and the day star to arise in their hearts, but the increasing clearness
and brightness of the light will be, as Isaiah expresses it, the light of the
moon shall be as the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be seven
fold, as the light of seven days. Isai. xxx. 26.
Well, in the clear shinings of this holy light, for truly it was as a morning
without clouds, the state of the people were so opened to us in this meeting,
and through us to them, the light within their own souls confirming our outward
testimony, that scarce an individual appeared insensible of the heavenly
visitation we were favored with: indeed most were deeply affected, greatly
tendered, and much refreshed as with a shower of celestial rain -- it seemed to
me in a degree like the day of Pentecost, the effusion of the Holy Ghost was so
eminently glorious among us! -- and I believe near or quite all present, said
in their hearts, and diverse with their mouths in substance after this meeting,
this is the everlasting gospel of Christ; and I said in my own soul, and still
say, it was of the Lord's doing, and mavelous in mine eyes! holy and reverend
is his name, and that for evermore -- may my soul ever acknowledge his wonders
and the riches of his love, lying low in humiliation before him.

On 7th and 1st days, the 17th and 18th, we were favored with the Master's
helping hand at the monthly and first day meetings at Center; in both which
light and life triumphed over death and darkness. -- On 3d-day we had a
painful, trying meeting near a water called Heworry, at a Dutch Friend's house,
(Michael Fout) among many Dutch people, and others. We labored in the little
ability afforded, to some degree of satisfaction. The two next days, we
attended Friends meetings as they were held in course, at Springfield and
Bulrun. Next day we had a discouraging meeting among many other professors,
near the Upper Reedy-Fork. I saw and felt clearly, that some of them came
prepared to bid defiance; however we labored a little, though under great
depression -- for though they were many of them high in profession of faith in
Christ, too many of them appeared to be unbelievers, and in the state of the
Scribes and Pharisees, in the inward ground of things -- and such, in all ages,
are the greatest opposers and even hinderers of good, of any people whatever;
yet I believe diverse present were humble hearted christians, who thought little
of themselves, and were hungering after better food than their teachers are
feeding them with: some of these I hope got at least a little crumb of heavenly
bread at this meeting -- may the Lord refresh their souls with the waters of
life, and sustain them.

Next day, being 7th of the week, and 24th of 10th month, began the select
yearly meeting at Center, in North Carolina, for Friends of that state,
South Carolina and Georgia -- it was a trying season, and Friends seemed
sensible it was a very low time. I was quite sealed up in silence, as were both
my companion and myself next day, at the public meeting for worship. On
second-day the business of society came on; it continued by adjournment four
days, and though the fore part was heavy and trying, yet the latter part was a
time of eminent overshadowing of the holy presence; many weighty subjects were
considered in this yearly meeting; and finally resulted with much unanimity,
love and solemnity. I was much bowed down, until the last day, under a sense of
the want of due dependence on the Lord in many present; but near and at the
close of the meeting, the helper of Israel opened a way, and helped me to be
thoroughly relieved, and the song that is ever new, was put into my heart and
mouth, in a very consolating manner. Large numbers, I believe, will at times,
while they live, bless the name of the Lord for that day's favor. The shout of
a King was heard in Sion, to the rejoicing of the tabernacles of Jacob. Bless
thy God, O Israel, for ever, and serve him with faithfulness and reverence, O
daughter of Jerusalem, for who indeed is like him? He brings down as into the
very dust, and he raises up to the heights of salvation -- He makes the dumb
to declare of his goodness; the inhabitant of the rock to sing of his power!
glory be to his name for ever -- my soul will praise him in the heights of Sion!

On 7th-day 31st, we attended New-Garden monthly meeting, and had therein a
degree of satisfaction. Next day we attended their first day meeting there,
being the 1st of the 11th month, in solid silence, as to us; and, feeling clear
of Carolina, on the day following we rode to Virginia; and on 4th-day the 4th
at night, we got among Friends at Goose-Creek; where next day we had a meeting,
and the day following had another at the upper meeting house on Goose-Creek,
which was silent. We next had meetings at Hills-Creek, Seneca-Creek, and
South-River; in all which we were helped through to our comfort, and hope to
some profit. -- On 4th-day the 11th, we had a blessed consolating meeting at
Henry Christian's, a Methodist, and a few others, in Amhurst county, Virginia
-- light and life prevailed, to the tendering and watering many souls. On
6th-day, we had a little meeting at Francis Walthall's, a man that for some
years appeared to have been convinced of our principles, as also his wife: this
was in Buckingham county. On first day the 15th, we had a meeting at Amelia, to
a degree of satisfaction, and that afternoon my dear companion James Ladd and I
parted, in much gospel sympathy, and endearment, he going home. On 4th-day, I
had a discouraging meeting at Camp-Creek, and another next day at Douglass
meeting, (so called) in the first I got but little relief; and in the last
could not open my mouth in the ministry.

On the first day following, the 22d of 11th mo. I was at meeting at Smith's
Creek, in suffering silence. About this time Satan seemed almost let loose upon
me, to buffet me with doubts, even in things wherein I had been well
established and assured. And persuaded I am, I have no words adequate to the
full and clear description of the buffetings, horror and distress, that seized
and bore down my drooping soul; but I have since clearly seen, that the Lord's
determination was, that if I would still be his, I should lay down my own life,
that of my own will entirely, and in all things, and take him and his will for
my only good, in and through all. And as my own will was once more crucified
and slain, my life laid down upon the cross -- all within me bowed -- On this
wise then my soul addressed my God: 'Lord, I know thou art all goodness; I have
drank of the rivers of pleasure at thy right hand, which is all of thy mere
bounty and grace; I surrender my all once more to thee without reserve. Here I
am -- do with me whatever thou please -- blessed and adored be thy name for
ever -- I yield to thy will -- not mine, but thine be done. Amen.'

After this full surrender of my will and my all, light sprang in my soul;
darkness fled before it; Satan's head was bruised; God did truly bruise Satan
under me; I saw his power was limited; and that the Lord God Omnipotent still
reigned over all. Life and immortality was again, as it were, brought to light
out of the depth of obscurity, and established over all in meridian brightness
and assurance in my soul. Great enlargement followed this sore conflict, and my
consolation was full, and unspeakably glorious -- blessed for ever be the Lord
my God, and wonderful leader! in the heights my soul will praise him, and for
the depths of prostration will I magnify his name, who makes all things work
together for good to those who truly love him -- Love him, O my soul, for ever,
and submit thy all to his holy care and keeping, through every trying time.

After this most trying conflict, I found my way opened again, and had meetings
at Crooked-Run, Center, Mount-Pleasant, Bear-Garden, Back-Creek, Hopewell,
Middle-Creek, Tuskarorah and Bull-skin, all open good meetings, and most of
them eminently so, even to my own admiration! Truth's doctrines were largely
opened with divine life and authority; many who were much unacquainted with
true religion were much reached; and such as were hungering and thirsting after
something more substantial than they had yet feelingly known, were greatly
refreshed. My soul bowed in awfulness before that God, who, through the deepest
probations and discouragements, safely brought me on in the right way; landed
me on firm ground; and even made my most fiery trials and extreme conflicts
promotive of almost inexpressible enlargement and consolation.

Oh! he well knows what he is about, in suffering his chosen followers to be
thus closely tried -- indeed this is the very way they become chosen; for he
ever chooses them in the furnace of affliction: here he refines them as gold
seven times tried in the fire: thus they bear his holy law: thus they are made
able to dwell with that which, to every thing sinful, is as a devouring fire
and everlasting burnings, and not be hurt; the fire shall not kindle on them to
devour; the smell of it shall not be on their garments; but every thing in them
that is chaffy shall be burnt up, in, and by this unquenchable fire; so the
weighty substantial wheat comes to be gathered into the garner. Oh! thou
traveller Sion-ward, whenever the Lord leads thee in this line, think not that
none have walked the way before thee; but remember it is the highway to glory;
the only trodden path to blessedness -- remember others, before thou wast
brought forth, have deeply experienced it, have tasted the wormwood and the
gall; and been ready to think it impossible for them ever to come forth into
the light again, or to rejoice in God, the rock and horn of their salvation.
But be thou patient, be thou faithful to death; yea, in and through this inward
death, and thou shall receive a crown of life: for it is an eternal truth, that
though many are the afflictions of the righteous, yet, assuredly the Lord
delivers them out of them all.

Next I had a meeting the 4th of the 12th month, in the Presbyterian
meeting house at Winchester: a glorious good meeting it was -- I was ready to
think near as much so, as our low state, while clothed with clay, is capable
of. Several important doctrines of the gospel were largely opened, having
strength and utterance given -- every mind seemed hushed into a degree of
awfulness and reverence! all glory and praise be ascribed to him who is our
only sufficiency; for with gratitude, and prostration of soul before him, it
may be truly said, 'hitherto has the Lord helped us!' 1 Samuel vii. 12.
-- On 7th-day I was helped to my own and others joy, at Friends monthly
meeting at Crooked-Run: and also next day at the meeting at Culpepper. Indeed
the arm of the Lord was marvellously made bare in our favor, from place to
place, throughout the foregoing favored meetings: and thence on to Southland,
South-Fork, Goose-Creek and Leesburg. At Southland I parted with my dear friend
Catlet Jones, who had been very acceptably with me most of the time since I
parted with my beloved friend James Ladd; but now he returned to his family. I
was at this place last spring, as I went southward, and though I was shut up
there, then, yet I felt such an engagement for the prosperity of that little
meeting and neighborhood, that I felt most easy, now on my return, to visit
them again; having been drawn in spirit to look toward them, at times, ever
since I was there before. We had now a heavenly watering time together, praised
be the Lord, whose power was eminently over all. I believe I have never known a
more constant fullness of God's love, life, and qualifying presence; nor a more
continued cheerfulness in and out of meetings, for so long a time, than
(blessed be the Lord) I have now been favored with, since my extreme
tribulation and distress at Smith's Creek, and about that time. Oh, the heights
and depths; may neither the one nor the other ever separate my soul from the
love of God! -- I well know the propriety and need of our Savior's caution,
pray ye that your flight be not in the winter; neither on the sabbath day.
Matt. xxiv. 20.
Great care is necessary, in both these states -- perhaps our Lord mentioned
the winter first, as it is the trials and distress of that painful
dispensation, which prepares for, and if patiently endured, terminates in the
comfortable rejoicings of the sabbath day. To abound, we must be abased: if we
will reign with Christ, we must suffer with him: but, Oh the danger of letting
in discouragements in the winter season, when all seems cold and uncomfortable
within; even sometimes benumbing, and almost deadly frost. Here thou exercised
traveller Sion-ward, if thou art not very watchful and careful to abide in the
faith and patience of the saints, thou will be very likely to take thy flight,
from walking in the light, and firm abiding on the everlasting rock and
foundation; by letting in and giving way to doubts, disputings, distrust,
murmurings and despair; and so repine at the dispensations of Divine
Providence, who is proving thee for thy good. Here many have took their flight
in the winter, and let go their hold of what they had received, and so have
lost their crown! for the terms are, 'be thou faithful unto death, and I will
give thee a crown of life.' Rev. ii. 10.
If thou abidest steadfast through the wintry dispensation, the Lord will bring
thee to the opening spring, to the summer, and the sabbath day; here thou will
praise him on the banks of deliverance; here thou will be made to shout and
sing! for, lo, the winter is past; the rain is over and gone; the flowers
appear on the earth; the time of the singing of birds is come; and the voice of
the turtle is heard in our land. Cant. ii. 11, 12.
But now, in the midst of thy rejoicing, have a care; stand fast; see thou
take not thy flight on the sabbath day. Danger awaits thee on every side;
thou art a frail mortal, and thy destruction, if it comes upon thee, will be
of thyself; but thy help can be only in and of the Lord; therefore look unto
him, for 'he that trusts in his own heart, is a fool.' Prove. xxviii. 26.
Let him that thinks he stands, even though his soul is filled with good,
and overflows with songs of joy, take heed lest he fall -- even now this care
is eminently necessary -- this is a moment wherein the watch is peculiarly
needful -- hence the precious caution in regard to these two seasons of most
pressing danger -- hence, also, he preached the watch, and that repeatedly, to
his disciples, yea to all; 'what I say unto you, I say unto all, watch.' Mark
xiii. 37.
He knew all needed it; not only the dejected and depressed soul, but even, and
especially, the joyful heart -- the mind of him whom joy overflows. My soul
well knows the mystery of these things by repeated experience; but I have
found, that, in proportion as all pride of every kind is done away, or hid from
man (which is God's work) and the creature fully humbled and reduced to the
loss of all things, the Lord is pleased more abundantly to fill us with divine
good; and to continue its blessed replenishings unto us! for through this
abasement we are enabled to bear this fullness without being puffed up, or
thinking great things of ourselves. Man is exceedingly inclined to
independance, and a language on this wise -- my own arm has brought salvation
-- is not this great Babylon, which I, great I, have builded, for mine own and
kingdom's honor? etc. -- Yes. O, thou who thus buildest, be assured, whenever
thou beginnest to think much of thyself, and that thou of thyself have done
something that is good, thou art a Babylonish idolater; thou art erecting a
Babel. This is great Babylon indeed, which thou, a poor worm of the dust, art
rearing up; and all this must be brought down, before thou come to live by
says; or can say in truth, 'I live: yet not I, but Christ lives in me,'
Gal. ii. 20.
-- and 'by the grace of God I am what I am.' 1 Cor. xv. 10.
It is truly a great attainment to be nothing but what grace makes us; yet
this is the case, in regard to the things of religion, with all who 'do nothing
of themselves: but have rested from their own works, as God did from his,' Heb.
iv. 10.
-- here 'God is all in all.' -- O, seek it -- lay hold of it, and secure it to
thy soul, by dying daily; dying unto all that can or would act of itself, make
haste, or be always ready; for this can never do any thing better, whatever it
boasts, than build for thee and others a Babel of confusion. -- Therefore, let
him that has an ear, hear what the spirit says unto the churches, in order to
gather all that will follow the Lamb, into the living gospel worship in spirit
and in truth, within the inward temple.

On 7th-day the 12th of 12th month, I attended the select quarterly meeting at
Fair-fax; next day the public meeting; and, on second-day one for public
worship and the discipline of the church; and, on third-day, a large public
meeting for the youth and others. I was shut up throughout, except some close
communications in the select meeting, and in that for public worship on
first day. My soul was deeply distressed under a sense that some were
neglecting an inward feeling after God, and were foolishly looking out for
words. -- Oh! how this wounds the living, and adds to the bonds of those who
have no other to look to but the Lord alone! scarce any thing tends more
powerfully to shut up the springs of life. -- 4th-day 16th, attended the
mid-week meeting at the same place; and next day had a good meeting at the Gap;
and on 6th and 7th days, seeing no way to go forward, I rested, wrote, and
waited further directions.

On 1st-day the 20th, I attended the meeting again at Fairfax; our friend Peter
Yarnall also attended it, on a religious visit. I sat long in suffering
silence; but at length, standing up, got forward with much difficulty; such
mountains of obstruction lying in my way, arising from the states of some
present, as I believed, that I seemed not enabled to get along far before I
found it best to sit down, rather abruptly; and sitting quiet and still in
mind, although I doubt not but many present thought me a fool, yet I felt
resigned to endure their ridicule. -- But after sitting a good while, and
finding I could not leave the place easy, and the meeting having continued
already to an unusual length, I stood up again, intending to desire another
meeting next day; but as I was not hasty to utter any thing, but waited to feel
and see my way in every word, I went on from one sentence to another for some
time, still expecting to request another meeting, but I could not find liberty
so to do; instead thereof finding my mind gradually and unexpectedly opened and
enlarged, until Truth reigned over all! I attained at length a great degree of
relief to my mind -- the meeting ended abundantly more to my satisfaction, and
some others, than I had expected -- blessed be the Helper of Israel, who still
as of old, leads the blind in paths they have not known. Isai. xlii. 16.


On 4th-day the 25th, I had an open good meeting at Bush-Creek in Maryland,
having crossed the great river Patowmack on 2d-day, being, as I hope, clear of
Virginia. On 5th-day 26th, had a very good open meeting at Pipe-Creek in
Maryland; and on seventh-day at Monallen in Pennsylvania, and so on to
Huntingdon, Warrington, Newbury and York, having meetings at each of these
places to good satisfaction. At York I had three, the two last laborious; but I
felt in good degree clear of the town. And on 6th-day the 1st of 1st month
1790, I went to a place called Wright's Ferry, on the river Susquehanna, where
I had a pretty good meeting at the widow Wright's house -- and the three next
days, three blessed meetings at Lancaster, Lampeter and Sadsbury; then on
3d-day the 5th, another such at East Nottingham in Maryland, -- Next day
another such at West Nottingham in Maryland -- and the day following another at
Little-Britain in Pennsylvania; and on 6th-day the 8th, a blessed and very open
one at Deer-Creek, over Susquehanna in Maryland. -- On first day the 10th,
through deep suffering, I was considerably opened and enlarged in the sore and
afternoon meetings at Baltimore. I staid a few days in this place, and then
rode to Little Falls, attending meeting there on 5th-day the 14th; and so on to
Sassafras, (on the eastern shore of Maryland) Head of Chester, George-Town,
Cecil, Chester meeting and Chester-Town; then to Churchill, Queen-Ann's and
Tuckahoe; having open good meetings at all these places, to the humiliation of
my mind, and bowing me into thankfulness and prostration before the Lord, who
alone gives ability for every religious service. -- Next day, being 3d of the
week, and 26th of the month, I attended the quarterly meeting of ministers and
elders at Third-Haven; the two next days was held the quarterly meeting for
church discipline; on the day following the monthly meeting there. -- The two
first of these four days were painfully exercising; but through patience in
tribulation, and not presuming to put forth a hand, or go forward, until the
Shepherd of Israel went before me, leading me on in the openings of light and
life, I at length obtained deliverance, triumphed over all opposition, and
coming forth from under that weight of death and darkness I had felt, found
renewed ability the two last days thoroughly to relieve my mind among them;
which was not only to the reproof of the lukewarm and disobedient, but
abundantly to the watering and refreshment of those who were truly hungering
and thirsting after righteousness. I was made sensible that there was present a
little remnant who truly loved the Lord, and whose meat and drink it was to do
his will; and blessed be his holy name for ever, they, with my own soul were
eminently filled.

Next day I had a meeting at the Bay-side; it was silent and dull for a long
time; after which my mouth was opened in the pure gospel spring, and the
meeting continued some considerable length of time longer, in a very open and
relieving manner; the nature of gospel worship and of all real gospel ministry,
being largely opened to the people -- may it fasten as a nail in a sure place.
Oh! how I have mourned before the Lord, under a sense of the death and
formality which reigns in Christendom! for want of waiting for divine help, and
through pushing forward in man's time and ability, which brings forth but a
form of godliness and devotion, without the life and power of it.

On 1st-day the 31st, I had a very large and highly favored meeting at
Third-Haven, among the inhabitants of the town, many of whom had not been at
any of the preceding meetings there. Gospel light shined eminently among us,
and I hope and believe instruction was sealed on some minds present, in a
manner not easily to be erased. -- The two next days we had meetings at
Choptank and Marshy-Creek, both precious seasons after long waiting. -- The two
days following these, we were at meeting with the Nicholites (so called) at two
of their meeting houses; and, after long and painful waiting, I labored among
them, I hope to the benefit of some of their souls.

After this we went into Delaware state, and had meetings at our friend Baptis
Lay's at Cold Spring, Lewis-Town, Three-Runs, Mother-kill, Frederico and
Mother-kill again. We were helped through to profit and relief in them all;
though mostly in a way much to the subjection of our own creaturely wills. Oh!
what need there is to lie low, and rise only as the pure life arises, lest we
be found offering strange fire, or lifting up a tool on the Lord's altar. --
Contentment in a lowly state, and moving on gently in the real necessity, is
highly acceptable to him, without whom we can do nothing. Here we acknowledge
his might, his right to command even faithfulness in the little, which fails
not, if we rightly obey, to make us, in his own time, rulers over much; and
sometimes to our own great admiration. -- Indeed it was so in several of these
meetings -- that at Lewis-Town and that at Frederico being times of high
favor: the people were mostly not of our society, no meeting of Friends being
usually held at either place. Also the meetings at Mother-kill were, in the
end, seasons of enlargement, though through difficulty, hard labor, and close
inward attention; especially the last, wherein the Lord eminently evinced to
us, beyond all room for doubt, that when he opens, none can shut -- for he did
remarkably both shut and open,' Rev. iii. 7.
and even before he opened the way in full clearness, he brought us under a
necessity of laboring in the little, wherein dear Mary Berry, a skilful
labourer, was made victorious; but we both found, that, move ever so carefully
and gently, as in the real necessity, it was not for a long season the Lord's
time or will to open fully or give us to reign: the seed was under suffering,
and we must suffer with it, and did very deeply and painfully, and labored in
great bowedness and abasement. -- But blessed be the Lord God of Israel, in his
own time ever best, he marvellously arose -- opened the way with clearness:
then all that was opposed proved unable to shut it.

We then had meetings at Dover and Little Creek, both highly favored; at the
close of (...) Little Creek, I had to part with my said friend Mary Berry,
Richard Bartlett, his wife a worthy friend, and John Dickenson; a tender
parting it was, not easily to be forgotten -- may the Lord hold them, and my
own soul, in his holy hand for ever! -- On 2d-day the 14th, we were at
Duck-Creek; 3d-day at Appoquinamink; 4th, at White-Clay Creek; 5th at
Wilmington -- all good open meetings -- the two first very relieving -- in the
two last relief was obtained through close attention and creaturely subjection.
I then went to Philadelphia. -- On first day the 20th, I attended in the
forenoon the meeting at Pine-Street; afternoon at the Bank, and in the evening
at Market-Street. On second-day the select morning meeting; 3d-day monthly
meeting at the Bank; 4th-day the monthly meeting at Pine-Street; 5th-day
preparative meeting at Market-Street, where also was a marriage; and on 6th-day
the monthly meeting of Friends belonging to Market-Street meeting. My mind was
deeply baptized into sympathy with the suffering seed in all these meetings --
but as I was favored and enabled to keep in the life, and attentive to the
openings thereof, I got relief from day to day, in a line of close plain
dealing, which was to me very laborious; to some present very alarming; and to
others greatly consolating and encouraging.

And now, finding my mind greatly relieved from a heavy weight of exercise, I
had to behold the great danger of taking my flight on a day of rest and
pleasantness. -- Oh, how careful ought we to be in all our words and actions,
lest feeling ease and liberty in our minds, we transgress the holy limits and
boundaries of Truth; offend some of the little ones; and wound our own souls!
Oh, thou only preserver of men, preserve me, I pray thee, in a humble watchful
state, with mine eye single to thy holy light, both in heights and depths,
henceforth for ever. Amen.

On 7th-day the 27th, I left the city, and rode to Bibury, to the house of that
deeply experienced minister of the gospel James Thornton, whom I much loved and
honored -- his health was ill, but I felt him to be alive in the everlasting
truth; I felt near and dear unity with him in the inward covenant of divine
life, where I saw and felt him hid with Christ in God; grown up to the stature
of a man in Christ, and into the heavenly authority and establishment, as a
pillar in the temple of God, that shall go no more out. -- I was much edified
by his conversation, and judicious unaffected remarks. -- Oh! that my latter
end may be like his! Next day I attended the meeting at said Bibury, and being
livingly opened into the state of things among them, and helped to discharge my
mind in Truth's holy authority, I felt great relief and satisfaction -- And the
day following, having spent a little more time with my dear friend James
Thornton, and visited his son Joseph, a choice young man, but very low, and
likely before long to finish his course here, I parted with them in fullness of
gospel endearment, and rode to Wrightstown, where next day I had an open
precious time at their monthly meeting. Then went home with my dear friend John
Simpson, who, having been on a religious visit in New England since I left
home, had kindly visited my dear wife and family, to his own, and I doubt not
to their satisfaction and comfort.

Next day the 4th of the week and 3d of the month, I went to see my kind friend
Thomas Smith and his family, of Buckingham, where, and at whose house, my dear
former companion Joseph Mitchel was sick and died. We were glad to see each
other; and Thomas kindly rode with me to Kingwood, in West- New Jersey, over
the river Delaware, where, on fifth-day I had a good refreshing meeting -- and
another on sixth-day at our friend Joseph Moore's, to a degree of satisfaction.
Then I returned to Kingwood, parting with Thomas at Joseph Moore's. I staid at
Kingwood (not being clear) until after the meeting on first day the 7th of the
month; an open, large and enlarged meeting it was, to my great relief, and I
trust, to the lasting benefit of diverse others. I then had meetings on
third-day at Hardwick, and fifth-day at Mendham -- in both Truth wrought relief
and enlargement. And feeling clear of these parts, I went to New York, where,
on first day the 14th, my mind and mouth were livingly opened, which had never
been the case in that city before, silence having always been my lot when there
before: but now my tongue was loosed, though in a close and somewhat alarming
manner, yet greatly to my own peace, both fore and afternoon -- after which was
held, by appointment, an evening meeting; it was large, and dear Isaac Everett,
of Pennsylvania, now on his return from a religious visit into New England, was
livingly opened and favored in this evening meeting. -- I also had a few words
in this meeting, and then felt clear of the city. But dear Isaac appointed
another meeting next day -- I staid and attended it -- he was helped to declare
deep truths in Truth's authority -- and the desire of my heart was and is, that
they may be duly regarded.

On 3d-day I left the city, and was next day at monthly meeting at Westbury on
Long Island; 5th-day at monthly meeting at Jericho; 6th-day at meeting at
Martinacock; 7th-day at Cow-Neck; first day at Westbury again; and on 2d-day at
Bethphage -- on the whole being greatly relieved in spirit after these
meetings, wherein I had known much subjection of the creaturely will, I found
my mind quite clear and easy; and so, taking an hearty farewell of my dear
friends on the Island, I sat out for New England, and got home to my dear wife
and family on 7th-day the 27th of said third month. -- And being thankful in
heart in finding them in usual health, and having to believe that I had
finished the service required of me at this time, and had been directed and
enabled to return as I went forth, in the Lord's own time and will, I bowed low
in inward awfulness and prostration before him, once more giving up and
dedicating my life and my all to his service, in full faith and assurance,
that, if I rely wholly on him, and remain to be given up to be just where and
what he pleases, go at his command, and come at his command, and at his command
stand still, he will not fail or forsake me; but will bear up, support and
preserve, through all tossings, tempests and dangers, both inward and outward;
and that though the fig tree should not blossom, nor fruit be in the vine;
though the labor of the olive should fail, the flocks be cut off from the
fold, and no herd be in the stall; though all earthly consolation should fail;
yet still I may, and if steadfastly patient and faithful, certainly shall,
amidst all conflicts, dangers and toils, at times and seasons, rejoice in the
Lord, and joy in the God of my salvation; Hab. iii. 17 18.
and finally sing his praise for ever, in that habitation, the house not made
with hands, eternal in the heavens.

My dear wife and children, as also my friends, appeared glad of my safe return
to them again; and on my own part, I was truly glad once more to be favored
with their endeared company and conversation -- may we all so abide in the holy
root of life, and so under the influence and direction of the inward light, as
that we may be mutual helps and encouragements to each other, in the arduous
path and pilgrimage of a truly christian life, through the remaining course of
time allotted us in this vale of tears, this scene of vicissitudes,
tribulations and joys.

I was out on this exercising journey a year and about fifteen days, and
traveled, by computation, about five thousand three hundred miles. And though
my trials and inward exercises have often been more deeply proving than I have
words to convey to any who have not traveled a path of like painful
experience; yet I have ever found, that as faith and patience have been abode
in, and sufferings quietly submitted to, the result has been, a coming forth
with songs of praise and hallelujahs, into the victory and dominion of Truth,
and the glorious liberty of the sons of God. -- And I think I may say, that
through divine help, without which I know I can do nothing, I have been
preserved through some of the deepest probations, and tribulations of my life,
in more constant resignation to the divine will, than ever was for a like space
of time and under equal extremity of trial, and varied anxiety, my attainment
and experience before! -- Blessed for ever, over all, be the great name of the
Lord, and to him be all the praise.

CHAP. IX. An account of his wife's last sickness and death -- some of her
dying sayings, and his peculiar exercises and trials at that time, and
especially on that occasion.
HAVING thus performed the service required of me in the southern states, I
passed near three years at and about home; and had, as usual, many close trials
and besetments to pass through from time to time, until in the 7th month 1791,
it pleased the Most High to prove me in a very near and heart-exercising
manner, in the removal by death of my dearly beloved wife. This trial came at a
time when I was otherways deeply plunged into many probations, both inwardly
and outwardly. -- My state indeed to me bore a lively resemblance to that of
Job of old -- wave on wave, and sorrow upon sorrow, seemed almost ready to
swallow me up. But the Lord had an end in all my sorrows. -- And had he not
been with me in the deeps, and borne up my head above the waves. I had been
swallowed up suddenly, and drowned in the mighty waters of affliction!

I thought before my wife's sickness, it was very doubtful whether I should
ever get safely through my many besetments: but alas! in the midst of these
trials, it pleased the Lord to take from me the dear partner of joys, and
sympathizer in my sorrows. -- She was confined to her bedchamber two weeks,
during great part of which time she was in exquisite bodily pain, which she
bore with becoming patience. One day she lay still and quiet, as if she was in
a slumber; but on hearing it remarked at night, that it had been a favorable
day to her as to pain, she said, it had been a day of much pain to her, though
she had not complained, for she felt no liberty to complain; but found it her
place to bear all that was laid upon her patiently. I kept an account of diverse
lively expressions which dropped from her in her sickness, and which abundantly
evinced her resignation of mind and acquiescence with the divine will in regard
to her approaching dissolution, which she seemed clearly sensible of, and
diverse times spoke of; but what I wrote got mislaid, and I have not since found
it; I much regret the loss of it, and especially because her advice to our dear
children might have been very useful. -- She also gave very suitable advice to
her brothers and sisters, and expressed her thankfulness to her parents for
their watchful and even restraining care exercised toward her in her younger
years, when she used to think a little more liberty would have been no harm;
but now she saw she was then too ignorant of the dangerous tendency of those
liberties, and rejoiced that they did not give way to her inclinations. -- She
pressed it upon her brothers and sisters to remember their parents in their old
age -- told them, they had done much for them when they were unable to help
themselves -- that now they were growing old and feeble, and to be kind to them
and not forget them. -- She also desired them not to forget their brother,
(meaning myself) saying, he will have many afflictions to pass through, with
much care. -- And likewise forget not these little children, they will miss
their mother, and need the care of their uncles and aunts. And speaking to one
of her sisters, said, thou have done a great deal for them, and must not think
of doing less when their mother is gone.

She charged it upon our children to be obedient to their father, loving to one
another, and good to their aged grandfather. -- Two Friends coming in, who had
both been widowers, after several other weighty expressions, she desired them
not to forget the afflicted -- told them they knew something of such trials as
her dear husband would be surrounded with, and that she hoped they would not be
unmindful of him. -- I can scarcely write this account without mourning the
loss of that I wrote from day to day in her sickness.

One day, after expressing her entire willingness to be taken hence at this
time, she said to me, but I have several times thought I should have been
willing to have taken the care of these dear children a little longer if it had
been the divine will -- and I have thought, if it might have been so ordered, I
could have given up every thing that might have been called for, even if it had
been to give thee up to travel in truth's service, let the time be longer or
shorter: I have always given thee up with a good degree of cheerfulness, and
have been supported in thy absence beyond my expectation; and yet I have often
thought, since thy return from thy last journey, that I did not know that I
could ever give thee up again, or bear up in thy absence: but in this sickness
I have felt as though I could give up all, if I might be spared a little longer
to help along in the care of the children -- it has seemed to me that I should
give thee up my dear husband, to go wherever the Lord might lead thee -- it has
seemed so, but may be it would not be so with me if I should be tried with it;
and perhaps I shall be taken away that thou may be set more fully at liberty
to attend to the Lord's requirings in whatever part of the world he may see
meet to employ thee. Then she expressed her deep sense of my kindness to her in
her sickness, and her heartfelt sympathy with me in my trials, past, present
and to come, and her living desires for my support and preservation through
all, to the end of my race, in such a moving manner, that the fresh sense
thereof melts my heart when I recollect the time and substance of the
conversation -- and I trust I shall not soon, if ever, forget the endearment
and solemnity attending it.

On my going into the room very shortly before the scene was closed with her
here, she expressed great gladness at seeing me, and that she had been desiring
me to come -- I believe she was sensible her end was just approaching. -- She
expressed great thankfulness to her dear young friend A. A. for the great care
she had taken of her through the night. All that was alive in me was moved at
this time, for I saw she was just going. Oh! how expressively she looked upon
me! how endearing her expressions! but she was soon past conversation, and
resigned her soul up to him who gave it, on the morning of the 5th of the 7th
month 1791, dying of a putrid disorder, and was buried the 6th in Friends
burying ground in Providence.

Through divine help my mind was pretty well stayed, though deeply affected and
tenderly moved through her sickness, death and burial. And through all, and
after all, I have this consolation, that her soul was centered in divine love,
and sweetened with a fore-taste of heavenly enjoyment. And though painful to me
the separation, and trying in many of my lonely moments; yet in God I have
confidence and hope of consolation, and I dare not do any other than bless his
holy name in every trial; and if he but preserves my soul alive in him, and
faithful in his covenant; all else I yield to his all-wise disposal.

Many a mournful day and anxious night did I pass through, in this my lonesome
condition, and in a deep-felt sense of the buffetings of Satan within, and
certain outward probations, in wisdom suffered to beset me. I saw clearly I
must be redeemed from many things wherein some are taking satisfaction, if I
would live wholly unto God. I saw also that he suffered me to be many ways
afflicted, in order that I might be so redeemed. Sometimes it seemed as if I
could scarce live through my inward baptisms and outward besetments; yet still
pressed forward, until, in a time of deep distress, I found relief and
consolation, in remembering that some of the most distressing mornings of my
life have been followed by some of the most happy and joyful evenings; and some
of the most melancholy evenings, by mornings of most substantial gladness --
therefore drew the following conclusion: I will strive to moderate my joy in
the moment of prosperity -- and in the hour of adversity I will endeavor to
hope; for though sorrow may remain for the night, yet joy comes in the morning.

CHAP. X. Extracts from his diary, and an account of his visit into Connecticut.
7th mo. 12th 1791.
I Feel that I stand in need of a renewal of my strength, in regard to religious
life and progress, and am afresh confirmed, a christian's life is (as he minds
his proper business) a continual warfare! -- Oh my soul, watch and pray
continually -- and think not to get forward rightly by an intermitting watch; a
watch sometimes pretty well maintained; and anon, almost or quite wholly
neglected; for be assured the enemy will make an inroad upon thee, if thou thus
neglectest the watch. -- O holy Father, and Fountain of light, life and
strength, I pray thee enable me to watch and pray without ceasing.

16th day. Afflicted and not comforted; yet dare not let go my hold, nor look
out to visibles for enjoyment. My state seemed that of almost total abstinence.
23d, Humbled and bowed in grateful prostration and reverence, in contemplating
on the wonderful goodness of God to mankind through all ages, especially in
opening and revealing, by his holy spirit, the deep things of his heavenly
kingdom to poor frail man. 27th, a day of great deliverance and enlargement in
gospel authority in the ministry and doctrine of Christ -- and some faithful
labors for the good of the brethren in a more private way. 28th, sat under my
own vine and fig tree, where none could make afraid. 29th, I find yet need of
dying daily -- have in good degree submitted to it this day. Lord, let not
thine hand spare, nor thine eye pity, until thou bring forth judgment unto
victory in me. Fifth of 8th month, I feel that my God has greatly weaned, and
is weaning me; but I want to be able to say, through and with my Savior, 'I
have overcome the world.' John xvi. 33.
I greatly desire fully and unreservedly to die to every thing that is not of
the Father, whether it be of the world, the flesh or the devil -- in short, to
know an overcoming of all evil, and all evil motions and desires, so as that
they may die at the root. And, indeed, this is the only true and effectual
overcoming; for now also the ax is laid unto the root of the tree, Matt. iii.
10.
not the branches only to lop and crop them, but to cut up the tree at the very
root. And talk what men will of imputation -- none are those overcomers to whom
the promise is made and will be performed, that they shall 'eat of the hidden
manna' Rev. ii. 17.
-- have a right to the tree of xxii. 14.
life -- receive a white stone and a new name -- enter in through the gates
into the city, and be made pillars in the temple of God, that shall go no more
out, iii. 12.
but those who maintain the warfare against sin, until Satan is wholly bruised
under them, and the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus set them free
from the law of sin and death. -- Oh! blessed holy God, and Father of all our
sure mercies, lead on, I pray thee, as thou have begun, my exercised soul,
through all the remaining steps and stages of sanctification, until true
judgment break forth unto victory over all sin in me.

6th. Blessed be the name of the Lord! -- the work goes on -- righteousness is
laid to the line, and judgment to the plumb-line, in my soul. Lord, spare not,
nor stay thy hand -- cleanse thoroughly the floor of my heart, and burn up all
the chaff in me with thy baptizing unquenchable fire. 19th, I feel much
reconciled to the divine will, and therein to all my sufferings and
afflictions, inward and outward; and do not wish them removed until they have
done all, for which the Lord leads me into them. And further, it is my desire,
that I may never seek or take satisfaction in any thing this world affords,
otherwise than according to God's most holy will; but that I may receive every
blessing, every favor, comfort and consolation, as also every trial,
affliction, cross and disappointment, as coming from his hand -- and so learn
truly to rejoice evermore, and in every thing give thanks. 1 These. v. 16 18.
So let it be, O Lord my God, for ever -- and may I, in every pursuit, attend
to thy counsel and direction -- may I see in thy light, that it is necessary
and expedient that I be engaged in this or that, either spiritual or temporal
vocation -- may I be ever ready and willing to pursue every necessary
engagement, exercise and labor, of either kind -- may a firm reliance on thy
providential care and blessing, prevent all improper haste or anxiety -- may I
pursue, from day to day, the work and proper business of the day, with suitable
diligence, moderation and composure, unanxious for the event, or for what may
be tomorrow, or some future time; but firmly believing that all things will
and do work together for the good of every soul that truly loves thee -- and
that the only right way for me to promote the prosperity of my future days, is,
to act well my part today, in thy counsel; leaving the disposal of events to
thy providential wisdom and goodness. -- Thus will day unto day utter speech,
and night unto night show knowledge -- One day's work, being rightly done, will
tend toward the right opening to, and performing aright, the work and service
of the succeeding day -- and here will be found no occasion to anticipate the
difficulties of the morrow, for sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.
Matt. vi. 34.
On the one hand, there will be no time to be idle -- nor on the other, to be
over anxious or troubled. -- If sparrows fall not to the ground without God's
providence -- surely he will never leave nor forsake the soul that trusts in
him. -- The life indeed is more than meat, and the body than raiment.

21st. Highly favored and greatly relieved was my exercised mind, in the
meeting at Uxbridge. Truth's testimony flowed like oil, and important doctrines
were therein opened to the people. 28th. This morning, I trust, my mind is in
subjection to the divine will, though heavily laden with inward exercise. --
Oh, gracious God, deliver me from all evil, and make me wholly thine! -- In our
forenoon meeting my soul praised God in silent adoration, on the banks of
heartfelt deliverance. Dear Mary Ridgeway and Jane Watson, from Ireland,
attended, and were livingly opened in the word of the Lord, and spoke with life
and precision to several states present. I think words never dropped from human
lips that ever sank deeper into my heart, than a few that dear Mary uttered
toward the close of her testimony-speaking to the Lord's tried servants,
mentioned, that where Christ is, there they must be; and that she had felt her
mind very nearly united in deep sympathy with some very closely tried souls
present; she added, And it is with me just to revive in the remembrance of
these, what Christ said to his dear disciples, Ye are they which have continued
with me in my temptations, and I appoint unto you a kingdom. Luke xxii. 28 29.
Oh, there is deep meaning in it; my soul felt it in the everlasting covenant
of divine light and life, and well understood the meaning of it. -- Verily,
unless we not only know what it is to be with him in his temptations now and
then a little while, but to continue with him to the end without forsaking him,
we cannot reign with him in his kingdom. But ah! says my soul, the sore and
almost inexpressible tribulations and conflicts that are endured by such for a
season as do truly and faithfully continue with him in his temptations!

Formalists may dream, conceive, and talk about them; but none know the depth
thereof, but such as do, through all pain, peril and probation, continue with
him. Bow low, Oh my soul, and bless his name for ever, that he has thus far
enabled thee to be with him, not only in his reign, but again and again in
poverty, sufferings and death. Thou know, thou deeply, painfully, and
joyfully know, that this leads to, and must precede thy fellowship with him
in glory. But sing, O ye heavens, and shout for joy, ye redeemed souls on
earth; as the pilgrimage, though painful, is rightly continued, and he is
continued with through all; the consolation that follows, when the angels
minister to him and us, as fellow-heirs of God, yea, joint-heirs of glory;
every sigh and every sorrow, is far more than compensated to us: therefore, Oh
thou tribulated follower of Christ, in the regeneration, hold on thy way, faint
not, hold fast that thou have received; let no man take thy crown; be thou
faithful unto death, and he will give thee a crown of life.

Afternoon, my soul bowed low before the Lord in reverent, thankful adoration,
and blessed his holy name. -- And may his name be blessed and praised for ever
by me, and all the living. -- Oh, the living, the living -- they alone can
praise him -- the dead may sing in the dead letter; but cannot praise nor
celebrate the name of the Lord Almighty. This has been a day of divine favor,
after a scene of almost unutterable anxiety and bitterness of soul for much of
many days and weeks past: the exercises attending me through which, the Lord my
God alone is fully acquainted with. But enough it is, that he knows them
thoroughly, and that with him in secret every sigh is numbered, and every tear
bottled up in remembrance; and will certainly, as his will is steadily abode
in, be changed into wine, new, in his heavenly kingdom. Amen, Amen -- thy will,
O God, be done for ever!

9th month 1st. The Lord, the God of my life, was graciously pleased to fill my
soul with the overflowing of divine love, and inshinings of divine light, which
continued with me until late in the night, and wherein I have been much
instructed. -- And, O Lord, my God, I humbly crave of thee to enable me,
rightly, to settle, or to have and know, through thy help, rightly settled in my
mind, every necessary rule, limit and regulation of life; and that thou
would steadily hold my hand and guide my feet, in ways that will please
thee, until every such rule and limitation, receive the sanction in my heart of
a divine law, that is not to be broken again for ever; yea, until a confirmed
and habitual observance of them shall have conformed my whole life thereunto;
and therein to thy divine will, and heavenly image. Amen!

10th month 4th. Jesus Christ is my only hope of glory -- my only consolation
in every woe. O, I long to be wholly his at all times -- I long to be able to
say continually and truly, 'my soul is even as a weaned child.' Psalm. cxxxi. 2.
It is delightful to me to feel myself like a child -- that is, weaned from
what I most delighted in -- yea, from much if any remaining delight in any
thing but the love of God shed abroad in my soul. 10th month 6th. -- Still
thankful for preservation, and begging to be preserved; much broken off from
all creaturely dependence, and all human, all earthly consolation; caring very
little where I am, or may be; what I am, or may be about; or what does, or may
happen to me; so that in and through all I may be preserved from all sin. I
scarce have any wish about my life, whether I may live long, or be soon
released; whether I may have little or much of this world; little or much toil
of body or mind; little or much of the favors and friendship, or the frowns
and reproaches of man -- so that through all I may dwell steadfastly given up
to the will of my God.

10th month 7th. O, thou ever watchful and unslumbering Shepherd of Israel, I
beg and beseech thee, on the bended knees of my prostrated soul, that thou
would arise and save; and suffer me not to crave thy aid in vain. O make, I
pray thee, my feelings, on the approach of every temptation, quick and lively,
in watchfulness and resistance against all sin; and raise, in the inmost of my
soul, an unabated and unremitting abhorrence of all evil; and even of all that
tends to lead the mind into it, or weaken its fortitude, or abate its
perseverance in holy wrestling warfare and watchfulness against it -- For, Oh
my God and my all; I cannot be willing to continue in sin; I cannot consent to
let thee go, or cease my wrestling with thee, until thou bless me, and
preservest my soul from all pollution and defilement. Oh hasten, I pray thee,
my deliverance from all evil, and bruise Satan under my feet; for thine is the
power, the kingdom and glory for ever. Amen.

10th month 8th. I renewed covenant with God, in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, through his help, to be given up, and wholly devoted to his will and
disposal: therefore, in awful prostration, humility, abasement and total
renunciation of my own ability without thee, I cast my care wholly upon thee;
and look up to thee and thy holy habitation for aid. I am sure I can do nothing
without thee -- I am fully persuaded, through thee I can do all things required
of me. O holy Father, thou know that I love thee -- that I love thee above
all things, and that I would rather lay down my life, than live to sin against
thee. O keep my soul alive and suffer it not to have cause again to deplore a
renewed deviation from the way of life and salvation; but as soon as Satan
attempts to ensnare, give me, I pray thee, to behold him -- to rise up in thine
invincible life and power against him, and therein to tread him under my feet.

10th month 18th. This day I am forty years old. I have gone through many deep
probations -- have made many considerable sacrifices for the sake of peace of
mind -- and have also at times come short of that strictness of life, watch and
devotion, which I have believed Truth required of me. O Lord my God and
Savior; thy holy aid, I still do crave. I know I have not yet fully and
abidingly attained thereto. My faith in the possibility and necessity of
attaining it, thou have unshakenly established. O then, I pray thee, enable me
to 'go on to perfection.' Heb. vi. 1.
I have vowed to serve thee for ever, through thy help, and I wish ever to keep
my covenant -- And in keeping my covenant with thee, there will be 'no
condemnation;' Romans viii. 1.
but will be a state of such deep and constant dwelling 'in Christ Jesus,' as
excludes 'walking after the flesh;' and preserves the soul in a steadfast
walking in and after the spirit.

10th month 20th. I opened my concern in our preparative meeting to make a
religious visit to some of the people in the state of Connecticut, and 26th,
laid the same before our monthly meeting.

28th of 11th mo. Riding on the road, my mind was livingly opened; and I
beheld, in the visions of God, large fields of labor allotted me in his
service. A language ran livingly through my soul, and the whole man seemed
almost swallowed up in the flowings of life which accompanied the glorious
prospect! The language was on this wise: -- Thou art called and appointed, and
through many and deep tribulations I have separated thee a prophet to the
nations. Thou have very little more ever to do in the business and affairs of
this life. Gather thy mind from all cumbering things, and stand singly and
wholly devoted to my work, service and appointment. Regard not the world; thou
must be about thy heavenly Father's business; thou must attend to my
directions, and submit therein to thy proper allotment. My will and purpose
requires and loudly calls, and has called, for greater dedication of heart and
singleness of devotion to my work and service in the glorious gospel. Take no
thought for the morrow: do to day what thou find to do, in my light, and in
the liberty and allotment of my holy spirit. Be thou faithful unto death, and I
will assuredly give thee a crown of life; I will hold thee in my holy hand for
ever; I will provide for and take care of thy motherless and as it were
fatherless children in thy absence. -- But if thou decline my service and
appointment, I can, and assuredly will, blast all thy undertakings. Thou may
think to do something for thy children; but thou shall find, to thy humiliation
and disappointment, thy labors shall be vain and fruitless; thou shall but
toil in the night and attain nothing; blasting and mildew shall attend thee;
thy children shall not be availingly assisted by all thy such like endeavors.
Thy comfort in them shall be little or nothing, and above all this, thy soul
shall suffer loss; temptation shall prevail against thee; Satan shall be let
loose to buffet thee, and shall be permitted to prevail; thy life shall be a
life of bitterness and desolation; neither the heaven nor the earth shall
afford thee enjoyment -- thou shall drag out a miserable life in anxiety, and
wish thou had never been. But if in full and unreserved reliance on my
all sufficiency, thou give up thy life and thy all to my disposal, I will
never leave thee nor forsake thee; no lack of any good thing shall thou ever
have cause to complain of. I am Alpha and Omega -- I am all in all -- take me
as such for thy only portion, and seek no other inheritance. In blessing I will
for ever bless thee -- and evermore in all things will I sustain thee, and that
through all time and eternity -- thy soul and all pertaining to thee, shall be
perfectly safe in my care and disposal -- The wind and the sea shall, to thy
awful admiration, obey me -- Thou shall see mavelous things in distant lands,
and wonders in remote regions -- Thou shall view the heavings and rollings of
the ocean -- the sea shall toss and roar about thee, and foam and rage
tremendously -- Amazement shall seize the mariners, the sailors hearts shall
tremble. -- But in the midst of all this amazement, thy soul shall know its
anchor, and in undoubting reliance on my Omnipotence, thine heart shall take
fast hold on me -- Calmness and assurance shall preside in thy soul; confidence
and tranquillity shall gird thee -- My overruling, all-controling government
shall be visibly set forth before thee -- thou shall lean in safety upon me --
and inwardly thou shall magnify my holy name -- and in fullness of faith shall
sing of my goodness -- saying, The Lord on high is mightier than the noise of
many waters. Psalm. xciii. 4.
Thy heart shall leap within thee -- thy soul shall shout for gladness -- Then
shall the language of thy spirit, in awful adoration, on this wise thankfully
arise within thee -- The sea saw it and fled -- Jordan was driven back -- the
mountains skipped like rams, and the little hills like lambs. What ailed thee,
O thou sea, that thou fleddest; thou Jordan, that thou wast driven back -- ye
mountains that ye skipped like rams, and ye little hills like lambs? Psalm.
cxiv. 3 4 5 6.


The foregoing livingly ran through my soul on the road this day. I came home
and penned it immediately, and whether it be ever fulfilled or not, time will
evince. However such is my confidence in that evidence of life accompanying the
opening, that I have ventured here to record it, this 28th day of 11th month
1791. 12th month 28th, Much depressed in our monthly meeting, though Friends gave
me a good certificate to travel into Connecticut, to visit the seed there.

1st month 12th 1792. Opened in the spring of life, in our quarterly meeting
for worship -- proceeded a little, but was suddenly and unexpectedly shut up,
and sat down immediately, after which my soul rejoiced that my will was in
subjection, and that I was sensible I could do nothing of myself. 13th, The
quarterly meeting for business gave me, and my dear friend David Buffum,
concurring certificates, in order to our religious visit to the people of
Connecticut. 15th, Low in heart. Oh, my God, thou leadest me in the valley -- I
accept it as thy will, and as in thy wisdom, for my good. 17th, My state is
depression. Satan roars like a lion. Lord, my heart is melted in me into
tenderness: mine eyes are affected while I write, under a sense of my utter
insufficiency to stand in my own strength. How long. O thou most Holy will it
be ere thou conform my whole man to thine own image or likeness? thou know I
groan within myself, waiting for the full adoption! O that all within me were
like thee, holy as thou art holy, and at all times joined to thee in the
heavenly oneness. Go on, I pray thee, conquering all that opposes thy reign in
me, until every thought be brought into captivity to the obedience of Christ.
Amen.

21st, I wrote the following letter, viz.

My dear friend,
I now feel in a good degree easy about my dear little motherless children. I
much desired way might be made, and could not be satisfied until it was made,
for them to be placed where I could be pretty easy, if even I should be soon
called from this probationary state. I have now given them up to God, and their
and my friends. -- May the Lord Almighty be their God, and bring them early
into saving acquaintance with himself. May those who have them, have them as
their own, and bring them along in the fear of God -- whether I remain in the
body or go hence -- whether I continue to live in that which has made my soul
alive, or depart from it, the dear children have souls immortal to be saved or
lost. And whatever becomes of me, my soul at present, in tenderness and
prostration, bows before the throne of grace on their account, and craves
Almighty aid, and the watchful guardianship of their friends for them. I may
again have them under my immediate care, and I never may -- God only knows --
and to him I commit myself and them -- and rest thy friend

J. S.


31st of 1st mo. I took a solemn leave of the family (that is, my father-in-law
Daniel Anthony's) living in my house, and in whose family I left my own father,
and my two youngest children: and being joined by my friend David Buffum, (Amos
Collins and Benedict Arnold having given up to bear us company) we were on 5th
day of the 2d mo. at the new meeting house in Gloucester, on our way toward
Connecticut, and had meetings as follows, viz. -- 7th, at Killingley, had a
small meeting at -- Dean's; 9th, at David Brayton's in Pomfret; 12th, attended
Friends meeting at Hopkinton; 14th, had one by appointment at Amos Collins's,
my way having been hitherto much closed up as to gospel ministry, my companion
D. B. having a little to offer at times, I trust, to good acceptance; 16th, we
had a good open meeting at Stonington Point, and another in the evening; 17th,
went to New London, and 18th, had a small meeting there in the congregational
meeting house; 19th, had a meeting among the Baptists at New London Great-Neck,
found but little relief in these last meetings, though hope they were of some
use; 20th, had an evening meeting at Lime, in a school-house -- The people were
unsettled, and appeared much unacquainted with spiritual worship -- we labored
a little among them; and, 21st, crossed Connecticut river, by boat, and not
without some danger in the ice, and went to Saybrook; 22d, had a meeting here
in the meeting house -- the priest attended, and a considerable number of his
hearers, and neither he nor his hearers appeared to be much acquainted with our
manner of waiting upon God in a silent travail of soul, and feeling after him.
We labored among them according to the ability received. After meeting he
inclined to have some conversation, and we, being willing, conversed with him
on diverse religious subjects. He was civil; and we parted friendly and
respectfully.

23d. We rode through Killingsworth to Guilford, where, 24th, we had a
soul-solacing meeting; among those who attended, were diverse religiously
exercised souls, whose countenances declared they had been with Jesus. 25th,
had another good meeting in a school-house at Wallingford. After meeting diverse
of the people came to our lodgings, and we had considerable conversation with
them. A physician contended earnestly for the final salvation of all men. We
told him none could be disciples of Christ, but such as took up their daily
cross and followed him, in the denial of self; that he wept over some, who,
though he would have gathered them, they would not; that, though many should
come from the east, west, north and south, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, in the kingdom of God; yet many who were outwardly the children of the
kingdom would be cast out; that those who die in their sins, where Christ is
gone, they can never come; that some were never to have forgiveness in this
world, nor in that which is to come: that some would be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power; that these must go away into everlasting punishment; but the
righteous into life eternal. And finally, parting very friendly, he said he
loved us, and wished us well; and the company seemed very friendly; so, taking
a hearty farewell of each other, we proceeded on our way.

26th. Rode to Waterbury. 27th, had a meeting there; the people were much
unsettled, and too many of them were light; a testimony to the principle of
light and life was borne among them by my companion; and I reproved them for
their uncivil behavior, and testified the impossibility of preaching the
gospel in man's time. 28th, we rode to our friend Elijah Steel's, in Cornwall.
-- 29th, attended Friends meeting at Goshen, at the house of our friend Charles
Richards. First of 3d month, had an appointed meeting at Goshen, at our friend
Charles Richards aforesaid; it was a precious open meeting; after which we rode
to Canaan, and, 2d, to Hudson, in New York state. 4th, attended Friends meeting
there. 7th-day, the Creek preparative meeting -- it was exercising in the fore
part; but Truth reigned over all in the end. 8th, attended Nine-Partners
preparative meeting. -- The searching power of Truth set things in close order
before them. 9th, took leave of several Friends, and rode toward home; where,
on the 14th day, I reached, and found all pretty well. In this journey I rode,
by the account I kept, 488 miles -- a painful exercising journey it has been;
but a good degree of patience was afforded us. -- 28th, contented in a low
state, in our monthly meeting. I am yet weak, -- Lord help, help my soul, and
give it stability.

31st, I opened in our select meeting a concern that had been about 14 years
ripening in my mind, to pay a religious visit to Friends in Europe. My heart
had of late been pressingly full of it, as a vessel wanting vent. Friends left
me at liberty to move the matter in our monthly meeting, when I might feel the
way open for it. They were feelingly dipped into a sense of the travail of my
exercised soul, and Truth was prevalent. 4th month 11th, I laid before the
meeting for sufferings a treatise I had written on baptism. 25th, opened my
concern to make a visit to Europe in our monthly meeting. 6th month 6th,
attended the first sitting of our yearly meeting, which continued until the
12th. It was a very comfortable yearly meeting: much unity, concord and love
prevailed throughout. 6th mo. 27th, in our monthly meeting, I asked for, and
obtained a certificate to pay a small debt, by a visit within Salem quarterly
meeting, and, 30th, set out on said visit into that quarter, and rode as far as
Boston, and, first day of the week, and 1st of 7th month, attended meeting
there -- silent -- the meeting small; yet I hoped Truth's testimony was not
quite lost among them. May a revival take place, and Truth yet prosper there.
Rode to Lynn, and* 2d of the month, had a meeting there: the way not very open;
but I labored in weakness. There is a number of panting souls in that place.
3d, had a laborious meeting at Salem; found some relief. 4th, had a pretty open
meeting at Newbury. 5th and 6th. was at Almsbury and Seabrook; painfully
exercised in both. 7th, 8th and 10th, was at Dover, Berwick and Wyndham; had a
good meeting at the last place, and returned to Falmouth. 11th. attended the
meeting there; it was a close, searching, laborious time. 12th, had a good open
rejoicing meeting at Durham* and rode from thence to Bath. 13th, had a very
trying meeting there; my mind was deeply sensible, though an entire stranger,
that there was either a wolf or wolves among us, in sheep's clothing; the which
gave me much and long painful, inward labor, and also lengthy vocal exercise.
The testimony of the word of life I felt as a flame against antichrist in the
temple of God, against likenesses in religion; forms without substance; words
without life and power: at length my spirit was clear and easy, and after
meeting I was informed a man was there, who was a preacher among a people at
some distance from Bath, and that he was not a religious, or even a moral man.
Thanks be unto God, who gave us the victory this day.

15th, was at Vasselborough: and 16th at Fairfield, where I had a good open
relieving time, having much to declare of the impossibility of salvation in
sin; and I apprehend there was a state present to whom it was applicable. --
17th, rode to Green, and 18th to Falmouth. -- 19th, had a meeting at Portland
in Falmouth, a place that used to be called Casco-Bay, in a congregational
meeting house, a good open meeting, and in the afternoon at Friends
meeting place. -- 20th, rode to Berwick; and, 21st, attended monthly meeting
there; and, 22d, their first day meeting. -- 23d, returned to Falmouth, and,
25th, attended monthly meeting there, was favored in opening divine truths. --
26th, rode to Durham; 27th, favored in the monthly meeting there. -- 29th,
opened in Truth's doctrines at Falmouth, being their first day meeting.

1st of 8th month, had a good meeting at Rochester, among Friends and others --
blessed be the name of the Lord. -- 2d, had a meeting at Lee, where, among
Friends and others, my mind was much relieved in a close searching testimony.
-- 3d, was at Epping, and 4th, at Newtown; had laborious service in each, but
relief in the conclusion. -- 5th, being first of the week, I attended the fore
and afternoon meetings at Salem; and after a close searching testimony, left
the town relieved in mind, and rode to Lynn -- and 6th of the month rode home
-- having been out about five weeks and an half in this journey, and rode about
seven hundred and fifty miles; passed through many deep, trying and exercising
seasons; and blessed the name of the Lord for his holy help, who, in the day of
battle, gave me the victory. -- 9th day of the 8th month, attended our
quarterly meeting; it was a favored time. Dear John and Benjamin Reeve, from
Jersey, attended this meeting.

Having passed the time since my return from the Eastern Quarter at and about
home, in the attendance of meetings and revision of my journal, some other
writings, and preparing for my European journey, having now obtained
certificates from our monthly and quarterly meetings for that purpose, placed
my children to satisfaction, and settled my outward affairs, am this 26th day
of the 11th month, about ready and expect this day to leave home. -- Lord, thou
have held my hand, and covered my head in many battles -- be with me, I pray
thee, through all; and keep me from evil. Be with my dear motherless children;
visit them, I pray thee, by thy holy spirit; lead them in the way of refinement
and self-denial; and, finally, bring them unto glory. -- Visit and revisit,
bless and preserve, O Lord my God, I humbly pray thee, all my near relations
and friends; make bare thy Arm for poor New England; and if it be thy holy
will, make thyself more livingly known to many within her borders: and hasten
thy great work over the face of the earth, that nation may cease warring with
nation, and righteousness cover the earth as water does the sea.

CHAP. XI. Account of his voyage to Europe.
ON the 26th day of the 11th month, 1792, I took a solemn leave of my dear
father, father and mother-in-law, my two youngest children, whom I left in
their care, and of my brothers and sisters-in-law, and accompanied by my kind
friends Thomas Arnold and Smith Brown, went to Boston. 27th, the ship not ready
to sail, I made some preparations for the voyage. 29th, my two said friends
returning home, I attended the meeting in Boston which was small; I had however
a few words of invitation for them. 30th, I went to Lynn, and 1st of the 12th
month, visited diverse families there; and 2d, attended their large meeting in
silence; 3d, returned to Boston; 4th, wrote letters home; and 5th, went on
board the ship Mercury of 240 tons, bound for Dunkirk, Benjamin Glover, of
Nantucket, master. We sailed about noon: some time in the afternoon we lost
sight of Boston. In the night all hands were called up, and the ship put about
in order to return to the harbor, she leaking, and the leak rapidly
increasing, that is, from the rate of one hundred strokes of the pump an hour
to six hundred. The captain, mates and crew, were alarmed; but she soon leaked
less on this tack, and they put about again. -- 6th, the ship still leaking,
the captain and several men searched on the outside for the leak, but sound
none; after which, the leak moderating, cheerfulness returned in the faces of
the company.

7th, the leak greatly increased, to near one thousand strokes an hour. Sadness
again resumed its empire over the crew. The captain knew not what to do; at
length he put about again, and sailed homeward a while. The weather was pretty
rugged during the time of this increasing leak. The leak continuing, the
captain ordered a hole to be cut through the second deck to go in and search
for it, which was done, and the leak soon found, to wit, an open auger-hole of
about an inch and an half, at the ship's stem, so high up as not to leak
constantly, which being stopped, the number of strokes were soon reduced to
twenty-five an hour. Oh! what a change this wrought in the countenances of the
poor sailors. They soon seemed as if they had forgot all their sorrows. They
put ship about, and now seemed as if they were going to sea in earnest. The
captain's looks proclaimed the relief of his heart, though he was moderate
through all. My trust was only in God my hope, refuge and defense. I appealed
to him who knew all hearts, that he knew my motives in this voyage were none
other than that I might be found obedient to his holy call, and faithful in his
service; and if it was now his will to suffer my body to descend into a watery
grave, 'thy will be done.' was the honest language of my heart. I could not
wish myself on shore, nor on board another vessel; for I had felt quite easy in
taking passage in this, and remained so. I believed the winds and waves obeyed
him, and that his providential care is over all his creatures. I felt safe in
his hand, and reposed myself as in the hollow of it -- blessed be his name for
ever.

8th, all cheerful on board. The motion of the ship has kept me a little
sea-sick. -- 9th, cloudy and rainy. -- I sat a while in solemn silence, waiting
upon the Lord my God; but though my mind was somewhat stayed, it was inwardly
as outwardly, a cloudy time, indeed a time of deep proving to me. -- 10th, At
evening the wind arose, and roared tremendously; it held all night: the men
tied up the sails, lashed the helm, and let the ship drift in the wind and
waves. -- 11th, the gale still continued all the last night, and all this day
and night with violence. The captain said this morning he had not, for eight
years past, known so terrible a time, for so long continuance, though that was
but about the middle of it: and indeed it was considerably more violent the
night following than at all before. It stormed through the whole; but this
night the storm and tempest of wind was dreadful. The ship was bound on a
whaling voyage from Dunkirk, and for that purpose had boats on board. One of
these was considerably dashed to pieces this night: three or four yards or
spars were lost: several fowls died, and the only live sheep we had on board
came near dying, even under deck. I felt resigned through all; and, though poor
in spirit, I never wished myself elsewhere, or in any wise repented my voyage.
I saw God's wonders in the deep, and it would almost seem at times as if the
briny waves might prevail against us -- though I cannot say there was a moment
wherein I really lost my confidence.

I had steadily, for many months, firmly expected and believed I should see
wonders on the mighty waters. My God had sealed it on my soul, that the loud
roar of winds and the dread rolling of the waves should awfully attend my
passage, and prove my hold on heaven. And, therefore, when the time of trial
came, I said in my heart, it is the Lord, let him fulfill his purposes: let him
do what he will with me: naught besides his holy will can be good for me; and
why should I wish even the most disagreeable parts of it averted, mitigated or
even shortened? I believed I had had his holy promise who cannot lie, that I
should live through these dreadful tossings on the bosom of the ocean, and once
more set my foot on firm ground; yea, bless his holy name, in wonders yet to
come on shore. See his prospect.
I cannot say I was not nearly proved in regard to his divine superintendency,
nor that I did not almost doubt the certainty of his inspoken word of promise
to my soul, though I well remembered the clearness of the prospect, and the
holy warmth and energy that did livingly attend the same, months before. And
though the evidence of divine things was very low in my mind, yet I could not
cast away my confidence, being still persuaded, that, if I had ever known the
holy word at all, I had had it in the present instance. Here my foot fixed, and
my all I still surrendered up to his disposal, who is God over all for ever.

12th. About noon the wind and storm was so far abated that the captain had the
ship under sail again, though still the roar of elements remained. 13th, It is
still cloudy and rainy. The sun has been seen but little since we left Boston;
and I think it has rained or snowed, more or less, every day and night but one.
14th, Very little sunshine -- some rain. 15th, Rainy all day, at night it
cleared up, and gave us to hope for settled and comfortable weather; but 16th,
it stormed again, and snowed plentifully; but at night it cleared off. 17th,
Stormy again. We had soundings on the grand banks of Newfoundland at forty
fathoms; but little wind for two or three days. Afternoon cleared up so
pleasantly, that great hopes were entertained of having good weather. 18th,
Forenoon stormy with but little wind, the storm continued until near night;
then the wind springing up fresh and fair, it cleared away. The captain said he
had not been able to get but one good observation during our being at sea, so
little sunshine have we had for this almost two weeks. But my soul is satisfied
in the divine disposal.

19th. Fair weather and a good fresh breeze. We now seem to look forward with
cheerfulness. 20th and 21st, a very good breeze continued most of these days.
22d, this day a good fresh breeze at S. W. the weather cloudy; but the cloud
over my mind is in degree dispelled; blessed be the name of the Lord. -- Lord,
hold me in thy holy hand, and make me ever truly watchful, thankful, and
steadfastly believing. Amen. 23d, we are still favored with a good lively
breeze, and make good way ahead. 24th, the same as yesterday; during the last
night I got very little sleep; (though this is usual with me on this voyage)
yet in most fervent intercessions I besought the Lord to be with me through
all. 25th, 26th and 27th, still good winds. O the wonders of the rolling
foaming deep! If the Lord's hand was not underneath, we should surely sink
beneath the raging waves! Who can be an atheist? or what can be an atheist's
hope? 28th, a very good lively wind, cloudy and small rains. Last night, a
night of anguish to my proved soul. All former experience cannot prevent
renewals of unspeakable anxiety, when the Lord is pleased to prove his own as
'at Massah,' and to 'strive with them (in his own way) as at the waters of
Meribah.' Exodus xvii. 7.
29th, an excellent wind, cloudy and wet. -- The mariners cast the lead, found
soundings at about 90 fathoms. 30th, fair wind and weather. It was agreed on
board, that this morning, when the sun was about two hours and an half high,
that we had not had so much fair weather at a time, since we left Boston, as
this morning. 31st, in the morning found sixty fathom water; we were now
abreast Scilly islands according to our calculations. This afternoon we saw the
Lizard. Fresh wind and cloudy. Thus ends the year 1792.

1st of the 1st month 1793. The wind increased from a good fresh breeze, to a
strong gale -- saw land diverse times this day, and a number of ships going up
and down the English channel. 2d, almost calm. Thus, after a storm, comes a
calm. May my soul take courage to weather out the yet remaining storms of life,
in consideration that, now and then, it will be calm; and in full hope of a
safe entrance ere long, and eternal calm abode in the haven of immortal bliss;
as we are now, I trust, about entering in a few days our outward port. 3d, in
the morning we were off Calais cliffs, almost becalmed, gained no ground all
day. 4th. after beating to and fro all night, just in by the land near Calais,
we took a pilot on board from there this morning, and tried to work up the
straits, but made little advance* by reason of contrary winds and tides. We lay
at anchor this night between Calais and Dunkirk.

5th, Got within about four miles of Dunkirk harbor; could get no further, so
cast anchor again. But being desirous to be with the few Friends at Dunkirk
next day at meeting, I went on board the pilot boat, among coarse uncouth
Flemmings, and a Frenchman or two, all strangers, and got safe ashore, and soon
to the house of my dear friend William Rotch and family, of Nantucket, now
resident here at Dunkirk in French Flanders, where I met a very cordial
reception. My soul bowed in thankfulness to Israel's God, whose unfailing Arm
had thus far borne up, and whose goodness so far had fulfilled his holy word,
as to bring me safe through all to shore. 6th, I sat with the few Friends of
this place, in their meeting, and rejoiced in the divine presence, of which my
enjoyment was greater than at any time during my whole passage from America. My
way opening in a small testimony, my soul was relieved and praised God, on the
banks of deliverance, both outward and inward.

7th. Wrote letters home to my friends. 8th and 9th, visited some families.
Dear Robert Grubb, of Ireland, came here from Paris the last evening. 13th, I
found a good degree of relief in the public meeting; but became much more
thoroughly relieved in an evening meeting which we found a concern to hold, at
the sixth hour. The meeting place being filled by Friends and others; it was a
good time; and at the close we had a solid opportunity with the members only,
and advised and encouraged, as way opened in the life; and diverse young Friends
being sensibly impressed with a living sense of the necessity of pressing
forward in the line of duty, my soul rejoiced among them, after several days of
close inward exercise. 14th, I left Dunkirk, accompanied by my dear friends
William Rotch and Robert Grubb, and rode to Calais; and feeling quite clear of
Dunkirk, it was to me a pleasant ride, though the ways were very broken and
difficult. 15th, the wind being very high, we were detained in Calais, from
crossing to England; and though the detention was not desirable, yet being
resigned, we fell into a field of instructive and cementing conversation, which
I trust will not soon if ever be erased. 16th and 17th, still detained at
Calais. 18th, crossed to Dover, and was glad to find myself at last in the
company of my dear friends in England.

20th. At the fore and afternoon meetings, and an evening sitting at the house
of my dear friend Richard Baker, with a pretty large number of Friends, I had
full opportunity to become relieved in mind in regard to the deep travail of
spirit which I felt for Friends of this place: May they live loose to the
world, and separate from its beguiling friendships and influence. 21st and 22d,
much unwell with a cold, and a deep heavy cough, so that I kept house. 23d.
rode, accompanied by my dear friend William Rotch, by post-chaise to Rochester,
lodged at our friend Dr. William Cooper's. 24th, attended the meeting at
Rochester; long silent, but at length I was a little helped in testimony -- my
travail was and is that Friends there may live and move in the life of true
religion. 25th, we went to London, and attended the meeting for sufferings
there. 26th, we attended two sittings of said meeting* and my concern was, that
Friends might dwell deep, and act in the current of life in their religious
movements: I labored a little to that purpose and sound satisfaction. 27th,
attended in the forenoon Grace Church Street meeting -- afternoon that at
Devonshire-House -- in the evening we again attended the meeting for
sufferings, where my concern and labor still was, that Friends should dwell
and act in the divine life. 28th, we attended the select morning meeting, where
my service was in silent travail among them. 29th, attended Horseleydown
meeting, silent, as also next day at the Peel meeting. 31st, livingly opened in
Ratcliff meeting, to a degree of unspeakable rejoicing; but at the Park
meeting, in the evening, I stood up in a feeling sense of some good, and much
good will; but could not get forward, the way quite closed up, and I sat down.

1st of 2d mo. I attended the meeting for sufferings. 3d. In the forenoon I
attended Westminster meeting, and afternoon the Peel; in both I had divine
relief in bearing gospel testimony. 4th, Attended the select morning meeting.
5th, We attended Devonshire-House monthly meeting, my way was much closed up.
6th, My soul was made glad in gospel testimony, at Grace Church Street monthly
meeting. 7th, We rode out about seven miles to the monthly meeting at
Tottenham, where the Lord livingly helped us. It was a good time, and we
returned in the evening. 8th, attended the meeting for sufferings. 9th, We
visited diverse Friends families. 10th, We attended in the forenoon the Park
meeting, and in the afternoon that at Horseleydown; in both the Lord dealt
bountifully with us, Truth rising over all, and we may thankfully say,
'hitherto the Lord has helped us.' 11th, Found relief in clearing my mind in a
good degree in the select meeting. 12th, We attended the monthly meeting at
Horseleydown. 13th, I rejoiced in Truth's victory over death, in a meeting at
the school-house for Friends at Peel meeting. Also on 14th, at the monthly
meeting at Westminster. 15th, Had a hard cold and cough; kept house. 16th and
17th, Still unwell. 18th, I got out though weak to the select morning meeting.
19th, We went out to Barking monthly meeting held at Plasto, about four or five
miles from London. 20th, attended Peel monthly meeting, where I was much closed
up except in discipline. 21st, that at Ratcliff, much in the same way. 22d,
attended the school meeting at Islington, and the meeting for sufferings: still
I was quite shut up in silence. 23d, I wrote letters to my friends. 24th,
attended Devonshire-House and Grace Church Street meetings, and select meeting
in the evening at Devonshire-House, besides a family visit; in all which Truth
triumphed over all, the Lord himself gave the word, and in his divine life and
authority it was published. 25th, we attended the select meeting to a good
degree of satisfaction. 26th, at Horseleydown, and 27th at Deptford -- the
testimony and word of life were rejoicingly witnessed in eminent exaltation,
diverse persons attended not of our society -- the spring of the gospel and its
glorious doctrines were livingly opened. 28th, Truth opened gospel doctrines,
and brought forth necessary admonitions and warnings in its own pure life at
Westminster, where we sat up our Ebenezer, and thankfully acknowledged, as on
many former occasions, 'hitherto the Lord has helped us.' 1st of 3d mo. I was
at the meeting for sufferings, shut up in silence. 2d. I wrote, visited a sick
friend, and rode to Plasto, to attend meeting there next day.

I may here mention, my mind has been deeply affected under some serious
considerations of the state of things in the world, and particularly in this
nation. What a number of men are there who assume the station of gospel
ministers; and, under that pretense, drain and even violently force away from
the proper owners large sums of money, which they do very little to earn! --
Even if it were right to preach for hire, and if Christ's true ministers could
freely and righteously receive money for their ministry, (which they by no
means can) yet to see a set of almost idle drones living on the honest labors
of the industrious, as great numbers of the upper clergy do, whilst they not
only thus oppress many poor laymen, as they choose to call them, but also press
down to a very low price and poor living, even many of the lower clergy who do
the work for them, as if a minister of Jesus could have his work done and his
ministry performed faithfully in the sight of God, by hiring another to preach
for him, and with money extorted from those it properly and honestly belongs
to, while themselves live in luxury and at ease, in their ceiled houses, and
but seldom visit their flock; the prospect of these things is deeply affecting.

Oh! most assuredly the land mourns, and God is angry because of these things,
and in some way or other he will arise and shake the earth, and also this false
heaven -- this vain and oppressive ministry, and rend the power from the idle,
lordly clergy. But whatever be the means, so that it is in the pure counsel of
God, my very soul breathes to the Almighty, that he may, in the way of his own
good pleasure, hasten the downfall even of protestant Babylon; rend the power
of the idle, useless clergy, and thus emancipate the people from the bondage
and oppression they groan under, that the earth may enjoy her sabbaths again.
But how these deeply to be pitied, these too worthless, too worldly, and too
cruel pretenders to the ministry of the gospel of Christ; or how those civil
rulers* who, to answer the purposes of aggrandizement and power, support them;
will be able to settle their accounts in the great day of the Lord, the solemn
settlement of all things, is a consideration truly awful!

If these hints are ever published, let not delicacy prevail to affect any
unnecessary mitigation of the close expressions in which they are couched. It
is time these deceivers of men, these dark bodies, who form an eclipse between
God and the souls of men, should hear and seriously hearken to the voice of
plain, honest and undisguised truth. And whether they will hearken and hear,
yea or nay, let them be assured God is arising, and will shake and remove them
out of the way; and their domination shall be remembered with abhorrence!

3d of 3d mo. We had a good open meeting at Plasto. 4th, I had solid relief in
the select morning meeting there, through deep dwelling and plain dealing: may
the Lord fasten it as a nail in a sure place. 5th, we attended the monthly
meeting at Devonshire-House. 6th, that at Grace Church Street. 7th, that at
Tottenham; in all which I had solid satisfaction; as also at an evening meeting
which I was concerned to appoint on the 8th, at said Tottenham: general notice
was given, and it was a large crowded meeting, many not of our society
attending. It was long silent; but after that, Truth's doctrines were largely
opened and declared to the people, who behaved very commendably, and were
remarkably still and quiet, through the long silence, and to the close of the
meeting.

9th, I visited diverse families, and therein had peace. 10th, attended meeting
fore and afternoon at Tottenham. 11th, the select morning meeting at
Grace Church Street; and 12th, the meeting at Devonshire-House; all to solid
satisfaction in the Lord. 13th, we attended the monthly meeting at Stains,
seventeen miles from London; and next day their particular meeting at the same
place; in both which Truth reigned over all: thanks be unto God who gave the
victory. Many not of our society, being notified, attended the last meeting:
and I believe some of them were, through the openings of divine life, solidly
instructed and solemnized in spirit. 15th, we had a good open meeting at
Long-ford, and, on 16th, another at Uxbrigde* 17th. one at Brentford, and in
the evening one at Hammersmith -- all favored meetings; though many of the
people's views and expectations being too much outward caused the spring to be
long shut up in several of them. -- This may be strange doctrine to some; but
some others know that the spring must be opened in the hearer, or else there
can be but little profitably done by the speaker. And he that speaks only in
the ability that God immediately gives, must feel a door of entrance in the
people's minds, or it is very difficult to get safely and relievingly forward.
But when the spring is livingly opened in him that speaks, and in those that
hear, then it is that deep calls unto deep, at the sound of the waterspouts
Psalm. xlii. 7.
of life, and here instruction is sealed.

After these meetings we rode to London, and were affectionately received by
our dear friend John Elliot, his wife and children* 18th, we again attended the
select morning meeting in the city, to a degree of satisfaction. 19th, we were
at monthly meeting at Barking. 20th, at a meeting appointed at Plasto; and, on
21st, at their meeting at Barking; all affording some consolation. 22d, we
attended the meeting for sufferings at London. 23d, I wrote letters home, and
went out to Wandsworth. 24th, the word of the Lord was powerful through me, a
poor instrument, to the people at Wandsworth; and I can truly say with Paul,
according to his working, which works in me mightily, Colos. i. 29.
in many of these meetings: may it have its full effect on the minds of the
people. 25th, we attended the select quarterly meeting in London, at
Grace Church Street, where I was silent. 26th, and the quarterly meeting for
worship and discipline was large and favored. 27th, we attended its
adjournment, and in the evening, the youth's quarterly meeting for worship.
28th, were at the meeting at Kingstown upon Thames, where some hardened hearts
were felt to oppose in spirit the arising of Truth's testimony, they being in a
dark and unbelieving state. In the evening we had a meeting at Esher, to solid
satisfaction. 29th, attended the burial of a Friend at Alton: dark spirits here
also, I apprehended, inwardly opposed the truth: however, the testimony arose
through deep wading over all, blessed be the name of the Lord!

30th, we had an evening meeting at Gadalming, to some solid instruction. 31st,
attended the fore and afternoon meetings at Guildford, in which Truth reigned,
though things are low there. In the evening we attended the select quarterly
meeting, and, 1st of 4th mo. Truth livingly qualified to labor, both in the
quarterly meeting for worship, and in the men's and women's meetings for church
affairs. 2d, we rode to Reading* and 3d. had a meeting there, and in the
evening at Kerby. 4th, one at Shillingford, and at evening at Wallingford, and,
5th, one at Abingdon; in all which diverse besides Friends attended, but seemed
in general to have very little sense of any thing more in religion than the
customary formal performances -- which, according to my observation, is too
generally the case with the professors of religion in England. Tell them any
thing about divine life in religion, and they seem to think one an enthusiast,
and perhaps some of them would give a smile of ridicule: yet, to do them
justice, they are pretty generally civil; but appear very insensible and
unbelieving as to divine influence. There is indeed so little entrance into
their hearts in many places, that it almost prevents a door of utterance; and
when something opens, it requires great humility and watchfulness to keep on
the right foundation. I had some satisfaction in these last meetings, though
Truth did not reign triumphant over all, as at some other times.

7th, We had a large meeting at Oxford, silent for a considerable time; but
Truth gradually arose, and light shined through and over great obscurity and
insensibility. Oh! the deadness of professors! Oh! the flat formality that too
generally reigns! The English Episcopal hierarchy must and will be shaken! Yet
once more I shake not the earth only, but also heaven. Heb. xii. 26.
One stone must not be left upon another, of mere creaturely performances,
where God is known to be all in all, and so he is known, where Christ has
reigned in the heart, until he has put down all rule and all authority, 1 Cor.
xv. 24.
but that of the pure truth; for this is the state in which is fulfilled the
precious prediction and promise, that the Lord alone shall be exalted in that
day, Isai. ii. 17.
and that the professors of Christianity may be shaken from their dead forms
and lifeless images, and come to know 'that day,' and therein God's exaltation
over all that is of man, is the travail and prayer of my soul to the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. And, O my God, if it be thy will, I pray thee,
hasten the more general coming and knowledge of that day among the nations.
Amen. After meeting we rode to Witney, and 9th, attended the quarterly meeting
there -- I was helped a little, but got very low in mind.

10th. I could not see my way to go forward, so staid the meeting for worship,
in which I felt and observed a total silence, I believe ordered in divine
wisdom as a lesson of instruction to others. 11th, we had a meeting at
Farringdon. 12th, rode to Circencester, and had an evening meeting there. 13th,
went to Hampton, and, 14th, were at meeting at Nailsworth; and in the evening
at Painswick. 15th, we had two meetings at Gloucester, and, 16th, one at Ross.
In all these the one universal and only principle of all true religion and
godliness was our help, and, through its own living and helping influence, was
declared and testified of to the people, though sometimes with but little
evidence of entrance; yet at others it seemed evidently to prevail over all.
17th, we had a painful evening meeting at Monmouth in South Wales -- diverse of
the people were whispering, talking, and some laughing, near all the time, for
which they were pretty closely reproved. We concluded the meeting without any
attempt to preach the gospel among them, for no way seemed to open for it.
18th, we had a pretty large evening meeting at Pontypool, to a degree of
satisfaction; from thence we went to Llandilo, and, 21st, were at meeting
there, and though I was sensible there was great place in the people's minds,
with seriousness and tenderness, I could not express a word of what I felt
flowing in my heart toward them; but for some cause, was made an example of
silence among them. O Lord, I pray thee preserve my spirit alive in thee, and
keep me subjectly given up, whether to speak or keep silence. After this
meeting we rode to Caermarthen, and, 22d, had a meeting there, and, 23d, came
on the select meeting of ministers and elders there, for North and South Wales,
wherein I experienced considerable exercise among them. Afterward came on a
meeting for worship, of Friends only; and then the business of the quarterly
meeting transacted at this season of the year, by what is called the yearly
meeting.

24th, Were held two large public meetings, one in the sore and the other in
the afternoon; silence was my lot. 25th, the select meeting and meeting for
discipline met again, after which Friends held another meeting for worship
among themselves in the evening, my pain and affliction continued through all,
though I dropped some close hints in the select meeting respecting ministry, and
made a few remarks in the evening meeting, which afforded some relief to my
mind. After all these meetings, I felt not clear of the people of Caermarthen:
so when Friends were mostly gone from the place, dear Deborah Darby, Rebecca
Young and myself, staid one more meeting, viz. on 26th, in which I received
much relief; and 27th, rode with a very peaceful mind to Swansea; 28th, had
great enlargement and relief in the meeting there. The four following days we
had meetings at Neath, Cowbridge, Cardiff and Newport. These were almost wholly
of people not of our profession, among whom gospel doctrines were opened
(though under some depression at times) in Truth's life and authority. An
increase of true religion in England and Wales is much wanting; yet, blessed be
Jehovah's holy name, a few are found from place to place, who know it in a good
degree of dominion.

3d. We left Wales and went to Bristol, where I met with my dear friend Samuel
Emlen from Philadelphia, in America, on a religious visit to this country, who
had been in this city some time: Our joy was mutual, and mingled with tears of
affection, in remembrance of past seasons of divine refreshment together in our
native country. 5th, We attended three large public meetings at the Fryar'a
meeting (so called) in the city of Bristol. 6th, one more select, though large;
and, 7th, two more large public meetings; these concluded the yearly meeting
at Bristol. I was silent through all these meetings, as was also dear Samuel
Emlen; and on first day afternoon the meeting was silent likewise. I was led to
deplore the low state of the ministry, with renewed desires, that our preaching
might be such, through him who is the Resurrection and the life, that the dead
may be raised: for the letter will kill, does kill, and has killed its tens of
thousands.

8th. I attended meeting at Lawrence-Weston, where, in the power of the gospel,
I labored among them. 9th, I sat the meeting in silence again at Bristol; and,
though I expected, from the exercise of my mind, my bonds would burst in
sunder, it proved not so: the time was not come. We went to Melksham, and
visited diverse families, in true gospel openness; and 12th. attended the fore
and afternoon meetings there, in both which Truth prevailed. 13th, we attended
the monthly meeting at Broomham; at six in the afternoon we had a meeting at
Devizes, and one next day at Marlborough, after which I again thankfully
acknowledged, 'hitherto has the Lord helped us.' 1 Samuel vii. 12.
15th and 16th, We had relieving and edifying meetings at Newbury and
Maidenhead; our dear friend Samuel Emlen being with us at these, to our
rejoicing. 17th, we attended the meeting at Uxbridge, after which, conducted by
my kind friend John Hull, who had been with me several weeks, I went to London,
where I attended the yearly meeting, which began for ministers and elders the
18th of 5th mo. 19th, I attended the Peel meeting; silent.

20th, Began the yearly meeting for church discipline, for inspecting into the
state of the society, and regulations thereof; which continued by adjournments
until the 28th, as did the select meeting until the 29th, the latter not
meeting every day like the former: and though I was silent in several of these
meetings, yet I had some service in some of them, both public and in a more
select capacity; and, on the whole, I had a good degree of solid satisfaction
in this yearly meeting: the great Helper of Israel was graciously pleased to
shine upon our hearts, and qualify for service in his church. And many deeply
exercised souls being gathered together, they were a strength to each other.
Friends generally appeared condescending to what arose as Truth's judgment,
whomsoever it was through and however contrary to what they had conceived or
expressed. The Lord is raising up a living army in this nation, who are, and if
they stand faithful will yet become more and more useful in the militant
church. Oh, the need there is of wisdom and forbearance in the church! may the
God of Israel guide, guard and preserve the honest-hearted, and may they, in
the becoming meekness of true wisdom, keep singly to his divine directions.

30th, I attended Westminster meeting, to the relief of my mind. 31st, the
school meeting for children at Clerkenwell, in which I found little exercise in
the ministry. In this meeting dear Mary, the wife of our friend George Stacy,
and daughter of our beloved friend Rachel Wilson, for the first time appeared
in public testimony -- may the Lord preserve her; she appeared to be a deeply
exercised woman, and to have given up greatly in the cross, thus to be exposed.

First of 6th month. I wrote letters and visited the sick and afflicted. 2d, I
attended Peel and Westminster meetings, to the solid peace of my mind. 3d, the
morning meeting of ministers and elders; 4th, then monthly meeting at
Devonshire-House -- an open and triumphant season. 5th, the monthly meeting at
Grace Church Street. 6th, that at Tottenham, silent as to public testimony.
7th and 8th, Joseph Nicholson going with me for Ireland, we rode to Birmingham,
a large town; and 9th, were at their two meetings, and preparative meeting; and
10th, had a meeting at Tamworth -- In all which Truth reigned, and life was in
dominion, though things are but low at those places. 11th, we had a meeting at
Uttoxeter, wherein, though I had much to say, I found very little satisfaction;
but had great need of patience after it was ended in order to my inheriting the
promises. 12th and 13th, attended the quarterly meeting at Leek, to solid
satisfaction. Then went to Macclesfield, Stockport and Morley; the last a very
large but exercising meeting. I found much to say, but got little solid relief.
17th, we rested at our dear friends Richard and Martha Routh's. 18th, attended
monthly meeting there. 19th, we had a good meeting at Oldham, and 20th, another
at Crawshay booth, also attended monthly meeting there. 21st, we had a blessed
large meeting at Marsden, and one the same day at Sawley. Thence we went to
Newton, and, 23d, were at meeting there; had much labor and little relief.
25th, we had a meeting at Preston, to some satisfaction, a few serious people
attending among others. We went on to Liverpool; where, 26th, at dear Robert
Benson's, I wrote letters to my friends both in New and Old-England, and next
day attended meeting there; the spring was low, but rose gradually, some of us
singing joyfully unto it.

28th and 29th, I was unwell, and the wind was against our passage to Ireland,
and after several days detention by contrary winds, and attending their
meetings on first day, on the 4th of the 7th month, we sailed for Ireland, in
the Viceroy Packet, of Liverpool. The wind was mostly contrary during the
passage, which was therefore a long and trying one of near six days. 9th, we
landed at Dublin, where I received comfortable letters from home; and after
writing letters and visiting a few families, on the 12th attended meeting at
Sycamore-Alley in Dublin, in the life and power of the gospel. 14th, I attended
the meeting at Meath-street and Sycamore-Alley, to my own great relief of mind;
16th, the monthly meeting at Meath-Street, in the enlargement of the gospel;
and, through some close searching labors, got great relief. Meath-Street and
Sycamore-Alley meetings are both for the same Friends, but held alternately to
accommodate, both parts of the town. 17th, accompanied by my kind young friend
Thomas Bewley, junior, son of dear Thomas Bewley, at whose house I lodged at
Dublin, I went to Baltebois, and had there an open meeting among a few Friends
and others, and we rode to Ballitore, where I was sick all the next day, being
taken the day before. 19th, had a pretty good meeting here, and next day
another at Castle-Dermot; the day following at Carlow, where, near the close of
the afternoon meeting, I had to bear testimony to a good degree of peace and
satisfaction. 22d, long silence of prevailed in a meeting I had at Kilconner;
but truth gave us the victory at last: blessed be the name of the Lord for
ever. Then we had meetings at Ross, Forest, Ennescortha, Cooladine, Ballantore,
Ballanclay, Ballicone and Wicklow, taking two in a day -- all pretty open
satisfactory meetings except the last, which was somewhat painfully exercising.

29th, we returned to Dublin, and next day attended the meeting for worship,
and adjournment of the monthly meeting at Meath-Street; and the day following,
wrote to my family and some other friends in America. Thence accompanied still
by dear Thomas Bewley, jun. we went to Rathfriland, and 3d of 8th month, had a
good meeting there. 4th, attended the meeting there, both fore and afternoon, I
was considerably enlarged in testimony, but in so low and feeble a manner, that
after meeting I sunk into great discouragement, to think that though I stood up
and proceeded in the evidence and feeling of duty, yet very little life or
relief of mind was experienced. The meeting was large. 5th, exercise of mind
and pain of body caused the last to be unto me a night of much uneasiness; but
endeavoring this morning to 'possess myself in patience.' I became at length
composed. 6th, I remained unwell, but rode to Lurgan, and was at meeting there
next day. I felt no freedom that public notice should be given, which was very
unusual; and near the close of the meeting, (having sat in silence) I stood up,
though not expecting to say any thing in the usual line of the ministry, and
told them, those who go to their religious meetings with expectations and
desires of outward help, and are thereby diverted from looking inward and
feeling after divine help, go to their meetings in a deviation of mind from a
true gospel state and dependence -- and all who are looking to instruments for
help in their meetings, otherwise than helped of God through them, and in his
own time and according to his own will, are not true worshippers in spirit and
in truth. But I have cause to believe, that even some of our society, at times,
who attend meetings and sit very still and orderly, know little or nothing of
true silence, and feel very little of that exercise of soul by which they may
experience true christian watch and prayer, when assembled together before God,
and in his awful presence. -- The meeting then broke up, and I felt solid
peace, in a living sense, that I had not kindled a fire of my own; but had been
limited to Truth's pure motion, which is ever safe.

8th. I was at the meeting at Lisburn: public notice was given, but the
meeting was silent. 9th, I had a meeting at Killsborough, wherein I labored in
a low way, I hope to some edification. Truth rose not very high, and I rejoiced
that the animation of nature rose not above it. 11th, I was at meeting at
Ballenderry in the forenoon, and in the afternoon was again at Lisburn, both
good open meetings. 13th, I had a large painful meeting among the
Presbyterians, at Newtown-Aras near Mile-Cross. They were too wise, rich and
full, for instrumental help much to reach or benefit them. I left them with a
heavy heart, and returned with my kind friend John Hancock to his house near
Lisburn, and 15th, attended monthly meeting there, to a good degree of
satisfaction, and next day had a good meeting at Antrim; and the day following
another at Grange; and then went to Ballimany, where, on the 18th, I had a very
large one. An ear was open in a few to hear the true gospel preached; but the
crowd and concourse was so great, and large numbers so light and unsettled, and
some so noisy, that we were under a necessity of concluding the meeting much
sooner than otherwise we might have done; after which diverse of the sober
people with tears desired we would have another meeting, and proposed our
having a large meeting house in the town for the purpose. They appeared greatly
grieved at the behavior of some of their neighbors, and much disappointed at
hearing so little of Truth's living testimony declared. My bowels yearned
toward them, but we could not see a way open in the light to appoint another
meeting. Indeed what little was uttered among them was so much in the life that
they greatly hungered for more; and I thought it much better to leave them
hungering, than to fill them until they might even loathe the honeycomb. So in
much love we left them, and rode to Ballynacree.

19th, we had good open meetings at Ballynacree and Colerain. My openness and
service was as usual mostly toward people not of our society; and next day at
Toberhead, which appeared to be a feeble one; and the day following I had good
satisfaction in the monthly meeting at Grange, near Charlemont, both in the
public and in the more select part. There is a little living remnant of
valuable Friends belonging to that monthly meeting. 22d, we had a good meeting
among Friends and others, at Ballahagan; next day a relieving one at Moy; and,
25th, the fore and afternoon meetings at Grange were large and highly favored,
as was that held next day at the Presbyterian meeting house in Dungannon. The
doctrines of the everlasting gospel, in most of these meetings in the north,
flowed like oil upon the spirits of the people. But this last meeting was hurt
by an unskilful and unseasonable appearance, after the people were risen to go
out.

27th, we had a meeting at a place called Carborough, among a few Friends and a
pretty many Presbyterians. In this meeting gospel truths flowed somewhat
largely in a gentle current of life to the people; but there was too little of
a door of entrance into their hearts to admit of any great dominion of the life
divine among them. Even Jesus wrought not many mighty works in some places,
because of the people's unbelief; they shut up the kingdom of heaven against
themselves, which is often the case in our day. Next day I attended at Grange;
and from the 31st of the 8th month to the 3d of the 9th, was held the quarterly
meeting there, in the course of which Truth reigned over all, both in public
testimony, and at times in solemn silence, though some spirits seemed opposed
thereto. 4th, attended again the meeting at Grange, and next day rode to
Lurgan, and had a painful meeting there. Notice was given to the town's people,
and many attended; but it seemed as though they knew scarce any thing about the
life of religion. I got little relief among them. Friends there, as well as
others, are in a low state.

After this I was at two meetings at Moy-Allen, one silent, and the other
nearly so. One at Ballahagan, long silent and suffering, but ended triumphant.
One at Richhill, dull and painful. One at Castleshane, silent until near the
close, when I opened to the people the impossibility of man's preaching the
gospel without immediate divine help. One at Coothill, wherein the joy of the
Lord was our strength, and in true gospel authority the people were instructed
in the gospel mysteries of Christ in man, his hope of glory. At Coothill there
was a great fair, and a fight, which was in some degree bloody* considering the
occasion, between the soldiers with swords, and country people with clubs,
about a lad just enlisted, who attempting to make his escape, the soldiers
endeavoring to secure him, the country people were enraged, and aiming to
support his escape, the quarrel ran so high that the street was in an uproar
from end to end; and being crowded full of country people, town's people and
soldiers, to the amount I suppose of several thousands, the scene was truly
affecting; and though I believe there were no lives lost, yet as there was
considerable bloodshed, and diverse wounded, it afforded a very horrid spectacle
of the depravity of human nature. And I thought it not amiss to give a hint of
it here, as it led me to mourn over the benighted and dreadful state of poor
mankind.

What dreadful wars have raged, through almost all ages and nations! What
rivers of blood have human beings drawn from human beings! and what havoc are
men still making of human lives, who say they are christians! At this very day
(Oh, sad to mention) is France and England, and diverse other European nations
embroiled in cruel wars! Will the state of mankind never be meliorated! Will
the sword devour for ever, and the glorious and benign influence of the gospel,
by the wrath of men for ever be defeated! Forbid it, gracious heaven! Indeed, I
firmly believe, the time will yet come when 'nation shall not lift up sword
against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.' Isai. ii. 4.
O, blessed day! O, precious state of peace, harmony and happiness! My spirit
breathes unto God, that he may arise and hasten this great work of reformation
on the earth; that the kingdoms of this world may become the kingdom of God,
and of his Christ. Amen says my soul.

After this, from the 15th to the 21st, we had meetings at Old-Castle,
Edenderry, Timmahoe, Rathangan, Athy and Ballanakill -- the first of these was
open and edifying, the next very eminently overshadowed and owned of the
Shepherd of Israel, notwithstanding there were some strong opposers present.
Blessed be the name of the Lord God Omnipotent, who reigns and will reign
over all, convincing his enemies that they are but as dust beneath his feet,
and all their opposition to his spiritual reign and government, as a cloud
which the sun dispelleth.

The rest of these meetings were mostly dull painful seasons, several almost
silent, and the others laborious and but little relieving. At Rathangan a young
man sat and behaved very irreverently during much of the meeting; at the close
I reproved him; he retorted, was angry and denied the charge, and complained of
ill treatment. I felt the power of truth increasing over the meeting, and when
he had vented himself and spent his venomous shafts, I stood up and delivered
what was further on my mind respecting the poor dark depraved creature, and
addressed the people in the love of the gospel, the meeting closed to solid
satisfaction. I found afterward he was a dissolute stage player. Oh the
mischiefs of the theater! what dissipation it promotes! it operates directly
against the life of religion, and tends to the destruction of morals! where
shall we go to find the fear of God in an actor? yet, sorrowful to say, too
many great professors of christianity, and some of the pretended ministers of
the gospel, are not ashamed openly to plead for, and with all their eloquence
promote the destructive practice of stage-playing. My very soul is grieved
within me when I view the fallen state of poor degenerated christians, and
above all the dead, dark and carnal-minded state of the clergy, so called, like
swarms of locusts they darken the air, and in many places eat up almost every
green thing. Instead of turning the people to God, they bring them under the
administration of the letter that kills, and thus the spiritual freshness or
greenness, begotten of God, at times by his holy spirit in some, is as it were,
eaten out. But God Almighty will sweep them from the face of the earth. The
time assuredly comes when great Babylon's merchandise and traffic shall fail,
and when her flesh shall be burnt with fire. The Lord of hosts has spoken it.

The testimony at Athy was much by way of opening the deceits,
worldly-mindedness, and want of real gospel qualification, in those hireling
teachers, who, if ever such in any age existed, are the 'blind leaders of the
blind.' Matt. xv. 14.
And I am persuaded that no class of men in these nations do more to obstruct
the true work of the gospel, and the coming of Christ's kingdom on earth as in
heaven, than these; but I repeat it again, God will do them away! For false
religion and worship shall be shaken, as well as earthly-mindedness and corrupt
government, in order to make way for that which cannot be shaken, the work of
God's holy spirit in men's hearts, and that worship and religion which the holy
operation thereof enables man to persevere in to his own unshaken peace, and
the exaltation of the divine glory.

At Ballanakill there was so little sense of true religion among the people,
and so much lightness and irreverence, that no way opened in the spring of the
gospel to preach Jesus and the resurrection among them; so the meeting was
necessarily silent, for we preach not ourselves; and not being able rightly to
call Jesus Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, durst not attempt to preach his gospel
without that divine unction and influence, well knowing it cannot be done; and
that so many thousands attempting to do it, has been the means of overrunning
the nations with the dead formal image of worship, consisting of words without
life and sounds without substance.

When the meeting concluded I reproved the levity and irreverence of the
people, endeavored to put them upon a serious enquiry respecting a preparation
for death, and left them with an aching heart. Many of them seemed not to know
their right hand from their left more than the Ninevites did; which is indeed
the case with too many of the professors of christianity in England and
Ireland; and the priests above all men have mournfully contributed to its being
so; and this I believe will ever be the case, where and so long as the
preachers are mere hirelings: For, God will not give his glory to another, nor
his praise to graven images or the works of men's hands of any kind, however
specious or refined. He will indeed glorify the house of his glory, Isai. lx. 7.
where his honor dwells; where his holy spirit is the spring of action; and
where he is 'the worker of all things;' where his people will be still, and
know that he is God; where they patiently wait for him, and 'let him arise,'
Psalm. lxviii. 1.
not arising themselves before him or without him.

But alas! alas! who and where are these? Truly not all who are professing so
to do. But this is the standard unto which the true and thorough gospel
worshipper must be reduced. And though too many among us are falling short of
this standard, yet there are many who are alive in the power and dominion of
Truth, our first principle, and which is the everlasting principle and support
of all that is truly religious in every society to the world's end.

Under these considerations I do most fervently desire we may be a living,
faithful, spiritual people; firmly believing, if we are sufficiently so, we
shall, above all the families of the earth, show forth God's praise; many
thousands will flow unto Sion, there they will behold Jerusalem a quiet
habitation; be blessed with the dew of Hermon, and rejoice in the dew that
descends on the mountains of Zion, where the Lord commands the blessing, even
life for evermore; whilst the mere self-active, formal hirelings, remaining in
their self-active state, promoting abolished shadowy observations, will not
ascend far into the mountain of myrrh and hill of frankincense, but continue to
wither and die. -- Read William Penn's rise and progress of the people called
Quakers, wherein is shown how one people after another sunk into formality.
Consider deeply how lamentably it has been the case with some of us; and know
assuredly, that if we keep not in the divine life, we shall be rejected as well
as others.

However, if I am given to discern the signs of the times, a revival will take
place among us; but it will be only through faithfulness and deep dwelling,
being baptized into death, and arising in the newness of life with Christ. It
will not be through a great increase of rules of discipline; many have been
zealous therein, and centered too much in the letter that kills.

The scriptures are good, very good; discipline, good rules and good order, all
very necessary; but still it is the spirit that quickens and gives life; and
every departure from a right dependence on it, every zealous movement in
support of Truth's testimony independent of its necessary aid, tends to
introduce death, and set man on the throne, instead of him who is God over all
for ever.

22d, we attended meeting both fore and afternoon at Mountmelick, where live
our beloved friends Mary Ridgeway and Jane Watson, lately on a religious visit
to America; they were both at this time at home, where I was glad to feel unity
with their spirits in the fresh life of the everlasting covenant. It was a time
of considerable openness and enlargement in the gospel. I had, as at many other
places, to bear testimony against the blind leaders of the blind which swarm
through the land, and are a grievous oppression upon the poor people, grinding
them down exceedingly, and yet in general doing them no good; but a great deal
of injury in regard to the things of religion. Indeed, if ever people spent
their money for that which is not bread, they do it most sorrowfully so, both
in England and Ireland.

23d, I visited two schools, attended a meeting of ministers and elders, and
then rode to Tullamore, where we had a meeting consisting of the people of the
town chiefly. 25th, we had a lively precious meeting at Ballamurry. Next day I
rested and wrote, and endeavored to be content in my present allotment, though
truly it is sometimes difficult to feel resignation in so painful a pilgrimage
as much of mine has been in Ireland. There is so much superstition and lifeless
formality among the people in general; so little real religious exercise, or
true knowledge and experience of divine things; and such striving to make forms
and creaturely performances answer instead of life and substance; that it is
often almost impossible to obtain much solid relief, by expressing among them
even what opens and impresses the mind in the life and love of the gospel.

This was a most trying day to me. The elements seemed all in commotion.
Strife, contest and alarm seemed almost continually to pervade the whole man,
and agitate all that was alive within me. I strove for calmness and patience;
but great was the distress, which I was left to labor under, and extreme the
desertion of all sensible comfort or divine good. I looked up toward heaven; I
tried to draw inwardly near unto God, and to crave his assistance, and the
return of his countenance and presence; but he hid himself in thick darkness,
and stood as it were aloof from my cry. I was greatly overwhelmed with sorrow,
and swallowed up of distress! I retired several times; I lay down on my bed; I
read the bible and some other precious writings; but through all I felt almost
as if I was entirely forsaken! -- At length I yielded up my whole life and
being, as I had often done before, to go through and endure every pang, peril
and perturbation, which God all-wise might see meet to prove me with, and for
as long continuance as he should see needful. -- So, in the evening, the waves
of the sea began to subside a little at his voice whom both wind and sea obey
for ever. I grew more tranquil, and had a pretty good night's rest. This
morning when I awoke, being 27th, I felt in my body as it I had been all over
bruised, such had been my extreme agony of soul yesterday, and such is the
sympathy between soul and body. Some may scarce believe me; but there is one
who knows I lie not. I read, and then walked out a while; the sun shone
pleasantly; the birds sang, and the whole face of nature was beautiful; but my
soul remembered the gall and the wormwood, and I seemed forbidden to take much
satisfaction in any thing visible. Oh, my God, thou art weaning me still more
and more, and much more than I once thought necessary, from the world, and from
all that is in it -- Well, good is thy will, and thy counsel is excellent. --
Do with me what thou will; form, fashion and reduce me as thou please. Thou
have given me clearly to see, that many who have even been in thy furnace came
out too soon, and remain drossy and impure all their days by not abiding thy
judgments, and not enduring the turnings of thy holy hand upon them, and not
following thee fully into all that separates and weans from all that flesh and
blood delights in, which thou call for, and art graciously leading such as
will follow thee into. Oh! redeem my soul from all that hinders its full and
unimpeded access to thee, the fountain of living waters: set my affections
wholly on things divine, and make me entirely thy own in the heavenly image and
fellowship for ever.

28th, In deep depression of spirit I attended the select quarterly meeting at
Moat, held for ministers and elders of the province of Leinster; and next day I
attended the public quarterly meeting, was silent excepting a few words; and
the day following I attended almost in silence the meeting for church affairs;
and Oh! the want of deeper dwelling in the divine life!

1st of 10th mo. Having thus spent four or five days mostly in deep distress
and agony of foul, the Lord was graciously pleased to open the spring of life,
unseal my lips, and make me dip my foot in oil, treading on high places in the
name and strength of the highest. He tuned my harp anew, put a new song in my
heart and mouth, and divinely strung my bow for battle: thus the concluding
meeting held for worship this last day of the quarterly meeting was eminently
owned of the Lord: and Christ the resurrection and the life was joyfully known
among us: in his resurrection we arose with him; and because he lived, we lived
also; I mean principally such as had been baptized in the likeness of his
death, watched faithfully with him, and continued with him in his temptations
and sufferings; for unto these it was he appointed a kingdom: theirs it is; and
they continuing steadfast with him through all tribulation, shall, in spite of
death and hell, enjoy it. Much searching work prevailed in testimony, through the
openings of life, and much consolation to the mourners in Sion, was graciously
vouchsafed.

2d, was at Birr; and, 4th, we had a most triumphant meeting at Montrath; the
testimony of the gospel flowed like oil to many, and yet antichrist was exposed
in his true colors: blessed for ever be the Lord, who hitherto has helped us.
After this we had meetings at Knock-Ballamaher, Ross-Crea, Limerick, Cork,
Boudon, Younghall, Garryrian, Clonmel, and the several sittings of the
quarterly meeting at Waterford, for the province of Munster. Diverse of these
were highly favored seasons, but some of them afforded far less satisfaction
than others. From thence we went to Dublin in order to attend the national
half-year's meeting, where I was again kindly received by my kind friend Thomas
Bewley and children; and many other dear friends gave me a hearty welcome: this
has also been my experience in many other places. On the 26th, the national
select meeting opened; it was large, and the members, at least some of them,
appeared to be alive in a good degree in the holy root.

27th, In the meeting at Meath-Street and Sycamore-Alley, I was greatly
favored; Truth's divine testimony was, like fire among rubbish, against
worldly-mindedness, indifference and revolt; and some fresh encouragement
flowed to the mourners in Sion, the drooping-spirited and young and tender; the
doctrines and consolations of the gospel being pretty largely opened. The four
days following were held and concluded the national meeting for good order in
the society. Also two more meetings for worship, and the concluding select
meeting, all these as parts of the national meeting. A good degree of zeal
appeared in many for the support of our christian discipline; and things were
conducted in a degree of brotherly love and concord. And yet the lack in too
many of the divine anointing oil, in the several movements, was so sensibly
felt, that I sat rather a mourner in most of these meetings, and could say but
very little in them from first to last.

I may here relate a remarkable occurrence, viz. when I was in Dublin, soon
after my first landing, I was livingly opened in the life and power of the
gospel, at a meeting at Sycamore-Alley, in which, among other things, I had a
good deal to say about the spiritual fire of the Lord which is in Sion, and his
furnace which is in Jerusalem, for the refining of all such as ever become his
sons and daughters. A man, in a stable near by, made a great noise to drown my
voice, which he continued for some little time, and as my voice raised he
increased his noise; and I was told that some heard him saying something in
contempt about the fire I spoke of, or however he was heard speaking about the
burning of the fire. Another person discharged a gun just by the meeting house,
when I was in the midst of my most fervent engagement; the report was very loud
and disturbed many; but I was carried through as if nothing had happened;
blessed be the name of the Lord. But now on my return to Dublin, I was fully
informed that the poor wretched man, who shouted so loudly in the stable to
drown my voice, and spoke so ignorantly about the burning of the fire, was in
less than two weeks after consumed to death by fire in the same stable where he
had thus impiously behaved; for the stable taking fire by some means when he
was in it, he was burnt before he could be got out.

This I heard of several weeks before my return, but I chose not to insert it
until I had got fuller information and confirmation in the city; but finding it
fact, and much noticed by many people of different religious professions in
Dublin, as a very remarkable instance of the providence or judgment of God; I
thought proper to give the relation of it a place here, and I do it without
presuming to say how far it was in special judgment. But as God's dealings are
all in wisdom, perhaps such an instance of his all-wise government as this may
have a striking and profitable effect upon some of the hardened and daring who
may read it, or at least may tend to guard and caution some of the less
abandoned against giving way to the suggestions of infidelity, profaneness or
audacity. For most assuredly there is a God of justice as well as mercy, who
sees and knows all our thoughts, words and actions, and for every evil will
bring us into judgment; yea, for every thing contrary to his holy will and
wisdom.

After the national meeting, which ended on the last day of the 10th month, I
staid in Dublin some days, not seeing my way open to go for England or
elsewhere.

The 1st of the 11th month, I was again silent at the meeting at
Sycamore-Alley, as I also was at the meeting in the forenoon on the first day
following; but in the afternoon at Sycamore-Alley, I was somewhat enlarged,
though not a great deal relieved, My soul was indeed, for a number of days, in
deep affliction in that great city; insomuch that I greatly doubted my being
enabled to leave it with pleasantness. 3d, I attended a meeting at Ballabrigan,
about fifteen miles from Dublin, appointed for my dear friend Ann Tuke,
daughter of William Tuke of Yorkshire, in England. This meeting was very
distressing: the people seemed to know but very little of the real nature of
divine worship. I returned in heaviness to the city, and next day got a degree
of refreshment in the meeting at Meath-street, through deep dwelling and
keeping low in and with a little low stream of life, which at length enlarged
to something of a river; but still I could not quite ease off my burden, nor
rise above my deep depression of spirit. Another meeting at the same place in
the afternoon, appointed by A. Tuke, afforded me a degree of additional relief,
so that I began to feel a little cheerful. 5th, I felt restrained from
attending a meeting appointed for the same Friend at Dunlary; I knew not why,
but I felt easiest to decline going, so I rested and wrote at the house of my
dear friend Thomas Bewley, bringing up this account to the time of said day of
rest and writing.

After writing thus far, our dear friend, not feeling himself at liberty to
leave Dublin, until the 9th of 11th month, when by accounts received he
attended a public meeting at Johnstown, and being accompanied by S. S. and A.
S. went that evening to Ballitore, to the house of our friend Elizabeth
Shackleton. On first day the 10th he spoke largely in the morning meeting, and
very powerfully in a public meeting which was held in the evening at his
request, after which, he imparted weighty and instructive counsel in a Friend's
family, concluding in awful supplication. The following night he was taken
unwell, which continued to increase until the 14th, when an eruption appeared
which proved to be the smallpox, during which time his mind was preserved in
calmness and resignation, and mentioned that it mattered little what part of
the world he died in; that he sometimes hoped to see New England again and his
dear children, but that he had no will in it; that he had looked closely
toward home and his connections, and into the state of his own mind, though he
did not know how the disorder would terminate. During the progress of the
disorder he was kindly attended by several Friends, and among them was our
friend Ann Tuke, who preserved the following daily account.

5th-day 14th, He said, there is an eternal Arm underneath each of us, which is
sufficient to bear up and support, and will do it, as far as is needful we
should be supported. I have long been confirmed in the sentiment, that nothing
could possibly happen that would harm me while I keep under the divine
influence.

A physician from Dublin having been sent for, came this evening, with which he
expressed satisfaction, saying, he desired that he would continue near him,
which he did accordingly. Some time after, he said, though I am not without
some considerable bodily pain, yet I feel such a portion of that good which is
infinite, that it does not seem worth mentioning, and if there was no greater
enjoyment hereafter, the present would be a state truly, desirable, through a
never-ending eternity, and yet the fullness is still more desirable.

The evening of the 14th, he dictated a letter to his relations and friends at
home, from which the following are extracted.

Dearly beloved parents, (all three) brothers and sisters, relations and
friends,
I am now at Ballitore, twenty-eight Irish miles from Dublin, and I suppose
undoubtedly entered five days into the smallpox; the eruption began yesterday,
and is very greatly increased today. I am very agreeably attended by
physicians and the kindest of friends. -- My distress of body, through extreme
difficulty of breathing, etc. has, for a short space of time, been almost equal
to any thing I can suppose human nature capable of, but (it is now half past
nine at night) this has been a very comfortable day; and just now, and for some
hours past, I have been almost as easy as at any time in my life, I think
certainly never more so in mind -- I feel no kind of alarm; but the issue is
certainly very doubtful. I feel easiest to address you in this manner,
principally, that you may know that my mind enjoys a fullness of that which
removes beyond the reach of all sorrow. My dear children are placed so that I
have been pretty easy, but I could wish them to get a little more learning than
some of them are at present in the way of; and although I do not wish much of
the world's polish, yet it is, at this awful moment, my desire that they may
not be brought up with much rusticity, for this I believe has not very often
contributed either to civil or religious usefulness.

My desires for my childrens substantial growth in the truth, and strict
adherence to all its discoveries to the close of their days, is by far the
principal wish I have for them. Out of the enjoyment of a good degree of this
precious inheritance I know of nothing in this world worth living for. Ye that
know it, suffer nothing, I most cordially beseech you, ever to divert your
minds from an increasing and fervent pursuit after the fullness of it, even unto
the measure of the stature and fullness of Christ.

It is almost mavelous how my strength of body and mind holds out to address
you in this manner. I may now just mention, that nothing will be knowingly
neglected for my comfort of body or mind, that my physicians or friends can
afford: and greater cheerfulness, and even pleasure in doing all they can, I
have not met with among my nearest relations. I pray the Lord, in the riches of
His grace, to reward them with flowings of his love.

At the present day things are considerably ripening, and I have not the least
doubt that, before a great while, a highway will be opened through kingdoms
and nations, where darkness has long reigned, for the publication of the
everlasting gospel in its true life and authority; and as what is revealed in
the ear, is in due time to be declared on the housetop, I have little or no
doubt that the true doctrine of Christ will be much better understood, than has
hitherto been generally the case.

It is now eleven, I want rest; whether I shall be able to add further is to me
at present unknown; and however it may be, in the fullness and almost unlimited
flowings of true gospel love, I am, and trust shall ever remain in best
affection, your sincere relation and friend,

JOB SCOTT.


15th. The disorder is pretty strongly making its progress; I can scarce get
any sleep; my strength fails a little, but I admire at its holding out so well;
the pock on the face is, if not quite, very nearly confluent; the face
considerably swelled; on the body it is pretty distinct. The physicians speak
very encouragingly, I believe in my absence as well as presence; but were it
not that little or no sense seems given me as to the issue one way or the
other, I believe from the symptoms as they are, and from my knowledge of my own
constitution and the very different climate from America, I should pretty
strongly look out for dissolution, although my spirits are under little or no
depression at all. Perhaps I never saw a time before, when all things not
criminal were so near alike to me in point of any disturbance to the mind. I do
not know but when awake and capable of contemplation, I nearly rejoice and give
thanks in all. When I verge a little toward sleep I am all afloat from the
state of my nerves, and from the extreme irritation forced almost immediately,
and with very unpleasant sensations from beginning repose, but through all the
soul seems deeply anchored in God. Many and painful have been the probationary
exercises of this life to me. Ah! were there probability of strength, how I
could enlarge, for my heart seems melted within me in retrospective view; but
all the former conflicts, however grievous in their time, are lighter now than
vanity, except as they are clearly seen to have contributed largely to the
sanctification of the soul; as they are remembered with awfulness and gratitude
before Him who has not been wanting to preserve through them all; and as they
seem likely to introduce either very shortly, or before a very long time to an
exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Some have anxiously wished to have their
time to live over again; but though some of my early foibles and after
deviations, might possibly, on a second trial, be escaped* yet I know not but
there is quite as much reason to think a second might fall very short of the
first, as in any degree to exceed it; however, I have no kind of
self-complacency on account of any good works properly mine. My own works I
have long seen the necessity to cease from, and trust, through the grace of
God, by which I am what I am, I have been enabled, in some precious degree, to
do so. It is the Lord who works my works in me, and magnified be his name for
ever, he has often worked in me mightily, to my own humbling admiration, and I
trust, at times, to the thankful acknowledgment of many others; and as
certainly as he lives, he would work mightily in many thousands, if they would
but let him arise over all in them. Indeed he works in all as far as they
give way to his arising. This doctrine is to me as clear and certain at this
moment as ever it has been, and I have often been constrained to proclaim it to
the nations, sometimes with almost invincible authority, and sometimes under a
great deal of weakness and obstruction. The last has tended much to keep the
creature rightly dependant and humble, and through every dispensation the
Leader of Israel has seen best what was best for me.

Let my children be engaged in some innocent employments, as much as well may
be, out of the way of a great deal of temptation, and if I had need to add it,
out of the way of very great accumulation; and yet through industry and
perseverance moderately productive. My very soul abhors the idea that a
christian can ever be at liberty, whilst under the influence of heavenly good,
to seek or even desire much wealth, though this disposition, in direct
opposition to the life and doctrine of Christ, have gone far toward the
destruction of true spiritual religion, I believe in almost every religious
society in the world.

16th. The fore part of the night and this morning he slept; in the course of
the day said to A. T. I have seen the magnanimity of a true believer, and how
one that is really so would bear all the trials permitted to attend him;' and
by way of illustration added very forcibly, 'Dost thou believe in God, thou
must also believe in the justness of all his dispensations. It is a comfort to
me thy lot is cast among us. This is a service, if I had not any other in
Ireland. Death is a service we all owe to our great Creator, and sickness is a
service required of many. Oh! Ireland, Ireland! The Lord thy God has service
for thee in Ireland, was often sounded through the ear of my soul, before I
left home, as distinctly as you hear me now speak it. In the morning, when
speaking to the doctors who attended him, he said to this purpose, I believe my
having the disorder, and being here, is in the ordering of Providence. It is
not given me to know the event; but if there be a field of future labor for me
to enter into, it is as possible for the Master to raise me up now as it was at
the first; but I have no will in it I think.' The fore part of this day he
seemed easy and walked down stairs, expressing that he could do it nearly as
well as ever. The fever came on toward evening, and he became very restless;
his swallowing was also difficult, but had no other unfavourable symptom, and
this was not deemed more than usual in this afflicting disorder. In the night
got some uneasy sleep, swallowing and expectoration very difficult and painful.

First Day morning the 17th, on being asked how he rested, replied, I have got
through with what we call much difficulty to obtain a little relief. He desired
his affectionate love to M. B. the family and friends in Dublin, intimating the
weight of the disorder, and his escape from many trials, if he should be
removed; yet said, The Lord is able to raise me up, his Arm is underneath, but
from my present feebleness, it is very uncertain; and seemed not to have any
conclusion how it would terminate. He desired to be remembered to dear M. R.
and J. W. in the love of the everlasting gospel. At another time said, I am in
a very low way, cannot see about the event, but must leave all to the Lord; the
strength of nature seems very doubtful. He continued all this day under much
oppression from the load of matter, took wine and bark every hour, but no
alarming symptoms appeared. -- He requested that if he was removed, some
further particulars might be transmitted to his friends at home, adding in
substance. The Lord's will is blessed, and I feel no controversy with it. It is
the Lord that enables us to coincide with his will, and say amen to all the
trials and conflicts he permits to attend us. My mind is centred in that which
brings into perfect acquiescence: there is nothing in this world worth being
enjoyed out of the divine will. It is his will that brings us into a state of
existence, and it is for a purpose of his glory. When my mind is abstracted and
capable of deriving satisfaction from any thing outward, it is an inexpressible
satisfaction that my lot is cast here, and that I am surrounded by such near
and dear friends, both from within this family, and these without who have
accompanied. The fore part of this night slept more than usual, and remained
through the whole of it tolerably easy.

18th, 2d-day. Frequently expressed that nature had a hard struggle, and his
getting through was very doubtful. The symptoms, considering the load of
matter, continued favorable. He gave directions, that, if he should go hence,
every thing about his interment should be plain and simple, and said that he
who raised up Lazarus could, if he had further labor for him to do, break his
bands asunder; but that, when he reasoned upon the nature of the disorder and
his own constitution, and felt the conflicts of nature, it seemed as if he was
gradually advancing toward his everlasting home. To two Friends from
Mountmelick he expressed his entire resignation to divine disposal, and that he
found nothing to stand between him and the fountain of everlasting love: said,
he knew many Friends in Ireland loved him, and he loved them in the Lord Jesus,
and desired to be affectionately remembered to such as might enquire after him.
This night, and until three in the morning, (3d-day 19th) he patiently and
quietly suffered much; yet got several naps. About seven in the evening his
stomach, too weak to bear the bark and wine, discharged the last potion; he
remarked these efforts to support nature failing; and added, There are many
resources in nature, but if the great Author of nature does not think fit that
any of them should be for me, all is well: I could not desire to have such
another struggle to go through, and I think, if you can part with me, I can
with you with a degree of cheerfulness. -- The fore part of the night spent
quiet and patient as usual, much oppressed and worn down with this grievous
malady: he said, I have no fear, for perfect love casts out all fear, and he
that fears is not perfected in love.

20th, About five o'clock on fourth-day morning he supplicated thus: O Lord my
God, thou that have been with me from my youth to this day; if a man who has
endured with a degree of patience the various turnings of thy holy hand, may be
permitted to supplicate thy name; cut short the work in righteousness, if
consistent with thy will; thou, who have wrought deliverance for Jacob, evince
that thou art able to break my bonds asunder, and show forth thy salvation,
that so my soul may magnify thy name for ever and ever. And after a pause,
wherein he seemed to feel the earnest of his petition, added, 'So be it says
my soul.' -- After two o'clock his stomach refused all nourishment, and a
hiccough came on; he said, Do not force nature, let me pass quietly away to the
eternal inheritance, to which I have no objection to go, and the sooner the
better if the work be done, I have no wish to lay here. -- His oppression
seemed to increase, and in a little while he said, I am waiting patiently to
see the salvation of God: do you wait patiently with me. I have no desire, nor
the shadow of desire, to be restored. I hope the doctors will soon find that
they have done their part. The fore part of this night he could take little
except water, slept at times pretty easy to appearance, at others his breathing
very difficult. On P. J. assisting him, he said, I am no flatterer, but thou
art one I depended on for outward assistance. Thou have contributed much to the
relief of this body, and thy being here has been an inexpressible satisfaction
to me.

21st. At three o'clock on 5th-day morning, said, You have seen the awful
progress of this disorder; as to me, it matters little only present pain -- may
the Lord release me shortly. Complained of the want of more air, and seemed
declining fast. Toward evening said, You may tell my friends in New England,
and every part of the world, that never did my soul bless the Lord on account
of any worldly enjoyment, as I do now, in the blessing felt by me to be
contained in the prospect of a very speedy release. To a person who came to see
him he said, Oh! Charles! Charles! an inheritance in the eternal truth is
infinitely, infinitely superior to all the enjoyments this world can afford;
remember it as long as thou live. Some time after, I do not wish hastily to
make my escape; but if the Lord will be pleased to release me from the bonds of
mortality and the struggles of life, and to cut the work short, considerably
short, in righteousness, I think I shall be willing to enrol it in the list of
his unspeakable favors. To the aforesaid, Farewell Charles, let no possible
consideration divert thee from a close attention to that, without which life
must be lived in vain. At another time said, Some of my wishes for myself are
centred in as speedy a release as may be, consistent with the will of our
heavenly Father, and an admission, which I have no doubt at all, not in the
least degree, of obtaining, into that glorious kingdom, where the wicked cease
from troubling, and the weary soul is eternally at rest. In a while after, I
think I have not, for several years past, known much or any thing of boasting;
I have known something of that law of grace whereby all boasting is entirely
excluded; but I may say, through that which has supported me under all the
trials and conflicts which have attended my passage through life, to you my
beloved friends as to dear children, -- follow me as I have endeavored to
follow Christ Jesus, the Lord of life and glory, and the Rock of my eternal
salvation.

At another time said, It would have been desirable to me to have been favored
with a clearer and more certain prospect respecting the termination of this
event; yet if I should be continued a while longer, I do not dispute but my end
would be unspeakably glorious. -- It would be painful to me to have to return
again to combat the trials and conflicts of mortality; but if the Lord should
see meet to continue me a while longer, I must submit, after having in humility
and resignation put up my intercessions to be released from the struggle of
nature; to have had prospects of further labor is not uncommon, it has
happened to many; and the Lord can raise up and qualify others for his own work
and service, and he will send by whom he will send, and is able to save by many
or by few. I feel, and I wish you to feel for and with me, after the eternal
Rock of life and salvation; for, as we are established thereon, we shall be in
the everlasting unity, which cannot be shaken by all the changes of time, nor
interrupted in a never-ending eternity. I do expect considerable derangement
will now take place; it is no discouragement to me, and ought to be none to
those who trust in the Lord, and put no confidence in the flesh. -- In a while
said, I must not expect a release but by suffering a due proportion of pain and
distress. -- You may feel sympathy with me, but you cannot feel the reduction
which must precede a release.

In the course of fifth-day he was rather more lightsome, and tried several
things to find what would best suit his stomach; seemed considerably relieved
from the extreme difficulty of breathing, but altered much toward evening, and
increased in weakness. About one o'clock on sixth-day morning, after suffering
great uneasiness, and getting little or no rest, he said, O Lord! if it be
consistent with thy holy will, let loose my bands, and send the moment of
relief to my poor body and soul. Afterward said, We cannot approve or
disapprove by parts the works of Omnipotence rightly; we must approve the whole
and say, Thy will be done in all things. From one to three he was extremely
restless and uneasy, from (as he expressed it) the extreme irritability of the
whole nervous system, which he said was as great as could be imagined. At times
he rambled a little, but said, I find all things must be endured. Do you, who
judge in the light, judge me for impatience? I answered, quite the reverse, and
that we were sensible his bodily distress was great, and wished to alleviate
it. He added, I cannot charge myself on that account, meaning impatience. About
four he seemed in great agony and conflict, turning his head frequently on the
pillow; and said, Can it be upon any other ground but that the time is come
that the purpose must be effected. Quarter past four, he desired to be turned
on his right side, which seemed a momentary relief. Calling to P. J. he said,
Make great allowance for me, my distress is nearly as much as is supportable by
human nature. -- Is there no possibility of my getting any sleep? Oh! the pain,
the inexpressible pain of my lungs! P. J. telling him that, from appearances,
there was a likelihood of his being very soon released, perhaps within an hour
or two, he replied, If so, the Lord's name be blessed and praised for ever; I
had much rather it were so than otherwise; for some time I perceived it
hastening fast. Afterward he added, The desire of my heart is, the great
blessing of time and the consolation of eternity. In a while said to a friend,
Guard against right hand errors and left hand errors; let self be of no
reputation; trust in the Lord, and he will carry thee through all.

About five he appeared to be wrestling with death; but struggled little
considering his remaining bodily strength. Being asked to take a little drink,
he appeared quite sensible, and said, Yes, yes -- Took it, and continued
without much struggling until about a quarter before seven, when he moved to
the side of the bed, but soon returned to his former position; and drew his
breath gently shorter and shorter, until seven o'clock, after which he breathed
no more, but ascended with joy to his heavenly mansion, and the glory of an
incorruptible crown and inheritance with the saints in light. His remains were
interred on first day, 24th of the 11th month 1793, in Friends burial ground at
Ballitore.

FINIS.

