AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT THE CELEBRATION OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE, At
Salisbury, FOURTH JULY, NINETY-SEVEN.

BY DR. SAMUEL ROCKWELL.

Published at the Request of the Committee.

Litchfield: PRINTED BY T. COLLIER.

An ORATION, etc.
THE rise and fall of empires are events, with which the happiness or misery of
millions are connected: They constitute the most important objects which can
employ the exertions of man, and furnish a dignified subject for his
contemplation. To trace the steps, by which the celebrated nations of
antiquity, from their first rude beginnings, rose to dignity and empire, -- and
mark the causes which occasioned their gradual declension and subversion, is a
pleasing, instructive, and melancholy employment. But it is in a still nearer,
and more interesting point of view, that we are now invited to contemplate the
subject. Our own country has lately assumed the rank of Empire; and this day,
the most important, perhaps, in the annals of mankind, is consecrated to
commemorate the event. -- No circumstance, which attended this important
transaction, is uninteresting or trifling. When the Resolution, for the
Declaration of Independence, was first moved in Congress, the magnitude of the
object filled every mind, in that august assembly, with ideas too big for
utterance. The fate of an extensive empire, and of unborn ages, was now to be
decided. In fixed contemplation, each appeared to forget his own existence, and
stood a living statue: In which expressive attitude, as drawn by the masterly
hand of a TRUMBULL, they still seem to remain. After this solemn pause, the
motion was ably, and deliberately supported, against every objection which
could be raised, and at length received their unanimous signature.

Hail, illustrious Patriots! who dared, in defiance of a host of foes, with all
their vengeance pointed at your devoted heads, -- appealing to the SUPREME
JUDGE of the world for the rectitude of your intentions, to declare, "That
these COLONIES were, and of right ought to be, FREE and INDEPENDENT STATES;"
and, for the support of this declaration, did pledge to each other, "your
Lives, your Fortunes, and your sacred Honor." -- May your names be transmitted
to future ages, as examples of fortitude and heroism, when the Alexanders and
Caesar's of mankind shall be buried in oblivion. -- Forever sacred be this
Anniversary: Let this day be devoted, through all succeeding ages, to
commemorate the important events, with which it is connected. Tell the
interesting tale to your children, and leave it in charge, that they tell it
again to theirs.

When the bravery of our countrymen had conquered their foes, and our
Independence was established, a more important victory was still to be gained,
-- a victory over ourselves. -- When we consider the discordant materials which
composed our Empire, and the disorganizing principles, which are the constant
attendants of all revolutions, -- the establishment of our National Government
is a matter of the highest astonishment. -- This was the greatest triumph of
Reason, over the passions of selfishness and ambition, that was ever exhibited
by the human race. -- To behold an extensive empire, like this, in a time of
peace, collected by their Representatives, and uninfluenced by the ambition of
individuals among themselves, or the intrigues of foreign nations, calmly
deliberating upon, and at length exhibiting to view, a form of government, so
well adapted to the genius and circumstances of our country, -- so well
combining energy with liberty, -- and after this, to see it adopted by the
great body of the people, with scarce a single instance of riot or confusion,
must have been a pleasing spectacle to superior Intelligencies.

Every circumstance, attending the revolution, and the establishment of our
government, derives a new importance, when contrasted with the tumult and
horrid carnage which has attended, and still attends, the French revolution. --
O Liberty! how has thy sacred name been perverted! -- The mind is disgusted at
the sound, and the grating terms of Tyranny and Despotism, are music to the
ear, when compared with French Liberty and Equality. In vain has the present
age boasted of its refinement, and of the progress of reason; -- in vain have
we looked forward, with pleasing expectation, for a speedy termination of war,
among the nations of the earth: The delusive prospects are vanished, and human
nature sinks, degraded, into its lowest state of depravity.

It affords a pleasing source of reflection, that this country has, in so great
a degree, escaped the convulsive storm, which has shaken Europe to its center;
and that, in spite of all the attempts of foes from without, and traitors
within, our Independence, and Government, have been hitherto supported; and we
have enjoyed a high degree of national prosperity.

A further consolation will be afforded to the mind, in contemplating the
wretched state of European nations, from the consideration of a superintending
Providence; which often, in the most unexpected ways, brings about events, of
the highest importance, to the happiness of mankind. But no circumstance of
past success, or of present prosperity, -- no tokens of Divine interposition in
our favor, or ideas of a superintending Providence, can excuse us from a
vigilant attention to our duty, as citizens and as men; nor can any of these
considerations, prevent a deep anxiety at the storm which threatens us.

Think not, my countrymen, that you are now at liberty to sit down in
indolence, or that the blessings of Liberty, and good Government, are to be
preserved without your attention. -- Your Independence, your Rights and
Liberties, your Government, so highly valued, are endangered: An ambitious,
unprincipled nation, fired with the rage of universal dominion, -- intoxicated
with their victories, and governed by men puffed up with insufferable vanity,
are exercising the highest insult toward our government, -- are committing the
most wanton spoliations on our commerce, and threatening us with the vengeance
of their arms. -- An attempt to prove to this audience, the injustice of their
complaints, would be an insult to their understanding. To add to our danger, a
powerful Faction, of our own Citizens, are, by misrepresentation, and all the
arts of intrigue, aiding the wicked designs of these domineering Despots. Their
disorganizing principles have poisoned the minds of many of our citizens, and
corrupted our councils. Instead of those venerable Fathers, who conducted the
Revolution, and whose wisdom and integrity commanded the admiration of the
world, -- too large a proportion of inexperienced youth, -- of factious
demagogues, and dupes to foreign influence, compose our present councils. --
Hitherto a virtuous majority have saved us from ruin; but, in repeated
instances, the contest has been long and dubious, -- and the final success the
seeming effect of mere accident. -- While our most important rights are thus
threatened, and subjected to the quibbles of faction, it behooves us to prepare
the means of defense. -- The millenial state, when swords shall be beat to
plough-shares, and spears to pruning hooks, is not yet arrived. A long period
of war and bloodshed, -- of nation rising against nation, and kingdom against
kingdom, is probably to intervene, before any settled order of things, or
regular system, will be established, that will lay the foundation of a
permanent peace among the nations of Europe; -- and, whatever may be the
success of our present earnest endeavors to preserve the peace of our country,
yet, until that event shall take place, we are exposed to the danger of war, --
and exposed, in proportion as we neglect the means of defense. -- Let our youth
be trained to arms, to order and discipline. -- War, when considered merely as
a field for military achievments, without regard to the justice of the cause
for which it is undertaken, is a disgraceful employment; -- but when it is
considered as the means of defending our rights from an unjust invasion, and of
transmitting them to posterity, it becomes a noble art; and the soldier who
defends these rights, is entitled to the highest possible gratitude of his
country.

Ye Young Men, the eyes of your country are fixed on you for its means of
protection. While you were engaged in your youthful sports, your fathers and
friends have bled and conquered, to secure the rights which you now enjoy, and
to establish the Independence, which you this day celebrate. Should this
country again be called to defend its Liberties and Independence, a worthy band
of experienced veterans, will once more unsheath the sword, and conduct you in
your turn to the field. Prove yourselves the worthy sons of the conquerors of
Britain. Fear not to engage any nation which can be employed against you.
Confirm the solemn Resolution of this country, expressed by our Representatives
in Congress, at the most gloomy period of our former contest, -- that We will
never be hewers of wood, or drawers of water, to any nation under heaven; and
are resolved, with one mind, to die freemen, rather than live slaves.

The imputation of cowardice is more to be dreaded than death: Should you
hesitate to defend the Liberties and Independence of your country, when
unjustly invaded, -- the ghosts of a hundred thousand Americans, -- your
fathers, your brothers and friends, -- whose mangled corses have strewed the
ground, from the plains of Abraham to the Eutaw springs, -- will rise to haunt
you: -- Posterity will execrate your memories, and the stings of your own
consciences will be your perpetual tormentors -- Should you, on the other hand
(which I have no reason to doubt) prove yourselves, on all occasions, the able
defenders of the rights and the Independence of your country, your names, and
your deeds, will be recorded, for the praise and imitation of succeeding ages,
-- and your own reflections will be a perpetual source of refined satisfaction.

While our country stands firmly prepared, for any event which may take place,
let us not neglect the arts of peace. -- Diffuse useful knowledge among all
classes of citizens. Here, though young in empire, the United States stand
foremost among the nations of the world. This is the firm pillar which supports
our Republican Government, and if neglected, it will soon tumble in ruins.

The French nation, furnishes a melancholy example of the dangerous
consequences of introducing a Republican Government, where the great mass of
the people are in a state of ignorance, and unacquainted with the rights and
duties of citizens. What will be the final event of the experiment in France, I
will not undertake to predict; but this may with safety be asserted, that under
whatever name a government is administered, so long as the great body of the
people continue in ignorance, they are in a state of oppression. They have no
will of mong us." And, therefore, with propriety, he is also called the SON OF
MAN.

THIS is the glorious, the illustrious character, whom the FATHER has anointed
and set as "KING, upon his holy hill of Zion;" and, as a mediator, has made him
also "head over ALL THINGS;" all creatures being subjected to him.

This is the KING whom we are to proclaim in our preaching. One clothed with
divine authority, having all power in heaven and earth in his hands. And, at
the same time, one who is "meek, having salvation." "A just GOD, and yet a
Savior."

But it is necessary farther to observe here, that the character and work of
CHRIST, which is the great subject of gospel preaching, comprehends more than
merely his regal office. In accomplishing the work, for which he came into our
world, we are taught, that he sustained a prophetic and a priestly office, as
well as that of a KING. That he was the great teacher sent from GOD, to "show
us the Father," and to reveal the only way of acceptance with GOD unto eternal
life. That he also "gave his life a ransom" for sinners -- became "obedient
unto death," in the room of guilty men; that he thereby made an atonement, and
brought in an everlasting righteousness, which is the only foundation of a
sinner's justification before GOD. And that, in consequence of this, "whosoever
believes on him, shall receive forgiveness of sins and obtain everlasting
life." Which leads us, in the next place,

(2.) To speak of the SUBJECTS of this kingdom.

It is of peculiar importance, in preaching the kingdom of GOD, that the marks
and characters of these subjects be clearly defined, according to the only
unerring standard, the WORD OF GOD. Here we find, they were once, like the rest
of mankind, in a state of awful rebellion against their rightful Sovereign --
opposed to his laws, character and government -- "children of wrath, by nature"
-- and would have continued in this state, forever, had not the sovereign, free
and boundless grace of their offended KING, interposed, to prevent their ruin,
by turning their hearts to himself, and, "in the day of his power, making them
his willing people." By this, their hearts are won over to an everlasting
attachment to their KING, and to his cause and interest; so that it has become
dearer to them than their own; yea, than all other interests in the universe.

Indeed, there are many who profess to be friends to him, who are nominally his
subjects, and who cry "LORD, LORD," and yet are real enemies to him, in heart
and practice. So there are, often, traitors to be found in every kingdom and
commonwealth among men, who make pretensions to loyalty and patriotism; while
they are opposed, in their hearts, to the government they are under. These
traitors are, sometimes, though not always, detected, and meet the just
vengeance of the state. So it will be, finally, with all the pretended friends,
but real enemies, of CHRIST'S KINGDOM.

His true subjects are essentially distinguished from these, by this mark, that
they are, in heart and life, as well as in profession, friends to their KING.
They have deliberately and cordially chosen him for their SAVIOR and their
LORD; and make it the great business of their lives to serve and obey him. And
this brings me to observe,

(3.) That to preach the kingdom of GOD, it is of special importance to
proclaim the LAWS and regulations of this kingdom. No community or state can
subsist long, with any tolerable degree of order and happiness, without laws
and rules, by which they must be governed. Indeed, there are errors and
imperfections to be found in all human governments and laws. But, not so, with
respect to those of this kingdom. These are all absolutely perfect; calculated
to promote the greatest happiness of the kingdom, and of all its subjects; for
they are all "holy, just and good."

It is true, that, according to these laws, the enemies of this kingdom are to
be punished with great and awful severity. The threatenings denounced against
rebellion, are very pointed, and exceedingly terrible. Their language is, "He
that believes not, shall be damned." "Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise
perish." And, "The wrath of GOD is revealed from heaven, against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men." But, terrible as these threatenings
are, they are no more than proportioned to the crime against which they are
pointed; and will, therefore, be cordially approved of, by all the real friends
and subjects of the kingdom, as just and righteous. Indeed, they all flow from
infinite wisdom and goodness; and are necessary to preserve order in the
kingdom, to secure the honor and dignity of the divine government, and to
promote the highest interest and happiness of its subjects.

Thus does it appear, that, in preaching the kingdom of GOD, it is of great
importance to inculcate the laws and regulations by which its subjects are to
be governed, and to which they all owe a willing obedience and subjection. Once
more,

(4.) The peculiar PRIVILEGES, belonging to this kingdom, are, by no means, to
be passed over in silence. These are such as become the character of the great
Head of the kingdom to confer; and such as might naturally be expected from a
being so perfect, so infinitely wise and benevolent. Free PARDON of all their
former rebellion -- reception into his favor and family -- protection from
their enemies -- constant provision for their support and comfort -- peculiar
tokens of his love and care -- divine aids under all their trials here --
special consolation and support, in the hour of death -- a final deliverance
from all sin, and suffering -- admittance into his immediate presence, and to
the full enjoyment of perfect felicity in his everlasting kingdom hereafter.

These are the honors and PRIVILEGES, which belong to, and will be conferred
upon, all the loyal and happy subjects of the kingdom of GOD, and which, they
who preach it, are bound to proclaim.

Having thus considered what is implied in the command in the text, we proceed,
briefly, to show, as was proposed,

II. TO WHOM this command is given, "Go thou and preach the kingdom of GOD." To
this important question, the inspired oracles afford a full, clear and ready
answer. The wisdom of GOD has not left this point involved in such uncertainty,
as to make it impossible, or even difficult, to ascertain it. It is an object
of too great importance, to be left to the wisdom or to the will and humor of
men. The KING of Zion has clearly pointed out the character and qualifications
of those, whom he sends upon this important business. And they are described by
the following marks.

First, MEN OF KNOWLEDGE. For ignorance, especially of the great system of
doctrines in divine Revelation, and those other branches of science, which are
necessary to enable the preacher to explain, rightly divide and defend those
doctrines, totally disqualifies a person for this work. A Novice, i. e. one
rude, ignorant and unlearned, is expressly forbidden to enter upon the work of
preaching the gospel. It is an arduous employment, and requires a great deal of
labor and exertion of the head, heart and hands, to discharge it with fidelity.
Close and diligent application to reading, meditation and prayer; above all, a
constant and prayerful attention to, and study of the holy Scriptures; for it
is from this source that "the man of God is to be thoroughly furnished for his
work."

Nor is it sufficient that he be possessed of a doctrinal, or merely
speculative knowledge of divine truths; he must have an EXPERIMENTAL
acquaintance with them; having felt the power and efficacy of them upon his own
soul, as well as experienced the consolations of the gospel. There certainly
appears to be something more than an absurdity in a person's being employed to
promote the honor and interest of a kingdom or society, who is, at heart, an
enemy, and utterly opposed to that kingdom. What must naturally be expected as
the consequence, in this case; but that he will, when opportunity presents, act
agreeably to his real character, and betray its dearest interests into the
hands of its enemies? No proposition, surely, can be more rational, no truth
more important, than this, that they who preach the kingdom of GOD, ought to be
firm and cordial friends to this kingdom, and to prefer its interest "above
their chief joy."

ANOTHER mark by which the gospel preacher is described, is, a READINESS AND
FACILITY OF COMMUNICATION. It is expressly required, that they be "apt to
teach." A man may be possessed of a good understanding, of many acquired
accomplishments, and of undoubted piety and goodness; and yet be wholly
deficient in this point; not having a faculty of communicating what he does
know, with that perspicuity and ease, which are necessary to render him a
useful preacher, and "a workman that need not be ashamed."

TO THESE, must be added, an EVIDENT CALL OF DIVINE PROVIDENCE, by such
concurring circumstances, as clearly show it to be the will of CHRIST, that the
person qualified, should enter upon this work. Such as harmony, and a good
degree if not an entire unanimity, among the people with whom he is called to
labor; a prospect of a reasonable and comfortable support among them; and such
appearances, in other respects, as render it hopeful, that he may prove a
useful Minister in his day, and not labor in vain, or spend his strength for
naught. -- But we pass to the IMPROVEMENT of the subject; which would naturally
suggest a great variety of remarks. A few of them, only, will be just hinted
at; and we shall close with those reflections, which are more immediately
pertinent to the present occasion.

The subject leads us to reflect, what cause of thankfulness have we, that the
kingdom of GOD, which is a kingdom of grace, has been erected in this fallen
world! No such blessing was ever indulged the apostate angels. Upon their
rebellion, they were doomed to endless woe, without hope of relief. But to
fallen man, GOD has proclaimed a free pardon to all those, who shall repent,
submit, and return to their allegiance.

How sad, then, is the reflection, that there should be so many among mankind,
who turn a deaf ear to these gracious offers from their offended Sovereign; and
obstinately refuse a cordial subjection to him, and how righteously might such
be left of GOD to receive the punishment so justly due to their rebellion!

But, amidst all the ingratitude, infidelity and wickedness, that prevail at
this day, in the gospel world, our subject still affords a joyful prospect, to
all the benevolent friends of Zion, of the future great increase and
advancement of this kingdom, in the latter day glory; and the present aspect of
providence, compared with the word of GOD, gives no small ground to believe,
that period is fast approaching; when universal peace and love shall reign on
earth; when wars shall cease, and "all shall know the LORD, from the greatest
to the least."

How earnest should christians be in prayer, and what great encouragement have
they, to "continue instant" in it, for this happy event.

Furthermore, the preceding subject affords a just and scriptural criterion, by
which to determine who is the faithful Preacher of the kingdom of GOD. He is
one, who has a cordial friendship, a supreme love to JESUS CHRIST, the great
Head of this kingdom.

He will, therefore, endeavor clearly to explain and hold up to view, his true
character, as set forth in the word of GOD; as the brightness of the FATHER'S
glory and the express image of his person. "As Immanuel, GOD with us:" To whom
are ascribed divine honors; and who, of right, claims divine prerogatives;
which consideration alone could give such dignity to his character and work, as
to render him capable of making a sufficient atonement for sin, and bringing in
everlasting righteousness.

He will, also, with great earnestness, preach and inculcate upon his hearers,
the LAWS of Christ's kingdom; and that a uniform, conscientious obedience to
them, is the only evidence of real love to CHRIST and his kingdom. On which
ground, he will "affirm constantly, that they who believe, be careful to
maintain good works." And that, "by their fruits we are to know" who are, and
who are not, the friends of GOD.

It is seasonable, further, to remark, that our subject presents the most
powerful motives to ministerial faithfulness, that can be conceived of. The
honor of the great GOD -- the precious cause and interest of our divine
REDEEMER -- our own peace and comfort -- and the everlasting salvation of our
fellow sinners, are all, most intimately, concerned in our fidelity in this
work. How frequently, then, my brethren, should we examine our views and
conduct, and call ourselves to an account, how we have discharged our duty;
whether we have preached the pure, unadulterated gospel of JESUS CHRIST; not
temporizing, to please the corrupt humors of men; but boldly and faithfully
declaring the whole counsel of GOD, that we may be "pure from the blood of all
men!"

But, on this solemn occasion, how must the mind of our younger brother be
impressed with the most serious concern, who is, this day, to be separated to
the great and important work of preaching the kingdom of GOD!

In the view, SIR, of the vast importance of this work, as it stands connected
with everlasting consequences, to yourself and your hearers; and under a sense
of your own weakness and inability, is not your heart ready to tremble at the
prospect before you; and to exclaim, in the language of the apostle, "Who is
sufficient for these things?" The work indeed is great and arduous; and the
responsibility, which is attached to it, is, in a peculiar manner, a
consideration, which adds amazing weight to the employment; as you are to
"watch for souls, as one who must give an account." You will naturally reflect
upon that solemn passage in the word of GOD, which declares, that if any souls
should finally perish, through the watchman's neglect or unfaithfulness, their
blood will be required at the watchman's hand. But be not discouraged, brother.
Your work is with the LORD. If you are faithful in his service, and make it the
great aim of your ministerial labors to win souls to CHRIST, and to advance his
kingdom in the world; though you should not have the happiness to be so
successful as you may desire; yet, you will be glorious in the eyes of the
LORD, even "though Israel should not be gathered;" and will be "a sweet favor
to GOD, both in them that perish, and in them that are saved."

Hear, then, the voice of your Master, saying to you, this day, "Go thou and
preach the kingdom of GOD;" and, for your encouragement, hear him also saying,
if you are obedient to his command, "LO, I AM WITH YOU ALWAYS, EVEN TO THE END."
If you have his presence, you have enough. And remember, also, that, "without
HIM, you can do nothing."

We wish you a divine blessing in this great undertaking; and that you may be a
wise, and successful laborer in the vineyard of our LORD; be instrumental in
turning many to righteousness, and, atlast, shine as a distinguished star
forever, in the kingdom of GOD.

THE FLOCK OF CHRIST, in this place, we cordially congratulate, upon this
occasion. We rejoice with them, that after the late frown of Divine Providence,
in the sorrowful removal of their late beloved pastor by death, whose labors
they enjoyed for so very short a season; that the great Head of the Church has
disposed their hearts to unite in the choice of another, who, we sincerely
hope, will be made a rich and lasting blessing to them and their children.
Receive him, brethren, in the LORD; and esteem him highly in love, for his
work's sake. Encourage his heart, and strengthen his hands, by a diligent
attendance on his administrations; and by all those acts of kindness and love,
which are justly required and expected from your mutual relation to each other.
Above all, "brethren, pray for him," that he may be taught of GOD, that so he
may be able to teach you. That he may win many souls among you to JESUS CHRIST;
and may he who sows, and they who reap, at last meet together, and rejoice
forever, in the kingdom of GOD.

To conclude. The foregoing subject, and the thoughts which have been suggested
by it, may, with great propriety, be applied to this numerous and solemn
assembly; and ought to excite very serious, but different sensations, according
to the differing characters in it.

We have, all of us, been educated in a land of gospel privileges, and
ordinances; we have had the kingdom of GOD preached to us; and have been
earnestly invited to become subjects of it. What the effect has been, GOD
knows; and will shortly call us to a strict and solemn account. By nature, we
have all been in a state of rebellion against the glorious King of the
universe, and refused to have him to reign over us. Has the rebellion and
opposition of our hearts ever been subdued? We have been invited, yea,
entreated, to be reconciled to GOD; to come into, and partake of the rich and
everlasting blessings of his kingdom; and we are still the subjects of these
gracious calls. If we have obeyed them, and have complied with the offers of
mercy, happy are we indeed; happy in the favor and protection of our KING and
SAVIOR, while in this world; and hereafter we shall see his face in peace, and
shall live and reign with him forever in glory.

But if, notwithstanding all the means of grace and the peculiar advantages we
have enjoyed, any of us continue rebels to GOD, and refuse subjection to JESUS
CHRIST as our SAVIOR and LORD; awful, indeed, and unspeakably hazardous, is our
situation, It will be more tolerable for the heathen, in the day of judgment,
than for us. It becomes all such, therefore, to realize their true and
sorrowful condition; immediately to renounce their rebellion, and fly to the
mercy seat, while it is "an accepted time, and a day of salvation." Otherwise,
the KINGDOM OF GOD, will, in a very short time, be preached no more to them;
and their justly offended KING, will rise up in anger, and shut the door of
mercy forever against them. Wherefore, "let us hear his gracious voice, today,
and not harden our hearts."

AMEN
THE CHARGE, GIVEN BY THE REV. MR. WHITNEY, OF NORTHBOROUGH.
WE, the Presbytery, hereunto called in the providence of GOD, and in virtue of
authority derived from the Founder of Christianity, having solemnly separated
and ordained you, Mr. WARD COTTON, (by prayer and the laying on of our hands)
to the work of the Gospel Ministry, in general, with authority to preach the
word, and administer the ordinances of GOD, whenever and wherever you shall be
regularly invited thereto; do, now, declare you to be the special Bishop and
Overseer of the first Christian Church and Society in Boylston.

As you are set apart to this sacred employment, let me stir up your pure mind,
by way of remembrance of the duties of your high and holy calling.

Accordingly, I, who am an elder, (as thou also now art,) exhort you, before
GOD, and the LORD JEJUS CHRIST, (who shall judge the quick and the dead at his
second appearing in the glory of the Father,) that you take heed to the
ministry you have received in the LORD, to fulfill it.

Take heed, therefore, unto yourself, and unto all the flock, of which the HOLY
GHOST has made you an overseer, to feed the Church of CHRIST, which he has
purchased with his own blood. You will consider this flock as your peculiar
charge; to their service you will, then, devote your time, and every talent the
GOD of nature or grace has bestowed upon you. While this people support you,
"necessity is laid upon you, and woe be unto you, if you preach not the gospel."

Preach the word; GOD'S word; not as many, who corrupt it with human
inventions, mixtures, or additions.

"Take heed unto your doctrine," what you teach and preach, Feed this flock
with the sincere milk of the word, that they may grow thereby, up to the
measure of the stature of the fullness of CHRIST.

The holy scriptures are committed to you as a sacred depositum: These you are
to open and explain; and teach or preach nothing but what is clearly contained
therein, or may be fairly and evidently deduced therefrom. As an ambassador
from the Prince of Peace, your instructions are all laid before you in the
Bible. "All scripture is given by inspiration of GOD, and is profitable for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, and for instruction in righteousness;
that the man of GOD, the Christian Minister, may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto all good works." The Bible, then, you will make your chief
study, that you may rightly understand that, and preach it faithfully to your
hearers; not following cunningly devised fables, which, as an ignisfatuus, only
mislead. You are set for the defense of the gospel, against all who would
oppose or corrupt it. In this age of infidelity, when some, professing
themselves wise, become fools, and employ their wit, not reason, to decry the
wisdom of GOD, it is particularly important, that, from a thorough examination
of all the evidences of Christianity, you endeavor to be well grounded, rooted,
and settled in the faith; whereby you will be the better able to confirm and
establish the faith of others; and by clear reasoning to convince gainsayers,
and to put to silence the ignorance of foolish men.

I shall not take upon me to tell you what to preach in particular. I claim not
infallibility, nor any dominion over your faith. I know not any right I have,
authoritatively to enjoin on you to teach and preach according to my Creed, or
agreeable to my system of divinity. It is your right, nay more, as you will
answer it to GOD, it is your duty, to examine and think for yourself, and to
preach what, after painful and prayerful inquiry, appears to you to be the
truth as it is in JESUS, "calling no man Master upon earth. One is your Master,
even CHRIST. And to your own Master you must stand or fall." In the sermons of
our LORD, and of his Apostles, you have eminent patterns of gospel preaching.

You will frequently advert to that solemn appeal, which St. Paul made to men,
respecting the matter and the manner of his preaching, and his fidelity in the
discharge of the duties of his sacred embassy; and, in imitation of so bright
an example, "keep back nothing which may be profitable to your hearers, nor
shun to declare the whole counsel of God; testifying, to all, repentance
toward GOD, and faith toward our LORD JESUS CHRIST. And suffer none of the
trials you meet with to move you, neither count your life dear unto yourself,
so that you may finish your course with joy, and the ministry you have received
of the LORD JESUS, to testify the gospel of the grace of GOD." Study to show
yourself approved unto GOD, a workman who needs not to be ashamed, rightly
dividing the word of truth; and, as a faithful and wise steward in the house of
GOD, give to every one his portion of meat in due season; feeding the lambs, as
well as the sheep of the flock; not assuming dominion over their faith, but
striving to be a helper of their joy. Be instant in season, and out of season;
reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all authority, and with all long suffering and
doctrine; teaching every man, and warning every man, that, if possible, you may
present every man perfect in CHRIST JESUS.

You will urge mankind to a seasonable and diligent use of the means of grace;
but, cautious of attributing the salvation of man to outward means, solely, and
knowing that, in bringing sinners to final happiness, you are a laborer
together with GOD, you will never cease to pray for this people, that the
energy of GOD'S HOLY SPIRIT may ever accompany all your sacred ministrations;
and render them effectual means of convincing and converting sinners; and of
building them up in holiness and comfort, through faith, unto salvation;
pressing it upon them to be working out their own salvation, with fear and
trembling, while GOD, by the efficacious influences of his SPIRIT, is working
in them, to will and to do of his own good pleasure.

"Take heed," also, unto the manner of your preaching. Having your mind deeply
impressed with the sense and weight of eternal concerns; and feeling a joint
personal interest in the great truths you preach to others, you will speak as
becomes the oracles of GOD; not with those theatrical airs and gestures, which,
however they may befit a schoolboy, or a youth just completing his academical
studies, by no means become the sacred desk, nor him who is speaking, in the
name of GOD, to sinful men: But with that gravity and solemnity, that
earnestness and pathos, which the reference of these things to men's final
state will generate and inspire. And never attempt to supply the want of
matter, by the mere graces of composition, or to court the temporary applause
of the ignorant, instead of the lasting approbation of the deserving.

"Take heed unto yourself," as well as to your doctrine and manner of
preaching. Endeavor to make yourself master of your business. Stir up the gifts
you are possessed of. Give attendance to reading, meditation and prayer, that
your advances in ministerial furniture may appear to all. "Take heed unto
yourself," to the state and welfare of your own soul, lest, after having
preached to others, you should be a castaway.

"Take heed unto yourself," how you live and behave in the world. Give no
offense in any thing, that the ministry be not blamed. Be wise as a serpent,
and harmless as a dove. Let no man despise you; but, by dignity and propriety
of conduct, magnify your office; and be thou an example to all, in word, in
conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity; in all things showing
thyself a pattern of good works.

As you are brought near to GOD, to do the service of the temple of the LORD,
and to stand before the Congregation to minister unto them, see that you give
no occasion to the enemies of the LORD to blaspheme; but let "holiness to the
LORD," be written on all your services, and on all your enjoyments.

Take heed how you behave, with respect to your Fathers and Brethren in the
Ministry.

You will avoid that lust of Diotrephical preeminence, which some hanker after;
and while you wish to be seen and known, among your brethren, according to your
age and rank, and according to your station in the church of GOD, you will, as
a modest, (a sure sign of a sensible) man, shun those forward, assuming,
dictatorial airs, which by no means become the face of youth in the presence of
age. Be not found smiting your fellow servants; neither play the bishop in
other men's parishes; nor listen to the disaffected therein, from a sordid
thirst for popularity, or that you may rise upon the ruins of others, lest you
should have occasion to say, "As I have done, so GOD has requited me."

Administer the ordinances of CHRIST'S appointment to the proper subjects
thereof; making a difference between the clean and the unclean. Yet never
impose unscriptural terms, for christian communion, upon any. Make not the door
of admission into CHRIST'S church narrower than he has made it. He, who well
knew what was in man, admitted a Judas into his first little church. You will
strive to keep up the discipline appointed by CHRIST in his house. Prefer not
one before another. Do nothing by partiality.

The powers of ordination belong to you. Whenever, therefore, you are called to
separate persons to this work, make a proper use of your power, for the glory
of GOD, the interest of religion, the credit and reputation of the Clergy, and
the peace, order and unity of the Churches. Lay hands, suddenly, on no man;
neither be partaker of other men's sins.

Introduce not a novice into the ministry, lest, being elated with pride, he
fall into the comdemnation of the devil. It is not every fellow who thrusts
himself into the pulpit, who is fit for the ministry. You are bound to judge of
their qualifications, who are called by a people, and offer themselves to this
service. The things, therefore, which you have receivceived of us, before all
these witnesses, the same commit you to faithful men, who shall be able to
teach others also; men of good abilities, fair moral characters, and blameless
lives.

In a word; endure afflictions as a good soldier of JESUS CHRIST; for these, if
your life is spared, you must expect to meet with. "The servant is not above
his master; neither he who is sent, above him who sent him."

Finally; remember you watch for souls, as one who must give an account. You
are this day entering on your labors. How soon you may be called to give
account of your stewardship, is known only to him who sends you forth to labor.
You will bear in mind the short course allotted to that worthy young man, your
immediate predecessor; and let it be a memento to you, to "work the works of
him, who sends you into his vineyard, while it is day; the night comes when no
man can work." And, now, we say to you, dear Sir, if you keep this commandment,
unrebukable, and are found faithfully discharging the duties of your office,
whether your term be long or short, and though this Israel be not all gathered,
as you could wish; yet you shall be glorious in the eyes of the LORD; and when
the Chief Shepherd shall appear, you shall receive, from his hands, a crown of
life, which shall never fade away. So help you, GOD.

THE RIGHT HAND OF FELLOWSHIP, BY THE REV. AARON BANCROFT, OF WORCESTER.
CHRISTIANITY is the consummation of divine goodness. The spirit of the gospel
is love and candor: Its general tendency is to rectify every dissocial
affection in its disciples; to refine the human character, and to promote the
happiness of man through all his relations. Peace on earth and good will to men
were proclaimed by the celestial Harbingers of the birth of its Divine Author.
But the nature of the gospel has often been misunderstood, and its benevolent
intentions have been perverted. The professed disciples of JESUS CHRIST have
often exercised tyranny over the consciences of their fellow beings, and
supported their usurpations by every act of cruelty. Where the power of
persecution has been denied -- blind attachment to system -- zeal for points of
doubtful speculation, have often stifled the amiable principles of our
religion, and excited passionate disputes and inveterate parties among
Christians. The intemperate cry for Paul, Cephas and Apollos, has taken the
place of love, candor and meekness. From these errors, we may all take lessons
of moderation.

Our civil government makes no distinction between different denominations of
Christians. It is for us, individually, to carry into full effect the
charitable spirit of our religion. We cannot suppose, that GOD has suspended
the rewards of immortality upon those conditions, on which the genius of
superstition makes them to depend; abstract speculations and ceremonial rites.
Piety and virtue may, doubtless, subsist, amidst a variety of opinions and a
diversity of forms. We ought not to require that, at a term of communion, which
GOD does not require as a condition of salvation. The scriptures are an
infallible rule to all christians; but the wisest and the best of men may err
in its application: Our charity therefore may be extended to all, who
consistently support the christian character. In this way, we shall promote
unity of spirit in the bond of peace.

Under these impressions, Dear Sir, in the name and by the appointment of the
Council present, I give you the Right Hand of Fellowship. We acknowledge you
our equal; possessed of all the privileges of a Christian Bishop. We presume
not to exercise dominion over your faith; but we wish to be the helpers of your
joy. By this sacred pledge, we allow your right of private judgment, and
promise a corresponding practice. We proffer you our friendship in the walks of
private life, and our advice and assistance in the business of your probation.
In every suitable way, we engage to cooperate with you, in the promotion of a
kingdom of righteousness, peace and joy. From you, we expect the like offices
of friendship, advice and assistance.

GOD ALMIGHTY bless thee, my Brother. May he grant clearness to thine
understanding and improvement to thy studies; may he add length to thy life and
luster to thine example; success to thy ministerial labors, and to thy fidelity
the crown of glory.

The Christian Church and Society in this place will accept our congratulation
on the events of this day. With you we have noticed the dispensations of
Providence, in the repeated and quick removal of your ministers: With you we
mourned the early death of your late Pastor. We applaud your spirited exertions
in support of the public institutions of the gospel: We rejoice at the
unanimity and order which have attended the choice and induction of your
present Minister. He relies on your friendship, your candor and support. We are
persuaded, you will, by a serious attendance on his ministry, encourage his
heart, and strengthen his hands. Your own salvation, and the happiness of your
children, urge this duty upon you. The state of society with us, renders the
attention to the public worship and instruction of the Sabbath highly
important. The increasing wealth of our country opens daily new channels of
luxury and dissipation. Arguments of general skepticism are placed before the
public in their most engaging forms. Every seducing speculation finds an
emission from the press. The friends of mankind must wish to counteract this
excess of liberty, by useful information and religious impressions; by habits
of sober reflection and good practice. No methods can be conceived better
calculated to impress the unexperienced mind with a sense of moral obligation,
to enforce the laws of religion on conscience, and to furnish armor of defense
against the seductions of a wicked world, than the public institutions of
Christianity. By the regular attendance of yourselves and your families at the
Altar of DEITY may you expect, that energy will be given to your private
instruction and example. Your Minister will rise up and make a good report of
you; your children, and call you blessed.

May the GOD of peace and love delight to dwell with and to bless you.

When JESUS shall a second time appear, may you, your Pastor, and all to whom
he shall minister, with HIM, enter into the joys of Heaven.


