THE ITALIAN, OR, THE CONFESSIONAL OF THE Black Penitents. A ROMANCE.

BY ANN RADCLIFFE, AUTHOR OF THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, ROMANCE OF THE FOREST,
CICILIAN ROMANCE, etc.

He, wrapped in clouds of mystery and silence,
Broods over his passions, bodies them in deeds,
And sends them forth on wings of fate to others:
Like the invisible Will, that guides us,
Unheard, unknown, unsearchable!
IN TWO VOLUMES. VOL. I.

MOUNT-PLEASANT: PRINTED W DURELL, FOR R. MAGILL, S. CAMP BELL, E. DUYCKINCK
and co. GAIN and TENEYCK, N. JUDAH, P. MESIER, J. HARRISSON T. GREENLEAF, and
THOMAS, ANDREWS and PENNIMAN. 1797.

THE ITALIAN, OR, THE Confessional of the Black Penitents.
ABOUT the year 1764, some English travelers in Italy, during one of their
excursions in the environs of Naples, happened to stop before the portico of
the Santa Maria del Pianto, a church belonging to a very ancient convent of the
order of the Black Penitents. The magnificence of this portico, though impaired
by time, excited so much admiration, that the travelers were curious to survey
the structure to which it belonged, and with this intention they ascended the
marble steps that led to it.

Within the shade of the portico, a person with folded arms, and eyes directed
toward the ground, was pacing behind the pillars the whole extent of the
pavement, and was apparently so engaged by his own thoughts, as not to observe
that strangers were approaching. He turned, however, suddenly, as if startled
by the sound of steps, and then, without further pausing, glided to a door that
opened into the church, and disappeared.

There was something too extraordinary in the figure of this man, and too
singular in his conduct, to to pass unnoticed by the visitors. He was of a tall
thin figure, bending forward from the shoulders; of a sallow complexion, and
harsh features, and had an eye, which, as it looked up from the cloak that
Muffled the lower part of his countenance, seemed expressive of uncommon
ferocity.

The travelers on entering the church, looked round for the stranger, who had
passed thither before them, but he was no where to be seen, and, through all
the shade of the long aisles, only one other person appeared. This was a friar
of the adjoining convent, who sometimes pointed out to strangers the objects in
the church, which were most worthy of attention, and who now, with this design,
approached the party that had just entered.

The interior of this edifice had nothing of the shewy ornament and general
splendour, which distinguish the churches of Italy, and particularly those of
Naples; but it exhibited a simplicity and grandeur of design, considerably more
interesting to persons of taste, and a solemnity of light and shade much more
suitable to promote the sublime elevation of devotion.

When the party had viewed the different shrines and whatever had been judged
worthy of observation, and were returning through an obscure aisle toward the
portico, they perceived the person who had appeared upon the steps, passing
toward a confessional on the left, and, as he entered it, one of the party
pointed him out to the friar, and enquired who he was; the friar turning to
look after him, did not immediately reply, but on the question being repeated,
he inclined his head, as in a kind of obeisance, and calmly replied, "he is an
assassin."

"An assassin!" exclaimed one of the Englishmen; "an assassin, and at liberty!"

An Italian gentleman, who was of the party, smiled at the astonishment of his
friend.

"He has sought sanctuary here," replied the friar; "within those walls he may
not be hurt."

"Do your altars, then, protect the murderer?" said the Englishman.

"He could find shelter no where else," answered the friar meekly.

"This is astonishing!" said the Englishman, "of what avail are your laws, if
the most atrocious criminal may thus find shelter from them? But how does he
contrive to exist here! He is, at least, in danger of being starved?"

"Pardon me," replied the friar; "there are always people willing to assist
those, who cannot assist themselves; and as the criminal may not leave the
church in search of food, they bring it to him here."

"Is this possible?" said the Englishman, turning to his Italian friend.

"Why, the poor wretch must not starve," replied the friend; "which he
inevitably would do, if food were not brought to him! But have you never since
your arrival in Italy, happened to see a person in the situation of this man?
It is by no means an uncommon one.',

"Never!" answered the Englishman, "and I can scarcely credit what I see now!"

"Why, my friend," observed the Italian, "if we were to show no mercy to such
unfortunate persons, assassinations are so frequent, that our cities would be
half depopulated."

In notice of this profound remark, the Englishman could only gravely bow.

'But observe yonder confessional,' added the Italian, "that beyond the pillars
on the left of the aisle, below a painted window. Have you discovered it? The
colors of the glass throw, instead of light, a shade over that part of the
church, which, perhaps, prevents your distinguishing what I mean!"

The Englishman looked whither his friend pointed, and observed a confessional
of oak, or some very dark wood adjoining the wall, and remarked also, that it
was the same, which the assassin had just entered. It consisted of three
compartments, covered with a black canopy. In the central division was the
chair of the confessor, elevated by several steps above the pavement of the
church; and on either hand was a small closet, or box, with steps leading up to
a grated partition, at which the penitent might kneel, and, concealed from
observation, pour into the ear of the confessor, the consciousness of crimes
that lay heavy on his heart.

"You observe it?" said the Italian.

"I do," replied the Englishman; "it is the same which the assassin has passed
into; and I think it one of the most gloomy spots I ever beheld; the view of it
is enough to strike a criminal with despair!"

"We, in Italy, are not so apt to despair," replied the Italian smilingly.

"Well, but what of this confessional?" enquired the Englishman. "The assassin
entered it!"

"He has no relation, with what I am about to mention," replied the Italian;
"but I wish you to mark the place, because some very extraordinary
circumstances belong to it."

"What are they?" replied the Englishman.

"It is now several years since the confession, which is connected with them,
was made at that very confessional," added the Italian; "the view of it, and
the sight of this assassin, with your surprise at the liberty which is allowed
him, led me to a recollection of the story. When you return to the hotel, I
will communicate it to you, if you have no pleasanter way of engaging your time.

"I have a curiosity to hear it," replied the Englishman, "cannot you relate it
now?,'

"It is much too long to be related now; that would occupy a week; I have it in
writing, and will send you the volume. A young student of of Padua, who
happened to be at Naples soon after this horrible confession became public" --

"Pardon me," interrupted the Englishman, "that is surely very extraordinary? I
thought confessions were always held sacred by the priest, to whom they were
made."

"Your observation is reasonable," rejoined the Italian; "the faith of the
priest is never broken, except by an especial command from an higher power; and
the circumstances must even then be very extraordinary to justify such a
departure from the law. But, when you read the narrative, your surprise on this
head will cease. I was going to tell you that it was written by a student at
Padua, who, happening to be here soon after the affair became public, was so
muck struck with the facts, that, partly, as an exercise, and partly, in return
for some trifling services I had rendered him, he committed them to paper for
me. You will perceive from the work, that this student was very young, as to
the arts of composition, but the facts are what you require, and from these he
has not deviated. But come let us leave the church."

"After I had taken another view of this solemn edifice," replied the
Englishman, "and particularly of the confessional you have pointed to my
notice!"

While the Englishman glanced his eye over the high roofs, and along the solemn
perspectives of the Santa del Pianto, he perceived the figure of the assassin
stealing from the confesional across the choir, and, shocked on again,
beholding him, he turned his eyes, and hastily quitted the church.

The friends then separated and the Englishman, soon after returning to his
hotel, received the volume. He read as follows:

THE ITALIAN.
CHAP I.
"What is this secret sin; this untold tale,
That art cannot extract nor penance cleanse?"
MYSTERIOUS MOTHER.
IT was in the church of San Lorenzo at Naples, in the year 1758; that Vicentio
di Vivaldi first saw Ellena Rosa^ba. The sweetness and fine expression of her
voice attracted his attention to her figure, which had a distinguished air of
delicacy and grace; but her face was concealed in her veil. So much indeed was
he facinated by the voice, that a most painful curiosity was excited as to her
countenance, which he fancied must express all the sensibility of character
that the modulation of her tones indicated. He listened to their exquisite
expression with a rapt attention, and hardly withdrew his eyes from her person
till the matin service had concluded; when he observed her leave the church,
with an aged lady, who leaned upon her arm, and who appeared to be her mother.

Vivaldi immediately followed their steps, determined to obtain, if possible, a
view of Ellena's face, and and to discover the home to which she should retire.
They walked quickly, looking niether to the right or left, and as they turned
into the Strada di Toledo he had nearly lost them; but quickening his pace, and
relinquishing the cautious distance he had hitherto kept-he overtook them as
they entered on the Terrazzo Nuovo* which runs along the bay of Naples, and
leads toward the Gran Corso. He overtook them; but the fair unknown still held
her veil close, and he knew not how to introduce himself to her notice or to
obtain a view of the features, which excited his curiosity. He was embarrassed
by a respectful timidity, that mingled with his admiration, and which kept him
silent, notwithstanding his wish to speak.

In descending the last steps of the Terrazzo, however, the foot of the elder
lady faultered, and, while Vivaldi, hastened to assist her, the breeze from the
water caught the veil, which Ellena had no longer a hand sufficiently
disengaged to confine, and, wafting it partially aside, disclosed to him a
countenance more touchingly beautiful than he had dared to imagine. Her
features were of the Grecian outline, and, though they expressed the
tranquillity of an elegant mind, her dark blue eyes sparkled with intelligence.
She was assisting her companion so anxiously, that she did not imediately
observe the admiration she had inspired; but the moment her eyes met those of
Vivaldi, she became conscious of their effect, and she hastily drew her veil,

The old lady was not materially hurt by her fall, as she walked with
dificulty, Vivaldi siezed the opportunity thus offered, and insisted that she
should except his arm. She refused this with many acknowledgements; but he
pressed so repeatedly and respectfully, that; at length, she accepted it, and
they walked toward her residence together.

On the way thither, he attempted to converse with Ellena, but her replies were
concise and he arrived at the end of the walk while he was yet considering what
he could say, that might interest and withdraw her from this severe reserve.
From the style of their residence, he imagined they were persons of honorable
but moderate independence. The house was small, but exhibited an air of
comfort, and even of taste. It stood on an eminence, surrounded by a garden and
vineyards, which commanded the city and bay of Naples, an ever-moving picture,
and was canopied by a thick grove of pines and majestic date-trees; and though
the little portico and colonade in front were of common marble, the style of
architect was elegant. While they afforded a shelter from the sun, they
admitted the cooling breezes that rose from the bay below, and a prospect of
the whole scope of its enchanting shores.

Vivaldi stopped at the little gate, which led into the garden, where the elder
lady repeated her acknowledgement for his care, but did not invite him to
enter; and he, trembling with anxiety and sinking with disappointment, remained
for a moment gazing upon Ellena, unable to take leave, yet irresolute what to
say that might prolong the interview, till the old lady again bade him
good-day. He then summoned courage enough to request he might be allowed to
enquire after her health, and, having obtained her permission, his eyes bade
adieu to Ellena, who, as they were parting, ventured to thank him for the care
he had taken of her aunt. The sound of her voice, and his acknowledgment of
obligation, made him less willing to go than before, but at length he tore
himself away. The beauty of her countenance haunting his imagination, and the
touching accents of her voice still vibrating on his heart, he descended to the
shore below her residence, pleasing himself with the consciousness of being
near her, though he could no longer behold her; and sometimes hoping that he
might again see her, however distantly, in a balcony of the house, where the
silk awning seemed to invite the breeze from the sea. He lingered hour after
hour, stretched beneath the umbrageous pines that waved over the shore, or
traversing, regardless of the heat, the base of the cliffs that crowned it;
recalling to his fancy the enchantment of her smile, and seeming still to
listen to the sweetness of her accents,

In the evening he returned to his father's palace at Naples, thoughtful yet
pleased, anxious yet happy; dwelling with delightful hope on the remembrance of
the thanks he had received from Ellena, yet not daring to form any plan as to
his future conduct. He returned time enough to attend his mother in her evening
ride on the Corso, where, in every gay carriage that passed he hoped to see the
object of his constant thought; but she did not appear. His mother, the
Marchesa di Vivaldi, observed his anxiety and unusual silence, and asked him
some questions, which she meant should lead to an explanation of the change in
his manners; but his replies only excited a stronger curiosity, and though she
forbore to press her enquiries, it was probable that she might employ a more
artful means of renewing them.

Vincentio di Vivaldi was the only son of the Marchese di Vivaldi, a nobleman
of one of the most ancient families of the kingdom of Naples, a favorite
possessing an uncommon share of influence at Court, and a man still higher in
power than in rank. His pride of birth was equal to either, but it was mingled
with the justifiable pride of a principled mind; it governed his conduct in
morals as well as in the jealousy of ceremonial distinctions, and elevated his
practice as well as his claims. His pride was at once his vice and his virtue,
his safeguard and his weakness.

The mother of Vivaldi, descended from a family as ancient as that of his
father, was equally jealous of her importance; but her pride was that of birth
and distinction, without extending to morals. She was of violent passions,
haughty, vindictive, yet crafty and deceitful; patient in stratagem, and
indefatigable in pursuit of vengeance, on the unhappy objects who provoked her
resentment. She loved her son, rather as being the last of two illustrious
houses, who was to reunite and support the honor of both, than with the
fondness of a mother.

Vicentio inherited much of the character of his father, and very little of
that of his mother. His pride was as noble and as generous as that of the
Marchese; but he had somewhat of the fiery passions of the Marchesa, without
any of her craft, her duplicity, or vindictive thirst of revenge. Frank in his
temper, ingenuous in his sentiments. quickly offended, but easily appeased;
irritated by any appearance of disrespect, but melted by a concession, a high
sense of honor rendered him no more jealous of offense, than a delicate
humanity made him ready for reconciliation, and anxious to spare the feelings
of others.

On the day following that, on which he had seen Ellena, he returned to the
villa Altieri, to use the permission granted him on enquiring after the health
of Signora Bianchi. The expectation of seeing Ellena agitated him with
impatient joy and trembling hope, which still, increased as he approached her
residence, till, having reached the garden-gate, he was obliged to rest for a
few moments to recover breath and composure.

Having announced himself to an old female servant, who came to the gate, he
was soon after admitted to a small vestibule, where he found Signora Bianchi
winding balls of silk, and alone; though from the position of a chair which
stood near a frame for embroidery, he judged that Ellena had just quitted the
apartment.

Signora Bianchi received him with a reserved politeness, and seemed very
cautious in her replies to his enquiries after her niece, who, he hoped, every
moment, would appear. He lengthened his visit till there was no longer an
excuse for doing so; till he had exhausted every topic of conversation, and
till the silence of Signora Bianchi seemed to hint, that his departure was
expected. With a heart saddened by disappointment, and having obtained only a
reluctant permission to enquire after the health of that lady on some future
day, he took his leave.

On his way through the garden he often paused to look back on the house,
hoping to obtain a glimpse of Ellena at a lattice; and threw a glance around
him, almost expecting to see her seated beneath the shade of the luxuriant
plaintains; but his search was every where vain, and he quitted the place with
the slow and heavy step of despondency.

The day was employed in endeavors to obtain intelligence concerning the
family of Ellena, but of this he procured little that was satisfactory. He was
told, that she was an orphan, living under the care of her aunt, Signora
Bianchi: that her family, which had never been illustrious, was decayed in
fortune, and that her only dependence was upon this aunt. But he was ignorant
of what was very true, though very secret, that she assisted to support this
aged relative, whose sole property was the small estate on which they lived,
and that she passed whole days in embroidering silks, which were disposed of to
the nuns of a neighboring convent, who sold them to the Neapolitan ladies,
that visited their grate, at a very high advantage. He little thought, that a
beautiful robe, which he had often seen his mother wear, was worked by Ellena;
nor that some copies from the antique, which ornamented a cabinet of the
Vivaldi palace, were drawn by her hand. If he had known these circumstances,
they would only have served to increase the passion, which, since they were
proofs of a ^^^parity of fortune, that would certainly render his family
repugnant to a connection with hers, it would have been prudent to discourage.

Ellena could have endured poverty, but not contempt; and it was to protect
herself from this effect of the narrow prejudices of the world around her, that
she had so cautiously concealed from it a knowledge of the industry, which did
honor to her character. She was not ashamed of poverty or the industry which
overcame it, but her spirit shrunk from the senseless smile and humiliating
condescension, which prosperity sometimes gives to indigence. Her mind was not
yet strong enough, or her views sufficiently enlarged, to teach her a contempt
of the sneer of vicious folly, and to glory in the dignity of virtuous
independence, Ellena was the sole support of her aunt's declining years; was
patient of her infirmities, and consoling to her sufferings; and repaid the
fondness of a mother with the affection of a daughter. Her mother she had never
known, having lost her while she was an infant, and from that period Signora
Bianchi had performed the duties of one for her.

Thus innocent and happy in the silent performance of her duties and in the
veil of retirement, lived Ellena Rosalba, when she first saw Vincentio di
Vivaldi. He was not a figure to pass unobserved when seen, and Ellena had been
struck by the spirit and dignity of his air, and by his countenance, so frank,
noble, and full of that kind of expression, which announces the energies of the
soul. But she was cautious of admitting a sentiment more tender than
admiration, and endeavor to dismiss his image from her mind, and by engaging
in her usual occupations, to recover the state of tranquillity, which his
appearance had somewhat interrupted.

Vivaldi, mean while, restless from disappointment, and impatient from anxiety,
having passed the greater part of the day in enquiries, which repaid him only
with doubt and apprehension, determined to return to the villa Altieri, when
evening should conceal his steps, consoled by the certainty of being near the
object of his thoughts, and hoping, that chance might favor him once more with
a view, however, transient of Ellena.

The Marchesa Vivaldi held an assembly this evening, and a suspicion concerning
the impatience he betrayed, induced her to detain him about her person to a
late hour, engaging him to select the music for her orchestra, and to
superintend the performance of a new piece, the work of a composer whom she had
brought into fashion. Her assemblies were among the most brilliant and crowded
in Naples, and the nobility, who were to be at the palace this evening, were
divided into two parties as to the merits of the musical genius, whom she
patronized, and those of another candidate for fame. The performance of the
evening it was expected it would finally decide the victory. This therefore,
was a night of great importance and anxiety to the Marchesa, for she was as
jealous of the reputation of her favovrite composer as of her own, and the
welfare of her son did but slightly divide her cares.

The moment he could depart unobserved, he quitted the assembly, and, muffling
himself in his cloak, hastened to the villa Altiera, which lay at a short
distance to the west of the city. He reached it unobserved, and breathless with
impatience, traversed the the boundary of the garden; where, free from
ceremonial restraint and near the object of his affection, he experienced for
the first few moments a joy as exquisite as her presence could have inspired.
But this delight faded with its novelty, and in a short time he felt as forlorn
as if he was separated for ever from Ellena, in whose presence he but lately
almost believed himself.

The night was far advanced, and, no light appearing from the house, he
concluded the inhabitants had retired to rest, and all hope of seeing her
vanished from his mind. Still, however, it was sweet to be near her, and he
anxiously sought to gain admittance to the gardens, that he might approach the
window where it was possible she reposed. The boundary, formed of trees and
thick shrubs, was not difficult to be passed, and he found himself once more in
the portico of the villa.

It was nearly midnight, and the stillness that reigned was rather soothed than
interrupted by the gentle dashings of the waters of the bay below, and by the
hollow murmurs of Vesuvius, which threw up at intervals its sudden flame on the
horizon, and then left it to darkness. The solemnity of the scene accorded with
the temper of his mind, and he listened in deep attention for the returning
sounds, which broke upon the ear like distant thunder muttering imperfectly
from the clouds. The pauses of silence, that succeeded each groan of the
mountain, when expectation listened for the rising sound, affected the
imagination of Vivaldi at this time with particular awe, and, rapt in thought,
he continued to gaze upon the sublime and shadowy outline of the shores, and on
the sea, just descerned beneath the twilight of a cloudless sky. along its gray
surface many vessels were pursuing their silent course, guided over the deep
waters only by the polar star, which burned with steady luster. The air was
calm, and rose from the bay with most balmy and refreshing coolness; it
scarcely stirred the heads of the broad pines that overspread the villa: and
bore no sounds but of the waves and the groans of the far-off mountain -- till
a chaunting of deep voices ^welled from a distance. The solemn character of the
strain engaged his attention; he perceived that it was a requiem, and he
endeavored to discover from what quarter it came. It advanced, though
distantly, and then passed away on the air. The circumstance struck him; he
knew not it was usual in some parts of Italy to chant this strain over the bed
of the dying; but here the mourners seemed to walk on the earth, or in the air.
He was not doubtful as to the strain itself; -- once before he had heard it,
and attended with circumstances which made it impossible that he should forget
it. As he now listened to the choral voices softening distance, a few pathetic
voices notes brought full upon his remembrance the divine melody he had heard
Ellena utter in the church of San Lorenzo. Overcome by the recollection, he
started away, and, wandering over the garden reached another side of the villa,
where he soon heard the voice of Ellena herself, performing the midnight hymn
to the virgin, and accompanied by a lute, which she touched with most affecting
and delicate expression. He stood for a moment entranced, and scarcely daring
to breathe, lest he should lose any ^ote of that meek and holy strain' which
seemed to flow from a devotion almost saintly, Then looking round to discover
the object of his admiration, a light issuing from among the bowery foliage of
a clematis led him to a lattice, and showed him Ellena. The lattice had been
thrown open to admit the cool air, and he had a full view of her and the
apartment. She was rsiiug from a small altar where she had concluded the
service; the glow of devotion was still upon her countenance as she raised her
eyes, and with rapt earnestness fixed them on the heavens. She still held the
lute, but no longer awakened it, and seemed lost to every surroun-object. Her
fine hair was negligently bound up in a silk net, and some tresses that had
escaped it, played on her neck, and round her beautiful countenance, which now
was not even partially concealed by a viel. The light drapery of her dress, her
whole figure, air, and attitude, were such as might have been copied for a
Grecian nymph.

Vivaldi was perplexed and agitated between the wish of seizing an opportunity,
which might never again occur, of pleading his love, and the fear of offending,
by intruding upon her retirement at so sacred an hour; but, while he thus
hesitated, he heard her sigh, and then with a sweetness peculiar to her accent,
pronounce his name. During the trembling anxiety, with which he listened to
what might follow this mention of his name, he disturbed the clematis that
surrounded the lattice, and she turned her eyes toward the window; but Vivaldi
was entirely concealed by the foliage. She, however, rose to close the lattice,
as she approached which, Vivaldi, unable any longer to command himself,
appeared before her. She stood fixed for an instant, while her countenance
changed to an ashy paleness; and then, with trembling haste closing the
lattice, quitted the apartment. Vivaldi felt as if all his hopes had vanished
with her.

After lingering in the garden for some time without perceiving a light in any
other part of the building, or hearing a sound proceed from it, he took his
melancholy way to Naples. He now began to ask himself some questions, which he
ought to have urged before, and to enpuire wherefore he sought the dangerous
pleasure of seeing Ellena, since her family was of such a condition as rendered
the consent of his parents to a marriage with her unattainable.

He was lost in revere on this subject, sometimes half resolved to seek her no
more, and then shrinking from a conduct, which seemed to strike him with the
force of despair, when, as he emerged from the dark* arch of ruin that extended
over the road, his was way crossed by a person in the habit of a monk, whose
face was shrouded by his cowl still more than by the twilight. The Stranger,
addressing him by his name, said, "Signor! your steps are watched; beware how
you revisit Alteri!" Having uttered this, he disappeared, before Vivaldi could
return the sword he had half drawn into the scabbard, or demand an explanation
of the words he had heard. He called loudly and repeatedly conjuring the
unknown person to appear; and lingered near the spot for a considerable time;
but the vision came no more.

Vivaldi arrived at home with a mind occupied by this incident, and tormented
by the jealousy to which it gave rise; for, after indulging various
conjectures, he concluded with believing the notice, of which he had been
warned, tobe that of a rival, and that the danger which menaced him, was from
the poniard of jealousy. This belief discovered to him at once the extent of
his passion, and of the imprudence, which had thus readily admitted it; yet so
far was this new prudence from overcoming his error, that, stung with a torture
more exquisite than he had ever known, he resolved, at every event, to declare
his love, and sue for the hand of Ellena. Unhappy young man, he knew not the
fatal error, into which his passion was precipitating him.

On his arrival at the Vivaldi palace, he learned that the Marchesa had
observed his ^bsence, had repeatedly enquired for him, and had given orders
that the time of his return should be mentioned to her. She had however,
retired to rest; but the Marchese, who had attended the king on an excursion to
one of the royal villas on the bay, returned home ^oon after Vincentio, and,
before he had withdrawn to hi s apartment, he met his son with unusual
displeasure, but avoided saying any thing, which either explained or alluded to
the subject of it; and, after a short conversation they separated.

Vivaldi shut himself in his apartment to deliberate, if that may deserve the
name of del^^eration, in which a conflict o^ passions, rather than an exertion
of judgment, prevailed. For several hours he traversed his suit of rooms,
alternately tortured by the remembrance of Ellena, fired with jealousy, and
alarmed for the consequence of the imprudent step, which he was about to take.
He knew the temper of his father, and some of the traits of the character of
his mother, sufficently to fear that their displeasure would be irreconcilable
concerning the marriage he meditated; yet, when he considered that he was their
only son, he was inclined to admit a hope of forgiveness, notwithstanding the
weight which the circumstance must add to their disappointment. These
reflections were frequently interrupted by sears lest Ellena had already
disposed of her affections to this imaginary rival. He was however, somewhat
consoled by remembering the sigh she had uttered, and the tenderness, with which
she had immediately pronounced his name. Yet, even, if she were not averse to
his suit, how could he solicit her hand, and hope it would be given him, when
he should declare that this must be in secret? He scarcely dared to believed
that she would condescend to enter a family who disdained to receive her? and
again despondency overcame him.

The morning found him as distracted as the night had left him; his
determination, however, was fixed; and this was to sacrifice what he now
considered as a delusive pride of birth, to a choice which he believed would
ensure the happiness of his life. But, before he ventured to declare himself to
Ellena, it appeared necessary to ascertain whether he held an interest in her
heart, or whether she had devoted it to the rival of his love, and who this
rival really was. It was so much easier to wish for such information than to
obtain it, that, after forming a thousand projects, either the delicacy of his
respect for Ellena, or his fear of offending her, or an apprehension of
discovery from his family before he had secured an interest in her affections,
constantly opposed his views of an enquiry.

In this difficulty he opened his heart to a friend, who had long possessed his
confidence, and whose advice he solicited with somewhat more anxiety and
sincerity than is usual on such occasions. It was not a sanction of his own
oppinion that he required, but the impartial judgment of another mind. Bonarmo,
however little he might be qualified for the office of an adviser, did not
scruple to give his advice. As a means of judging whether Ellena was disposed
to favor Vivaldi's addresses, he proposed, that, according to the custom of
the country, a serenade should be given; he maintained, that, if she was not
disinclined toward him, some sign of approbation would appear; and if
otherwise, that she would remain silent and invisible. Vivaldi objected to this
coarse and inadequate mode of expressing a love so sacred as his, and he had
too lofty an opinion of Ellena's mind and delicacy, to believe, that the
trifling homage of a serenade would either flatter her self-love, or interest
her in his favor; nor, if it did, could he venture to believ, that she would
display any sign of approbation.

His friend laughed at his scruples and at his opinion of what he called such
romantic delicacy, that his ignorance of the world was his only excuse for
having cherished them. But Vivaldi interrupted this raillery, and would neither
suffer him to speak thus of Ellena, or to call such delicacy romantic. Bonarmo,
however still urged the serenade as at least a possible means of discovering
her disposition toward him before he made a formal avowel of his suit; and
Vivaldi, perplexed and distracted with apprehension and impatience to terminate
his present state of suspense, was at length so far overcome by his own
difficulties, rather then by his friend's persuasion, that he consented to make
the adventure of a serenade on the approaching night. This was adopted rather
as a refuge from desponedncy, than with any hope of success; for he still
believed that Ellena would not give any hint, that might terminate his
uncertainty.

Beneath their cloaks they carried musical instruments, and, muffling their
faces, so that they could not be known, they proceeded in thoughtful silence on
the way to the villa Altieri. Already they had passed the arch, in which
Vivaldi was stopped by the stranger on the proceeding night, when he heard a
sudden sound near him, and, raising his head from the cloak, he perceived the
same figure! Before he had time for exclamation, the stranger crossed him
again. "Go not to the villa Altieri," said he in a solemn voice, "lest you meet
the fate you ought to dread."

"What fate?" demanded Vivaldi, stepping back; "Speak, I conjure you!"

But the monk was gone, and the darkness of the hour baffled observation as to
the way of his departure.

"Dio mi guardi^" exclaimed Bonarmo, "this is almost beyond belief! but let us
return to Naples; this second warning ought to be obeyed."

"It is almost beyond endurance," exclaimed Vivaldi; "which way did he pass?"

"He glided by me," replied Bonarmo, "and he was gone before I could cross him?"

"I will tempt the worst at once," said Vivaldi; "if I have a rival, it is best
to meet him. Let us go on."

Bonarmo remonstrated, and represented the serious danger that threatened from
so rash a proceeding. "It is evident that you have a rival," said he; "and your
courage cannot avail you against hired bravos." Vivaldi's heart swelled at the
mention of a rival. "If you think it dangerous to proceed, I will go alone,"
said he.

Hurt by this reproof, Bonarmo accompanied his friend in silence, and they
reached without interruption the boundary of the villa. Vivaldi led to the
place (...) which he had entered on the preceding night, and they passed
unmolested into the garden.

"Where are these terrible bravos of whom you warned me?" said Vivaldi, with
taunting exultation.

"Speak cautiously," replied his friend; "we may even now, be within their
reach?"

"They also may be within ours," observed Vivaldi.

At length these adventurous friends came to the orangery, which was near the
house, when, tired by the ascent, they rested to recover breath and to prepare
their instruments for the serenade. The night was still, and they now heard,
for the first time, murmurs as of a distant multitude* and then the sudden
splendor of fire works broke upon the sky. These arose from a villa on the
western margin of the bay, and were given in honor of the birth of one of the
royal princes. They soared to an immence height, and, as their luster broke
silently upon the night, it lightened on the thousand upturned faces of the
gazing crowd, illumined the waters of the bay, with every little boat that
skimmed its surface, and showed distinctly the whole sweep of its rising
shores, the stately city of Naples on the strand below, and spreading far among
the hills, its terraced roofs crowded with spectators and the Corso tumultuous
with carriages and blazing with torches.

While Bonarmo surveyed this magnificent scene, Vivaldi turned his eyes to the
residence of Ellena, part of which looked out from among the trees, with a hope
that the spectacle would draw her to a balcony; but she did not appear, nor was
there any light that might indicate her approach,

While they still rested on the turf of the orangery, they herad a rustling of
the leaves, as if the branches were disturbed by some person who endeavored to
make his way between them when, Vivaldi demanded who passed. No answer was
returned, and a long silence followed.

"We are observed," said Bonarmo, at length, "and are even now, perhaps, almost
beneath the poniard of the assassin: let us be gone.

"O that my heart were as secure from the darts of love, the assassin of my
peace," exclaimed Vivaldi, "as yours is from those of bravos! My friend, you
have little to interest you, since your thoughts have so much leisure for
apprehension."

"My fear is that of prudence, not of weakness," retorted Bonarmo, with
acrimony; "you will find, perhaps, that I have none, when you most wish me to
possess it."

"I understand you," replied Vivaldi "let us finish this business, and you
shall receive reparation, since you believe yourself injured: I am as anxious
to repair an offense, as jealous of receiving one."

"Yes," replied Bonarmo, "you would repair the injury you have done your friend
with his blood.

"Oh! never, never!" said Vivaldi, falling on his neck. "Forgive my hasty
violence; allow for the distraction of my mind."

Bonarmo returned the embrace, "It is enough," said he; "no more, no more! I
hold again my friend to my heart."

While this conversation passed, they had quitted the orangery, and reached the
walls of the villa, where they took their station under a balcony that overhung
the lattice, through which Vivaldi had seen Ellena on the preceding night. They
tuned their instruments, and opened the serenade with a duet.

Vivaldi's voice was a fine tenor, and the same susceptibility, which made him
passionately fond of music, taught him to modulate its cadence with exquisite
delicacy, and to give his emphasis with the most simple and pathetic
expression, His soul seemed to breathe in the sounds, -- so tender, so
imploring, yet so energetic. On this night, enthusiasm inspired him with the
highest eloquence, perhaps, which music is capable of attaining; what might be
its effect on Ellena he had no means of judging, for she did not appear either
at the balcony or the lattice, nor give any hint of applause. No sounds stole
on the stillness of the night, except those of the serenade, nor did any light
from within the villa break upon the obscurity without; once, indeed, in a
pause of the instruments Bonarmo fancied he distinguished voices near him, as
of persons who feared to be heard, and he listened attentively, but without
ascertaining the truth. Sometimes they seemed to sound heavily in his ear, and
then a death-like silence prevailed. Vivaldi affirmed the ^ound to be nothing
more than the confused murmur of the distant multitude on the shore, but
Bonarmo was not thus easily convinced.

The musicians, unsuccessful in their first endeavor to attract attention,
removed to the opposite side of the building, and placed themselves in front of
the portico, but with as little success; and, after having exercised their
powers of harmony and of patience for above an hour, they resigned all further
effort to win upon the obdurate Ellena. Vivaldi, notwithstanding the feebleness
of his first hope of seeing her, now suffered an agony of disappointment; and
Bonarmo, alarmed for the consequence of his despair, was as anxious to persuade
him that he had no rival, as he had lately been pertinacious in affirming that
he had one.

At length they left the gardens, Vivaldi, protesting that he would not rest
until he had discovered the stranger, who so wantonly destroyed his peace, and
had compelled him to explain his ambiguous warnings; and Bonarmo remonstrating
on the imprudence and difficulty of the search, and representing that such
conduct would probably be the means of spreading a report of his attachment,
where most he dreaded it should be known,

Vivaldi refused to yield to remonstrance or considerations of any kind. "We
shall see," said he, "whether this demon in the garb of a monk, will haunt me
again at the accustomed place; if he does, he shall not escape my grasp; and if
he does not, I will watch as vigilantly for his return, as he seems to have
done for mine. I will lurk in the shade of the ruin, and wait for him, though
it be till death!"

Bonarmo was particularly struck by the vehemence which he pronounced the last
words, but he no longer opposed his purpose, and only bade him consider whether
he was well armed, "For" he added, "you may have need of arms there, though you
had no use for them at the villa Altieri. Remember that the stranger told you
that your steps were watched."

"I have my sword," replied Vivaldi, "and the dagger which I usually wear; but
I ought to enquire what are your weapons of defense."

"Hush!" said Bornarmo, as they turned the foot of a rock that overhung the
road, "we are approaching the spot; yonder is the arch!" It appeared duskily in
the perspective, suspended between two cliffs, where the road wound from sight,
on one of which were the ruins of the Roman fort it belonged to, and on the
other, shadowing pines, and thickets of oak that tufted the rock to its base.

They proceeded in silence, treading lightly, and often throwing a suspicious
glance around, expecting every instant that the monk would steal out upon them
from some recess of the cliffs. But they passed on un^olested to the arch-way.
"We are here before ^im, however," said Vivaldi as they entered the darkness.
"Speak low, my friend," said Bonarmo, "others besides ourselves may be shrouded
in this obscurity. I like not the place."

"Who but ourselves would choose so dismal a retreat?" whispered Vivaldi,
"unless indeed, it were banditti; the savageness of the spot would, in truth,
suit their humor, and it suits well also with my own."

"It would suit their purpose too, as well as their humor," observed Bonarmo.
"Let us remove from this deep shade, into the more open road, where we can as
closely observe who passes.

Vivaldi objected that in the road they might themselves be observed, "and if
we are seen by my unknown tormentor, our design is defeated, for he comes upon
us suddenly, or not at all, lest we should be prepared to detain him.

Vivaldi, as he said this, took his station within the thickest gloom of the
arch, which was of considerable depth, and near a flight of steps that was cut
in the rock, and ascended to the fortress. His friend stepped close to his
side. After a pause of silence, during which Bonarmo was meditating, and
Vivaldi was impatiently watching, "do you really believe," said the former,
"that any effort to detain him would be effectual? He glided past me with a
strange facility, it was surely more than human!"

"What is it you mean?" enquired Vivaldi.

"Why, I mean that I could be superstitious. This place, perhaps, infects my
mind with congenial gloom, for I find that, at this moment, there is scarcely a
superstition too dark for my credulity."

Vivaldi smiled. "And* you must allow," added Bonarmo, "that he has appeared
under circumstances somewhat extraordinary. How should he know your name, by
which you say he addressed you at the first meeting? How should he know from
whence you came, or whether you designed to return? By what magic could he
become acquainted with your plans?"

"Nor am I certain that he is acquainted with them," observed Vivaldi; "but if
he is, there was no necessity for superhuman means to obtain such knowledge."

"The result of this evening surely ought to convince you that he is acquainted
with your designs," said Bonarmo. Do you believe it possible that Ellena could
have been insensible to your attentions, "if her heart had not been
pre-engaged, and that she would not have shown herself at a lattice?"

"You do not know Ellena," replied Vivaldi, "and therefore I once more pardon
you the question. Yet had she been disposed to accept my addresses, surely some
sign of approbation," -- he checked himself.

"The stranger warned you not to go to the villa Altieri," resumed Bonarmo, "he
seemed to anticipate the reception which awaited you, and to know a danger,
which hitherto you have happily escaped."

"Yes, he anticipated too well that reception," said Vivaldi, losing, his
prudence in passionate exclamation; "and he is himself, perhaps, the rival,
whom he has taught me to suspect. He has assumed a disguise only the more
effectually to impose upon my credulity, and do deter me from addressing
Ellena. And shall I tamely lie in wait for his approach? Shall I lurk like a
guilty assassin for his rival?"

"For heaven's sake!" said Bonarmo, "moderate these transports; consider where
you are. This surmise of yours is in the highest degree improbable." He gave
his reasons for thinking so, and these convinced Vivaldi, who was prevailed
upon to be once more patient.

They had remained watchful and still for a considerable time, when Bon^^mo saw
a person approach the end of the arch-way nearest to Altieri. He heard no step,
but he perceived a shadowy figure station itself at the entrance of the arch,
where the twilight of this brilliant climate was, for a few paces, admitted.
Vivaldi's eyes were fixed on the road leading toward Naples, and he,
therefore, did not perceive the object of Bonarmo's attention, who, fearful of
his friend's precipitancy, forbore to point out immediately what he observed,
judging it more prudent to watch the motions of this unknown person, that he
might ascertain whether it really were the monk. The size of the figure, and
the dark drapery in which it seemed wrapped, induced him, at length, to believe
that this was the expected stranger; and he seized Vivaldi's arm to direct his
attention to him, when the form glided forward disappeared in the gloom, but
not before Vivaldi had understood the occasion of his friend's gesture and
significant silence. They heard no footstep pass them, and, being convinced
that this person, whatever he was, had not left the arch-way, they kept their
station in watchful stillness. Presently they heard a rustling, as of garments,
near them, and Vivaldi, unable longer to command his patience, started from his
concealment, and with arms extended to prevent any one from escaping, demanded
who was there.

The sound ceased, and no reply was made. Bonarmo drew his sword, protesting he
would stab the air till he found the person who lurked there; but if the latter
would discover himself, he should receive no injury. This assurance Vivaldi
confirmed by his promise. Still no answer was returned; but as they listened
for a voice, they thought something passed them, and the avenue was not narrow
enough to have prevented such a circumstance. Vivaldi rushed forward, but did
not perceive any person issue from the arch into the highway, where the
stronger twilight must have discovered him.

"Somebody certainly passed," whispered Bonarmo, "and I think I hear a sound
from yonder steps, that lead to the fortress."

"Let us follow," cried Vivaldi, and he began to ascend.

"Stop, for heaven's sake stop!" said Bonarmo; "consider what you are about! Do
not brave the utter darkness of these ruins; do not pursue the assassin to his
den!"

"It is the monk himself! exclaimed Vivaldi, still ascending; "he shall not
escape me!"

Bonarmo paused a moment at the foot of the steps, and his friend disappeared;
he hesitated what to do, till ashamed of suffering him to encounter danger
alone, he sprang to the flight, and not without difficulty surmounted the
rugged steps.

Having reached the summit of the rock, he found himself on a terrace, that ran
along the top of the archway and had once been fortified; this, crossing the
road, commanded the defile each way. Some remains of massy walls, that still
exhibited loops for archers, were all that now hinted of its former use. It led
to a watchtower almost concealed in thick pines, that crowned the opposite
cliff, and had thus served not only for a strong battery over the road, but
connecting the opposite sides of the defile, had formed a line of communication
between the fort and this out-post.

Bonarmo looked round in vain for his friend, and the echoes of his own voice
only, among the rocks, replied to his repeated calls. After some hesitation
whether to enter the walls of the main building, or to cross to the
watchtower, he determined on the former, and entered a rugged area, the walls
of which, following the declivities of the precipice, could scarcely now be
traced. The citadel, a round tower, of majestic strength, with some Roman
arches scattered near, was all that remained of this once important fortress;
except, indeed, a mass of ruins near the edge of the cliff, the construction of
which made it difficult to guess for what purpose it had been designed.

Bonarmo entered the immense walls of the citadel, but the utter darkness
within checked his progress, and, contenting himself with calling loudly on
Vivaldi, he returned to the open air.

As he approached the mass of ruins, whose singular form had interested his
curiosity, he thought he distinguished the low accents of a human voice, and
while he listened in anxiety, a person rushed forth from a door-way of the
ruin, carrying a drawn sword. It was Vivaldi himself. Bonarmo sprang to meet
him; he was pale and breathless, and some moments elapsed before he could
speak, or appeared to hear the repeated enquiries of his friend.

"Let us go," said Vivaldi, "let us leave this place."

"Most willingly," replied Bonarmo, "but where have you been, and who have you
seen, that you are thus affected?"

"Ask me no more questions, let us go,' repeated Vivaldi.

They descended the rock together, and when having reached the arch way,
Bonarmo enquired, half sportively, whether they should remain any longer on the
watch, his friend answered, "No!" with an emphasis that startled him. They
passed hastily on the way to Naples, Bonarmo repeating enquiries which Vivaldi
seemed reluctant to satisfy, and wondering no less at the cause of this sudden
reserve, than anxious to know whom he had seen.

"It was the monk, then," said Bonarmo; "you secured him at last?"

"I know not what to think," replied Vivaldi, "I am more perplexed than ever."

"He escaped you then?"

"We will speak of this in future," said Vivaldi; "but ^e it as it may, the
business rests not here. I will return in the night of tomorrow with a torch;
dare you venture yourself with me?"

"I know not," replied Bonarmo, "whether I ought to do so, since I am not
informed for what purpose?"

"I will not press you to go," said Vivaldi; my purpose is already known to
you."

"Have you really failed to discover the stranger -- have you still doubts
concerning the person you pursued?"

I have doubts, which to-morow night, I hope will dissipate."

"This is very strange!" said Bonarmo, "It was but now that I witnessed the
horror, with which you left this fortress of Puluzzi, and already you speak of
returning to it! And why at night -- why not in the day, when less danger would
beset you?"

"I know not as to that," replied Vivaldi, "you are to observe that daylight
never pierces within the recess, to which I penetrated; we must search the
place with torches at whatsoever hour we would examine it."

"Since this is necessary," said Bonarmo, "how happens it that you found your
way in total darkness?"

"I was too much engaged to know how; I was led on, as by an invisible hand."

"We must, notwithstanding," observed Banarmo, "go in daytime, if not by
daylight, provided I accompany you. It would be little less than insanity to
go twice to a place, which is probably infested with robbers, and at their own
hour of midnight."

"I shall watch again in the accustomed place," replied Vivaldi, "before I use
my last resource, and this cannot be done during the day. Besides, it is
necessary that I should go at a particular hour, the hour when the monk has
usually appeared.

"He did escape you, then?" said Bonarmo, "and you are still ignorant
concerning who he is?"

Vivaldi rejoined only with an enquiry whether his friend would accompany him.
"If not," he added* "I must hope to find another companion."

Bonarmo said, that he must consider of the proposal, and would acquaint him
with his determination before the following evening.

While this conversation concluded, they were in Naples, and at the gates of
the Vivaldi palace, where they separated for the remainder of the night.

CHAP. II.
OLIVIA. "Why what would you?"

VIOLA. "Make me a willow cabin at your gate,
And call upon my soul within the house;
Write loyal cantos of contemned love,
And sing them loud even in the dead of night;
Halloo your name to the reverberate hills,
And make the babbling gossip of the air
Cry out, Olivia! O! you should not rest
Between the elements of air and earth,
But you should pity me,"

TWELFTH NIGHT.
SINCE Vivaldi had failed to procure an explanation of the words of the monk,
he determined to relieve himself from the torture of suspense, respecting a
rival, by going to the villa Altieri, and declaring his pretensions. On the
morning immediately following his late adventure, he went thither, and on
equiring for Signora Bianchi, was told she could not be seen. With much
difficulty he prevailed upon the old house keeper to deliver a request that he
might be permitted to wait upon her for a few moments. Permission was granted
him, when he was conducted into the very apartment where he had formerly seen
Ellena. It was unoccupied, and he was told that Signora Bianchi would be there
presently.

During this interval, he was agitated at one moment with quick impatience, and
at another with enthusiastic pleasure, while he gazed on the altar whence he
had seen Ellena rise, and where to his fancy, she still appeared; and on every
object, on which he knew her eyes had lately dwelt. These objects so familiar
to her, had in the imagination of Vivaldi acquired somewhat of the sacred
character she had impressed upon his heart, and affected him in some degree as
her presence would have done. He trembled as he took up the lute she had been
accustomed to touch, and, when he awakened the chords, her own voice seemed to
speak. A drawing half-finished, of a dancing nymph, remained on a stand, and he
immediately understood that her hand had traced the lines. It was a copy from
Herculaneum, and though a copy, was touched with the spirit of original genius.
The light steps appeared almost to move, and the whole figure displayed the
airy lightness of exquisite grace. Vivaldi perceived this to be one of a set
that ornamented the apartment, and observed with surprise, that they were the
particular subjects, which adorned his father's cabinet, and which he had
understood to be the only copies permitted from the originals in the royal
museum.

Every object, on which his eyes rested, seemed to announce the presence of
Ellena; and the very flowers that so gaily embellished the apartment, breathed
forth a perfume, which fascinated his senses and affected his imagination.
Before Signora Bianchi appeared, his anxiety and apprehension had increased so
much that, believing he should not be able to support himself in her presence,
he was more than once upon the point of leaving the house. At length, he heard
her approaching step from the hall; and his breath almost forsook him. The
figure of Signora Bianchi was not of an order to inspire admiration, and a
spectator might have smiled to see the perterbation of Vivaldi, his faultering
step and anxious eye, as he advanced to meet the venerable Bianchi, as he bowed
upon her faded hand, and listened to her querulous voice. She received him with
an air of reserve, and some moments passed before he could recollect himself
sufficiently to explain the purpose of his visit; yet this, when he discovered
it, did not apparently surprise her. She listened with composure, though with
somewhat of a severe countenance, to his protestations of regard for her niece,
and when he implored her to intercede for him in obtaining the hand of Ellena,
she said, "I cannot be ignorant that a family of your rank must be averse to an
union with one of mine; nor am I unacquainted that a full sense of the value of
birth is a striking feature in the characters of the Marchese and Marchesa di
Vivaldi. This proposal must be disagreeable or unknown to them; and I am to
inform you, Signor, that, though Signora di Rosalba is their inferior in rank,
she is their equal in pride."

Vivaldi disdained to prevaricate, yet was shocked to own the truth thus
abruptly. The ingenious manner, however, with which he at length did this, and
the energy of a passion too eloquent to be misunderstood, somewhat soothed the
anxiety of Signora Bianchi, with whom other considerations began to arise. She
considered that from her own age and infirmities she must very soon, in the
course of nature, leave Ellena a young and friendless orphan; still somewhat
dependant upon her own industry, and entirely so on her discretion. With much
beauty and little knowledge of the world, the dangers of her future situation
appeared in vivid colors to the affectionate mind of Signora Bianchi; and she
sometimes thought that it might be right to sacrifice considerations, which in
other circumstances would be laudable, to the obtaining for her niece the
protection of a husband and a man of honor. If in this instance she descended
from the lofty integrity, which ought to have opposed her consent that Ellena
should clandestinely enter any family, her parental anxiety may soften the
censure she deserved.

But before she determined upon this subject, it was necessary to ascertain
that Vivaldi was worthy the confidence she might repose in him. To try, also,
the constancy of his affection, she gave little present encouragement to his
hopes. His request to see Ellena she absolutely refused, till she should have
considered further of his proposals; and his enquiry whether he had a rival,
and, if he had, whether Ellena was disposed to favor him, she evaded, since
she knew that a reply would give more encouragement to his hopes, than it might
hereafter be proper to confirm.

Vivaldi, at length took his leave, released, indeed, from absolute despair,
but scarcely encouraged to hope; ignorant that he had a rival, yet doubtful
whether Ellena honored himself with any share of her esteem.

He had received permission to wait upon Signora Bianchi on a future day, but
till that day should arrive time appeared motionless; and, since it seemed
utterly impossible to endure this interval of suspense, his thoughts on the way
to Naples were wholly engaged in contriving the means of concluding it, till he
reached the well known arch, and looked round, though hopelessly, for his
mysterious tormentor. The stranger did not appear; and Vivaldi pursued the
road, determined to re-visit the spot at night, and also to return privately to
the villa Altieri, where he hoped a second visit might procure for him some
relief from his present anxiety.

When he reached home he found that the Marchese, his father, had left an order
for him, to await his arrival; which he obeyed: but the day passed without his
return. The Marchesa, when she saw him, enquired with a look that expressed
much, how he had engaged himself of late, and completely frustrated his plans
for the evening, by requiring him to attend her to Portici. Thus he was
prevented from watching at Paluzzi, and from revisiting Ellena's residence.

He remained at Portici the following evening, and, on his return to Naples,
the Marchese being again absent, he continued ignorant of the intended subject
of the interview. A note from Bonarmo brought a refusal to accompany him to the
fortress, and urged him to forbear so dangerous a visit. Being for this night
unprovided with a companion for the adventure, and unwilling to go alone,
Vivaldi deferred it to another evening; but no consideration could deter him
from visiting the villa Altieri. Not choosing to solicit his friend to accompany
him thither, since he had refused his first request, he took his solitary lute,
and reached the garden at an earlier hour than usual.

The sun had been set above an hour, but the horizon still retained somewhat of
a saffron brilliancy, and the whole dome of the sky had an appearance of
transparency, peculiar to this enchanting climate, which seemed to diffuse a
more soothing twilight over the reposing world. In the south-cast the outline
of Vesuvius appeared distinctly, but the mountain itself was dark and silent.

Vivaldi heard only the quick and eager voices of some Lazaroni at a distance
on the shore, as they contended at the simple game of maro. From the bowery
lattices of a small pavilion within the orangery, he perceived a light, and the
sudden hope which it occasioned, of seeing Ellena, almost overcame him. It was
impossible to resist the opportunity of beholding her, yet he checked the
impatient step he was taking, to ask himself, whether it was honorable thus to
steal upon her retirement, and become an unsuspected observer of her secret
thoughts. But the temptation was too powerful for this honorable hesitation;
the pause was momentary; and stepping lightly toward the pavilion, he placed
himself near an open lattice, so as to be shrouded from observation by the
branches of an orange-tree, while he obtained a full view of the apartment.
Ellena was alone, sitting in a thoughtful attitude and holding her lute, which
she did not play. She appeared lost to a consciousness of surrounding objects,
and a tenderness was on her countenance, which seemed to tell him that her
thoughts were engaged by some interesting subject. Recollecting that, when last
he had seen her thus, she pronounced his name, his hope revived, and he was
going to discover himself and appear at her feet, when she spoke, and he paused.

"Why this unreasonable pride of birth!" said she, "A visionary prejudice
destroys our peace. -- Never would I submit to enter a family averse to receive
me; they shall learn, at least, that I inherit nobility of soul. O! Vivaldi!
but for this unhappy prejudice!" --

Vivaldi, while he listened to this, was immovable; he seemed as if entranced;
the sound of her lute and voice recalled him, and he heard her sing the first
stanza of the very air, with which he had opened the serenade on a former
night, and with such sweet pathos as the composer must have felt when he was
inspired with the idea.

She paused at the conclusion of the first stanza, when Vivaldi, overcome by
the temptation of such an opportunity for expressing his passion, suddenly
struck the chords of the lute, and replied to her in the second. The tremor of
his voice, though it restrained his tones, heightened its eloquence. Ellena
instantly recollected it; her color alternately faded and returned; and,
before the verse concluded, she seemed to have lost all consciousness. Vivaldi
was now advancing into the pavilion, when his approach recalled her; she waved
him to retire, and before he could spring to her support, she rose and would
have left the place, had he not interrupted her and implored a few moments
attention.

"It is impossible," said Ellena.

"Let me only hear you say that I am not hateful to you," rejoined Vivaldi;
"that this intrusion has not deprived me of the regard, with which but now you
acknowledged you honored me." --

"Oh, never, never!" interrupted Ellena, impatiently; "forget that I ever made
such acknowledgement; forget that you ever heard it; I know not what I said."

"Ah, beautiful Ellena! do you think it possible I ever can forget it? It will
be the solace of my solitary hours, the hope that shall sustain me."

"I cannot be detained, Signor," interrupted Ellena, still more embarrassed,
"o^ forgive myself for having permitted such conversation!" but as she spoke
the last words, an involuntary smile seemed to contradict their meaning.
Vivaldi believed the smile in spite of the words; but, before he could express
the lightning joy of conviction, she had left the pavilion; he followed through
the garden -- but she was gone.

From this moment Vivaldi seemed to have arisen into a new existence; the whole
world to him was Paradise; that smile seemed impressed upon his heart for ever.
In the fullness of present joy, he believed it impossible that he ever could be
unhappy again, and defied the utmost malice of future fortune. With footsteps
light as air, he returned to Naples, nor once remembered to look for his old
monitor on the way.

The Marchese and his mother being from home, he was left at his leisure to
indulge the rapturous recollection, that pressed upon his mind, and of which he
was impatient of a moment's interruption. All night he either traversed his
apartment with an agitation equal to that, which anxiety had so lately
inflicted, or composed and destroyed letters to Ellena; sometimes fearing that
he had written too much, and at others feeling that he had written too little;
recollecting circumstances which he ought to have mentioned, and lamenting the
cold expression of a passion, to which it appeared that no language could do
justice.

By the hour when the domestics had risen, he had, however, completed a letter
somewhat more to his satisfaction, and he dispatched it to the villa Altieri by
a confidential person; but the servant had scarcely quitted the gates, when he
recollected new arguments, which he wished to urge, and expressions to change
of the utmost importance to enforce his meaning, and he would have given half
the world to have recalled the messenger.

In this state of agitation he was summoned to attend the Marchese, who had
been too much engaged of late to keep his own appointment. Vivaldi was not long
in doubt as to the subject of this interview.

"I have wished to speak with you," said the Marchese, assuming an air of
haughty severity, "upon a subject of the utmost importance to your honor and
happiness; and I wished, also, to give you an opportunity of contradicting a
report, which would have occasioned me considerable uneasiness, if I could have
believed it. Happily I had too much confidence in my son to credit this; and I
affirmed that he too well understood what was due both to his family and
himself, to take any step derogatory from the dignity of either. My motive for
this conversation, therefore, is merely to afford you a moment for refuting the
calumny I shall mention, and to obtain for myself authority for contradicting
it to the persons who have communicated it to me."

Vivaldi waited impatiently for the conclusion of this exordium, and then
begged to be informed of the subject of the report.

"It is said." resumed the Marchese, "that there is a young woman, who is
called Ellena Rosalba -- I think that is the name; -- do you know any person of
the name?"

"Do I know!" exclaimed Vivaldi, "but pardon me, pray proceed, my Lord."

The Marchese paused, and regarded his son with sternness, but without
surprise. "It is said, that a young person of this name has contrived to
fascinate your affections, and" --

"It is most true, my Lord, that Signora Rosalba has won my affections,"
interrupted Vivaldi with honest impatience, "but without contrivance."

"I will not be interrupted," said the Marchese, interrupting in his turn. "It
is said that she has so artfully adapted her temper to yours, that, with the
assistance of a relation who lives with her, she has reduced you to the
degrading situation of her devoted suitor."

"Signora R^salba has, my Lord, exalted me to the honor of being her suitor,"
said Vivaldi, unable longer to command his feelings. He was proceeding, when
the Marchese abruptly checked him, "You avow your folly then!"

"My Lord, I glory in my choice."

"Young men," rejoined his father, "as this is the arrogance and romantic
enthusiasm of a boy, I am willing to forgive it for once, and observe me, only
for once. If you will acknowledge your error, instantly dismiss this new
favorite." --

"My Lord!"

"You must instantly dismiss her," repeated the Marchese with sternner
emphasis; "and, to prove that I am more merciful than just, I am willing, on
this condition, to allow her a small annuity as some reparation for the
depravity, into which you have assisted to sink her."

"My Lord!" exclaimed Vivaldi aghast, and scarcely daring to trust his voice;
"my Lord! -- depravity!" struggling for breath. "Who has dared to pollute her
spotless fame by insulting your ears with such infamous falfehoods? Tell me, I
conjure you, instantly tell me, that I may hasten to give him his reward --
Depravity! -- an annuity -- an annnity! O Ellena! Ellena!" As he pronounced her
name tears of tenderness mingled with those of indignation.

"Young man," said the Marchese, who had observed the violence of his emotion
with strong displeasure and alarm, "I do not lightly give faith to report, and
I cannot suffer myself to doubt the truth of what I have advanced. You are
deceived, and your vanity will continue the delusion, unless I condescend to
exert my authority, and tear the veil from your eyes. Dismiss her instantly,
and I will adduce proof of her former character which will stagger even your
faith, enthusiastic as it is."

"Dismiss her!" repeated Vivaldi, with calm yet stern energy, such as his
father had never seen him assume; "My Lord, you have never yet doubted my word,
and I now pledge you that honorable word, that Ellena is innocent. Innocent! O
heavens, that it should ever be necessary to affirm so, and, above all, that it
should ever be necessary for me to vindicate her!"

"I must indeed lament that it ever should," replied the Marchese coldly. "You
have pledged your word, which I cannot question. I believe, therefore, that you
are deceived; that you think her virtuous, notwithstanding your midnight visits
to her house. And grant she is, unhappy boy! what reparation can you make her
for the infatuated folly, which has thus stained her character? What" --

"By proclaiming to the world, my Lord, that she is worthy of becoming my
wife," replied Vivaldi, with a glow of countenance which announced the courage
and exultation of a virtuous mind.

"Your wife!" said the Marchese with a look of ineffable disdain, which was
instantly succeeded by one of angry alarm, -- "If I believed you could so far
forget what is due to the honor of your house, I would for ever disclaim you
as my son."

"O! why," exclaimed Vivaldi, in an agony of conflicting passions, "why should
I be in danger of forgetting what is due to a father, when I am only asserting
what is due to innocence; when I am only defending her, who has no other to
defend her! Why may not I be permitted to reconcile duties so congenial! But,
be the event what it may, I will defend the oppressed, and glory in the virtue,
which teaches me, that it is the first duty of humanity to do so. Yes, my Lord,
if it must be so, I am ready to sacrifice inferior duties to the grandeur of a
principle, which ought to expand all hearts and impel all actions. I shall best
support the honor of my house by adhering to its dictates."

"Where is the principle;" said the Marchese, impatiently, "which shall teach
you to disobey a father? where is the virtue which shall instruct you to
degrade your family?"

"There can be no degradation, my Lord, where there is no vice," replied
Vivaldi; "and are instances, pardon me, my Lord, there are some few instances
in which it is virtuous to disobey."

"This paradoxical morality," said the Marchese, with passionate displeasure,
"and this romantic language, sufficiently explain to me the character of your
associates, and the innocence of her, whom you defend with so chivalric an air.
Are you to learn, Signor, that you belong to your family, not your family to
you; that you are only a guardian of its honor, and not at liberty to dispose
of yourself? My patience will endure no more!"

Nor could the patience of Vivaldi endure this repeated attack on the honor of
Ellena. But while he yet asserted her innocence, he endeavored to do so with
the temper, which was due to the presence of a father; and, though he
maintained the independence of a man, he was equally anxious to preserve
inviolate the duties of a son. But unfortunately the Marchese and Vivaldi
differed in opinion concerning the limits of these duties; the first extending
them to passive obedience, and the latter conceiving them to conclude at a
point, wherein the happinefs of an individual is so deeply concerned as in
marriage. They parted mutually inflamed; Vivaldi unable to prevail with his
father to mention the name of his infamous informant, or to acknowledge himself
convinced of Ellena's innocence; and the Merchese equally unsuccessful in his
endeavors to obtain from his son a promise that he would see her no more.

Here then was Vivaldi, who only a few short hours before, had experienced a
happiness so supreme as to efface all impressions of the past, and to
annihilate every consideration of the future; a joy so full that it permitted
him not to believe it possible that he could ever again taste of misery; he,
who had felt as if that moment was an eternity, rendering him independent of
all others, -- even he was thus soon fallen into the region of time and of
suffering.

The present conflict of passion appeared endless; he loved his father, and
would have been more shocked to consider the vexation he was preparing for him,
had he not been resentful of the contempt he expressed for Ellena. He adored
Ellena; and, while he felt the impracticability of resigning his hopes, was
equally indignant of the slander, which affected her name, and impatient to
avenge the insult upon the original defamer.

Though the displeasure of his father concerning a marriage with Ellena had
been already foreseen, the experience of it was severer and more painful than
he had imagined; while the indignity offered to Ellena was as unexpected as
intolerable. But this circumstance furnished him with an additional argument
for addressing her; for, if it had been possible that his love could have
paused, his honor seemed now engaged in her behalf; and, since he had been a
means of sullying her fame, it became his duty to restore it. Willingly
listening to the dictates of a duty so plausible, he determined to persevere in
his original design. But his first efforts were directed to discover her
slanderer, and recollecting, with surprise, those words of the Marchese, which
had confessed a knowledge of his evening visits to the villa Altieri, the
doubtful warnings of the monk seemed explained. He believed that this man was
at once the spy of his steps, and the defamer of his love, till the
inconsistency of such conduct with the seeming friendliness of his admonitions,
struck Vivaldi and compelled him to believe the contrary.

Meanwhile, the heart of Ellena had been little less tranquil. It was divided
by love and pride; but had she been acquainted with the circumstances of the
late interview between the Marchese and Vivaldi, it would have been divided no
longer, and a just regard for her own dignity would instantly have taught her
to subdue, without difficulty, this infant affection.

Signora Bianchi had informed her niece of the subject of Vivaldi's visit; but
she had softened the objectionable circumstances that attended his proposal,
and had, at first, merely hinted that it was not to be supposed his family
would approve a connection with any person so much their inferior in rank as
herself. Ellena, alarmed by this suggestion, replied, that, since she believed
so, she had done right to reject Vivaldi's suit; but her sigh, as she said
this, did not escape the observation of Signora Bianchi, who ventured to add,
that she had not absolutely rejected his offers.

While in this and future conversations, Ellena was pleased to perceive her
secret admiration thus justified by an approbation so indisputable as that of
her aunt, and was willing to believe that the circumstances, which had alarmed
her just pride, was no so humiliating as she at first imagined. Bianchi was
careful to conceal the real considerations, which had induced her to listen to
Vivaldi, being well assured that they would have no weight with Ellena, whose
generous heart and inexperienced mind would have revolted from mingling any
motives of interest with an engagement so sacred as that of marriage. When,
however, from further deliberation upon the advantages, which such an alliance
must secure for her niece, Signora Bianchi determined to encourage his views,
and to direct the mind of Ellena, whose affections were already engaged on her
side, the opinions of the latter were found less ductile than had been
expected. She was shocked at the idea of entering clandestinely the family of
Vivaldi. But Bianchi, whose infirmities urged her wishes, was now so strongly
convinced of the prudence of such an engagement for her niece, that she
determined to prevail over her reluctance, though she perceived that this must
be by means more gradual and persuasive than she had believed necessary. On the
evening, when Vivaldi had surprised from Ellena an acknowledgement of her
sentiments, her embarrassment and vexation, on her returning to the house, and
relating what had occurred, sufficiently expressed to Signora Bianchi the exact
situation of her heart. And when, on the following morning, his letter arrived,
written with the simplicity and energy of truth, the aunt neglected not to
adapt her remarks upon it, to the character of Ellena, with her usual address.

Vivaldi, after the late interview with the Marchese passed the remainder of
the day in considering various plans, which might discover to him the person,
who had abused the credulity of his father; and in the evening he returned once
more to the villa Altieri, not in secret to serenade the dark balcony of his
mistress, but openly, and to converse with Signora Bianchi, who now received
him more courteously than on his former visit. Attributing the anxiety in his
countenance to the uncertainty, concerning the disposition of her niece, she
was neither surprised nor offended, but ventured to relieve him from a part of
it, by encouraging his hopes. Vivaldi dreaded lest she should enquire further
respecting the sentiments of his family, but she spared both his delicacy and
her own on this point; and, after a conversation of considerable length, he
left the villa Altieri with a heart somewhat soothed by approbation, and
lightened by hope, although he had not obtained a sight of Ellena. The
disclosure she had made of her sentiments on the preceding evening, and the
hints she had received as to those of his family, still wrought upon her mind
with too much effect to permit an interview.

Soon after his return to Naples, the Marchesa, whom he was surprised to find
disengaged, sent for him to her closet, where a scene passed similar to that
which had occurred with his father, except that the Marchesa was more dexterous
in her questions, and more subtle in her whole conduct; and that Vivaldi, never
for a moment, forgot the decorum which was due to a mother. Managing her
passions, rather than exasperating them, and deceiving him with respect to the
degree of resentment she felt from his choice, she was less passionate than the
Marchese in her observations and menaces, perhaps, only because she entertained
more hope than he did of preventing the evil she contemplated.

Vivaldi quitted her, unconvinced by her arguments, unsubdued by her
prophecies, and unmoved in his designs. He was not alarmed, because he did not
sufficiently understand her character to apprehend her purposes. Despairing to
effect these by open violence, she called in an auxiliary of no mean talents,
and whose character and views well adapted him to be an instrument in her
hands. It was, perhaps, the baseness of her own heart, not either depth of
reflection or keenness of penetration, which enabled her to understand the
nature of his; and she determined to modulate that nature to her own views.

There lived in the Dominican convent of the Spirito Santo, at Naples, a man
called father Schedoni; an Italian, as his name imported, but whose family was
unknown, and from some circumstances, it appeared, that he wished to throw an
impenetrable veil over his origin. For whatever reason, he was never heard to
mention a relative, or the place of his nativity, and he had artfully eluded
every enquiry that approached the subject, which the curiosity of his
associates had occasionally prompted. There were circumstances, however, which
appeared to indicate him to be a man of birth, and of fallen fortune; his
spirit, as it had sometimes looked forth from under the disguise of his
manners, seemed lofty; it showed not, however, the aspirings of a generous
mind, but rather the gloomy pride of a disappointed one. Some few persons in
the convent, who had been interested by (...) appearance, believed that the
peculiarities of his manners, his severe reserve and unconquerable silence, his
solitary habits and frequent penances, were the effect of misfortunes preying
upon a haughty and disordered spirit; while others conjectured them the
consequence of some hideous crime gnawing upon an awakened conscience.

He would sometimes abstract himself from the society for whole days together,
or when with such a disposition he was compelled to mingle with it, he seemed
unconscious where he was, and continued shrouded in meditation and silence till
he was again alone. There were times when it was unknown whither he had
retired, notwithstanding that his steps had been watched, and his customary
haunts examined. No one ever heard him complain. The elder brothers of the
convent said that he had talents, but denied him learning; they applauded him
for the profound subtlety which he occasionally discovered in argument, but
observed that he seldom perceived truth when it lay on the surface; he could
follow it through all the labyrinths of disquisition, but overlooked it, when
it was undisguised before him. In fact he cared not for truth, nor sought it by
bold and broad argument, but loved to exert the wily cunning of his nature in
hunting it through artificial perplexities. At length, from a habit of
intricacy and suspicion, his vitiated mind could receive nothing for truth,
which was simple and easily comprehended.

Among his associates no one loved him, many disliked him, and more feared him.
His figure was striking, but not so from grace; it was stall, and, though
extremely thin, his limbs were large and uncouth, and as he stalked along,
wrapped in the black garments of his order, there was something terrible in its
air; something almost superhuman. His cowl, too, as it threw a shade over the
livid paleness of his face, increased its severe character, and gave an effect
to his large melancholy eye, which approached to horror. His was not the
melancholy of a sensible and wounded heart, but apparently that of a gloomy and
ferocious disposition. There was something in his physiognomy extremely
singular, and that cannot easily be defined. It bore the traces of many
passions, which seemed to have fixed the features they no longer animated. An
habitual gloom and severity prevailed over the deep lines of his countenance;
and his eyes were so piercing, that they seemed to penetrate at a single glance
into the hearts of men, and to read their most secret thoughts; few persons
could support their scrutiny, or even endure to meet them twice. Yet,
notwithstanding all this gloom and austerity, some rare occasions of interest
had called forth a character upon his countenance entirely different; and he
could adapt himself to the tempers and passions of persons, whom he wished to
conciliate, with astonishing facility, and generally with complete triumph.
This monk, this Schedoni, was the confessor and secret adviser of the Marchesa
di Vivaldi. In the first effervescence of pride and indignation, which the
discovery of her son's intended marriage occasioned, she consulted him on the
means of preventing it, and she soon perceived that his talents promised to
equal her wishes. Each possessed, in a considerable degree, the power of
assisting the other; Schedoni had subtlety with ambition to urge it; and the
Marchesa had inexorable pride, and courtly influence; the one hoped to obtain a
high benefice for his services, and the other to secure the imaginary dignity
of her house, by her gifts. Prompted by such passions, and allured by such
views, they concerted in private, and unknown even to the Marchese, the means
of accomplishing their general end.

Vivaldi, as he quitted his mother's closet, had met Schedoni in the corridor
leading thither. He knew him to be her confessor, and was not much surprised to
see him, though the hour was an unusual one. Schedoni bowed his head, as he
passed, and assumed a meek and holy countenance; but Vivaldi, as he eyed him
with a penetrating glance, now recoiled with involuntary emotion; and it seemed
as if a shuddering presentiment of what this monk was preparing for him had
crossed his mind.

CHAP. III.
"Art thou any thing?
Art thou some god, some angel, or some devil
That make my blood cold, and my hair to stand?
Speak to me, what thou art."
JULIUS CAESAR.
VIVALDI, from the period of his last visit to Altieri, was admitted a frequent
visitor to Signora Bianchi, and Ellena was prevailed upon to join the party,
when the conversation was always on different topics. Bianchi, understanding
the disposition of her niece's affections, and the accomplished mind and
manners of Vivaldi, judged that he was more likely to succeed by silent
attentions than by a formal declaration of his sentiments. By such declaration,
Ellena, till her heart was more engaged in his cause, would, perhaps, have been
alarmed into an absolute rejection of his addresses, and this was every day
less likely to happen so long as he had an opportunity of conversing with her.

Signora Bianchi had acknowledged to Vivaldi that he had no rival to apprehend;
that Ellena had uniformly rejected every admirer who had hitherto discovered
her within the shade of her retirement, and that her present reserve proceeded
more from considerations of the sentiments of his family than from
disapprobation of himself. He forbore, therefore, to press his suit, till he
should have secured a stronger interest in her heart, and in this hope he was
encouraged by Signora Bianchi, whose gentle remonstrances in his favor became
every day more pleasing and more convincing.

Several weeks passed away in this kind of intercourse, till Ellena, yielding
to the representations of Signora Bianchi, and to the pleadings of her own
heart, received Vivaldi as an acknowledged admirer, and the sentiments of his
family were no longer remembered, or if remembered, it was with a hope that
they might be overcome by considerations more powerful.

The lovers, with Signora Bianch and Signor Giotto, a distant relation of the
latter, frequently made excursions in the delightful environs of Naples; for
Vivaldi was no longer anxious to conceal his attachment, but wished to
contradict any report injurious to his love, by the publicity of his conduct;
while the consideration, that Ellena's name had suffered by his late
imprudence, contributed, with the unsuspecting innocence and sweetness of her
manners toward him, who had been the occasion of her injuries, to mingle a
secret pity with his love, which obliterated all family politics from his mind,
and bound her irrecoverably to his heart.

These excursions sometimes led them to Puzzuoli, Baia, or the woody cliffs of
Pausilippo, and as, on their return, they glided along the moonlight bay, the
melodies of Italian strains seemed to give enchantment to the scenery of this
shore. At this cool hour the voices of the vine-dressers were frequently heard
in trio, as they reposed from the labor of the day, on some pleasant
promontory, under the shade of poplars; or the brisk music of the dance from
fishermen, on the margin of the waves below. The boatmen rested on their oars,
while their company listened to voices modulated by sensibility to finer
eloquence, than is in the power of art alone to display; and at others, while
they observed the airy natural grace which distinguishes the dance of the
fishermen and peasants of Naples. Frequently as they glided round a promontory,
whose shaggy masses impended (...) over the sea, such magic scenes of beauty
unfolded, adorned by these dancing groups on the bay beyond, as no pencil could
do justice to. The deep clear waters reflected every image of the landscape,
the cliffs, branching into wild forms, crowned with groves, whose rough foliage
often spread down their steeps in picturesque luxuriance; the ruined villa on
some bold point, peeping through the trees; peasants cabins hanging on the
precipices, and the dancing figures on the strand -- all touched with the
silver tint and soft shadows of moonlight. On the other hand, the sea trembling
with a long line of radiance, and showing in the clear distance the sails of
vessels stealing in every direction along its surface, presented a prospect as
grand as the landscape was beautiful.

One evening that Vivaldi sat with Ellena and Signora Bianchi, in the very
pavilion where he had overheard that short but interesting soliloquy, which
assured him of her regard, he pleaded with more than his usual earnestness for
a speedy marriage. Bianchi did not oppose his arguments; she had been ill for
some time, and believing herself to be declining fast, was anxious to have
their nuptials concluded. She surveyed with languid eyes the scene that spread
before the pavilion. The strong effulgence which a setting sun threw over the
sea, showing innumerable gaily painted ships, and fishing-boats returning from
Santa Lucia into the port of (...) no longer power to cheer her. Even the Roman
tower that terminated the mole below, touched as it was with the ^laming rays;
and the various figures of fishermen, who lay smoking beneath its walls, in
the long shadow, or stood in the sunshine on the beach, watching the
approaching boats of their comrades, combined a picture which was no longer
interesting. "Alas!" said she, breaking from meditative silence, "this sun so
glorious, which lights up all the (...) coloring of these shores, and the glow
of those majestic mountains; alas! I feel that it will not long shine for me --
my eyes must soon close upon the prospect for ever!"

To Ellena's tender reproach for this melancholy suggestion Bianchi replied
only by expressing an earnest wish to witness the certainty of her being
protected; adding, that this must be soon, or she should not live to see it.
Ellena, extremely shocked both by this presage of her aunt's fate, and by the
direct reference made to her own condition in the presence of Vivaldi, burst
into tears, while he, supported by the wishes of Signora Bianchi, urged his
suit with increased interest.

"This is not a time for fastidious scruples," said Bianchi, "now that a solemn
truth calls out to us. My dear girl, I will not disguise my feelings; they
assure me I have not long to live. Grant me then the only request I have to
make, and my last hours will be comforted."

After a pause she added, as she took the hand of her niece, "This will, no
doubt, be an awful separation to us both; and it must also be a mournful one,
Signor," turning to Vivaldi, "for she has been as a daughter to me, and I have,
I trust, fulfilled to her the duties of a mother. Judge then, what will be her
feelings when I am no more. But it will be your care to sooth them."

Vivaldi looked at Ellena, and would have spoken; her aunt, however, proceeded.
"My own feelings would now be little less poignant, if I did not believe that I
was confiding her to a tenderness, which cannot diminish; that I should prevail
with her to accept the protection of a husband. To you, Signor, I commit the
legacy of my child. Watch over her future moments, guard her from inquietude as
vigilantly (...) I have done, and, if possible; from misfortune! I have yet
much to say, but my spirits are exhausted."

While he listened to this sacred charge, and recollected the injury Ellena had
already sustained for his sake, by the cruel obloquy which the Marchese had
thrown upon her character, he felt a degree of generous indignation, of which
he scarcely could conceal the cause, and a succeeding tenderness that almost
melted him to tears; and he secretly vowed to defend her fame and protect her
peace, at the sacrifice of every other consideration.

Bianchi, as she concluded her exhortation, gave Ellena's hand to Vivaldi, who
received it with emotion such as his countenance, only, could express, and with
solemn fervor raising his eyes to heaven, vowed that he never would betray the
confidence thus reposed in him, but would watch over the happiness of Ellena
with a care as tender, as anxious, and as unceasing as her own; that from this
moment he considered himself bound by ties not less sacred than those which the
church confers to defend her as his wife, and would do so to the latest moment
of his existence. As he said this, the truth of his feelings appeared in the
energy of his manner.

Ellena, still weeping, and agitated by various considerations, spoke not, but
withdrawing the handkerchief from her face, looked at him through her tears,
with a smile so meek, so affectionate, so timid, yet so confiding, as expressed
all the mingled emotions of her heart, and appealed more eloquently to his,
than the most energetic language could have done.

Before Vivaldi left the villa, he had some further conversation with Signora
Bianchi, when it was agreed that the nuptials should be solemnized on the
following week, if Ellena could be prevailed on to confirm her consent so soon;
and that when he returned the next day, her determination would probably be
made known to him.

He departed for Naples once more with the lightly-bounding steps of joy,
which, however, when he arrived there, was somewhat alloyed by a message from
the Marchese, demanding to see him in his cabinet. Vivaldi anticipated the
subject of the interview, and obeyed the summons with reluctance.

He found his father so absorbed in thought that he did not immediately
perceive him. On raising his eyes from the floor, where discontent and
perplexity seemed to have held them, he fixed a stern regard on Vivaldi. "I
understand," said he, "that you persist in the unworthy pursuit against which I
warned you. I have left you thus long to your own discretion, because I was
willing to afford you an opportunity of retracting with grace the declaration,
which you dared to make me of your principles and intentions; but your conduct
has not therefore been less observed. I am informed that your visits have been
as frequent (...) the residence of the unhappy young woman, who was the subject
of our former conversation, as formerly, and that you are as much infatuated."

"If it is Signora Rosalba, whom your lordship means," said Vivaldi, "she is
not unhappy; and I do not scruple to own, that I am as sincerely attached to
her as ever. Why, my dear father," continued he, subduing the feelings which
this degrading mention of Ellena had aroused, "why will you persist in opposing
the happiness of your son; and above all, why will you continue to think
unjustly of her, who deserves your admiration as much as my love?"

"As I am not a lover." replied the Marchese, "and that the age of boyish
credulity is past with me, I do not wilfully close my mind against examination,
but am directed by proof and yield to conviction."

"What proof is it my Lord, that has thus easily convinced you?" said Vivaldi;
"Who is it that persists in abusing your confidence, and in destroying my
peace?"

The Marchese haughtily reproved his son for such doubts and questions, and a
long conversation ensued, which seemed neither to reconcile the interests or
the opinions of either party. The Marchese persisted in accusation and menace;
and Vivaldi in defending Ellena, and in affirming, that his affections and
intentions were unalterable.

Not any art of persuasion could prevail with the Marchese to adduce his
proofs, or deliver up the name of his informer; nor any menace awe Vivaldi into
a renunciation of Ellena; and they parted mutually dissatisfied. The Marchese
had failed on this occasion to act with his usual policy, for his menaces and
accusations had aroused spirit and indignation, when kindness and gentle
remonstrance would certainly have awakened filial affection, and might have
occasioned a contest in the breast of Vivaldi. Now, no struggle of opposing
duties divided his resolution. He had no hesitation on the subject of their
dispute; but regarding his father as a haughty oppressor who would rob him of
his most sacred right; and as one who did not scruple to stain the name of the
innocent and the defenseless, when his interest required it, upon the doubtful
authority of a base informer, he suffered neither pity or remorse to mingle
with the resolution of asserting the freedom of his nature; and was even more
anxious than before, to conclude a marriage which he believed would secure his
own happiness, and the reputation of Ellena.

He returned, therefore, on the following day to the villa Altieri, with
increased impatience to learn the result of Signora Bianchi's further
conversation with her niece, and the day on which the nuptials might be
solemnized. On the way thither, his thoughts were wholly occupied by Ellena,
and he proceeded mechanically, and without observing where he was, till the
shade which the well known arch threw over the road recalled him to local
circumstances, and a voice instantly arrested his attention. It was the voice
of the monk, whose figure again passed before him, "Go not to the villa
Altieri," it said solemnly, "for death is in the house!"

Before Vivaldi could recover from the dismay into which this abrupt assertion
and sudden appearance had thrown him, the stranger was gone. He had escaped in
the gloom of the place, and seemed to have retired into the obscurity, from
which he had so suddenly emerged, for he was not seen to depart from under the
archway. Vivaldi pursued him with his voice, conjuring him to appear, and
demanding who was dead; but no voice replied.

Believing that the stranger could not have escaped unseen from the arch by any
way, but that leading to the fortress above, Vivaldi began to ascend the steps,
when, considering that the more certain means of understanding this awful
assertion would be, to go immediately to the villa Altieri, he left this
portentous ruin and hastened thither.

An indifferent person would probably have understood the words of the monk to
allude to Signora Bianchi, whose infirm state of health rendered her death
though sudden not improbable; but to the affrighted fancy of Vivaldi, the dying
Ellena only appeared. His fears, however probabilities might sanction, or the
event justify them, were natural to ardent affection; but they were accompanied
by a presentiment as extraordinary as it was horrible; -- it occurred to him
more than once, that Ellena was murdered. He saw her wounded, and bleeding to
death; saw her ashy countenance, and her wasting eyes, from which the spirit of
life was fast departing, turned piteously on himself, as if imploring him to
save her from the fate that was dragging her to the grave. And, when he reached
the boundary of the garden, his whole frame trembled so, with horrible
apprehension, that he rested a while, unable to venture further toward the
truth. At length he summoned courage to dare it, and, unlocking a private gate,
of which he had lately received the key, because it spared him a considerable
distance of the road to Naples, he approached the house. Every place around it
was silent and forsaken; many of the lattices were closed, and, as he
endeavored to collect from every trivial circumstance some conjecture, his
spirits still sunk as he advanced, till, having arrived within a few paces of
the portico, all his fears were confirmed. He heard from within a feeble sound
of lamentation, and then some notes of that solemn and peculiar kind of
recitative, which is in some parts of Italy the requiem of the dying. The
sounds were so low and distant that they only murmured on his ear; but, without
pausing for information, he rushed into the portico, and knocked loudly at the
folding doors, now closed against him.

After repeated summonses, Beatrice, the old housekeeper, appeared. She did not
wait for Vivaldi's enquiries. "Alas! Signor," said she, "alas-a-day! who would
have thought it; who would have expected such a change as this! It was only
yester-evening that you was here, -- she was then as well as I am; who would
have thought that she would be dead today?"

"She is dead, then!" exclaimed Vivaldi, struck to the heart; "she is dead!"
staggering toward a pillar of the hall, and endeavoring to support himself
against it. Beatrice, shocked at his condition, would have gone for assistance,
but he waved her to stay. "When did she die?" said he, drawing breath with
difficulty, "how and where?"

"Alas! here in the villa, Signor," replied Beatrice, weeping; "who would have
thought that I should live to see this day! I hoped to have laid down my old
bo^es* in peace."

"What has caused her death?" interrupted Vivaldi impatiently, "and when did
she die?"

"About two of the clock this morning, Signor; about two o'clock. O miserable
day, that I should live to see it!"

"I am better," said Vivaldi, raising himself, "lead me to her apartment, -- I
must see her. Do not hesitate, lead me on."

"Alas! Signor, it is a dismal sight; why should you wish to see her? Be
persuaded; do not go, Signor; it is a woeful sight!"

"Lead me on," repeated Vivaldi sternly; "or if you refuse, I will find the way
myself."

Beatrice, terrified by his look and gesture, no longer opposed him, begging
only that he would wait till she had informed her lady of his arrival; but he
followed her closely up the staircase and along a corridor that led round the
west side of the house, which brought him to a suite of chambers darkened by
the closed lattices, through which we passed toward the one where the body
lay. The requiem had ceased, and no sound disturbed the awful stillness that
prevailed in these deserted rooms. At the door of the last apartment, where he
was compelled to stop, his agitation was such, that Beatrice, expecting every
instant to see him sink to the floor, made an effort to support him with her
feeble aid, but he gave a signal for her to retire. He soon recovered himself
and passed into the chamber of death, the solemnity of which might have
effected him in any other state of his spirits; but these were now too severely
pressed upon by real suffering to feel the influence of local circumstances.
Approaching the bed on which the corpse was laid, he raised his eyes to the
mourner who hung weeping over it, and beheld -- Ellena! who, surprised by this
sudden intrusion, and still more by the agitation of Vivaldi, repeatedly
demanded the occasion of it. But he had neither power nor inclination to
explain a circumstance, which must deeply wound the heart of Ellena, since it
would have told that the same event, which excited her grief, accidentally
inspired his joy.

He did not long intrude upon the sacredness of sorrow, and the short time he
remained was employed in endeavors to command his own emotion and to soothe
here is.

When he left Ellena, he had some conversation with Beatrice, as to the death
of Signora Bianchi, and understood that she had retired to rest on the
preceding night apparently in her usual state of health. "It was about one in
the morning Signor," continued Beatrice, "I was waked out of my first sleep by
a noise in my lady's chamber. It is a grievous thing to me, Signor, to be waked
from my first sleep, and I Santa Maria forgive me! was angry at being
disturbed? So I would not get up, but laid my head upon the pillow again, and
tried to sleep; but presently I heard the noise again; nay now, says I,
somebody must be up in the house, that is certain. I had scarcely said so,
Signor, when I heard my young lady's voice calling, 'Beatrice! Beatrice!' Ah!
poor young lady! she was indeed in a sad fright, as well she might. She was at
my door in an instant, and looked as pale as death, and trembled so!
'Beatrice,' said she, 'rise this moment; my aunt is dying.' She did not wait
for my answer, but was gone directly. Santa Maria protect me! I thought I
should have swooned outright."

"Well, but your lady?" said Vivaldi, whose patience the tedious circumlocution
of old Beatrice had exhausted.

"Ah! my poor lady! Signor, I thought I never should have been able to reach
her room; and when I got there, I was scarcely more alive than herself. --
There she lay on her bed! O it was a grievous sight to see! there she lay,
looking so piteously; I saw she was dying. She could not speak, though she
tried often, but she was sensible, for she would look so at Signora Ellena, and
then try to speak; it almost broke one's heart to see her. Something seemed to
lie upon her mind, and she tried almost to the last to tell it; and as she
grasped Signora Ellena's hand, she would still look up in her face with such
doleful expression as no one who had not a heart of stone could bear. My poor
young mistress was quite overcome by it, and cried as if her heart would break.
Poor young lady! she has lost a friend indeed, such a one as she must never
hope to see again."

"But she shall find one as firm and affectionate as the last!" exclaimed
Vivaldi fervently.

"The good Saint grant it may prove so," replied Beatrice, doubtingly. "All
that could be done for our dear lady," she continued, "was tried, but with no
avail. She could not swallow what the Doctor offered her. She grew fainter and
fainter, yet would often utter such deep sighs, and then would grasp my hand so
hard! At last she turned her eyes from Signora Ellena, and they grew duller and
fixed, and she seemed not to see what was before her. Alas! I knew she was
going; her hand did not press mine as it had done a minute or two before, and a
deadly coldness was upon it. Her face changed so too in a few minutes! This was
about two o'clock, and she died before her confessor could administer."

Beatrice ceased to speak, and wept; Vivaldi almost wept with her, and it was
some time before he could command his voice sufficiently to enquire, what were
the symptoms of Signora Bianchi's disorder, and whether she had ever been thus
suddenly attacked before.

"Never, Signor!" replied the old housekeeper; "and though to be sure, she had
long been very infirm, and going down, as one may say, yet," --

"What is it you mean?" said Vivaldi.

"Why, Signor, I do not know what to think about my lady's death. To be sure,
there is nothing certain; and I may only get scoffed at, if I speak my mind
abroad, for nobody would believe me, it is so strange, yet I must have my own
thoughts, for all that."

"Pray speak intelligibly," said Vivaldi, "you need not apprehend censure from
me."

"Not from you, Signor, but if the report should get abroad, and it was known
that I had set it agoing."

"That never shall be known from me," said Vivaldi, with increased impatience,
"tell me, without fear, all that you conjecture."

"Well then, Signor, I will own, that I do not like the suddenness of my lady's
death, no, nor the manner of it, nor her appearance after death!"

"Speak explicitly, and to the point," said Vivaldi.

"Nay, Signor, there are some folks that will not understand if you speak ever
so plain, I am sure I speak plain enough. If I might tell my mind, -- I do not
believe she came fairly by her death at last."

"How!" said Vivaldi, "your reasons?"

"Nay, Signor, I have given them already; I said I did not like the suddenness
of her death, nor her appearance after, nor" --

"Good heaven!" interrupted Vivaldi, "you mean poison."

"Hush, Signor, hush! I do not say that; but she did not seem to die naturally."

"Who has been at the villa lately?" said Vivaldi, in a tremulous voice.

"Alas! Signor, nobody has been here; she lived so privately that she saw
nobody."

"Not one person?" said Vivaldi, "consider well, Beatrice, had she no visitor?"

"Not of a long while, Signor, no visitors but yourself and her cousin Signor
Giotto. The only other person that has been within these walls for many weeks,
to the best of my remembrance, is a sister of the Convent, who comes for the
silks my young lady embroiders."

"Embroiders! What convent?"

"The Santa Maria della Pieta, yonder, Signor; if you will step this way to the
window, I will show it you. Yonder, among the woods on the hill-side, just
above those gardens that stretch down to the bay. There is an olive ground
close beside it, and observe, Signor, there is a red and yellowish ridge of
rocks rises over the woods higher still, and looks as if it would fall down
upon those old spires. Have you found it, Signor?"

"How long is it since this sister came here?" said Vivaldi.

"There weeks at least, Signor."

"And you are certain that no other person has called within that time?"

"No other, Signor, except the fisherman and the gardener, and a man who brings
maccaroni, and such sort of things; for it is such a long way to Naples,
Signor, and I have so little time."

"Three weeks, say you! You say three weeks, I think? Are you certain as to
this?"

"Three weeks, Signor! Santa della Pieta! Do you believe, Signor, that we could
fast for three weeks! Why, they call almost every day."

"I speak of the nun," said Vivaldi.

"O yes, Signor," replied Beatrice; "it is that at least, since she was here."

"This is strange!" said Vivaldi, musing, "but I will talk with you some other
time. Meanwhile, I wish you could contrive that I should see the face of your
deceased lady, without the knowledge of Signora Ellena. And, observe me,
Beatrice, be strictly silent as to your surmises concerning her death: do not
suffer any negligence to betray your suspicions to your young mistress. Has she
any suspicions herself of the same nature?"

Beatrice replied, that she believed Signora Ellena had none: and promised
faithfully to observe his injunctions.

He then left the villa, meditating on the circumstances he had just learned,
and on the prophetic assertion of the monk, between whom, and the cause of
Bianchi's sudden death, he could not forbear surmising there was some
connection, and it now occurred to him, and for the first time, that this monk,
this mysterious stranger, was no other than Schedoni, whom he had observed of
late going more frequently than usual, to his mother's apartment. He almost
started, in horror of the suspicion, to which this conjecture led, and
precipitately rejected it, as a poison that would destroy his own peace for
ever. But though he instantly dismissed the suspicion, the conjecture returned
to his mind, and he endeavored to recollect the voice and figure of the
stranger, that he might compare them with those of the confessor. The voices
were, he thought, of a different tone, and the persons of a different height
and proportion. This comparison, however, did not forbid him to surmise that
the stranger was an agent of the confessor's; that he was, at least, a secret
spy upon his actions, and the defamer of Ellena; while both, if indeed there
were two persons concerned, appeared to be at the command of his parents. Fired
with indignation of the unworthy arts that he believed to have been employed
against him, and impatient to meet the slanderer of Ellena, he determined to
attempt some decisive step toward a discovery of the truth, and either to
compel the confessor to reveal it to him, or to search out his agent, who, he
fancied, was occasionally a resident within the ruins of Paluzzi.

The inhabitants of the convent, which Beatrice had pointed out, did not escape
his consideration, but no reason appeared for supposing them the enemies of his
Ellena, who, on the contrary, he understood had been for some years amicably
connected with them. The embroidered silks, of which the old servant had
spoken, sufficiently explained the nature of the connection, and discovering
more fully the circumstances of Ellena's fortune, her conduct heightened the
tender admiration with which he had hitherto regarded her.

The hints for suspicion which Beatrice had given respecting the cause of her
mistress's decease, incessantly recurred to him; and it appeared extraordinary,
and sometimes in the highest degree improbable, that any person could be
sufficiently interested in the death of a woman apparently so blameless, as to
administer p^^son to her. What motive could have prompted so horrible a deed,
was still more inexplicable. It was true that she had long been in a declining
state; yet the suddenness of her departure and the singularity of some
circumstances preceding as well as some appearances that had followed it,
compelled Vivaldi to doubt as to the cause. He believed, however, that, after
having seen the corpse, his doubts must vanish; and Beatrice had promised,
that, if he could return in the evening, when Ellena had retired to rest, he
should be permitted to visit the chamber of the deceased. There was something
repugnant to his feelings, in going thus secretly, or, indeed, at all, to the
residence of Ellena at this delicate period, yet it was necessary he should
introduce there some medical professor, on whose judgment he could rest,
respecting the occasion of Bianchi's death; and as he believed he should soon
acquire the right of vindicating the honor of Ellena, that consideration did
not so seriously affect him as otherwise it would have done. The enquiry which
called him thither was, besides, of a nature too solemn and important to be
lightly resigned; he had therefore, told Beatrice he would be punctual to the
hour she appointed. His intention to search for the monk was thus again
interrupted.

CHAP. IV.
"Unfold the impenetrable mystery,
That set your soul and you at endless discord."
MYSTERIOUS MOTHER.
WHEN Vivaldi returned to Naples, he enquired for the Marchesa, of whom he
wished to ask some questions concerning Schedoni, which, though he scarcely
expected they would be explicitly answered, might yet lead to part of the truth
he sought for.

The Marchesa was in her closet, and Vivaldi found the confessor with her.
"This man crosses me like my evil genius," said he to himself as he entered,
"but I will know whether he deserves my suspicions before I leave the room."

Schedoni was so deeply engaged in conversation, that he did not immediately
perceive Vivaldi, who stood for a moment examining his countenance, and tracing
subjects for curiosity in its deep lines. His eyes, while he spoke were cast
downward, and his features were fixed in an expression at once severe and
crafty. The Marchesa was listening with deep attention, her head inclined
toward him, as if to catch the lowest murmur of his voice, and her face
picturing the anxiety and vexation of her mind. This was evidently a
conference, not a confession.

Vivaldi advancing, the monk raised his eyes; his countenance suffered no
change, as they met those of Vivaldi. He rose, but did not take leave, and
returned the slight and somewhat haughty salutation of Vivaldi, with an
inclination of the head, that indicated* pride without pettishness, and a
firmness bordering o^ contempt.

The Marchesa, on perceiving her son was somewhat embarrassed, and her brow,
before slightly contracted by vexation, now frowned with severity. Yet it was
an involuntary emotion, for she endeavored to chase the expression of it with
a smile. Vivaldi liked the smile still less than the frown.

Schedoni seated himself quietly, and began with almost the ease of a man of
the world, to converse on general topics. Vivaldi, however, was reserved and
silent; he knew not how to begin a conversation, which might lead to the
knowledge he desired, and the Marchesa did not relieve him from the difficulty.
His eye and his ear assisted him at least to conjecture at least, if not to
obtain the information he wished; and, as he listened to the deep tones of
Schedoni's voice, he became almost certain, that they were not the accents of
his unknown adviser, though he considered, at the ^ame moment, that it was not
difficult to disguise, or to feign a voice. His stature seemed to decide the
question more reasonably; for the figure of Schedoni appeared taller than that
of the stranger; and though there was something of resemblance in their air,
which Vivaldi had never observed before, he again considered, that the habit of
the same order, which each wore, might easily occasion an artificial
resemblance. Or the likeness, as to countenance, he could not judge, since the
stranger had been so much shrouded by his cowl, that Vivaldi had never
distinctly seen a single feature. Schedoni's hood was now thrown back, so that
he could not compare even the air of their heads under similar circumstances;
but as he remembered to have seen the confessor on a former day approaching his
mother's closet with the cowl shading his face, the same gloomy severity seemed
to characterize both, and nearly the same terrible portrait was drawn on his
fancy. Yet this again might be only an artificial effect, a character which the
cowl alone gave to the head; and any face s^en imperfectly beneath its dark
shade, might have appeared equally severe. Vivaldi was still extremely
perplexed in his opinion. One circumstance, however seemed to throw some light
on his judgment. The stranger had appeared in the habit of a monk, and if
Vivaldi's transient observation might be trusted, he was of the very same order
with that of Schedoni, Yet if he were Schedoni, or even his agent, it was not
probable that he would have shown himself in a dress that might lead to a
discovery of his person. That he was anxious for a concealment, his manner had
strongly proved; it seemed then, that this habit of a monk was only a disguise,
assumed for the purpose of misleading conjecture. Vivaldi, however, determined
to put some questions to Schedoni, and at the same time to observe their effect
on his countenance. He took occasion to notice some drawing of ruins, which
ornamented the cabinet of the Marchesa, and to say that the fortress of Paluzzi
was worthy of being added to her collection. "You have seen it lately, perhaps,
reverend father," added Vivaldi, with a penetrating glance.

"It is a striking relic of antiquity," replied the confessor.

"That arch," resumed Vivaldi, his eye still fixed on Schedoni, "that arch
suspended between two rocks, the one overtopped by the towers of the fortress,
the other shadowed with pine and broad oak, has a fine effect. But a picture of
it would want human figures Now either the grotesque shapes of banditti lurking
within the ruin, as if ready to start out upon the traveller, or a friar rolled
up in his black garments, just stealing forth from under the shade of the arch,
and looking like some supernatural messenger of evil would finish the piece."

The features of Schedoni suffered no change during this speech. "Your picture
in complete," said he, "and I cannot but admire the ^ecility with which you
have classed the monks together with banditti."

"Your pardon, holy father," said Vivaldi, "I did not draw a parallel between
them."

"O! no offense, Signor," replied Schedoni, with a smile somewhat ghastly.

During the latter part of this conversation, if conversation it may be called,
the Marchesa had followed a servant, who had brought her a letter, out of the
apartment, and as the confessor appeared to await her return, Vivaldi
determined to press his enquiry. "It appears, however," said he, "that Paluzzi,
if not haunted by robbers, is at least frequented by ecclesiastics; for I have
seldom passed it without seeing one of the order, and that one has appeared so
suddenly, and vanished so suddenly, that I have been almost compelled to
believe he was literally a spiritual being!"

"The convent of the Black Penitents is not far distant," observed the
confessor.

"Does the dress of this convent resemble that of your order, reverend father?
for I observed that the monk I speak of was habited like yourself; aye and he
was about your stature, and very much resembled you."

"That well may be, Signor," replied the confessor calmly; "there are many
brethern who, no doubt, resemble each other; but the brothers of the Black
Penitents are clothed in sackcloth; and the death's head on the garment, the
peculiar symbol of this order, would not have escaped your observation; it
could not, therefore, be a member of their society whom you have seen."

"I am not inclined to think that it was," said Vivaldi; "but be it who it may,
I hope soon to be better acquainted with him, and to tell him truths so strong,
that he shall not be permitted even to affect the misunderstanding of them."

"You will do right, if you have cause of complaint against him," observed
Schedoni.

"And only if I have cause of complaint, holy father? Are strong truths to be
told only when there is direct cause of complaint? Is it only when we are
injured that we are to be sincere?" He believed that he had now detected
Schedoni, who seemed to have betrayed a consciousness that Vivaldi had reason
for complaint against the stranger.

"You will observe, reverend father, that I have not said I am injured," he
added. "If you know that I am, this must be by other means than by my words: I
have not even expressed resentment."

"Except by your voice and eye, Signor," replied Schedoni drily. "When a man is
vehement and disordered, we usually are inclined to suppose he feels
resentment, and that he has cause of complaint, either real or imaginary. As I
have not the honor of being acquainted with the subject you allude to, I
cannot decide to which of the two your cause belongs."

"I have never been in doubt as to that," said Vivaldi haughtily; "and if I
had, you will pardon me, holy father, but I should not have requested your
decision. My injuries are, alas! too real; and I now think it is also too
certain to whom I may attribute them. The secret adviser, who steals into the
bosom of a family only to poison its repose, the informer -- the base asperser
of innocence, stand revealed in one person before me.

Vivaldi delivered these words with a tempered energy, at once dignified and
pointed, which seemed to strike directly to the heart of Schedoni; but, whether
it was his conscience or his pride that took the alarm, did not certainly
appear. Vivaldi believed the former. A dark malignity overspread the features
of the monk, and at that moment Vivaldi thought he beheld a man, whose passions
might impel him to the perpetration of almost any crime, how hideous soever. He
recoiled from him, as if he had suddenly seen a serpent in his path, and stood
gazing on his face, with an attention so wholly occupied as to be unconscious
that he did so.

Schedoni almost instantly recovered himself; his features relaxed from their
first expression, and that portentous darkness passed away from his
countenance; but with a look that was still stern and haughty, he said,
"Signor, however ignorant I may be of the subject of your discontent, I cannot
misunderstand that your resentment is, to some extent or other, directed
against myself as the cause of it. Yet I will not suppose, Signor; I say I will
not suppose," raising his voice significantly, "that you have dared to brand me
with the ignominious titles you have just uttered; but" --

"I have applied them to the author of my injuries," interrupted Vivaldi; "you,
father, can best inform me whether they applied to yourself."

"I have then nothing to complain of," said Schedoni, adroitly, and with a
sudden calmness, that surprised Vivaldi. "If you directed them against the
author of your injuries, whatever they may be, I am satisfied."

The cheerful complacency, with which he spoke this, renewed the doubts of
Vivaldi, who thought it nearly impossible that a man conscious of guilt could
assume, under the very charge of it, the tranquil and dignified air which the
confessor now displayed. He began to accuse himself of having condemned him
with passionate rashness, and gradually became shocked at the indecorum of his
conduct toward a man of Schedoni's age and sacred profession. Those
expressions of countenance, which had so much alarmed him, he was now inclined
to think the effects of a jealous and haughty honor, and he almost forgot the
malignity, which had mingled with Schedoni's pride, in sorrow for the offense
that had provoked it. Thus, not less precipitate in his pity than his anger,
and credulous alike to the passion of the moment, he was now as eager to
apologize for his error, as he had been hasty in committing it. The frankness,
with which he apologized and lamented the impropriety of his conduct would have
won an easy forgiveness from a generous heart. Schedoni listened with apparent
complacency and secret contempt. He regarded Vivaldi as a rash boy, who was
swayed only by his passions; but while he suffered deep resentment for the evil
in his character, he felt neither respect nor kindness for the good, for the
sincerity, the love of justice, the generosity, which threw a brilliancy even
on his foibles. Schedoni, indeed, saw only evil in human nature.

Had the heart of Vivaldi been less generous, he would now have distrusted the
satisfaction, which the confessor assumed, and have discovered the contempt and
malignity, that lurked behind the smile thus imperfectly masking his
countenance. The confessor perceived his power, and the character of Vivaldi
lay before him as a map. He saw, or fancied he saw every line and feature of
its plan, and the relative proportions of every energy and weakness of its
nature. He believed, also, he could turn the very virtues of this young man
against himself, and he exulted, even while the smile of good will was yet upon
his countenance, in anticipating the moment that should avenge him for the past
outrage, and which, while Vivaldi was ingenuously lamenting it, he had
apparently forgotten.

Schedoni was thus ruminating evil against Vivaldi, and Vivaldi was considering
how he might possibly make Schedoni atonement for the affront he had offered
him, when the Marchesa returned to the apartment; and perceived in the honest
countenance of Vivaldi some symptoms of the agitation which had passed over it;
his complexion was flushed, and his brow was slightly contracted. The face of
Schedoni told nothing but complacency, except that now and then when he looked
at Vivaldi, it was with half shut eyes, that indicated treachery, or, at least,
cunning, trying to conceal exasperated pride.

The Marchesa, with displeasure directed against her son, enquired the reason
of his emotion; but he, stung with consciousness of his conduct toward the
monk, could neither endure to explain it, or to remain in her presence, and
saying that he would confide his honor to the discretion of the holy father,
who would speak only too favorably of his fault, he abruptly left the room.

When he had departed, Schedoni gave, with seeming reluctance, the explanation
which the Marchesa required, but was cautious not to speak too favorably of
Vivaldi's conduct, which, on the contrary, he represented as much more
insulting than it really was; and, while he aggravated the offensive part of
it, he suppressed all mention of the candor and self-reproach, which had
followed the charge. Yet this he managed so artfully that he appeared to
extenuate Vivaldi's errors, to lament the hastiness of his temper, and to plead
for a forgiveness from his irritated mother. "He is very young," added the
monk, when he perceived that he had sufficiently exasperated the Marchesa
against her son; "he is very young, and youth is warm in its passions and
precipitate in its judgments. He was, besides, jealous, no doubt, of the
friendship with which you are pleased to honor me; and it is natural that a
son should be jealous of the attention of such a mother."

"You are too good, father," said the Marchesa; her resentment increasing
toward Vivaldi in proportion as Schedoni displayed his artificial candor and
meekness.

"It is true," continued the confessor, "that I perceive all the inconveniences
to which my attachment, I should say my duty, to your family exposes me; but I
willingly submit to these, while it is yet possible that my advice may be a
means of preserving the honor of your house unsullied, and of saving this
inconsiderate young man from future misery and unavailing repentance."

During the warmth of this sympathy in resentment, the Marchesa and Schedoni
mutually, and sincerely, lost their remembrance of the unworthy motives, by
which each knew the other to be influenced, as well as that disgust which those
who act together to the same bad end, can seldom escape from feeling toward
their associates. The Marchesa, while she commended the fidelity of Schedoni,
forgot his views and her promises as to a rich benefice; while the confessor
imputed her anxiety for the splendour of her son's condition to a real interest
in his welfare, not a care of her own dignity. After mutual compliments had
been exchanged, they proceeded to a long consultation concerning Vivaldi, and
it was agreed, that their efforts for what they termed his preservation should
no longer be confined to remonstrances.

CHAP. V.
"What if it be a poison which the friar
Subtly has ministered?"
SHAKESPEARE.
VIVALDI, when his first feelings of pity and compunction for having insulted
an aged man, the member of a sacred profession, were past, and when he looked
with a more deliberate eye upon some circumstances of the confessor's conduct,
perceived that suspicion was again gathering on his mind. But, regarding this
as a symptom of his own weakness, rather than as a hint of truth, he
endeavored, with a magnanimous disdain, to reject every surmise that boded
unfavourably of Schedoni.

When evening arrived, he hastened toward the villa Altieri, and, having met
without the city, according to appointment, a physician, upon whose honor and
judgment he thought he might rely, they proceeded on their way together.
Vivaldi had forgotten, during the confusion of his last interview with Ellena,
to deliver up the key of the garden-gate, and he now entered it as usual,
though he could not entirely overcome the reluctance, which he felt on thus
visiting, in secret and at night, the dwelling of Ellena. Under no other
circumstances, however, could the physician, whose opinion was so necessary to
his peace, be introduced without betraying a suspicion, which must render her
unhappy, probably for ever.

Beatrice, who had watched for them in the portico, led the way to the chamber
where the corpse was laid out; and Vivaldi, though considerably affected when
he entered, soon recovered composure enough to take his station on one side of
the bed, while the physician placed himself on the other. Unwilling to expose
his emotion to the observation of a servant, and desirous also of some private
conversation with the physician, he took the lamp from Beatrice and dismissed
her. -- As the light glared upon the livid face of the corpse, Vivaldi gazed
with melancholy surprise, and an effort of reason was necessary to convince
him, that this was the same countenance which only one evening preceding was
animated like his own; which had looked upon him in tears, while, with anxiety
the most tender, she had committed the happiness of her niece to his care, and
had, alas! too justly predicted her approaching dissolution. The circumstances
of that scene now appeared to him like a vision, and touched every fiber of his
heart. He was fully sensible of the importance of the trust committed to him,
and, as he now hung over the pale and deserted form of Bianchi, he silently
renewed his solemn vows to Ellena, to deserve the confidence of her departed
guardian.

Before Vivaldi had courage enough to ask the opinion of the physician, who was
still viewing the face of the deceased with very earnest attention and
disapproving countenance, his own suspicions strengthened from some
circumstances of her appearance; and particularly from the black tint that
prevailed over her complexion, it seemed to him, that her death had been by
poison. He seared to break a silence, which prolonged his hope of the contrary,
feeble though it was; and the physician, who probably was apprehensive for the
consequence of delivering his real thoughts, did not speak.

"(...) read your opinion," said Vivaldi, at length, "it coincides with my own."

"I know not as to that, Signor," replied the physician, "though I think I
perceive what is yours. Appearances are unfavourable, yet I will not take upon
me to decide from them, that it is as you suspect. There are other
circumstances, under which similar appearances might occur." He gave his
reasons for this assertion, which were plausible even to Vivaldi, and concluded
with requesting to speak with Beatrice, "for I wish to understand," said he,
"what was the exact situation of this lady for some hours previous to her
decease."

After a coversation of some length with Beatrice, whatever might be the
opinion resulting from his enquiries, he adhered nearly to his former
assertions; pronouncing that so many contradictory circumstances appeared, as
rendered it impossible for him to decide, whether Bianchi had died by poison,
or otherwise. He stated more fully than he had done before the reasons which
must render the opinion of any medical person, on this subject, doubtful. But,
whether it was that he feared to be responsible for a decision, which would
accuse some person of murder, or that he really was inclined to believe that
Bianchi died naturally, it is certain he seemed disposed to adopt the latter
opinion; and that he was very anxious to quiet the suspicions of Vivaldi. He so
far succeeded, indeed, as to convince him that it would be unavailing to pursue
the enquiry, and almost compelled him to believe, that she had departed
according to the common course of nature.

Vivaldi, having lingered a while over the deathbed of Bianchi, and taken a
last farewell of her silent form, quitted the chamber and the house as softly
as he had approached, and unobserved, as he believed, by Ellena or any other
person. The morning dawned over the sea, when he returned into the garden, and
a few fishermen, loitering on the beach, or putting off their little boats from
the shore, were the only persons visible at this early hour. The time, however,
was passed for renewing the enquiry he had purposed at Paluzzi, and the
brightening dawn warned him to retire. To Naples, therefore, he returned, with
spirits somewhat soothed by a hope, that Bianchi had not fallen prematurely,
and by the certainty that Ellena was well. On the way thither, he passed the
fort without interruption, and, having parted with the physician, was admitted
into his father's mansion by a confidential servant.

CHAP. VI.
"For here have been
Some six or seven, who did hide their faces
Even from darkness.
SHAKESPEARE
ELLENA, on thus suddenly losing her aunt, her only relative, the friend of her
whole life, felt as if left alone in the world. But it was not in the first
moment of affliction that this feeling occurred. Her own forlorn situation was
not even observed, while affection, pity, and irresistible grief for Bianchi,
occupied her heart.

Bianchi was to be interred in the church belonging to the convent of Santa
Maria della Pieta. The body attired according to the custom of the country, and
decorated with flowers, was carried on an open bier to the place of interment,
attended only by priests and torch-bearers. But Ellena could not endure thus
lightly to part with the relics of a beloved friend, and being restrained by
custom from following the corpse to the grave, she repaired first to the
convent, to attend the funeral service. Her sorrow did not allow her to join in
the choral symphonies of the nuns, but their sacred solemnity was soothing to
her spirits, and the tears she shed while she listened to the lengthening
notes, assuaged the force of grief.

When the service concluded she withdrew to the parlour of the lady Abbess, who
mingled with her consolations many entreaties that Ellena would make the
convent her present asylum; and her affliction required little persuasion on
this subject. It was her wish to retire hither as to a sanctuary, which was not
only suitable to her particular circumstances, but especially adapted to the
present state of her spirits. Here she believed that she should sooner acquire
resignation and regain tranquillity, than in a place less consecrated to
religion; and, before she took leave of the Abbess it was agreed, that she
should be received as a boarder. To acquaint Vivaldi with her intention was,
indeed, her chief motive for returning to the villa Altieri, after this her
resolution had been taken. Her affection and esteem had been gradual in their
progress, and had now attained a degree of strength, which promised to decide
the happiness or misery of her whole life. The fanction given by her aunt to
this choice, and particularly the very solemn manner in which, on the evening
preceding her death, she bequeathed Ellena to his care, had still endeared him
to her heart, and imparted a sacredness to the engagement, which made her
consider Vivaldi as her guardian and only surviving protector. The more
tenderly she lamented her deceased relative, the more tenderly she thought of
Vivaldi; and her love for the one was so intimately connected with her
affection for the other, that each seemed strengthened and exalted by the union.

When the funeral was over, they met at Altieri.

He was neither surprised nor averse to her withdrawing awhile to a convert;
for there was a propriety in retiring, during the period of her grief, from*
home where she had no longer a guardian, which delicacy seemed to demand. He
only stipulated that (...) might be permitted to visit her in the parlour of
the convent, and to claim, when decorum should no longer object to it, the hand
which Bianchi had resigned to him.

Notwithstanding that he yielded to this arrangement without complaining, it
was not entirely without repining; but being assured by Ellena of the
worthiness of the Abbess of the Santa Maria della Pieta, (...) endeavored
(...) silence the secret murmurs of his heart with the (...) of his judgment.

Mean while, the deep impression made by his unknown tormentor, the monk, and
especially by his prediction of the death of Bianchi, remained upon his mind,
and he once more determined to ascertain, if possible, the true nature of this
portentous visitant, and what were the motives which induced him to haunt his
footsteps and interrupt his peace. He was awed by the circumstances which had
attended the visitations of the monk, if monk it was; by the suddenness of his
appearance, and departure; by the truth of his prophecies; and, above all, by
the solemn event which had verified his last warning; and his imagination, thus
elevated by wonder and painful curiosity, was prepared for something above the
reach of common conjecture, and beyond the accomplishment of human agency. His
understanding was* sufficiently clear and strong to teach him to detect many
errors of opinion, that prevailed around him, as well as to despise the common
superstitions of his country, and, in the usual state of his mind, he probably
would not have paused for a moment on the subject before him; but his passions
were now interested and his fancy awakened, and, though he was unconscious of
this propensity, he would, perhaps, have been somewhat disappointed to have
descended suddenly from the region of fearful sublimity, to which he had soared
-- to the world of terrible shadows -- to the earth, on which he daily walked,
and to an explanation simply natural.

He designed to visit again, at midnight, the fortress of Paluzzi, and not to
watch for the appearance of the stranger, but to carry torches into every
recess of the ruin, and discover, at least, whether it was haunted by any other
human beings than himself. The chief difficulty which had hitherto delayed him,
was that of finding a person, in whom he could confide, to accompany him in the
search, since his former adventure had warned him never to renew it alone.
Signor Bonarmo persisted absolutely, and, perhaps, wisely, to refuse his
request on this subject; and, as Vivaldi had no other acquaintance, to whom he
chose to give so much explanation of the affair as might induce compliance, he
at length determined to take with him Paulo, his own servant.

On the Evening, previous to the day of Ellena's departure to the Santo della
Pieta, Vivaldi went to Altieri, to bid her adieu. During this interview his
spirits were more than usually depressed; and, though he knew that her
retirement was only for a short period, and had as much confidence in the
continuance of her affection, as is, perhaps, possible to a lover, Vivaldi felt
as if he was parting with her for ever. A thousand vague and fearful
conjectures, such as he never till this moment admitted, assailed him, and
amongst them, it appeared probable, that the arts of the nuns might win her
from the world, and sacrifice her to the cloister. In her present state of
sorrow this seemed to be even more than probable, and not all the assurances
which Ellena gave him, and in these parting moments she spoke with less reserve
than she had hitherto done, could entirely re-assure his mind. "It should seem,
Ellena, by these boding fears," said he, imprudently, "that I am parting with
you for ever; I feel a weight upon my heart, which I cannot throw off. Yet I
consent that you shall withdraw awhile to this convent, convinced of the
propriety of the step; and I ought, also, to know that you will soon return;
that I shall soon take you from its walls as my wife, never more to leave me,
never more to pass from my immediate care and tenderness. I ought to feel
assured of all this; yet so apt are my fears, that I cannot confide in what is
probable, but rather apprehend what is possible. And is it then possible that I
yet may lose you, and is it only probable that you may be mine for ever? How
under such circumstances, could I weakly consent to your retirement? Why did I
not urge you to bestow immediately those indissoluble bonds, which no human
force can burst asunder? How could I leave the destiny of all my peace within
the reach of a possibility, which it was once in my power to have removed!
Which it was in my power! -- It is, perhaps, still in my power. O Ellena! let
the severities of custom yield to the security of my happiness. If you do go to
the Santa Maria, let it be only to visit its altar!"

Vivaldi delivered this expostulation with a rapidity, that left no pause for
Ellena to interrupt him. When, at length, he concluded, she gently reproached
him for doubting the continuance of her regard, and endeavored to sooth his
apprehensions of misforune, but would not listen to his request. She
represented, that not only the state of her spirits required retirement, but
that respect to the memory of her aunt demanded it; and added gravely, that if
he had so little confidence in the steadiness of her opinions, as to doubt the
constancy of her affection, and for so short a period, unless her vows were
secured to him, he had done imprudently to elect her for the companion of his
whole life.

Vivaldi, then ashamed of the weakness he had betrayed, besought her
forgiveness, and endeavored to appease apprehensions which passion only made
plausible, and which reason reproved; notwithstanding which, he could recover
neither tranquillity nor confidence; nor could Ellena, though her conduct was
supported and encouraged by justness of sentiment, entirely remove the
oppression of spirits she had felt from almost the first moment of this
interview. They parted with many tears; and Vivaldi, before he finally took his
leave, frequently returned to claim some promise, or to ascertain some
explanation, till Ellena remarked with a forced smile, that the seresembled
eternal adieus, rather than those of only a few days; an observation which
renewed all his alarm, and furnished an excuse for again delaying his
departure. At length he tore himself away, and left the villa Altieri; but as
the time was yet too early to suit his purposed enquiry at Paluzzi, he returned
to Naples.

Ellena, meanwhile, endeavoring to dissipate melancholy recollections by
employment, continued busied in preparation for her departure on the following
day, till a late hour of the night. In the prospect of quitting, though only
for so short a period, the home where she had passed almost every day since the
dawn of her earliest remembrance, there was something melancholy, if not solemn
in leaving those well-known scenes, where, it might be said, the shade of her
deceased relative seemed yet to linger, she was quitting all vestige of her
late happiness, all note of former years and present consolation; and she felt
as if going forth into a new and homeless world. Her affection for the place
increased as the passing time diminished, and it seemed as if the last moment
of her stay would be precisely that, in which the villa Altieri would be most
valued.

In her favorite apartments she lingered for a considerable time; and in the
room where she had supped on the night immediately preceding the death of
Signora Bianchi, she indulged many ^ender and mournful recollections, and
probably would have continued to indulge them much longer, had not her
attention been withdrawn by a sudden rustling of the foliage that surrounded
the window, when on raising her eyes, she thought she perceived some person
pass quickly before it. The lattices had, as usual, been left open to admit the
fresh breeze from the bay below, but she now rose with some alarm to close
them, and had scarcely done so when she heard a distant knocking from the
portico, and in the next instant the screams of Beatrice in the hall.

Alarmed for herself, Ellena, had, however, the courage to advance to the
assistance of her old servant, when, on entering the passage leading to the
hall, three men, masked and muffled up in cloaks, appeared, advancing from the
opposite extremity. While she fled, they pursued her to the apartment she had
quitted. Her breath and her courage were gone, yet she struggled to sustain
herself, and endeavored to ask with calmness what was their errand. They gave
no reply, but threw a veil over her face, and seizing her arms, led her almost
unresisting but supplicating, toward the portico.

In the hall, Ellena perceived Beatrice bound to a pillar; and another ruffian,
who was also masked, watching over and menacing her, not by words but gestures.
Ellena's shrieks seemed to recall the almost lifeless Beatrice, for whom she
supplicated as much as for herself; but entreaty was alike unavailing for each,
and Ellena was borne from the house and through the garden. All consciousness
had now forsaken her. On recovering, she perceived herself in a carriage which
was driven with great rapidity, and that her arms were within the grasp of some
persons, whom, when her recollection returned more fully, she believed to be
the men, who had carried her from the villa. The darkness prevented her from
observing their figures, and to all her questions and entreaties a deathlike
silence was observed.

During the whole night the carriage proceeded rapidly, stopping only while the
ho^ses were changed, when Ellena endeavored to interest by her cries the
compassion of the people at the post-houses, and by her cries only, for the
blinds were closely drawn. The postillions, no doubt imposed on the credulity
of these people, for they were insensible to her distress, and her immediate
companions soon overcame the only means that had remained by which she could
make it known.

For the first hours, a tumult of terror and amazement occupied her mind, but,
as this began to subside, and her understanding to recover its clearness, grief
and despondency mingled with her fears. She saw herself separated from Vivaldi,
probably for ever, for she apprehended that the strong and invisible hand which
governed her course, would never relinquish its grasp till it had placed her
irrecoverably beyond the reach of her lover. A conviction that she should see
him no more, came, at intervals with such overwhelming force, that every
consideration and emotion disappeared before it; and at these moments she lost
all anxiety as to the place of her destination, and all fear as to her personal
safety.

As the morning advanced and the heat increased, the blinds were let down a
little to admit air, and Ellena then perceived, that only two of the men, who
had appeared at the villa Altieri, were in the carriage, and that they were
still disguised in cloaks and visors. She had no means of judging through what
part of the country she was traveling, for above the small openings which the
blinds left she could see only the towering tops of mountains, or sometimes the
veiny precipices and tangled thickets, that closely impended over the road,

About noon, as she judged from the excessive heat, the carriage stopped at a
post house, and ice-water was handed through the window, when, as the blind was
lowered to admit it, she perceived herself on a wild and solatary plain,
surrounded by mountains and woods. The people at the door of the post house
seemed "unused to pity or be pitied." The lean and sallow countenance of
poverty stared over their gaunt bones, and habitual discontent had fixed the
furrows of their cheeks. They regarded Ellena with only a feeble curiosity,
though the affliction in her looks might have interested almost any heart that
was not corroded by its own sufferings; nor did the masked faces of her
companions excite a much stronger attention.

Ellena accepted the cool refreshment offered her, the first she had taken on
the road. Her companions having emptied their glasses drew up the blind, and,
notwithstanding the almost intolerable heat of noon, the carriage proceeded.
Fainting under its oppression, Ellena entreated that the windows might he open,
when the men, in compliance with their own necessity rather than with her
request, lowered the blinds, and she had a glimpse of the lofty region of the
mountains, but of no object that could direct her conjecture concerning where
she was. She saw only pinnacles and vast precipices of various-tinted marbles,
intermingled with scanty vegetation, such as stunted pinasters, dwarf oak and
holly, which gave dark touches to the many-coloured cliffs, and sometimes
stretched in shadowy masses to the deep valleys, that, winding into obscurity,
seemed to invite curiosity to explore the scenes beyond. Below these bold
precipices extended the gloomy regions of olive trees, and lower still other
rocky steeps sunk toward the plains, bearing terraces crowned with vines, and
were often the artificial soil was propped by thickets of juniper, pomegranates
and oleander.

Ellena, after having been so long shut in darkness, and brooding over her own
alarming circumstances found temporary, though feeble, relief in once more
looking upon the face of nature; till, her spirits being gradually revived and
elevated by the grandeur of the images around her, she said to herself, "If I
am condemned to misery, surely I could endure it with more fortitude it scenes
like these, than amidst the tamer landscapes of nature! Here, the objects seem
to impart somewhat of their own sublimity, to the soul. It is scarcely possible
to yield to the pressure of misfortunes while we walk, as with the Deity,
amidst his most stupendous works!"

But soon after the idea of Vivaldi glancing athwart her memory, she melted
into tears; the weakness however was momentary, and during the rest of the
journey she preserved a strenuous equality of mind.

It was when the heat and the light were declining that the carriage entered a
rocky defile, which showed, as through a tellescope reversed distant plains,
and mountains opening beyond, lighted up with all the purple splendour of the
setting sun. Along this deep and shadowy perspective a river, which was seen
descending among the cliffs of a mountain, rolled with impetuous force,
fretting and foaming amidst the dark rocks in its descent, and then flowing in
a limpid lapse to the brink of other precipices, whence again it fell with
thundering strength to the abyss, throwing its misty clouds of spray high in
the air, and seeming to claim the sole empire of this solitary wild. Its bed
took up the whole breadth of the chasm, which some strong convulsion of the
earth seemed to have formed, not leaving space even for a road along its
margin. The road, therefore, was carried high among the cliffs, that impended
over the river, and seemed as if suspended in the air; while the gloom and
vastness of the precipices, which towered above and sunk below it, together
with the amazing force and uproar of the falling waters combined to render the
pass more terrific than the pencil could describe, or language can express.
Ellena ascended it, not with indifference but with calmness; she experienced
somewhat of a dreadful pleasure in looking down upon the irresistible flood;
but this emotion was heightened into awe, when she perceived that the road led
to a slight bridge, which, thrown across the chasm at an immense height, united
two opposite cliffs, between which the whole cataract of the river descended.
The bridge, which was defended only by a slender railing, appeared as if hung
amidst the clouds. Ellena, while she was crossing it, almost forgot her
misfortunes. Having reached the opposite side of the glen, the road gradually
descended the precipices for about half a mile, when it opened to extensive
prospects over plains and toward distant mountains -- the sunshine landscape,
which had long appeared to bound this shadowy pass. The transition was as the
passage through the vale of death to the bliss of eternity; but the idea of its
resemblance did not long remain with Ellena. Perched high among the cliffs of a
mountain, which might be said to terminate one of the jaws of this terific
gorge, and which was one of the loftiest of a chain that surrounded the plains,
appeared the spires and long terraces of a monastry; and she soon understood
that her journey was to conclude there,

At the foot of this mountain her companions alighted, and obliged her to do
the same, for the ascent was too steep and irregular to admit of a carriage.
Ellena followed unresistingly, like a lamb to the sacrifice, up a path that
wound among the rocks, and was coolly over-shadowed by thickets of almond
trees, figs broad-leaved myrtle, and ever-green rose bushes, intermingled with
the strawberry tree, beautiful in fruit and blossoms, the yellow jasemine, the
delightful acacia mimosa, and a variety of other fragrant plants. These bowers
frequently admitted glimpses of the glowing country below, and sometimes opened
to expansive views bounded by the snowy mountains of Abruzzo. At every step
were objects which would have afforded pleasure to a tranquil mind; the
beautifully varigated marbles, that formed the cliffs immediately above, their
fractured masses embossed with mosses and flowers of every vivid hue that
paints the rainbow; the elegance of the shrubs that tufted, and the majestic
grace of the palms which waved over them would have charmed almost any other
eye than Ellena's, whose spirit was rapt in care or than those of her
companions, whose hearts were dead to feeling. Partial features of the vast
edifice she was approaching, appeared now and then between the trees; the tall
west window of the cathedral with the spires that overtopped it; the narrow
pointed roofs of the cloisters; angles of the insurmountable walls, which
fenced the garden from the precipices below, and the dark portal leading into
the chief court; each of these, seen at intervals beneath the gloom of cypress
and spreading cedar, seemed as if manacing the unhappy Ellena with hints of
future suffering. She past several shrines and images half hid among the shrubs
and the cliffs; and, when she drew near the monastery, her companions stopped
at a little chapel which stood beside the path, where, after examining some
papers, an act which she observed with surprise, they drew aside, as if to
consult respecting herself. Their conversation was delivered in voices so low,
that she could not catch a single tone distinctly, and it is probable that if
she could, this would not have assisted her in conjecturing who they were; yet
the pro^ound silence they had hitherto observed had much increased her
curiosity, now that they spoke.

One of them soon after quitted the chapel, and proceeded alone to the
monastery, leaving Ellena in the custody of his comrade, whose pity she now
made a last, though almost hopeless, effort to interest. He replied to all her
entreaties only by a waving of the hand and an averted face; and she
endeavored to meet with fortitude and to endure with patience, the evil which
she could neither avoid nor subdue. The spot where she awaited the return of
the ruffian, was not of a character to promote melancholy, except, indeed, that
luxurious solemn kind of melancholy, which a view of stupendous objects
inspires. It overlooked the whole, extent of plains, of which she had before
caught partia scenes, with the vast chain of mountains, which seemed to form an
insurmountable rampart to the rich landscape at their feet. There towering and
fantastical summits, crowding together into dusky air, like flames tapering to
apoint, exhibited images of peculiar grandeur, which each minuter line and
feature withdrawing, at this evening hour from observation, seemed to resolve
itself into the more gigantic masses, to which the dubious tint, the solemn
obscurity, that began to prevail over them, gave force and loftier character.
The silence and deep repose of the landscape, served to impress this character
more awfully on the heart, and while Ellena sat rapt in the thoughtfulness it
promoted, the vesper-service of the monks breathing softly from the cathedral
above, came to her ear; it was a music which might be said to win on silence,
and was in perfect unison with her feelings; solemn, deep, and full, it swelled
in holy peals, and rolled away in murmurs, which attention pursued to the last
faint note that melted into air. Ellena's heart owned the power of its high
minstrelsy; and while she caught for a moment the sweeter voices of the nuns
mingling in the chorus, she iudulged a hope that they would not be wholly
insensible to her sufferings, and that she should receive some consolation from
sympathy as ^oft as these tender-breathing strains appeared to indicate.

She had rested nearly half an hour on the turfy slope before the chapel, when
she perceived through the twilight, two monks descending from the monastery
toward the spot where she sat. As they drew near, she distinguished their
dress of gray stuff, the hood, the shaven head, where only a coronet of white
hair was left, and other ensigns of their particular Order. On reaching the
chapel they accosted her companion, with whom they retired a few paces, and
conversed. Ellena heard, for the first time the sound of her conductor's voice,
and though this was but faintly, she marked it well. The other ruffian did not
appear, but it seemed evident that these friars had left the convent in
consequence of his information; and sometimes when she looked upon the taller
of the two, she fancied she saw the person of the very man whose absence she
had remarked, a conjecture which strengthened while she more accurately noticed
him. The portrait had certainly much resemblance in height and bulk; and the
same gaunt awkwardness, which even the cloak of the ruffian had not entirely
shrouded, obtruded itself from under the folded garments of the recluse. If
countenance, too, might be trusted, this same friar had a ruffian's heart, and
his keen and cunning eye seemed habitually upon the watch for prey. His brother
of the order showed nothing strongly characteristic either in his face or
manner.

After a private conversation of some length, the friars approached Ellena, and
told her, that she must accompany them to the convent; when her disguised
conductor, having resigned her to them, immediately departed and descended the
mountain.

Not a word was uttered by either of the party as they pursued the deep tract
leading to the gates of this secluded edifice, which were opened to them by a
lay-brother, and Ellena entered a spacious court. Three sides of this were
closed by lofty buildings, lined with ranges of cloisters; the fourth opened to
a garden, shaded with avenues of melancholy cypress, that extended to the
cathedral, whose fretted windows and ornamented spires appeared to close the
perspective. Other large and detached buildings skirted the gardens on the
left, while, on the right, spacious olive grounds and vineyards spread to the
cliffs that formed a barrier to all this side of the domain of the convent.

The friar, her conductor, crossed the court to the north wing, and there
ringing a bell a door was opened by a nun, into whose hands Ellena was given. A
significant look was exchanged between the devotees, but no words; the friar
departed, and the nun, still silent, conducted her through many solitary
passages, where not even a distant foot-fall echoed, and whose walls were
roughly painted with subjects indicatory of the severe superstitions of the
place, tending to inspire melancholy awe. Ellena's hope of pity vanished as her
eyes glanced over these symbols of the disposition of the inhabitants, and on
the countenance of the nun characterised by a gloomy malignity, which seemed
ready to inflict upon others some portion of the unhappiness she herself
suffered. As she glided forward with soundless step, her white drapery,
floating along these solemn avenues, and her hollow features touched with the
mingled light and shadow which the partial rays of a taper she held occasioned,
she seemed like a spectre newly risen from the grave, rather than a living
being. These passages terminated in the parlour of the Abbess, where the nun
paused, and turning to Ellena, said, "It is the hour of vespers; you will wait
here till our lady of the convent leaves* the church; she would speak with you."

"To what saint is the convent dedicated," said Ellena, "and who, sister,
presides over it?

The nun gave no reply, and after having eyed the forlorn stranger for a
moment, with inquisitive ill nature, quitted the room. The unhappy Ellena had
not been le^t long to her own reflections, when the Abbess appeared; a stately
lady, apparently occupied with opinions of her own importance, and prepared to
receive her guest with rigor and supercilious haughtiness. This Abbess, who
was herself a woman of some distinction, believed that of all possible crimes,
next to that of sacrilege, offenses against persons of rank were least
pardonable. It is not surprising, therefore, that supposing, Ellena a young
woman of no family, to have sought clandestinely to unite herself with the
noble house of Vivaldi, should feel for her, not only disdain, but indignation,
and that she should readily consent, not only to punish the offender, but at
the same time, to afford means of preserving the ancient dignity of the
offended.

"I understand," said the Abbess, on whose appearance the alarmed Ellena had
arisen, "I understand," said she, without making any signal for her to be
seated, "that you are the young person who is arrived from Naples,"

"My name is Ellena di Rosalba," said her auditor, recovering some degree of
courage from the manner which was designed to depress her.

"I know nothing of your name," replied the superior; "I am informed only that
you are sent here to acquire a knowledge of yourself and of your duties. Till
the period shall be passed, for which you are given into my charge, I shall
scrupulously observe the obligations of the troublesome office, which my regard
for the honor of a noble family, has induced me to undertake."

By these words, the author and the motives of this extraordinary transaction
were at once revealed to Ellena, who was for some moments almost overwhelmed by
the sudden horrors that gathered in her mind, and stood silent and motionless.
Fear, shame, indignation, alternately assailed her; and the sting of offended
honor, on being suspected, and thus accused of having voluntarily disturbed the
tranquillity, and sought the alliance of any family, and especially of one who
disdained her, struck forcibly to her heart, till the pride of conscious worth
revived her courage and fortified her (...) and she demanded by whose will she
had been torn from her house, and by whose authority she was now detained, as
it appeared, a prisoner.

The Abbess, unaccustomed to have her power opposed, or her words questioned,
was for a moment too indignant to reply; and Ellena observed, but no longer
with dismay, the brooding tempest ready to burst over her head. "It is I only
who am injured," said she to herself, "and shall the guilty oppressor triumph,
and the innocent sufferer sink under the shame that belongs only to guilt!
Never will I yield to a weakness so contemptible. The consciousness of
deserving well, will recall my presence of mind, which permitting me to
estimate the characters of my oppressors by their actions, will enable me also
to despise their power."

"I must remind you," said the Abbess, at length, "that the questions you make
are unbecoming in your situation; and that contrition and humility are the best
extenuations of error. You may withdraw."

"Most true," replied Ellena, bowing with dignity to the Superior; "and I most
willingly resign them to my oppressors."

Ellena forebore to make further* enquiry or remonstrance, and perceiving that
reproach would not only be useless, but degrading to herself, she immediately
obeyed the ma^^^ate of the Abbess, and determined since she must suffer, to
suffer if possible, with firmness and dignity.

She was conducted from the parlour by the nun who had admitted her, and as she
passed through the refactory where the nuns, just returned from vespers, were
assembled, their inquisitive glances, their smiles and busy whispers, told her,
that she was not only an object of curiosity, but of suspicion, and that little
sympathy could be expected from hearts, which even the offices of hourly
devotion had not purified from the malignant envy, that taught them to exalt
themselves upon the humiliation of others.

The little room to which Ellena was led, and where, to her great satisfaction,
she was left alone, rather deserved the denomination of a cell than of a
chamber; since, like those of the nuns, it had only one small lattice; and a
mattress, one chair, and a table, with a prayer book were all its furniture.
Ellena, as she surveyed her melancholy habitation, suppressed a rising sigh,
but she could not remain unaffected by recollections, which, on this view of
her altered state, crowded to her mind: nor think of Vivaldi far away, perhaps
for ever, and probably, even ignorant of her distination, without bitter tears.
But she dried them, as the idea of the Marchesa obtruded on her thoughts, for
other emotions than those of grief possessed her. It was to the Marchesa that
she especially attributed her present situation; and it now appeared that the
family of Vivaldi had not only been reluctant, but absolutely averse to a
connection with hers, contrary to the suggestions of Signora Bianchi, who had
represented, that it might be supposed only, from their known character, that
they would disapprove of the alliance, but would of course be reconciled to an
event, which their haughtiest displeasure never could revoke. This discovery of
their absolute rejection awakened all the proper pride, which the mistaken
prudence of her aunt, and her affection for Vivaldi had lulled to rest; and she
now suffered the most acute vexation and remorse, for having yielded her
consent to enter clandestinely into any family. The imaginary honors of so
noble an alliance vanished, when the terms of obtaining them were considered;
and now, that the sound mind of Ellena was left to its own judgment, she looked
with infinitely more pride and preference upon the industrious means, which had
hitherto rendered her independent, than on all distinction which might be
reluctantly conferred. The consciousness of innocence, which had supported her
in the presence of the Superior, began to falter. "Her accusation was partly
just!" said Ellena, "and I deserve punishment, since I could even for a moment,
submit to the humiliation of desiring an alliance, which I knew would be
unwillingly conferred. But it is not yet too late to retrieve my own esteem by
asserting my independence, and resigning Vivaldi for ever. By resigning him! by
abandoning him who loves me, -- abandoning him to misery! Him, whom I cannot
even think of without tears, -- to whom my vows have been given, -- who may
claim me by the sacred remembrance of my dying friend, -- him, to whom my whole
heart is devoted! O! miserable alternative! -- that I can no longer act justly,
but at the expense of all my future happiness! Justly! And would it then be
just to abandon him who is willing to resign every thing for me, -- abandon him
to ceaseless sorrow, that the prejudices of his family may be gratified?"

Poor Ellena perceived that she could not obey the dictates of a just pride,
without such opposition from her heart as she had never experienced before. Her
affections were now too deeply engaged to permit her to act with firmness, at
the price of long-suffering. The consideration of resigning Vivaldi was so very
grievous, that she could scarcely endure to pause upon it for a moment; yet, on
the other hand, when she thought of his family, it appeared that she never
could consent to make a part of it. She would have blamed the eroneous judgment
of Signora Bianchi, whose persuasions had so much assisted in reducing her to
the present alternative, had not the tenderness with which she cherished her
memory, rendered this impossible. All, that now remained for her, was to
endeavor patiently to endure present evils which she could not conquer; for,
to forsake Vivaldi as the price of liberty, should liberty be offered her on
such terms, or to accept him in defiance of honorable pride, should he ever
affect her release, appeared to her distracted thoughts almost equally
impracticable But, as the probability of never being able to discover her
abode, returned to her consideration, the anguish she suffered told how much
more she dreaded to lose then to accept Vivaldi, and that love was, after all,
the most powerful affection of her heart.

CHAP. VII
"The bell then beating one."
SHAKESPEARE.
VIVALDI, meanwhile, ignorant of what had occurred at the villa Altieri,
repaired as he had proposed to Paluzzi, attended hy his servant Paulo. It was
deep night before he left Naples, and so anxious was he to conceal himself from
observation, that though Paulo carried a torch, he did not permit it to be
lighted, till after he should have remained some time within the arch-way,
thinking it most prudent to watch awhile in secret for his unknown adviser,
before he proceeded to examine the fort.

His attendant, Paulo, was a true Neapolitian, shrewd, inquisitive,
insinuating, adroit; possessing much of the spirit of intrigue, together with a
considerable portion of humor, which displayed itself not so much in words, as
in his manner and countenance, in the archness of his dark, penetrating eye,
and in the exquisite adaptation of his gesture to his idea. He was a
distinguished favorite of his master, who, if he had not humor himself, had a
keen relish for it in others, and who certainly did possess wit, with all its
lively accompaniments, in an eminent degree. Vivaldi had been won by the
naivete and humor of this man, to allow him an unusual degree of familiarity
in conversation; and, as they now walked together toward Paluzzi, he unfolded
to Paulo as much of his former adventure there as he judged necessary to
interest his curiosity and excite his vigilance. The relation did both. Paulo,
however, naturally courageous, was ^ncredulous to superstition of any kind; and
having quickly perceived that his master was not altogether indisposed to
attribute to a supernatural cause the extraordinary occurrences at paluzzi, he
began, in his manner, to rally him; but Vivaldi was not in temper to endure
jesting; his mood was grave, even to solemnity, and he yielded, though
reluctantly, to the awe which, at intervails, returned upon him with the force
of a magical spell, binding up all his faculties to sternness, and fixing them
in expectation. While he was nearly regardless of defense against human agency,
his servant was, however, preparing for that alone; and very properly
represented the imprudence of going to Paluzzi in darkness. Vivaldi observed
that they could not watch for the monk otherwise than in darkness. since the
torch which lighted them would also warn him, and he had very particular
reasons for watching before he proceeded to examine. He added, that after a
certain time had elapsed, the torch might be lighted at a neighboring cottage.
Paulo objected, that in the meanwhile, the person for whom they watched might
escape; and Vivaldi compromised the affair. The torch was lighted but concealed
within a hollow of the cliffs, that bordered on the road, and the sentinels
took their station in darkness, within the deep arch, near the spot where
Vivaldi had watched with Bonarmo. As they did this, the distant chime of a
convent informed Vivaldi that midnight was turned. The sound recalled to his
mind the the words of (...), concerning the vicinity of the convent of the
Black Penitents, to Paluzzi, and he asked Paulo whether this was the chime of
that convent. Paulo replied that it was, and that a remarkable circumstance had
taught him to remember the Santa del Pianto, or our Lady of Tears. "The place,
Signor, would interest you," said Paulo for there are some-odd stories told of
it; and I am inclined ^o think, this unknown monk must be one of that society,
his conduct is so strange."

"You believe then, that I am willing to give faith to wonderful stories," said
Vivaldi, smiling.

"But what have you heard, that is so extraordinary, respecting this convent?
Speak low, or we may be discovered."

"Why, Signor, the story is not generally known," said Paulo in a whisper; "I
half promised never to reveal it."

"If you are under any promise of secresy," interruped Vivaldi, "I forbid you
to tell this wonderful tale, which, however, seems somewhat too bad to rest
within your brain."

"The story would fain expand itself to yours Signor," said Paulo; "and, as I
did not absolutely promise to conceal it, I am very willing to reveal it."

"Proceed, then," said Vivaldi; "but let me once more caution you to speak low."

"You are obeyed, Signor. You must know then, Maestro, that it was on the eve
of the festival of Santo Marco and about six years since." --

"Peace!" said Vivaldi. They were silent; but every thing remaining still,
Paulo, after some time ventured to proceed, though in a yet slower whisper. "It
was on the eve of the Santo Marco, and when the last bell had rung, that a
person" -- He stopped again, for a rustling sound passed near him.

"You are too late," said a sudden voice beside Vivaldi, who instantly
recognized the thrilling accents of the monk. -- "It is past midnight; she
departed an hour ago. Look to your steps!"

Though thrilled by this well known voice, Vivaldi scarcely yielded to his
feelings for a moment, but, checing the question which would have asked "who
departed?" he, by a sudden spring, endeavored to sieze the intruder, while
Paulo, in the first hurry of his alarm fired a pistol, and then hastened for
the torch. So certainly did Vivaldi believe himself to have leaped upon the
spot whence the voice proceeded, that, on reaching it, he instantly extended
his arms and searching around expected every moment to find his enemy in his
grasp.

Darkness again bafled his attempt*

"You are known," cried Vivaldi; "you shall see me at the Santa del Pianto!
What, oh! Paulo, the torch! -- the torch!"

Paulo, swift as the wind, appeared with it. "He passed up those steps in the
rock, Signor; I saw the skirts of his garments ascending!"

"Follow me, then," said Vivaldi, mounting the steps. "Away, away, Maestro!"
said Paulo, impatiently; "but for Heaven's sake, name no more the convent of
the Santa del Pianto; our lives may answer it!"

He followed to the terrace above, where Vivaldi, holding high the torch,
looked round for the monk. The place, however, as far as his eye could
penetrate, was forsaken and silent. The glare of the torch enlightened only the
rude walls of the citadel, some points of the cliff below, and some tall pines
that waved over them, leaving in doubtful gloom many a rec^ss of the ruin, and
many a tangled thicket, that spread among the rocks beyond.

"Do you perceive any person, Paulo?" said Vival di, waving the torch in the
air to rouse the flame.

"Among those arches on the left, Signor, those arches that stand duskily
beyond the citadel, I thought I saw a shadowy sort of a figure pass. He might
be a ghost, by his silence, for aught I know, Maestro; but he seems to have a
good mor^^^ instinct in taking care of himself, and to have as swift a pair of
heels to assist in carrying him off, as any Lazaro in Naples need desire

"Fewer words, and more caution!" said Vivaldi, lowering the torch, and
pointing it toward the quarter which Paulo had mentioned, "Be vigilant, and
tread lightly."

"You are obeyed, Signor; but their eyes will inform them, though their ears
refuse, while we hold a light to our steps."

"Peace, with this buffoonery!" said Vivaldi, somewhat sternly; "follow in
silence, and be on your guard."

Paulo submitted and they proceeded toward the range of arches; which
communicated with the building, whose singular structure had formerly arrested
the attention of Bonarmo, and whence Vivaldi himself had returned with such
unexpected precipitancy and consternation.

On perceiving the place he was approaching, he suddenly stopped and Paulo,
observing his agitation, and probably not relishing the adventure, endeavored
to dissuade him from further research: "For we know not who may inhabit this
gloomy place, Signor, or their numbers, and we are only two of us after all.
Besides, Signor, it was through that door, yonder;" and he pointed to the very
spot whence Vivaldi had so fearfully issued; "through that door, that I fancied
just now, I saw something pass."

"Are you certain as to this?" said Vivaldi, with increased emotion. "What was
its form?"

"It was so dusky thereabout, Maestro, that I could not distinguish."

Vivaldi's eyes were fixed upon the building, and a violent conflict of
feelings seemed to shake his soul. A few seconds decided it. "I will go on,"
said he, "and terminate, at any hazard, this state of intolerable anxiety.
Paulo, pause a moment, and consider well, whether you can depend on your
courage, for it may be severely tried. If you can descend with me in silence,
and I warn you to be wary; if you cannot, I will go alone."

"It is too late now, Signor, to ask myself that question," replied Paulo, with
a submissive air; "and if I had not settled it long ago, I should not have
followed you thus far. My courage, Signor, you never doubted before."

"Come on then," said Vivaldi. He drew his sword, and entering the narrow
door-way, the torch, which he had now resigned to Paulo, showed a stone
passage, that was, however, interminable to the eye.

As they proceeded, Paulo observed that the walls were stained in several
places with what appeared to be blood, but prudently forbore to point out this
to his master, observing the strict injunction of silence he had received.

Vivaldi stepped cautiously, and often paused to listen, after which he went on
with a quicker pace, making signs only to Paulo to follow, and be vigilant. --
The passage terminated in a staircase, that seemed to lead to vaults below.
Vivaldi remembered the light which had formerly appeared there, and, as
recollection of the past gathered on his mind, he faultered in his purpose.

Again he paused, looked back upon Paulo, but was going forward, when Paulo
himself seized his arm. -- "Stop! Signor," said he in a low voice. "Do you not
distinguish a figure standing yonder in the gloom?"

Vivaldi looked onward, and perceived indistinctly, something as of human form,
but motionless and silent.

It stood at the dusky extremity of the avenue, near the staircase. Its
garments, if garments they were, were dark; but its whole figure was so saintly
traced to the eye, that it was impossible to ascertain whether this was the
monk. Vivaldi took the light, and held it forward, endeavoring to distinguish
the object before he ventured further; but the enquiry was useless, and
resigning the torch to Paulo, he rushed on. When he reached the head of the
staircase, however, the form, whatever it might be, was gone. Vivaldi had
heard no ^oo^^t^p. Paulo pointed out the exact spot where it had ^^ood, but no
vestige of it appeared. Vivaldi called loudly upon the monk, but he heard only
the lengthening echoes of his own voice revolving among the chambers below;
and, after hesitating a while on the head of the stairs, he descended.

Paulo had not followed down many steps, when he called out, "It is there!
Signor; I see it again! and now again! and now it flits away through the door
that opens to the vaults!"

Vivaldi pursued so swiftly, that Paulo could scarcely follow fast enough with
the light; and, as at length he rested to take breath, he perceived himself in
the same spacious chamber to which he had formerly descended. At this moment
Paulo perceived his countenance change. "You are ill, Signor," said he, "In the
name of our holy Saint, let us quit this hideous place. Its inhabitants can be
nothing good, and no good can come of our remaining here."

Vivaldi made no reply; he drew breath with difficulty, and his eyes remained
fixed on the ground, till a noise, like the creaking of a heavy hinge, rose in
a distant part of the vault. Paulo turned his eye, at the same instant, toward
the place whence it came, and they both perceived a door in the wall ^lowly
opened and immediately closed again, as if the person within had feared to be
discovered. Each believed, from the transient view he had of it, that this was
the fame figure which had appeared on the staircase, and that it was the monk
himself. Reanimated by this belief, Vivaldi's nerves were instantly r^braced,
and he sprang to the door, which was unfastened and yielded immediately to his
impetuous hand, "You shall not deceive me now," cried he, as he entered;
"Paulo! keep guard at the door!"

He looked round the second vault, in which he now found himself, but no person
appeared; he examined the place, and particularly the walls, without
discovering any aperture, either of door or window, by which the figure could
have quitted the chamber; a strongly grated casement, placed near the roof, was
all that admitted air and probably light. Vivaldi was astonished! "Have you
seen any thing pass?" said he to Paulo.

"Nothing, Maestro," replied the servant.

"This is almost incredible," exclaimed, Vivaldi; "'it is certain, this form can
be nothing human!"

"If so, Signor," observed Paulo, "why should it fear us? as surely it does; or
why should it have fled?"

"That is not so certain," rejoined Vivaldi; "it may have fled only to lead us
into evil. But bring hither the torch; here is something in the wall which I
would examine."

Paulo obeyed. It was merely a ruggedness in the stones, not the partition of a
door, that had excited his curiosity. "This is inexplicable," exclaimed
Vivaldi, after a long pause. "What motive could any human being have for thus
tormenting me?"

"Or any being superhuman, either, my Signor?" said Paulo.

"I am warned of evils that await me," continued Vivaldi, musing: "of events
that are regularly fulfilled; the being who warms me, crosses my path
perpetually, yet, with the cunning of a demon, as constantly eludes my grasp,
and baffles my pursuit! It is incomprehensible, by what means he glides thus
away from my eye, and fades, as if into air, at my approach! He is repeatedly
in my presence, yet is never to be found?"

"It is most true, Signor," said Paulo, "that he is never to be found, and
therefore let me entreat you to give up the pursuit. This place is enough to
make one believe in the horrors of purgatory? Let us go, Signor."

"What but spirit could have quitted this vault so mysteriously," continued
Vivaldi, not attending to Paulo; "what but spirit!" --

"I would fain prove," said the servant, "that substance can quit it as easily;
I would fain evaporate through that door myself."

He had scarcely spoken the words, when the door closed, with a thundering clap
that echoed through all the vaults; and Vivaldi and Paulo stood for a moment
aghast! and then both hastened to open it, and to leave the place. Their
consternation may be easily conceived, when they found that all their efforts
at the door were ineffectual. The thick wood was inlaid with solid bars of
iron; and was of such unconquerable strength, that it evidently guarded what
had been designed for a prison, and appeared to be the keep or dungeon of the
ancient fort.

"Ah, Signor mio!" said Paulo," if this was a spirit, it is plain he knew we
were not so, by his luring us hither. Would we could exchange natures with him
for a moment; for I know not how, as mere mortal men, we can ever squeeze,
ourselves out o^ this scrape. You must allow, Maestro, that this was not one of
the evils he warned you of; or, if he did, it was through my organs, for I
entreated you" --

"Peace, good Signor Buffo!" said Vivaldi; "a truce with this nonsense, and
assist in searching for some means of escape."

Vivaldi again examined the walls, and as unsuccessfully as before; but in one
corner of the vault ^ay an object, which seemed to tell the fate of one who had
been confined here, and to hint his own: it was a garment covered with blood.
Vivaldi and his servant discovered it at the same instant; and a dreadful
foreboding of their own distin^ fixed them, for some moments, to the spot.
Vivaldi first recovered himself, when instead of yielding to despondency, all
his faculties were aroused to divise some means for escaping; but Paulo's hopes
seemed buried beneath the dreadful vestments upon which he still gazed. "Ah, my
Signor!" said he, at length, in a faultering accent, "who shall dare to raise
that garment? What if it should conceal the mangled body whose blood has
stained it!"

Vivaldi, shudderingly, turned to look on it again.

"It moves!" exclaimed Paulo; "I see it move!" as he said which, he started to
the opposite side of the chamber. Vivaldi stepped a few paces back, and as
quickly returned; when, determined to know the event at once, ^e raised the
garment upon the point of his sword, and perceived, beneath, other remains of
dress, heaped high together, while even the floor below was stained with gore.

Believing that fear had deceived the eyes of Paulo, Vivaldi watched this
horrible spectacle for some time, but without perceiving the least motion; when
he became convinced, that not any remains of life were shrouded beneath it, and
that it contained only articles of dress, which had belonged to some
unfortunate person, who had probably been decoyed hither for plunder, and
afterward murdered. This belief, and the repugnance he felt to dwell upon the
spectacle, prevented him from examining further, and he turned away to a remote
part of the vault. A conviction of his own fate, and of his servant's, filled
his mind for a while with despair. It appeared that he had been ensnared by
robbers, till, as he recollected the circumstances which had attended his
entrance, and several peculiar occurrences connected with the arch*way, this
conjecture seemed highly improbable: It was unreasonable, that robbers should
have taken the trouble to decoy, when they might at first have seized him;
still more so, that they would have persevered so long in the attempt; and most
of all, that when he had formerly been in their power, they should have
neglected their opportunity, and suffered him to leave the ruin unmolested.
Yet, granting that all this, improbable as it was, were, however, possible, the
solemn warnings and predictions of the monk, so frequently delivered, and so
faithfully fulfilled, could have no connection with the schemes of banditti. It
appeared, therefore, that Vivaldi was not in the hands of robbers; or, if he
were, that the monk, at least, had no connection with them; yet it was certain
that he had just heard the voice of this monk beneath the arch; that his
servant had said, he saw the vestments of one ascending the steps of the fort;
and that they had both reason, afterward, to believe it was his shadowy
figure, which they had pursued to the very chamber where they were now confined.

As Vivaldi considered all these circumstances, his perplexity increased, and
he was more than ever inclined to believe, that the form, which had assumed the
appearance of a monk, was something super-human.

"If this being had appeared only," said he to himself, "I should, perhaps,
have thought it the perturbed spirit of him, who doubtless has been murdered
here, and that it led me hither to discover the deed, that his bones might be
removed to holy ground; but this monk, or whatever it is, was neither silent,
nor apparently anxious concerning himself; he spoke only of events connected
with my peace, and predicted of the future, as well as reverted to the past! If
he had either hinted of himself, or had been wholly silent, his appearance, and
manner of eluding pursuit, is so extraordinary, that I should have yielded, for
once, perhaps, to the tales of our grandfathers, and thought he was the spectre
of a murdered person."

As Vivaldi expressed his incredulity, however, he returned to examine the
garment once more, when, as he raised it, he observed, what had before escaped
his notice, black drapery mingled with the heap beneath; and, on lifting this
also on the point of his sword, he perceived part of the habiliment of a monk!
He started at the discovery, as if he had seen the apparition, which had so
long been tempting his credulity. Here were the vest and scapulary, rent and
stained with blood! Having gazed for a moment, he let them drop upon the heap;
when Paulo, who had been silently observing him, exclaimed,

"Signor! that should be the garment of the demon who led us hither. Is it a
winding sheet for us, Maestro? Or was it one for the body he inhabited while on
earth!"

"Neither, I trust," replied Vivaldi, endeavoring to command the perturbation
he suffered, and turning from the spectacle; "therefore we will try once more
to regain our liberty."

This was a design, however, beyond his accomplishment; and having again
attacked the door, raised Paulo to the grated window, and vociferated for
release with his utmost strength, in which he was very ably seconded by Paulo,
he abandoned for the present all further attempts, and, weary and desponding,
threw himself on the ground of the dungeon.

Paulo bitterly lamented his master's rashness in penetrating to this remote
spot, and bewailed the probability of their being famished.

"For supposing, Signor, that we were not decoyed hither for plunder and
butchery, and supposing that we are not surrounded by malicious spirits, which
San Januarius forbid I should take upon me to affirm is impossible! supposing
all this, Signor, yet still there remains almost a certainty of our being
starved to death; for how is it possible that any body can hear our cries, in a
place so remote from all resort, and buried, as one may say, under ground as
this is?"

"Thou art an excellent comforter," said Vivaldi, groaning.

"You must allow, Signor, that you are as excellent a conductor."

Vivaldi gave no answer, but lay on the ground, abandoned to agonizing thought.
He had now leisure to consider the late words of the monk, and to conjecture,
for he was in a mood for conjecturing the worst, that they not only alluded to
Ellena, but that his saying, "she had departed an hour ago," was a figurative
manner of telling that she had died then. This was a conjecture which dispelled
almost all apprehension for himself. He started from the ground, and paced his
prison with quick and unequal steps; it was now no longer a heavy despondency
that oppressed him, but an acute anxiety that stung him, and with the tortures
of suspense, brought also that of passionate impatience and horror concerning
the fate of Ellena. The longer he dwelt upon the possibility of her death, the
more probable it appeared. The monk had already forewarned him of the death of
Bianchi; and when he recollected the suspicious circumstances which had
attended it, his terrors for Ellena increased. The more he yielded to his
feelings, the more violent they became, till at length, his ungovernable
impatience and apprehensions arose almost to frenzy.

Paulo forgot for a while his own situation in the superior sufferings of his
master, and now, at least endeavored to perform the offices of a comforter,
for he tried to calm Vivaldi's mind, by selecting the fairest circumstances for
hope which the subject admitted, and he passed without noticing, or, if
noticing, only lightly touched upon the most prominent possibilities of evil.
His master, however, was insensible to all he said, till he mentioned again the
convent del Pianto; and this subject, as it seemed connected with the monk, who
had hinted the fate of Ellena, interested the unhappy Vivaldi, who withdrew
awhile from his own reflection, to listen to a recital which might assist his
conjectures.

Paulo complied with his command, but not without reluctance. He looked round
the empty vault, as if he feared that some person might be lurking in the
obscurity, who would overhear and even answer him.

"We are tolerably retired here too, Signor," said he, recollecting himself;
"one may venture to talk secrets with little danger of being discovered.
However, Maestro, it is best to make matters quite sure; and therefore, if you
will please to take a seat on the ground, I will stand beside you and relate
all I know of the convent of Our Lady of Tears, which is not much after all."

Vivaldi having seated himself, and bidden Paulo do the same, the servant began
in a low voice -- "It was on the vigil of the Santo Marco, just after the last
vesper-bell had tolled -- You never was at the Santa Maria del Pianto, Signor,
or you would know what a gloomy old church it has -- It was in a confessional
in one of the side ailes of this church, and just after the last bell had
ceased, that a person, so muffled up that neither shape nor face could be
distinguished, came and placed himself on the steps of one of the boxes
adjoining the confessional chair; but if he had been as airily dressed as
yourself, Signor, he might have been just as well concealed; for the dusky aile
is lighted only by one lamp, which hangs at the end next the painted window,
except when the tapers at the shrine of San Antonio happen to be burning at the
other extremity, and even then the place is almost as gloomy as this vault. But
that is, no doubt contrived for the purpose, that people may not blush for the
sins they confess; and in good faith, this is an accommodation which may bring
more money to the poors' box, for the monks have a shrewd eye that way, and" --

"You have dropped the thread of your story," said Vivaldi.

"True, Signor, let me recollect where I lost it -- Oh! at the steps of the
confessional: -- the stranger knelt down upon them, and for some time poured
such groans into the ear of the confessor, as were heard all along the aile.
You are to know, Signor, that the brothers of Santa del Pianto are of the order
of Black Penitents; and people who have more than ordinary sins to confess,
sometimes go there, to consult with the grand penitentiary himself, what is to
be done. Now it happened that Father Ansaldo, the grand penitentiary himself
was in the chair, as is customary on the vigil of the Santo Marco; and he
gently reproved the penitent for bewailing so loud, and bade him take comfort;
when the other replied only by a groan deeper than before, but it was not so
loud, and then proceeded to confess. But what he did confess, Signor, I know
not; for the confessor, you know, never must divulge, except, indeed, on very
extraordinary occasions. It was, however, something so very strange and
horrible, that the grand penitentiary suddenly quitted the chair, and before he
reached the cloisters he fell into strong convulsions. On recovering himself,
he asked the people about him, whether the penitent who had visited such a
confessional, naming it, was gone; adding, that if he was still in the church,
it was proper he should be detained. He descri^ed, at the same time, as well as
he could, the sort of figure he had dimly seen approaching the confessional
just before he had received the confession, at recollecting which, he seemed
ready to go off again into his convulsions. One of the fathers, who had crossed
the aile on his way to the cloisters, upon the first alarm of Ansaldo's
disorder, remembered that a person, such as was described, had passed him
hastily. He had seen a tall figure, muffled up in the habit of a white friar,
gliding swiftly along the aile, toward the door that opened into the outer
door of the convent; but he was himself too much engaged to notice the stranger
particularly. Father Ansaldo thought this must be the person; and the porter
was summoned, and asked whether he had observed such an one pass. He affirmed
that he had not seen any person go forth from the gate within the last quarter
of an hour; which might be true enough, you know, Signor, if the rogue had been
off his post. But he further said, that no one had entered, during the whole
evening, habited in white, as the stranger was described to be: so the porter
proved himself to be a vigilant watchman; for he must have been asleep too, or
how could this personage have entered the convent, and left it again, without
being seen by him!"

"In white, was he?" said Vivaldi; "if he had been in black, I should have
thought this must have been the monk my tormentor."

"Why, you know, Signor, that occurred to me before," observed Paulo, "and a
man might easily change his dress if that were all."

"Proceed," said Vivaldi.

"Hearing this account from the porter," continued Paulo, "the Fathers believed
one and all, that the stranger must be secreted within the walls; and the
convent, with every part of the precincts, was searched; but no person was
found!"

"This must certainly be the monk," said Vivaldi, notwithstanding the
difference of his habit; there surely cannot be two beings in the world, who
would conduct themselves in this same mysterious manner!"

He was interrupted by a low sound, which seemed to his distracted fancy, to
proceed from a dying person. Paulo also heard it; he started, and they both
listened with intense and almost intolerable expectation.

"Ah!" said Paulo at length, "it was only the wind.

"It was no more," said Vivaldi; proceed therefore.

"From the period of this strange confession,' 'resumed Paulo, "Father Ansaldo
was never properly himself; he" --

"Doubtless the crime confessed related to himself," observed Vivaldi.

"Why, no, Signor, I never heard that that was the case; and some remarkable
circumstances, which followed, se^med to prove it otherwise. About a month
after the time I have mentioned, on the eveing o^ a sultry day, when the monks
were retiring from the last service" --

"Hark!" cried Vivaldi.

"I hear whispers," said Paulo, whispering himself.

"Be still" said Vivaldi.

They listened attentively, and heard a murmuring as of voices; but could not
ascertain whether they came from the adjacent vault, or arose from beneath the
one in which they were. The sound returned at intervails; and the persons who
conversed, whatever they were, seemingly restrained their voices, as if they
feared to be heard. Vivaldi considered whether it were better to discover
himself, and call for assistance, or to remain still.

"Remember, Signor," said Paulo, "what a chance we have of being starved,
unless we venture to discover ourselves to these people or whatever they are."

"Venture!" exclaimed Vivaldi. "What has such a wretch as I to do with fear? O,
Ellena, Ellena!"

He instantly called loudly to the person whom he believed he had heard, and
was seconded by Paulo; but their continued vociferations availed them nothing;
no answer was returned; and even the indistinct sounds, which had awakened
their attention, were heard no more.

Exhausted by their efforts, they laid down on the floor of the dungeon,
abandoning all further attempts at escape till the morning light might assist
them.

Vivaldi had no further spirits to enquire for the remainder of Paulo's
narrative. Almost despairing for himself, he could not feel an interest
concerning strangers; for he had already perceived, that it could not afford
him information connected with Ell^na; and Paulo, who had roared himself
hoarse, was very willing to be silent

CHAP. VIII.
Who may she be that stea^s through yonder cloister,
And, as the beam of evening tints her veil,
Unconsciously discloses saint^y features,
Informed with the high sou^ of saintly virtue?

DURING several days after Ellena's arrival at the monastery of San Stefano,
she was not permitted to leave the room. The door was locked upon her, and not
any person appeared except the nun, who brought her a scanty portion of food,
and who was the same, that had first admitted her into that part of the convent
appropriated to the abbess.

On the fourth-day, when, probably, it was believed that her spirits were
subdued by confinement, and by her experience of the suffering she had to
expect from residence, she was summoned to the parlour. The abbess was alone,
and the air of austerity, with which she regarded Ellena, prepared the latter
to endure.

After an exordium on the heniousness of her offense and the nessessity there
was for taking measures to protect the peace and dignity of a noble family,
which her late conduct had nearly destroyed; the abbess informed her, that she
must determine either to accept the veil, or the personwhom the Marchesa di
Vivaldi had, of her great goodness, selected for her husband.

"You never can be sufficiently grateful," added the abbess, "for the
generosity the Marchesa displays, in allowing you a choice on the subject.
After the injury you have endeavored to inflict upon her and her family, you
could not expect that any indulgence would be shown you. It was natural to
suppose, that the Marchesa would punish you with severity; instead of which,
she allows you to enter into our society; or, if you have not strength of mind
sufficient to enable you to renounce a sinful world, she permits you to return
into it, and gives you a suitable partner to support you through its cares and
toils, -- a partner much more suitable to your circumstances than him, to whom
you had the temerity to lift your eye."

Ellena blushed at this coarse appeal to her pride, and persevered in a
disdainful silence. Thus to give injustice the coloring of mercy, and to acts
most absolutely tyrannical the softening tints of generosity, excited her
honest indignation. She was not, however, shocked by a discovery of the designs
formed against her, since, from the moment of her arrival at San Stefano, she
had expected something terribly severe, and had, prepared her mind to meet it
with fortitude; for she believed, that, so supported, she should weary the
malice of her enemies, and finally triumph over misfortune. It was only when
she thought of Vivaldi that her courage failed, and that the injuries she
endured seem too heavy to be long sustained.

"You are silent!" said the abbess, after a pause of expectation. "Is it
possible, then, that you can be ungrateful for the generosity of the Marchesa?
But, though you may at present be insensible to her goodness, I will forbear to
take advantage of your indiscretion, and will still allow you liberty of
choice. You ^ay retire to your chamber, to consider and to decide. But
remember, that you must abide by the determination you shall avow; and, that
you will be allowed no appeal from the alternatives which are now placed before
you. If you reject the veil, you must accept the husband offered you."

"It is unnecessary," said Ellena, with an air of dignified tranquillity, "that
I should withdraw for the purposes of considering and deciding. My resolution
is already taken, and I reject each of the offered alternatives. I will neither
condemn myself to a cloister, or to the degradation, with which I am threatened
on the other hand. Having said this, I am prepared to meet whatever suffering
you shall inflict upon me; but be assured, that my own voice never shall
sanction the evils to which I may be subjected, and that the immortal love of
justice which fills all my heart, will sustain my courage no less powerfully
than the sense of what is due to my own character. You are now acquainted with
my sentiments and my resolutions; I shall repeat them no more."

The abbess, whose surprise had thus long suffered Ellena to speak, still fixed
upon her a stern regard, as she said, "Where is it that you have learned these
heroics, and acquired the rashness which thus prompts you to avow them! -- the
boldness which enables you to insult your superior, a priestess of your holy
religion, even in her sanctuary!"

"The sanctuary is profaned," said Ellena, mildly, but with dignity: "it is
become a prison. It is only when the superior ceases to respect the precepts of
that holy religion, the precepts which teach her justice and benevolence, that
she herself is no longer respected. -- The very sentiment which bids us revere
its mild and beneficent laws, bids us also reject the violators of them: when
you command me to reverence my religion, you urge me to condemn yourself."

"Withdraw!" said the abbess, rising impatiently from her chair; "your
admonition, so becomingly delivered, shall not be forgotten."

Ellena willingly obeyed, and was led back to her cell, where she sat down
pensively, and reviewed her conduct. Her judgment approved of the frankness,
with which she had asserted her rights, and of the firmness, with which she had
reproved a woman, who had dared to demand respect from the very victim of her
cruelty and oppression. She was the more satisfied with herself, because she
had never, for an instant, forgotten her own dignity so far, as to degenerate
into the vehemence of passion, or to faulter with the weakness of fear. Her
conviction of the abbess's unworthy character was too clear to allow Ellena to
feel abashed in her presence; for she regarded only the censure of the good, to
which she had ever been tremblingly alive, as she was obdurately insensible to
that of the vicious.

Ellena, having now asserted her resolutions, determined to avoid, if possible,
all repetition of scenes like the last, and to repel, by silence only, whatever
indignity might be offered her. She knew that she must suffer, and she resolved
to endure. Of the three evils, which were placed before her, that of
confinement, with all its melancholy accompaniments, appeared considerably less
severe than either the threatened marriage, or a formal renunciation of the
world; either of which would devote her, during life, to misery, and that by
her own act. Her choice, therefore, had been easy, and the way was plain before
her. If she could endure with calmness the hardships which she could not avoid,
half their weight would be unfelt; and she now most strenuously endeavored to
attain the strength of mind, which was necessary to support such equanimity.

For several days after the late interview with the abbess, she was kept a
close prisoner; but on the fifth evening she was permitted to attend vespers.
As she walked through the garden to the chapel, the ordinary freshness of the
open air, and the verdure of the trees and shrubs were luxuries to her, who had
so long been restricted from the common blessings of nature. She followed the
nuns to a chapel where they usually performed their devotions, and was there
s^ated among the novices. The solemnity of the service, and particularly of
those parts, which were accompanied by music, touched all her heart, and
soothed and ^levated her spirit.

Among the voices of the choir, was one whose expression immediately fixed her
attention; it seemed to speak a loftier sentiment of devotion than the others,
and to be modulated by the melancholy of an heart, that had long since taken
leave of this world. Whether it swelled with the high peal of the organ, or
mingled in low and trembling accents with the sinking chorus, Ellena felt that
she understood all the feelings of the breast from which it flowed; and she
looked to the gallery where the nuns were assembled, to discover a countenance,
that might seem to accord with the sensibility expressed in the voice. As no
strangers were admitted to the chapel, some of the sisters had thrown back
their veils, and she saw little that interested her in their various faces; but
the figure and attitude of a nun, kneeling in a remote part of the gallery,
beneath a lamp, which threw its rays aslant her head, perfectly agreed with the
idea she had formed of the singer, and the sound seemed to approach immediately
from that direction. Her face was concealed by a black veil, whose
transparency, however, permitted the fairness of her complexion to appear; but
the air of her head, and the singularity of her attitude, for she was the only
person who remained kneeling, sufficiently indicated the superior degree of
fervency and penitence, which the voice had expressed.

When the hymn had ceased she rose from her knees, and Ellena, soon after,
observed her throw back her veil, discovered, by the lamp, which shed its full
light upon her features, a countenance that instantly confirmed her conjecture.
It was touched with a melancholy kind of resignation; yet grief seemed still to
occasion the paleness, and the air of languor, that prevailed over it, and
which disappeared only when the momentary energy of devotion seemed to lift her
spirit above this world, and to impart to it somewhat of a seraphic grandeur.
At those moments her blue eyes were raised toward Heaven, with such meek, yet
fervent love, such sublime enthusiasm as the heads of Guido sometimes display,
and which renewed with Ellena, all the enchanting effects of the voice she had
just heard.

While she regarded the nun with a degree of interest which rendered her
insensible to every other object in the chapel, she fancied she could perceive
the calmness in her countenance to be that of despair, rather than of
resignation; for, when her thoughts were not elevated in prayer, there was
frequently a fixedness in her look, too energetic for common suffering, or for
the temper of mind which may lead to perfect resignation. It had, however, much
that attached the sympathy of Ellena, and much that seemed to speak a
similarity of feeling. Ellena was not only soothed, but in some degree
comforted, whilst she gazed upon her; a selfishness which may, perhaps, be
pardoned, when it is considered, that she thus knew there was one human being,
at least, in the convent, who must be capable of feeling pity, and willing to
administer consolation. Ellena endeavored to meet her eye, that she might
inform her of the regard she had inspired, and express her own happiness; but
the nun was so entirely engaged by devotion, that she did not succeed.

As they left the chapel, however, the nun passed close by Ellena, who threw
back her veil, and fixed upon her a look so supplicating and expressive, that
the nun paused, and in her turn regarded the novice, not with surprise only,
but with a mixture of curiosity and compassion. A faint brush crossed her
cheek, her spirits seemed to faulter, and she was unwilling to withdraw her
eyes from Ellena: but it was necessary that she should continue in the
procession, and, bidding her farewell by a smile of ineffable pity, she passed
on to the court, while Ellena followed with attention still fixed upon the
sister, who soon disappeared beyond the doorway of the Abbess's apartment, and
Ellena had nearly reached her own, before her thoughts were sufficiently
disengaged to permit her to enquire the name of the stranger.

"It is sister Olivia whom you mean, perhaps," said her conductress.

"She is very handsome," said Ellena.

"Many of the sisters are so," replied Margaritone, with an air of pique.

"Undoubtedly," said Ellena; "but she, whom I mean, has a most touching
countenance; frank, noble, full of sensibility; and there is a gentle
melancholy in her eye, which can not but interest all who observe her."

Ellena was so fascinated by this interesting nun, that she forgot she was
describing her to a person, whose callous heart rendered her insensible to the
influence of any countenance, except, perhaps, the commanding one of the lady
abbess; and to whom, therefore, a description of the fine traits, which Ellena
felt, was as unintelligible as would have been an Arabic inscription.

"She is passed the bloom of youth," continued Ellena, still anxious to be
understood; "but she retains all its interesting graces, and adds to them the
dignity of" --

"If you mean that she is of middle age," interrupted Margaritone, peevishly,
"it is sister Olivia you mention, for we are all younger than she is."

Ellena, raising her eyes almost unconsciously, as the nun spoke this, fixed
them upon a face sallow, meagre, seemingly near fifty years an inhabitant of
this world; and she could scarcely suppress the surprise she felt, on
perceiving such wretched vanity lingering among the chilled passions of so
repulsive a frame, and within the sequestered shade of a cloister, Margaritone,
still jealous of the praise bestowed on Olivia, repelled all further enquiry,
and, having attended Ellena to her cell, locked her up for the night.

On the following evening Ellena was again permitted to attend vespers, and, on
the way to the chapel, the hope of seeing her interesting favorite reanimated
her spirits. In the same part of the gallery, as on the preceding night, she
again appeared, and kneeling, as before, beneath the lamp, in private orison,
for the service was not begun.

Ellena endeavored to subdue the impatience she felt to express her regard,
and to be noticed by the holy sister, till she should have finished. When the
nun rose, and observed Ellena, she lifted her veil, and, fixing on her the same
enquiring eye, her countenance brightened into a smile so full of compassion
and intelligence, that Ellena, forgetting the decorums of the place, left her
seat to approach her; it seemed as if the soul, which beamed forth in that
smile, had long been acquainted with hers. As she advanced, the nun dropped her
veil, a reproof which she immediately understood, and she withdrew to her seat;
but her attention remained fixed on the nun during the whole service.

At the conclusion, when they left the chapel, and she saw Olivia pass without
noticing her, Ellena could scarcely restrain her tears; she returned in deep
dejection to her room. The regard of this n^n was not only delightful, but
seemed necessary to her heart, and she dwelt, with fond perseverance, on the
smile that had expressed so much, and which threw one gleam of comfort, even
through the bars of her prison.

Her reveries was soon interrupted by a light step, that approached her cell,
and in the next moment the door was unlocked, and Olivia herself appeared.
Ellena rose with emotion to meet her; the nun held forth her hand to receive
hers.

"You are unused to confinement," said she, curtsying mournfully, and placing
on the table a little basket containing refreshment, "and our hard fare" --

"I understand you," said Ellena, with a look expressive of her gratitude; "you
have a heart that can pity, though you inhabit these walls; you have suffered
too and know the delicate generosity of softening the sorrows of others, by any
attention that may tell them your sympathy. O! if I could express how much the
sense of this affects me!"

Tears interrupted her. Olivia pressed her hand, looked steadily upon her face,
and was somewhat agitated, but she soon recovered apparent tranquillity, and
said, with a serious smile, "You judge rightly, my sister, respecting my
sentiments, however you may do concerning my sufferings. My heart is not
insensible to pity, nor to you my child. You were designed for happier days
than you can hope to find within these cloisters!"

She checked herself as if she had allowed too much, and then added, "But you
may, perhaps, be peaceful; and since it consoles you to know you have a friend
near you, believe me that friend -- but believe it in silence. I will visit you
when I am permitted -- but do not enquire for me; and if my visits are short,
do not press me to lengthen them."

"How good is this!" said Ellena, in a faultering voice. "How sweet too it is!
you will visit me, and I am pitied by you!"

"Hush!" said the nun, expressively; "no more; I may be observed. Good night,
my sister; may your slumbers be light!"

Ellena's heart sunk. She had not spirits to say, "Good night!" but her eyes,
covered with tears, said more. The nun turned her own away suddenly, and,
pressing her hand in silence, left the cell. Ellena, firm and tranquil under
the insults of the abbess, was now melted into tears by the kindness of a
friend. These gentle tears were refreshing to her long oppressed spirits, and
she indulged them. Of Vivaldi she thought with more composure than she had done
since she left the villa Alti^ri; and something like hope began to revive in
her heart, though reflection offered nothing to support it.

On the following morning, she perceived that the door of her cell had not been
closed. She rose impatiently, and, not without a hope of liberty, immediately
passed it. The cell opening upon a short passage, which communicated with the
main building, and which was shut up by a door, was secluded, and almost
insulated from every other chamber; and this door being now secured, Ellena was
as trully a prisoner as before. It appeared then, that the nun had omitted to
fasten the cell only for the purpose of allowing her more space to walk in the
passage, and she was grateful for the attention. Still more she was so, when,
having traversed it, she perceived one extremity terminate in a narrow
staircase, that appeared to lead to other chambers.

She ascended the winding steps hastily, and found they led only to a door,
opening into a small room, where nothing remarkable appeared, till she
approached the windows, and beh^ld thence an horizon, and a landscape spread
below, whose grandeur awakened all her heart. The consciousness of her prison
was lost, while her eyes ranged over the wide and freely sublime scene without.
She p^rceived that this chamber was within a small turret, projecting from an
angle of the convent over the wa^ls, and suspended, as in air, above the vast
precipices of granite, that formed part of the mountain. These precipices were
broken into cliffs, which, in some places, impended f^r above their bas^, and
in others, ^ose, in nearly perpendicular lines, to the walls of the monastery,
which they supported. Ellena, with a dreadful pleasure, looked down them,
shagged as they were with larch, and frequently darkened by lines of gigantic
pine bending along the rocky ledges, till her eye rested on the thick chestnut
woods that extended over their winding base, and which softening to the plains,
seemed to ^orm a gradation between the variegated cultivation there, and the
awful wildness of the rocks above. Round these extensive plains were tumbled
the mountains, of various shape and attitude, which Ellena had admired on her
approach to San Stefano; some shaded with forests of olive and almond trees,
but the greater part abandoned to the flocks, which, in summer, feed on their
aromatic herbage, and on the approach of winter, descend to the sheltered
plains of the Tavogliere di Puglia.

On the left opened the dreadful pass which she had traversed, and the thunder
of whose waters now murmured at a distance. The accumulation of over-topping
points, which the mountains of this dark perspective exhibited, presented an
image of grandeur superior to any thing she had seen while within the pass
itself.

To Ellena, whose mind was capable of being highly elevated, or sweetly
soothed, by scenes of nature, the discovery of this little turret was an
important circumstance. Hither she could come, and her soul, refreshed by the
views it afforded, would acquire strength to bear her with equanimity, through
the persecutions that might await her. Here, gazing upon the stupendous imagery
around her, looking, as it were, beyond the awful veil which obscures the
features of the Deity, and conceals Him from the eyes of his creatures,
dwelling as with a present God in the midst of his sublime works; with a mind
thus elevated, how insignificant would appear to her the transactions, and the
sufferings of this world! How poor the boasted power of man, when the fall of a
single cliff from these mountains would with ease destroy thousands of his race
assembled on the plains below! How would it avail them, that they were
accoutred for battle, armed with all the instruments of destruction that human
invention ever fashioned? Thus man, the giant who now held her in captivity,
would shrink to the diminutiveness of a fairy; and she would experience, that
his utmost force was unable to enchain her soul, or compel her to fear him,
while he was destitute of virtue.

Ellena's attention was recalled from the scene without by a sound from within
the gallery, and she then heard a key turning in the door of the passage.
Fearing that it was sister Margaritone who approached, and who, informed by her
absence of the consolatory turret she had discovered, would perhaps debar her
from ever returning to it, Ellena descended with a palpitating heart, and found
that nun in the cell. Surprise and severity were in her countenance, when she
enquired by what means Ellena had unlocked the door, and whether she had been.

Ellena answered without any prevarication, that she had found the door
unfastened, and that she had visited the turret above; but she forebore to
express a wish to return thither, judging that such an expression would
certainly exclude her in future. Margaritone, after sharply rebuking her for
prying beyond the passage, and setting down the breakfast she had brought, left
the room, the door of which she did not forget to secure. Thus Ellena was at
once deprived of so innocent a means of consolation as her pleasant turret had
afforded.

During several days, she saw only the austere nun, except when she attended
vespers; where, however, she was so vigilantly observed, that she feared to
speak with Olivia, even by h^^ eyes. Olivia's were often fixed upon her face,
and with a kind of expression which Ellena, when she did venture to look at
her, could not perfectly interpret. It was not only of pity, but of anxious
curiosity, and of something also like fear. A blush would sometimes wander over
her cheek, which was succeeded by an extreme paleness, and by an air of such
universal langour as precedes a fainting fit: but the exercises of devotion
seemed frequently to recall her fleeting spirits, and to elevate them with hope
and courage.

When she left the chapel, Ellena saw Olivia no more that night; but on the
following morning she came with breakfast to the cell. A character of peculiar
sadness was on her brow.

"O! how glad I am to see you!" said Ellena* "and how much I have regretted
your long absence! I was obliged to remember constantly what you had enjoined,
to forbear enquiring after you."

The nun replied with a melancholy smile, "I am come in obedience to our lady
abbess," said she, as she seated herself on Ellena's mattress.

"And did you not wish to come?" said Ellena, mournfully.

"I did wish it," replied Olivia; "but" -- and she hesitated.

"Whence then this reluctance?" enquired Ellena Olivia was silent a moment.

"You are a messenger of evil news!" said Ellena; "you are only reluctant to
afflict me."

"It is as you say," replied Olivia; "I am only reluctant to afflict you; and I
fear you have too many attachments to the world, to allow you ^o receive,
without sorrow, what I have to communicate. I am ordered to prepare you for the
vows, and to say, that since you have rejected the husband which was proposed
to you, you are to accept the veil; that many of the customary forms are to be
dispensed with; and that the ceremony of taking the black veil, will follow
without delay that of receiving the white one."

The nun paused; and Ellena said, "You are an unwilling bearer of this cruel
message; and I reply only to the lady abbess, when I declare, that I never will
accept either; that force may send me to the altar, but that it never shall
compel me to utter vows which my heart abhors; and if I am constrained to
appear there, it shall be only to protest against her tyranny, and against the
form intended to sanction it."

To Olivia this answer was so far from being displeasing, that it appeared to
give her satisfaction.

"I dare not applaud your resolution," said she; "but I will not condemn it.
You have, no doubt, connections in the world which would render a seclusion
from it afflicting. You have relations, friends, from whom it would be dreadful
to part?"

"I have neither," said Ellena, sighing.

"No! Can that be possible? and yet you are so unwilling to retire!"

"I have only one friend," replied Ellena, "and it is of him they would deprive
me!"

"Pardon, my love, the abruptness of these enquiries," said Olivia; "yet,
whi^^* I entreat your forgiveness, I am inclined to (...) again, and to ask
your name."

"That is a question I will readily answer. My name is Ellena di Rosalba."

"How?" said Olivia, with an air of deliberation; "Ellena di" --

"Di Ros^lba," repeated her companion; "and permit me to ask your motive for
the enquiry; do you know any person of my name?"

"No," replied the nun, mournfully: "but your features have some resemblance to
those of a friend I once had."

As she said this, her agitation was apparent, and she arose to go. "I must not
lengthen my visit, lest I should be forbidden to repeat it," said she. "What
answer shall I give to the abbess? If you are determined to reject the veil,
allow me to advise you to soften your refusal as much as possible. I am,
perhaps, better acquainted with her character than you are; and O, my sister! I
would not see you pining away your existence in this solitary cell."

"How much am I obliged by the interest you express for my welfare," said
Ellena, "and by the advice you offer! I will yield my judgment in this instance
to yours; you shall modulate my refusal as you think proper: but remember that
it must be absolute: and beware, lest the abbess should mistake gentleness for
irresolution."

"Trust me, I will be cautious in all that relates to you," said Olivia.
"Farewell! I will visit you, if possible, in the evening. In the mean time the
door shall be left open, that you may have more air and prospect than this cell
affords. That staircase leads to a pleasant chamber."

"I have visited it already," replied Ellena, "and have to thank you for the
goodness which permitted me to do so. To go thither will greatly soothe my
spirits; if I had some book, and my drawing-instruments, I could almost forget
my sorrows there."

"Could you so?" said the nun, with an affectionate smile. "Adieu! I will
endeavor to see you in the evening. If sister Margaritone returns, be careful
not to enquire for me; nor once ask her for the little indulgence I give you."

Olivia withdraw, and Ellena retired to the chamber above, where she lost for a
while all sense of sorrow amidst the great scenery, which its window exhibited.

At noon, the step of Margaritone summoned Ellena from her retreat, and she was
surprised that no reproof followed this second discovery of her absence.
Margaritone only said, that the abbess had the goodness to permit Ellena to
dine with the novices, and that she came to conduct her to their table.

Ellena did not rejoice in this permission, preferring to remain in her
solitary turret, to the being exposed to the examining eyes of strangers; and
she followed dejectedly, through the silent passages to the apartment where
they were assembled. She was not l^ss surprised than embarrassed to observe, in
the manners of young people residing in a convent, an absence of that decorum,
which includes beneath its modest shade every grace that ought to adorn the
female character, like the veil which gives dignity to their air and softness
to their features. When Ellena entered the room, the eyes of the whole company
were immediately fixed upon her; the young ladies began to whisper and smile,
and showed, by various means, that she was the subject of conversation, not
otherwise than censorious. No one advanced to meet and to encourage her, to
welcome her to the table, or still less display one of those nameless graces,
with which a generous and delicate mind delights to re-animate the modest and
the unfortunate.

Ellena took a chair in silence; and, though she had at first felt forlorn and
embarrassed by the impertinent manners of her companions, a consciousness of
innocence gradually revived her spirits, and enabled her to resume an air of
dignity, which repressed this rude presumption.

Ellena returned to her cell, for the first time, with eagerness. Margaritone
did not fasten the door of it, but she was careful to secure that of the
passage; and even this small indulgence she seemed to allow with a surly
reluctance, as if compelled to obey the command of a superior. The moment she
was gone, Ellena withdrew to her pleasant turret, where, after having suffered
from the coarse manners of the novices, her gratitude was the more lively, when
she perceived the delicate attention of her beloved nun. It appeared that she
had visited the chamber in Ellena's absence, and had caused to be brought
thither a chair and a table, on which were placed some books, and a knot of
fragrant flowers. Ellena did not repress the grateful tears, which the generous
feelings of Olivia excited; and she forbore, for some moments, to examine the
books, that the pleasing emotions she experienced might not be interrupted.

On looking into these books, however, she perceived that some of them treated
of mystical subjects, which she laid aside with disappointment; but in others
she observed a few of the best Italian poets, and a volume or two of
Guicciardini's history. She was somewhat surprised, that the poets should have
found their way to the library of a nun, but was too much pleased with the
discovery to dwell on the enquiry.

Having arranged her books, and set her little room in order, she seated
herself at a window, and, with a volume of Tasso, endeavored to banish every
painful remembrance from her mind. She continued wandering in the imaginary
scenes of the poet, till the fading light recalled her to those of reality. The
sun was set, but the mountain-tops were still lighted up by his beams, and a
tint of glorious purple colored all the west, and began to change the snowy
points on the horizon. The silence and repose of the vast scene, promoted the
tender melancholy that prevailed in her heart; she thought of Vivaldi, and wept
-- of Vivaldi, whom she might, perhaps, never see again, though she doubted not
that he would be indefatigable in searching for her. Every particular of their
last conversation, when he had so earnestly lamented the approaching
separation, even while he allowed of its propriety, came to her mind; and while
she witnessed, in imagination, the grief and distraction, which her mysterious
departure and absence must have occasioned him, the fortitude, with which she
had resisted her own sufferings, yielded to the picture of his.

The vesper-bell, at length, summoned her to prepare for mass, and she
descended to her cell to await the arrival of her conductress. It was
Margaritone, who soon appeared; but in the chapel she, as usual, saw Olivia,
who, when the service had concluded, invited her into the garden of the
convent. There, as she walked beneath the melancholy cypresses, that ranged on
either side the long walks, formed a majestic canopy, almost excluding the
evening twilight. Olivia conversed with her on serious, but general topics,
carefully avoiding any mention of the abbess, and of the affairs of Ellena. The
latter, anxious to learn the effect of her repeated rejection of the veil,
ventured to make some enquires, which the nun immediately discouraged, and as
cautiously checked the grateful effusions of her young friend for the
attentions she had received.

Olivia accompanied Ellena to her cell, and there no longer scrupled to relieve
her from uncertainty. With a mixture of frankness and discretion, she related
as much of the conversation, that had passed between herself and the abbess, as
it appeared necessary for Ellena to know, from which it seemed that the former
was as obstinate, as the latter was firm.

"Whatever may be your resolution," added the nun, "I earnestly advise you, my
sister, to allow the Superior some hope of compliance, lest she should proceed
to extremities."

"And what extremity can be more terrible," replied Ellena, "than either of
those to which she would now urge me? Why should I descend to practice
dissimulation?"

"To save yourself from undeserved sufferings," said Olivia mournfully.

"Yes, but I should then incur deserved ones," observed Ellena; "and forfeit
such peace of mind as my oppress^^ never could restore to me." As she said
this, she looked at the nun with an expression of gentle reproach and
disappointment.

"I applaud the justness of your sentiment," replied Olivia, regarding her with
tenderest compassion. -- "Alas! that a mind so noble should be subjected to the
power of injustice and depravity!"

"Not subjected," said Ellena, "do not say subjected. I have accustomed myself
to contemplate these sufferings; I have chosen the least of such as were given
to my choice, and I will endure them with fortitude; and can you then say that
I am subjected?"

"Alas, my sister! you know not what you promise," replied Olivia; "you do not
comprehend the sufferings which may be preparing for you."

As she spoke, her eyes filled with tears, and she withdrew them from Ellena,
who, surprised at the extreme concern on her countenance, entreated she would
explain herself.

"I am not certain myself as to this point," said Olivia; "and if I were, I
should not dare to explain it."

"Not dare!" repeated Ellena, mournfully. "Can benevolence like yours know
fear, when courage is necessary to prevent evil?"

"Enquire no further," said Olivia; but no blush of conscious duplicity stained
her cheek. "It is sufficient that you understand the consequence of open
resistance to be terrible, and that you consent to avoid it."

"But how avoid it, my beloved friend, without incurring a consequence which,
in my apprehension, would be yet more dreadful? How avoid it, without either
subjecting myself to a hateful marriage, or accepting the vows? Either of these
events would be more terrible to me, than any thing with which I may be
menaced."

"Perhaps not," said the nun, "Imagination cannot draw the horrors of -- But,
my sister, let me repeat, that I would save you! O, how willingly save you from
the evils preparing! and that the only chance of doing so is, by prevailing
with you to abandon at least the appearance of resistance."

"Your kindness deeply affects me," said Ellena; "and I am fearful of appearing
insensible of it, when I reject your advice; yet I cannot adopt it. The very
dissimulation, which I should employ in self-defence, might be a means of
involving me in destruction."

As Ellena concluded, and her eyes glanced upon the nun, unaccountable
suspicion occurred to her, that Olivia might be insincere, and that, at this
very moment, when she was advising dissimulation, she was endeavoring to draw
Ellena into some snare, which the abbess had laid. She sickened at this
dreadful supposition, and dismissed it without suffering herself to examine its
probability. That Olivia, from whom she had received so many attentions, whose
countenance and manners announced so fair a mind, and for whom she had
conceived so much esteem and affection, should be cruel and treacherous, was a
suspicion that gave her more pain than the actual imprisonment in which she
suffered; and when she looked again upon her face, Ellena was consoled by a
clear conviction, that she was utterly incapable of perfidy.

"If it were possible that I could consent to practice deceit," resumed Ellena,
after a long pause, "what could it avail me? I am entirely in the power of the
abbess, who would soon put my sincerity to the proof; when a discovery of my
duplicity would only provoke her vengeance, and I should be punished even for
having sought to avoid injustice."

"If deceit is at any time excusable," replied Olivia, reluctantly, "it is when
we pract^^^ ^t in self-defence. There are some rare situations, when it may be
resorted to without our incurring ignominy, and yours is one of those. But I
will acknowledge, that all the good I expect is from the delay which
temporizing may procure you. The Superior, when she understands there is a
probability of obtaining your consent to her wishes, may be willing to allow
you the usual time of preparation for the veil, and meanwhile something may
occur to rescue you from your present situation."

"Ah! could I but believe so!" said Ellena; "but alas! what power can rescue
me? And I have not one relative remaining even to attempt my deliverance. To
what possibility do you allude?"

"The Marchesa may relent."

"Does, then, your possibility of good rest with her, my dear friend? If so, I
am in despair again; for such a chance of benefit, there would certainly be
little policy in forfeiting one's integrity."

"There are also other possibilities, my sister," said Olivia; "but, hark! what
bell is that? It is the chime which assembles the nuns in the apartment of the
abbess, where she dispenses her evening benediction. My absence will be
observed. Good night, my sister. Reflect on what I have advised; and remember,
I conjure you, to consider, that the consequence of your decision must be
solemn, and may be fatal?"

The nun spoke this with a look and emphasis so extraordinary, that Ellena at
once wished and dreaded to know more; but before she had recovered from her
surprise, Olivia had le^t the room.

CHAP. IX.
"He, like the tenant
Of some night-haunted ruin bore an aspect
Of horror, worn to habitude."
MYSTERIOUS MOTHER.
THE adventurous Vivaldi, and his servant Paulo, after passing the night of
Ellena's departure from the villa Altieri in one of the subterraneous chambers
of the fort of Palluzz^, and yielding, at length, to exhausted nature, awoke in
terror, and utter darkness, for the flambeau had expired. When a recollection
of the occurrences of the preceding evening returned, they renewed their
efforts for liberty with a^dour. The grated window was again examined, and
being found to overlook only a confined court of the fortress, no hope appeared
of escaping.

The words of the monk returned with Vivaldi's first recollections to torture
him with apprehension, that Ellena was no more; and Paulo, unable either to
console or to appease his master, sat down dejectedly beside him. Paulo had no
longer a hope to suggest, or a joke to throw away; and he could not forbear
seriously remarking that to die of hunger was one of the most horrible means of
death, of lamenting the rashness which made them liable to so sad a probability.

He was in the midst of a very pathetic oration, of which, however, his master
did not hear a single word, so wholly was his attention engaged by his own
melancholy thoughts, when, on a sudden he became silent, and then, starting to
his feet, exclaimed, "Signor, what is yonder? Do you see nothing?"

Vivaldi looked round.

"It is certainly a ray of light," continued Paulo; "and I will soon know where
it comes from."

As ^e said this he sprang forwards, and his surprise almost equalled his joy
when ^e discovered that the light issued through the door of the vault, which
stood a little open. He could scarcely believe his senses, since the door had
been strongly fastened on the preceding night, and he had not heard its
ponderous bolts undrawn. He threw it widely open, but recollecting himself,
stopped to look into the adjoining vault before he ventured forth; when Vivaldi
darted past him, and bidding him follow instantly, ascended to the day. The
courts of the fortress were silent and vacant, and Vivaldi reached the arch way
without ^aving observed a single person, breathless with speed, and scarcely
daring to believe that he had regained his liberty.

Beneath the arch he stopped to recover breath, and to consider whether he
should take the road to Naples, or to the villa Altieri, for it was yet early
morning, and at an hour when it appeared improbable that Ellena's family would
be risen. The apprehension of her death had vanished as Vivaldi's spirits
revived, which the pause of hesitation sufficiently announced: but even this
was the pause only of an instant; a strong anxiety concerning her determined
him to proceed to the villa Altieri, notwithstanding the unsuitableness of the
hour, since he could at least, reconnoitre her residence, and await till some
sign of the family having risen should appear.

"Pray, Signor," said Paulo, while his master was deliberating, "do not let us
stop here, least the enemy should appear again; and do, Signor, take the road
which is nearnest to some house where we may get breakfast, for the fear of
starving has taken such hold upon me, that it has nearly anticipated the
reality of it already."

Vivaldi immediately departed for the villa. Paulo, as he danced joyfully
along, expressed all the astonishment that filled his mind, as to the cause of
their late imprisonment and escape; but Vivaldi, who had now leisure to
consider the subject, could not assist him in explaining it. The only certainty
that appeared, was, that he had not been confined by robbers; and what interest
any person could have in imprisoning him for the night, and suffering him to
escape in the morning, did not appear.

On entering the garden at Altieri, he was surprised to observe that several of
the lower lattices were open at this early hour, but surprise changed to
terror, when, on reaching the portico, he heard a moaning of distress from the
hall, and, when, after loudly calling, he was answered by the piteous cries of
Beatrice. The hall door was fastened, and, Beatrice being unable to open it,
Vivaldi, followed by Paulo, sprang through one of the unclosed lattices; when
on reaching the hall, he found the housekeeper bound to a pillar, and learned
that Ellena had been carried off during the night by armed men.

For a moment he was almost stupefied by the shock of this intelligence, and
then asked Beatrice a thousand questions concerning the affair, without
allowing her time to answer one of them. When, however, he had patience to
listen, he learned that the ruffians were four in number; that they were
masked; that two of them had carried Ellena through the garden, while the others,
after binding Beatrice to a pillar, threatening her with death if she made any
noise, and watching over her till their comrades had secured their prize, left
her a prisoner. This was all the information she could give respecting Ellena.

Vivaldi, when he could think coolly, believed he had discovered the
instigators and the design of the whole affair, and the cause, also, of his
late confinement. It appeared that Ellena had been carried off by order of his
family, to prevent the intended marriage, and that he had been decoyed into the
fort of Paluzzi, and kept a prisoner there, to prevent him from intercepting
the scheme, which his presence at the villa Altieri would effectually have
done. He had himself spoken of his former adventure at Paluzzi; and it now
appeared, that his family had taken advantage of the curiosity he had
expressed, to lead him into the vaults. The event of this design was the more
certain, since, as the fort lay in the direct road to the villa Altieri,
Vivaldi could not go thither without being observed by the creatures of the
Marchesa, who, by an artful maneuver, might make him their prisoner, without
employing violence.

As he considered these circumstances, it appeared certain, also, that father
Schedoni was in truth the monk who had so long haunted his steps; that he was
the secret adviser of his mother, and one of the authors of the predicted
misfortunes which, it seemed, he possessed a too certain means of fulfilling.
Yet Vivaldi, while he admitted the probability of all this, reflected with new
astonishment on the conduct of Schedoni, during his interview with him in the
Marchesa's cabinet; -- the air of dignified innocence with which he had
repressed accusation, the apparent simplicity, with which he had pointed out
circumstances respecting the stranger, that seemed to make against himself; and
Vivaldi's opinion of the confessor's duplicity began to waver. "Yet what other
person," said he, "could be so intimately acquainted with my concerns, or have
an interest (...) strong for thus indefatigably thwarting me, except this
confessor, who is, no doubt, well rewarded for his perseverance? The monk can
be no other than S^hedoni, yet it is strange that he should have forborne to
disguise his person, and should appear in his mysterious office in the very
habit he usually wears!"

Whatever might be the truth as to Schedoni, it was evident that Ellena had
been carried away by order of Vivaldi's family, and he immediately returned
toward Naples with an intention of demanding her at their hands, not with any
hope of their compliance, but believing that they might accidentally afford him
some lights on the subject. If, however, he should fail to obtain any hint that
might assist him in tracing the route she had been carried, he determined to
visit Schedoni, accuse him of perfidy, urge him to a full explanation of his
conduct, and, if possible, obtain from him a knowledge of Ellena's place of
confinement.

When, at length, he obtained an interview with the Marchese, and, throwing
himself at his feet, supplicated that Ellena might be restored to her home, the
unaffected surprise of his father overwhelmed him with astonishment and
despair. The look and manner of the Marchese could not be doubted; Vivaldi was
convinced that he was absolutely ignorant of any step which had been taken
against Ellena.

"However ungraciously you have conducted yourself," said the Marchese, "my
honor has never yet been sullied by duplicity; however I may have wished to
break the unworthy connection you have formed, I should disdain to employ
artifice as the means. If you really design to marry this person, I shall make
no other effort to prevent such a measure, than by telling you the consequence
you are to expect; -- from thenceforth I will disown you for my son."

The Marchese quitted the apartment when he had said this, and Vivaldi made no
attempt to detain him. His words expressed little more than they had formerly
done, yet Vivaldi was shocked by the absolute menace now delivered. The
stronger passion of his heart, however, soon overcame their effect; and this
moment, when he began to fear that he had irrecoverably lost the object of his
dearest affection^, was not the time in which he could feel remoter evils, or
calculate the force of misfortunes which never might arrive. The nearer
interest pressed solely upon his mind, and he was conscious only to the loss of
Ellena.

The interview, which followed with his mother, was of a different character
from that which had occurred with the Marchese. The keen dart of suspicion,
however, sharpened as it was by love and despair, pierced beyond the veil of
her duplicity; and Vivaldi as quickly detected her hypocrisy as he had yielded
his conviction to the sincerity of the Marchese. But his power rested here; he
possessed no means of awakening her pity or actuating her justice, and could
not obtain even a hint, that might guide him in his search of Ellena.

Schedoni, however, yet remained to be tried; Vivaldi had no longer a doubt as
to his having caballed with the Marchesa, and that he had been an agent in
removing Ellena. Whether he was the person who haunted the ruins of Paluzzi,
still remained to be proved, for, though several circumstances seemed to
declare that he was, others, not less plausible, asserted the contrary.

On leaving the Marchesa's apartment, Vivaldi repaired to the convent of the
Spirito Santo, and enquired for father Schedoni. The lay-brother who opened the
gate, informed him that the father was in his cell, and Vivaldi stepped
impatiently into the court, requesting to be shown thither.

"I dare not leave the gate, Signor," said the brothe, "but if you cross the
court, and (...) that staircase which you see yonder beyond the door-way on
your right, it will lead you to a gallery, and the third door you will come to
is father S^hed^ni's."

Vivaldi passed on without seeing another human being, and not a sound
disturbed the silence of this sanctuary, till, as he ascended the stairs, a
feeble note of lamentation proceeded from the gallery, and he concluded i^ was
uttered by some penitent at confession.

He stopped, as he had been directed, at the third door, when, as he gently
knocked, the sound ceased, and the same profound silence returned. Vivaldi
repeated his summons, but receiving no answer, he ventured to open the door. In
the dusky cell within no person appeared, but he still looked round, expecting
to discover some one in the dubious gloom. The chamber contained little more
than a mattress, a chair, a table, and a crucifix; some books of devotion were
upon the table, one or two of which were written in unknown characters; several
instruments of torture lay beside them. Vivaldi shuddered as he hastily
examined these, though he did not comprehend the manner of their application,
and he left the chamber, without noticing any other object, and returned to the
court. The porter said, that since father Schedoni was not in his cell, he was
probably either in the church or in the gardens, for that he had not passed the
gates during the morning.

"Did he pass yester-evening?" said Vivaldi, eagerly.

"Yes, he returned to vespers," replied the brother with surprise.

"Are you certain as to that, my friend?" rejoined Vivaldi, "are you certain
that he slept in the convent last night?"

"Who is it that asks the question?" said the lay-brother, with displeasure,
"and what right has he to make it? You are ignorant of the rules of our house,
Signor, or you would perceive such questions to be unnecessary; any member of
our community is liable to be severely punished if he sleep a night without
these walls, and father S^h^doni would be the last among us so to tr^spass. He
is one of the most pious of the brotherhood; few indeed have courage to imitate
his severe example. His voluntary sufferings are sufficient for a saint. He
pass the night abroad? G^ Signor, yonder is the church, you will find him
there, perhaps!

Vivaldi did not linger to reply. "The hypocrite!" said he to himself as he
crossed to the church, which formed one side of the quadrangle; "but I will
unmask him."

The church, which he entered, was vacant and silent like the court. "Whither
can the inhabitants of this place have withdrawn themselves?" said he;
"wherever I go, I hear only the echoes of my own scotsteps; it seems as if
death reigned here over all! But, perhaps, it is one of the hours of general
meditation, and the monks have only retired to their cells."

As he paced the long aisles, he suddenly stopped to catch the startling sound
that murmured through the lofty roof; but it seemed to be only the closing of a
distant door. Yet he often looked forward into the sacred gloom, which the
painted windows threw over the remote perspective, in the expectation of
perceiving a monk. He was not long disappointed; a person appeared, standing
silently in an obscure part of the cloister, clothed in the habit of this
society, and he advanced toward him.

The monk did not avoid Vivaldi, or even turn to observe who was approaching,
but remained in the same attitude, fixed like a statue. This tall and gaunt
figure had, at a distance, reminded him of Schedoni, and Vivaldi, as he now
looked under the cowl, discovered the ghastly countenance of the confessor.

"Have I found you at last?" said Vivaldi. "I would speak with you, father, in
private. This is not a proper place for such discourse as we must hold."

Schedoni made no reply, and Vivaldi, once again looking at him, observed that
his features were ^ixed, and his eyes bent toward the ground. The words of
Vivaldi seemed not to have reached his understanding, nor even to have made any
impression on his senses.

He repeated them in a louder tone, but still not a single line of Schedoni's
countenance acknowledged their influence. "What means this mummery?" said he,
his patience exhausted, and his indignation aroused; "This wretched subterfuge
shall not protect you, you are detected, your stratagems are known! Restore
Ellena di Rosalba to her home, or confess where you have concealed her."

S^hedoni was still silent and unmoved. A respect for his age and profession
withheld Vivaldi from seizing and compelling him to answer; but the agony of
impatience and indignation which he suffered, formed a striking contrast to the
death-like apathy of the monk. "I now also know you," continued Vivaldi, "for
my tormentor at Paluzzi, the prophet of evils, which you too well practiced the
means of fulfilling, the predictor of the death of Signora Bianchi." Schedoni
frowned. "Forewarner of Ellena's depar^ure; the phantom who decoyed me into the
dungeons of Paluzzi; the prophet and the artificer of all my misfortunes."

The monk raised his eyes from the ground, and fixed them with terrible
expression upon Vivaldi, but was still silent.

"Yes, father," added Vivaldi, "I know and will proclaim you to the world. I
will strip you of the holy hypocrisy in which you shroud yourself; announce to
all your society the despicable artifices you have employed, and the misery you
have occasioned. Your character shall be announced aloud."

While Vivaldi spoke, the monk had withdrawn his eyes, and fixed them again on
the ground. His countenance had resumed its usual expression.

"Wretch! restore to me Ellena di Rosalba!" cried Vivaldi, with the sudden
anguish of renewed despair. "Tell me at least, where she may be found, or you
shall be compelled to do so. Whither, whither have you conveyed her?"

As he pronounced this in loud and passionate accents, several ecclesiastics
entered the cloisters, and were passing on to the body of the church, when his
voice arrested their attention. They paused, and perceiving the singular
attitude of Schedoni, and the frantic gesticulations of Vivaldi, hastily
advanced toward them. "Forbear," said one of the strangers, as he seized the
cloak of Vivaldi, "do you not observe!"

"I observe a hypocrite," replied Vivaldi, stepping back and disengaging
himself, "I observe a destroyer of the peace, it was his duty to protect. I" --

"Forbear this desperate conduct," said the priest, "lest it provoke the just
vengeance of Heaven! Do you not observe the holy office in which he is
engaged?" pointing to the monk. "Leave the church while you are permitted to do
so in safety; you suspect not the punishment you may provoke."

"I will not quit the spot till you answer my enquiries," said Vivaldi to
Schedoni, without deigning even to look upon the priest; "Where, I repeat, is
Ellena di Rosalba?"

The confessor was still silent and unmoved. "This is beyond all patience and
all belief," continued Vivaldi. "Speak! Answer me, or dread what I may unfold.
Yet silent! Do you know the convent del Pianto? Do you know the confessional of
the Black Penitents?"

Vivaldi thought he perceived the countenance of the monk suffer some change.
"Do you remember that terrible night," he added, "when, on the steps of that
confessional, a tale was told?" --

S^hedoni raised his eyes, and fixing them once more on Vivaldi, with a look
that seemed intended to strike him to the dust, "Avaunt!" cried he in a
tremendous voice; "avaunt! sacrilegious boy! Tremble for the consequence of thy
desperate impiety!"

As he concluded, he started from his position, and gliding with the silent
swiftness of a shadow along the cloister, vanished in an instant. Vivaldi, when
attempting to pursue him, was seized by the surrounding monks. Insensible to
his sufferings, and exasperated by his assertions, they threatened, that if he
did not immediately quit the convent, he should be confined, and undergo the
severe punishment to which he had become liable, for having disturbed and even
insulted one of their holy order while performing an act of penance.

"He had need of such acts," said Vivaldi; "but when can they restore the
happiness his treachery has destroyed? Your order is disgraced by such a
member, reverend fathers; your" --

"Peace!" cried a monk, "he is the pride of our house; he is severe in his
devotion, and in self-punishment terrible beyond the reach of -- But I am
throwing away my commendations, I am talking to one who is not permitted to
value or to understand the sacred mysteries of our exercises."

"Away with him to the Padre Abbate!" cried an enraged priest; "away with him
to the dungeon!"

"Away! away!" repeated his companions, and they endeavored to force Vivaldi
through the cloist^rs. But with the sudden strength which pride and indignation
lent him, he burst from their united hold, and, quitting the church by another
door, escaped into the street.

Vivaldi returned home in a fl^te of mind that would have engaged the pity of
any heart, which prejudice or self-interest had not hardened. He avoided his
father, but ^ought the March^sa, who triumphant in the success of her plan, was
still insensible to the sufferings of her son.

When the Marchesa had been informed of his approaching marriage, she had, as
usual, consulted with her confessor on the means of preventing it, who had
advised the scheme she adopted, a scheme which was the more easily carried into
effect, since the Marchesa had early in life been acquainted with the abbess of
San Stefano, and knew, therefore, enough of her character and disposition to
confide, without hesitation, the management of this important affair to her
discretion. The answer of the abbess to her proposal, was not merely
acquiescent, but zealous, and it appeared that she too faithfully justified the
confidence reposed in her. After this plan had been so successfully prosecuted,
it was not to be hoped that the Marchesa would be prevailed upon to relinquish
it by the tears, the anguish, or all the varied sufferings of her son. Vivaldi
now reproved the easiness of his own confidence in having hoped it, and quitted
her cabinet with a despondency that almost reached despair.

The faithful Paulo obeyed the hasty summons of his master, but he had not
succeeded in obtaining intelligence of Ellena; and Vivaldi, having dismissed
him again on the same enquiry, retired to his apartment, where the excess of
grief, and the feeble hope of devising some successful mode of remedy,
alternately agitated and detained him.

In the evening, restless and anxious for change, though scarcely knowing
whither to bend his course, he l^ft the palace, and strolled down to the
sea-beach. A few fishermen and lazzaroni only were loitering along the strand,
waiting for boats from St. Lucia. Vivaldi with folded arms, and his hat drawn
over his face to shade his sorrow from observation, paced the edge of the
waves, listening to their murmur, as they broke gently at his feet, and gazing
upon their undulating beauty, while all consciousness was lost in melancholy
reverie concerning Ellena. Her late residence appeared at a distance, rising
over the shore. He remembered how often from thence they had together viewed
this lovely scene! Its features had now lost their charm; they were colorless
and uninteresting, or impressed only mournful ideas. The sea fluctuating
beneath the setting sun, the long mole and its light-house tipped with the last
rays, fishermen reposing in the shade, little boats, skimming over the smooth
waters, which their oars scarcely dimpled; these were images that brought to
his recollection the affecting evening when he had last seen this picture from
the villa Altier^, when seated in the orangery with Ellena and Bianchi on the
night preceding the death of the latter, Ellean herself had so solemnly been
given to his care, and had so affectingly consented to the dying request of her
relative.

The recollection of that scene came to Vivaldi with all the force of contrast,
and renewed all the anguish of despair; he paced the beach with quicker steps,
and long groans burst from his heart. He accused himself of indifference and
inactivity, for having been thus long unable to discover a single circumstance
which might direct his search; and though he knew not whither to go, he
determined to leave Naples immediately, and return no more to his father's
mansion till he should have rescued Ellena.

Of some fishermen who were conversing together upon the beach, he enquired,
whether they could accommodate him with a boat, in which he meant to coast the
bay; for it appeared probable that Ellena had been conveyed from Altieri by
water, to some town or convent on the shore, the privacy and facility of such a
mode of conveyance being suitable to the designs of her enemies.

"I have but one boat, Signor," said the fisherman, "and that is busy enough in
going to and fro between here and Santa Lucia, but my comrade, here, perhaps,
can serve you. What, Carlo, can you help the Signor to your little skiff? the
other, I know has enough to do in the trade."

His comrade, however, was too much engaged with a party of three or four men,
who were listening in deep attention round him, to reply; Vivaldi advancing to
urge the question, was struck by the eagerness with which he delivered his
narrative, as well as the uncouthness of his gesticulation; and he paused a
moment in attention. One of the auditors seemed to doubt of something that had
been asserted. "I tell you," replied the narrator, "I used to carry fish there
two and three times a week, and very good sort of people they were; they have
laid out many a ducat with me in their time. But as I was saying, when I got
there, and knocked upon the door, I heard, all of a sudden, a huge groaning,
and presently I heard the voice of the old housekeeper herself, roaring out for
help; but I could give her none, for the door was fastened; and while I ran
away for assistance to old Bartoli, you know old Bartoli, he lives by the road
side as you go to Naples; well while I ran to him, comes a Signor, and jumps
through the window and ^ets her at liberty at once. So then, I heard the whole
story." --

"What story?" said Vivaldi, "and of whom do you speak?"

"All in good time, Maestro, you shall hear," said the fisherman, who looking
at him for a moment, added, "Why, Signor, it should be you I saw there, you
should be the very Signor that let Beatrice loose."

Vivaldi, who had scarcely doubted before, that it was Al^ieri, of which the
man had spoken, now asked a thousand questions respecting the route the
ruffians had taken Ellena, but obtained no relief to his anxiety.

"I should not wonder," said a Lazzaro, who had been listening to the relation;
"I should not wonder if the carriage that passed Bracelli early on the same
morning, with the blinds drawn up, though it was so hot that people could
scarcely breathe in the open air, should prove to be it which carried off the
lady!"

This hint was sufficient to re-animate Vivaldi, who collected all the
information the Lazzaro could give, which was, however, little more than that a
carriage, such as he described, had been seen by him, driving furiously through
Bracelli, early on the morning mentioned as that of Signora di Rosalba's
departure. Vivaldi had now no doubt as to its being the one which conveyed her
away, and he determined to set out immediately for that place, where he hoped
to obtain from the postmaster further intelligence concerning the road she had
pursued.

With this intention he returned once more to his father's mansion, not to
acquaint him with his purpose, or to bid him farewell, but to await the return
of his servant Paulo, who he meant should accompany him in the search.
Vivaldi's spirits were now animated with hope, slender as were the
circumstances that supported it; and, believing his design to be wholly
unsuspected by those who would be disposed to interrupt it, he did not guard
either against the measures, which might impede his departure from Naples, or
those which might overtake him on his journey.

CHAP. X.
"What would thou have a serpent sting twice?"
SHAKESPEARE.
THE Marchesa, alarmed at some hints dropped by Vivaldi in the late interview
between them, and by some circumstances of his latter conduct, summoned her
constant adviser, Schedoni. Still suffering with the insult he had received in
the church of Spirito Santo, he obeyed with sullen reluctance, yet not without
a malicious hope of discovering some opportunity fo retaliation. That insult,
which had pointed forth his hypocrisy, and ridiculed the solemn abstraction he
assumed, had sunk deep in his heart, and fermenting the direct passions of his
nature, he meditated a terrible revenge. It had subjected him to mortifications
of various kinds. Ambition, it has already appeared, was one of his strongest
motives of action, and he had long since assumed a character of severe
sanctity, chiefly for the purposes of lifting him to promotion. He was not
beloved in the society of which he was a member; and many of the brotherhood,
who had labored to disapp^^^t his views, and to detect his error, who had
hated him for his pride, and envied him for his reputed sanctity, now gloried
in the mortification ^e had received, and endeavored to turn the circumstance
to their own advantage. They had not scrupled already to display by insinuation
and pointed sneers, their triumph, and to menace his reputation; and S^h^doni,
though he deserved contempt, was not of a temper to (...) it.

But above all, some hints respecting his past life, which had fa^len from
Vivaldi, and which occasioned him so abruptly to leave the church, alarmed him.
So much terror, indeed, had they excited, that it is not improbable that he
would have sealed his secret in death, devoting Vivaldi to the grave, had he
not been restrained by the dreaded vengeance of the Vivaldi family. Since that
hour he had known no peace, and had never slept; he had taken scarcely any
food, and was almost continually on his knees upon the steps of the high altar.
The devotees who beheld him, paused and admired; such of the brothers as
disliked him, sneered and passed on. Schedoni appeared alike insensible to
each; lost to this world, and preparing for a higher.

The torments of his mind and the severe penance he had observed, had produced
a surprising change in his appearance, so that he resembled a spectre rather
than a human being. His visage was wan and wasted, his eyes were sunk and
become nearly motionless, and his whole air and attitudes axhibited the wild
energy of something -- not of this earth.

When he was summoned by the Marchesa, his conscience whispered this to be the
consequence of circumstances, which Vivaldi had revealed; and, at first, he had
determined not to attend her; but, considering that if it was so, his refusal
would confirm suspicion, he, resolved to trust once more to the subtilty of his
address for deliverence.

With these apprehensions, tempered by this hope, he entered the Marchesa's
closet. She almost started on observing him, and could not immediately withdraw
her eyes from his altered visage, while Schedoni was unable wholly to conceal
the perturbation which such earnest observation occasioned. "Peace rest with
you, daughter!" said he, and he seated himself, without lifting his eyes from
the floor.

"I wish to speak with you, father, upon affairs of moment," said the Marchesa
gravely, "which are probably not unknown to you." She paused, and Schedoni
bowed his head, awaiting in anxious expectation what was to follow.

"You are silent, father," resumed the Marchesa. "What am I to understand by
this?"

"That you have been misinformed," replied Schedoni, whose apt conscience
betrayed his discretion.

"Pardon me," said the Marchesa, "I am too well informed, and should not have
requested your visit if any doubt had remained upon my mind."

"Signora! be cautious of what you credit," said the confessor imprudently;
"you know not the consequence of a hasty credulity."

"Would that mine were a rash credulity!" replied the Marchesa; "but -- we are
betrayed."

"We?" repeated the monk, beginning to revive: "What has happened*"

The Marchesa informed him of Vivaldi's absence, and inferred from its length,
for it was now several days since his departure, that he had certainly
discovered the place of Ellena's confinement, as well as the authors of it.

Schedoni differed from her, but hinted, that the obedience of youth was
hopeless, u^^^ss severer measures were adopted.

"Severer!" exclaimed the Marchesa; "good father, is it not severe enough to
confine her for life?"

"I mean severer with respect to your son, lady," replied Schedoni. "When a
young man has so far overcome all reverence for an holy ordinance as publicly
to insult its professors, and yet more, when that professor is in the very
performance of his duties, it is time he should be contrould with a strong
hand. I am not in the practice of advised to such measures, but the conduct of
Signor Vivaldi is such as calls aloud for them. Public decency demands it. For
myself, indeed, I should have endured patiently the ^ndignity which has been
offered me, receiving it as a salutary mortification, as one of those
inflictions that purify the soul the from pride, which even the holiest men may
unconsciously cherish. But I am no longer permitted to consider myself; the
public good requires that an example should be made of the horrible impiety of
which your son, it grieves me, daughter, to disclose it! -- your son, unworthy
of such a mother! has been guilty."

It is evident that in the style, at least, of this accusation, Schedoni
suffered the force of his resentment to prevail over the usual subtilty of his
address, the deep and smooth insinuation of his policy.

"To what do you allude, righteous father!" enquired the astonished Marchesa;
"what indignity, what imp^ety has my son to answer for? I entreat you will
speak explicitly, that I may prove I can lose the mother in the strict severity
of the judge."

"That is spoken with the gradeur of sentiment, which has always distinguished
you my daughter! Strong minds perceive that justice is the highest of the moral
attributes, mercy is only the favorite of weak ones."

Schedoni had a view in this commendation beyond that of confirming the
Marchesa's present resolution against Vivaldi. He, wished to prepare her for
measures, which might hereafter be necessary to accomplish the revenge he
meditated, and he knew that by flattering her vanity, he was most likely to
succeed. He praised her, therefore, for qualities he wished her to possess,
encouraged her to reject general opinions by admiring as the symptoms of a
superior understanding, the convenient morality upon which she had occasionally
acted; and, calling sternness justice, extolled that for strength of mind,
which was only callous insensibility.

He then described to her Vivaldi's late conduct in the church of the Spi^ito
Santo, exaggerated some offensive circumstances of it, invented others, and
formed of the whole an instance of monstrous impiety and unprovoked insult.

The Marchesa listened to the relation with no less indignation that surprise,
and her readiness to adopt the confessor's advice allowed him to depart-with
renovated spirits and most triumphant hopes.

Meanwhile, the Marchese remained ignorant of the subject of the conference
with Schedoni. His opinions had formerly been sounded, and having been found
decidedly against the dark policy it was thought expedient to practice, he was
never afterward consulted respecting Vivaldi. Parental anxiety and affection
began to revive as the lengthened absence of his son was observed. Though
jealous of his rank, he loved Vivaldi; and, though he never positively believed
that he designed to enter into a sacred engagement with a person, whom the
Marchese considered to be so much his inferior as Ellena, he had suffered
doubts, which gave him considerable uneasiness. The present extraordinary
absence of Vivaldi renewed his alarm. He apprehended that if she was discovered
at this moment, when the fear of losing her for ever, and the exasperation,
which such complicated opposition occasioned, had awakened all the passions of
his son, this rash young man might be prevailed upon to secure her for his own
by the indissoluble vow. On the other hand, he dreaded the effect of Vivaldi's
despair, should he fail in the pursuit; and thus, fearing at one moment that
for which he wished in the next, the Marchese suffered a tumult of mind
inferior only to his son's.

The instructions, which he delivered to the servants whom he sent in pursuit
of Vivaldi, were given under such distraction of thought, that scarcely any
person perfectly understood his commission; and, as the Marchesa had been
careful to conceal from him her knowledge of Ellena's abode, he gave no
direction concerning the route to San Stefano.

While the Marchese at Naples was thus employed, and while Schedoni was forming
further plans against Ellena, Vivaldi was wandering from village to village,
and from town to town, in pursuit of her, whom all his efforts had hitherto
been unsuccessful to recover. From the people at the post house at Bracelli, he
had obtained little information that could direct him; they only knew that a
carriage, such as had been already described to Vivaldi, with the blinds drawn
up, changed horses there that morning, which he ^^membered to be that of
Ellena's departure, and had proceeded on the road to Morgagni.

When Vivaldi arrived thither, all trace of Ellena was lost; the master of the
post could not recollect a single circumstance connected with the travelers,
and even if he had noticed them, it would have been insufficient for Vivaldi's
purpose, unless he had also observed the road they followed; for at this place
several roads branched off into opposite quarters of the country; Vivaldi,
therefore, was reduced to choose of these as chance or fancy directed; and as it
appeared probable that the Marchesa had conveyed Ellena to a convent, he
determined to make enquires at every one on his way.

He had now passed over some of the wildest tracts of the Appennine, among
scenes which seemed abandoned by civilized society to the banditti who haunted
their recesses. Yet even here amidst wilds, that were nearly inaccessible,
convents, with each its small dependent hamlet, were scattered, and shrouded
from the world by woods and mountains, enjoyed unsuspectedly many of its
luxuries, and displayed unnoticed, some of its elegance. Vivaldi, who had
visited several of these in search of Ellena, had been surprised at the refined
courtesy and hospitality with which he was received.

It was on the seventh day of his journey, and near sunset, that he was
bewildered in the woods of Rugieri. He had received a direction for the road he
was to take at a village some leagues distant, and had obeyed it confidently
till now, when the path was lost in several tracts that branched out among the
trees. The day was closing, and Vivaldi's spirits began to fail, but Paulo,
light of heart and ever gay, commended the shade and pleasant freshness of the
woods, and observed, that if his master did lose his way, and was obliged to
remain here for the night, it could not be very unlucky, for they could climb
among the branches of a chestnut, and find a more neat and airy lodging than any
inn had yet afforded them.

While Paulo was thus endeavoring to make the best of what might happen, and
his master was sunk in reverie, they suddenly heard the sound of instruments
and voices from a distance. The gloom, which the trees threw round, prevented
their distinguishing objects afar off, and not a single human being was
visible, nor any trace of his art, beneath the shadowy scene. They listened to
ascertain from what direction the sounds approached, and heard a chorus of
voices, accompanied by a few instruments, performing the evening service.

"We are near a convent, Signor," said Paulo, "listen! they are at their
devotions."

"It is as you say," replied Vivaldi; "and we will make the best of our way
toward it."

"Well, Signor! I must say, if we find as good doings here as we had at the
Capuchin's, we shall have no reason to regret our beds alfresco among the
chestnut branches."

"Do you perceive any walls or spires beyond the trees?" said Vivaldi, as he
led the way.

"None, Signor," replied Paulo; "yet we draw nearer the sounds. Ah, Signor? do
you hear that note? How it dies away? And those instruments just touched in
symphony! This is not the music of peasants; a convent must be near, though we
do not see it."

Still as they advanced, no walls appeared, and soon after the music ceased;
but other sounds led Vivaldi forward to a pleasant part of the woods, where the
trees opening, he perceived a party of pilgrims seated on the grass. They were
laughing and conversing with much gaiety, as each spread before him the supper,
which he drew from his scrip; while he, who appeared to be the Father-Director
of the pilgrimage, sat with a jovial countenance in the midst of the company,
dispensing jokes and merry stories, and receiving in return a tribute from
every scrip. Wines of various sorts were ranged before him, of which he drank
abundantly, and seemed not, to refuse any dainty that was offered.

Vivaldi, whose apprehensions were now quieted, stopped to observe the groupe,
as the evening rays, glancing along the skirts of the wood, threw a gleam upon
their various countenances, showing, however, in each a spirit of gaiety that
might have characterised the individuals of a party of pleasure, father than
those of a pilgrimage. The Father Director and his ^lock seemed perfectly to
under each other; the Superior willingly resigned the solemn austerity of his
office, and permitted the company to make themselves as happy as possible, in
consideration of receiving plenty of the most delicate of their viands; yet
somewhat of dignity was mingled with his condescensions, that compelled them to
receive even his jokes with a degree of deference, and perhaps they laughed at
them less for their spirit than because they were favors.

Addressing the Superior, Vivaldi requested to be directed how he might regain
his way. The father examined him for a moment before he replied, but observing
the elegance of his dress, and a certain (...) of distinction; and perceiving,
also, that Paulo was his servant, he promised his services, and invited him to
take a s^at at his right hand, and partake of the supper.

Vivaldi, understanding that the party was going his road, accepted the
invitation, when Paulo, having fastened the horses to a tree, soon became busy
with the supper. While Vivaldi conversed with the father, Paulo engrosed all
the attention of the pilgrims near him; they declared he was the cleverest and
the merriest fellow they had ever seen, and often expressed (...) a wish that
he was going as far with them as to the shrine in a convent of Carmelites which
terminated their pilgrimage. When Vivaldi understood that this shrine was in
the church of a convent, partly inhabited by nuns, and that it was little more
than a league and a half distant, he determined to accompany them, for it was
as possible that Ellena was confined there as in any other cloister; and of her
being imprisoned in some convent, he had less doubt, the more he considered the
character and views of his mother. He set forward, therefore, with the
pilgrims, and on foot, having resigned his horse to the weary Father-Director.

Darkness closed over them long before they reached the village where they
designed to pass the night; but they beguiled the way with songs and stories,
now and then only stopping at command of the Father, to repent some prayer or
sing a hymn. But, as they drew near a village, at the base of the mountain on
which the shrine stood, they halted to arrange themselves in procession; and
the Superior having stopped short in the midst of one of his best jokes,
dismounted Vivaldi's horse, placed himself at their head, and beginning a loud
strain, they proceeded in full chorus of melancholy music.

The peasants hearing their sonorous voices, came ^orth to meet and conduct
them to their cabins. The village was already crowded with devotees, but these
poor peasants, looking up to them with love and reverence, made every possible
contrivance to accommodate all who came; notwithstanding which, when Paulo soon
after turned into his bed of straw, he had more reasons than one to regret his
chestnut ^attress.

Vivaldi passed an anxious night, waiting impatiently for the dawning of that
day, which might possibly restore to him Ellena. Considering that a pilgrim's
habit would not only conceal him from suspicion, but allow him opportunities
for observation, which his own dress would not permit, he employed Paulo to
provide him one. The address of the servant, assisted by a single ducat, easily
procured it, and at an early hour he set forward on his enquiry.

CHAP. XI.
Bring roses, violets, and the cold snow drop,
Beautiful in tears, to strew the pathway
Of our saintly sister.

A FEW devotees only had begun to ascend the mountain, and Vivaldi kept aloof
even from these, pursuing a lonely track, for his thoughtful mind desired
solitude. The early breeze sighing among the foliage, that waved high over the
path, and the hollow da^hing of distant waters, he listened to with
complacency, for these were sounds which soothed yet promoted his melancholy
mood; and he sometimes rested to gaze upon the scenery around him, for this too
was in harmony with the temper of his mind. Disappointment had subdued the
wilder energy of his passions, and produced a solemn and lofty state of
feeling; he viewed with pleasing sadness the dark rocks and precipices, the
gloomy mountains and vast solitudes, that spread around him; nor was the
convent that he was approaching a less sacred feature of the scene, as its gray
walls and pinacles appeared beyond the dusky groves. "Ah! if it should enclose
her!" said Vivaldi, as he caught a first glimpse of its hall. "Vain hope! I
will not invite your illusions again, I will not expose myself to the agonies
of new disappointment; I will search, but not expect. Yet, if she should be
there!"

Having reached the gates of the convent, he passed with hasty steps into the
court; where his emotion increased as he paused a moment and looked round its
silent cloisters. The porter only appeared, when Vivaldi, fearful lest he
should perceive him not to be a pilgrim, drew his hood over his face, and
gathering up his garments still closer in his folded arms, passed on without
speaking, though he know not which of the avenues before him led to the shrine.
He advanced, however, toward the church, a stately edifice, from the other
parts of the convent. Its highly vaulted aisles, extending in twilight
perspective, where a monk or a pilgrim only, now and then crossed, whose dark
figures, passing without sound, vanished like shadows; the universal stillness
of the place, the gleam of tapers from the high altar, and of lamps, which gave
a gloomy pomp to every shrine in the church: all these circumstances conspired
to impress a sacred awe upon his heart.

He followed some devotees through a side aisle to a court, that was overhung
by a tremendous rock, in which was a cave, containing the shrine of our Lady of
Mount Carmel. This court was enclosed by the rock, and by the choir of the
church, except that to the south a small opening led the eye to a glimpse of
the landscape below, which, seen beyond the dark jaws of the cliff, appeared
free, and light, and gaily colored, melting away into the blue and distant
mountains.

Vivaldi entered the cave, where, enclosed within a filigree screen of gold,
lay the image of the saint, decorated with flowers, and lighted up by
innumerable lamps and tapers. The steps of the shrine were thronged with
kneeling pilgrims, and Vivaldi, to avoid singularity, kneeled also; till a high
peal of the organ, at a distance, and the de^p voices of choiristers announced
that the first mass was begun. He left the cave, and, returning into the
church, loitered at an extremity of the aisles, where he listened awhile to the
solemn harmony pealing along the roofs, and softening away in distance. It was
such full and entrancing music as frequently swells in the high festivals of
the Sicilian church, and is adapted to inspire that sublime enthusiasm, which
sometimes elevates its disciples. Vivaldi, unable to endure long the excess of
feeling, which this harmony awakened was leaving the church, when suddenly it
ceased, and the tolling of a bell sounded in its stead. This seemed to be the
knell of death, and it occurred to him, that a dying person was approaching to
receive the last sacrament; when he heard remotely a warbling of female voices,
mingling with the deeper tones of the monks, and with the hollow note of the
bell, as it struck at intervals. So sweetly, so plaintively, did the strain
grow on the air, that those who listened, as well as those, who sung, were
touched with sorrow, and seemed equally to mourn for a departing friend.

Vivaldi hastened to the choir, the pavement of which was strewn with
palm-branches and fresh flowers. A pall of black velvet lay upon the steps of
the altar, where several priests were silently attending. Every where appeared
the ensigns of solemn pomp and ceremony, and in every countenance the stillness
and observance of expectation. Meanwhile the sounds draw nearer, and Vivaldi
perceived a procession of nuns approaching from a distant aisle.

As they advanced, he distinguished the lady abbess leading the train, dressed
in her pontifical robes, with the mitre on her head; and well he marked her
stately step, moving in time to the slow minstrelsy, and the air of proud yet
graceful dignity, with which she characterized herself. Then followed the nuns,
according to their several orders, and last came the novices, carrying lighted
tapers, and surrounded by other nuns, who were distinguished by a particular
habit.

Having reached a part of the church appropriated for their reception, they
arranged themselves in order. Vivaldi, with a palpitating heart, enquired the
occasion of the ceremony, and was told that a nun was going to be professed.

"You are informed, no doubt, brother," added the prior who gave him this
intelligence, "that on the morning of our high festival, our Lady's day, it is
usual for such as devote themselves to heaven, to receive the veil. Stand bye a
while, and you will see the ceremony.

"What is the name of the novice who is now to receive it?" said Vivaldi, in a
voice whose tremulous accents betrayed his emotion.

The friar glanced an eye of scrutiny upon him, as he replied, "I know not her
name, but if you will step a little this way, I will point her out to you."

Vivaldi, drawing his hood over his face, obeyed in silence.

"It is she on the right of the abbess," said the stranger, "who leans on the
arm of a nun, she is covered with a white veil, and is taller than her
companions."

Vivaldi observed her with a fearful eye, and though he did not recognize the
person of Ellena, yet, whether it was that his fancy was possessed with her
image, or that there was truth in his surmise, he thought he perceived a
resemblance of her. He enquired how long the novice had resided in the convent,
and many other par^iculars, to which the stranger could not or dared not reply.

With what anxious solicitude did Vivaldi endeavor to look through the veils
of several nuns in search of Ellena, whom he believed the barbarous policy of
his mother might already have devoted to the cloister! With a solicitude still
stronger he tried to catch a glimpse of the features of the novices, but their
faces were shaded by hoods, and their white veils, though thrown half back,
were disposed in such artful folds that they concealed them from observation,
as effectually as did the pendant lawn the features of the nuns.

The ceremony began with the exhortation of the Father-Abbot, delivered with a
solemn energy; then the novice kneeling before him, made her pro^^ssion, for
which Vivaldi listened with intense attention, but it was delivered in such low
and trembling accents, that he could not ascertain even the tone. But during
the anthem that mingled with the ensuing part of the service, he thought he
distinguished the voice of Ellena, that touching and well-known voice, which in
the church of San Lorenzo had first attracted his attention. He listened,
scarcely daring to draw breath, lest he should lose a note; and again he
fancied her voice spoke in a part of the plaintive response delivered by the
nuns.

Vivaldi endeavored to command his emotion, and to await with patience some
further unfolding of the truth; but when the priest prepared to withdraw the
white veil from the face of the novice, and throw the black one over her,
dreadful expectation that she was Ellena seized him, and he with difficulty
forbore stepping forward and discovering himself on the instant.

The veil was at length withdrawn, and a very lovely face appeared, but not
Ellena's. Vivaldi breathed again, and waited with tolerable composure for the
conclusion of the ceremony; till in the solemn strain that followed the putting
on of the black veil, he heard again the voice, which he was now convinced was
here is. Its accents were low, and mournful, and tremulous, yet his heart
acknowledged instantaneously their magic influence.

When this ceremony had concluded, another began; and he was told it was that
of a noviciation. A young woman, supported by two nuns, advanced to the altar,
and Vivaldi thought he beheld Ellena. The priest was beginning the customary
exhortation, when she lifted her half-veil, and, showing a countenance where
meek sorrow was mingled with heavenly sweetness, raised her blue eyes, all
bathed in tears, and waved her hand as if she would have spoken. -- It was
Ellena herself.

The pri^st attempted to proceed.

"I protest in the presence of this congregation," said she solemnly, "that I
am brought hither to pronounce vows which my heart disclaims. I protest" --

A confusion of voices interrupted her, and at the same instant she perceived
Vivaldi rushing toward the altar. Ellena gazed for a moment, and then,
stretching forth her supplicating hands toward him, closed her eyes, and sunk
into the arms of some persons round her, who vainly endeavored to prevent him
from approaching and assisting her. The anguish, with which he bent over her
lifeless form, and called upon her name, excited the commiseration even of the
nuns, and especially Olivia, who was most assiduous in efforts to revive her
young friend.

When Ellena unclosed her eyes, and looking up, once more beheld Vivaldi, the
expression with which she regarded him, told that her heart was unchanged, and
that she was unconscious of the miseries of imprisonment while he was with her.
She desired to withdraw, and, assisted by Vivaldi and Olivia, was leaving the
church, when the abbess ordered that she should be attended by the nuns only;
and, retiring from the altar, she gave directions that the young stranger
should be conducted to the parlour of the convent.

Vivaldi, though he refused to obey an imperious command, yielded to the
entreaties of Ellena, and to the gentle remonstrances of Olivia; and bidding
Ellena farewell for a while, he repaired to the parlour of the abbess. He was
not without some hope of awakening her to a sense of justice, or of pity; but
he found that her notions of right were inexorably against him, and that pride
and resentment usurped the influence of every other feeling. She began her
lecture with expressing the warm friendship she had so long cherished for the
Marchesa, proceeded to lament that the son of a friend, whom she so highly
esteemed, should have forgotten his duty to his parents, and the observance due
to the dignity of his house, so far as to seek connection with a person of
Ellena di Rosalba's inferior station; and concluded with a severe reprimand for
having disturbed the tranquillity of her convent and the decorum of the church
by his intrusion.

Vivaldi listened with submitting patience to this mention of morals and
decorum from a person, who, with the most perfect self-applause, was violating
some of the plainest obligations of humanity and justice; who had conspired to
tear an orphan from her home, and who designed to deprive her for life of
liberty, with all the blessings it inherits. But, when she proceeded to speak
of Ellena with the caustic of severe reprobation, and to hint at the
punishment, which her public rejection of the vows had incurred, the patience
of Vivaldi submitted no longer; indignation and contempt rose high against the
Superior, and he exhibited a portrait of herself in the strong colors of
truth. But the mind, which compassion could not persuade, reason could not
appal; selfishness had hardened it alike to the influence of each; her pride
only was affected, and she retaliated the mortification she suffered by menace
and denunciation.

Vivaldi, on quitting her apartment, had no other resource than an application
to the Abate, whose influence, at least, if not his authority, might assuage
the severity of her power. In this Abate, a mildness of temper, and gentleness
of manner were qualities of less value than is usually and deservedly imputed
to them; for, being connected with feebleness of mind, they were but the
pleasing merits of easy times, which in an hour of difficulty never assumed the
character of virtues, by inducing him to serve those, for whom he might feel.
And thus, with a temper and disposition directly opposite to those of the
severe and violent abbess, he was equally selfish, and almost equally culpable,
since by permitting evil, he was nearly as injurious in his conduct as those
who planned it. Indolence and timidity, a timidity the consequence of want of
clear perception, deprived him of all energy of character; he was prudent
rather than wise, and so fearful of being thought to do wrong that he seldom
did right.

To Vivaldi's temperate representations and earnest entreaties that he would
exert some authority toward liberating Ellena, he listened with patience;
acknowledged the hardships of her situation; lamented the unhappy divisions
between Vivaldi and his family, and then declined advancing a single step in so
delicate an affair. Signora di Rosalba, he said, was in the care of the abbess,
over whom he had no right of control in matters relative to her domestic
concerns. Vivaldi then supplicated, that, though he possessed no authority, he
would, at least, intercede or remonstrate against so unjust a procedure as that
of detaining Ellena a prisoner, and assist in restoring her to the home, from
which she had been forcibly carried.

"And this, again," replied the Abate, "does not come within my jurisdiction;
and I make it a rule not to encroach upon that of another person."

"And can you endure, holy father," said Vivaldi, "to witness a flagrant act of
injustice and not endeavor to counteract it? not even step forward to rescue
the victim when you perceive the preparation for the sacrifice?"

"I repeat, that I never interfere with the authority of others," replied the
Superior; "having asserted my own, I yield to them in their sphere, the
obedience which I require in mine."

Is power then," said Vivaldi, "the infallible test of justice? Is it morality
to obey where the command is criminal? The whole world have a claim upon the
fortitude, the active fortitude of those who are placed as you are, between the
alternative of confirming a wrong by your consent, or preventing it by your
resistance. Would that your heart expanded toward that world, reverend father!"

"Would that the whole world were wrong that you might have the glory of
setting it right!" said the Abate, smiling. "Young man! you are an enthusiast,
and I pardon you. You are a knight of chivalry, who would go about the earth
fighting with every body by way of proving your right to do good; it is
unfortunate that you were born somewhat (...) late."

"Enthusiasm in the cause of humanity" -- said Vivaldi, but he checked himself;
and despairing of touching a heart so hardened by selfish prudence, and
indignant at beholding an apathy so vicious in its consequence, he left the
Abate without other effort. He perceived that he must now have recourse to
further stratagem, a recourse which his frank and noble mind detested, but he
had already tried without success, every other possibility of rescuing the
innocent victim of the Marchesa's prejudice and pride.

Ellena meanwhile had retired to her cell, agitated by a variety of
considerations, and contrary emotions, of which, however, those of joy and
tenderness were long predominant. Then came anxiety, apprehension, pride, and
doubt, to divide and torture her heart. It was true that Vivaldi had discovered
her prison, but, if it were possible, that he could release her, she must
consent to quit it with him; a step from which a mind so tremblingly jealous of
propriety as hers, recoiled with alarm, though it would deliver her from
captivity. And how, when she considered the haughty character of the Marchese
di Vivaldi, the imperious and vindictive nature of the Marchesa, and, still
more, their united repugnance to a connection with her, how could she endure to
think, even for a moment, of intruding herself into such a family! Pride,
delicacy, good sense seemed to warn her against a conduct so humiliating and
vexatious in its consequences, and to exhort her to preserve her own dignity by
independence, but the ^steem, the friendship, the tender affection, which she
had cherished for Vivaldi, made her pause, and shrink with emotions, of little
less than horror, from the eternal renunciation, which so dignified a choice
required. Though the encouragement, which her deceased relative had given to
this attachment, seemed to impart to it a sacred character, that considerably
soothed the alarmed delicacy of Ellena, the approbation thus implied, had no
power to silence her own objections, and she would have regretted the mistaken
zeal, which had contributed to lead her into the present distressing situation,
had she revered the memory of her aunt, or loved Vivaldi, less. Still, however,
the joy, which his presence had occasioned, and which the consciousness that he
was still near her had prolonged, was not subdued, though it was frequently
obscured by such anxious considerations. With jealous and indiscreet
solicitude, she now recollected every look, and the accent of every word, which
had told that his affection was undiminished, thus seeking, with inconsistent
zeal for a conviction of the very tenderness, which but a moment before she had
thought it would be prudent to lament, and almost necessary to renounce.

She awaited with extreme anxiety the appearance of Olivia, who probably might
know the result of Vivaldi's conference with the abbess, and whether he was yet
in the convent.

In the evening Olivia came, a messenger of evil; and Ellena, informed of the
conduct of the abbess, and the consequent departure of Vivaldi, perceived all
her courage, and all the half-formed resolutions, which a consideration of his
family had suggested, faulter and expire. Sensible only of grief and
despondency, she ascertained, for the first time the extent of her affection
and the severity of her situation. She perceived, also, that the injustice
which his family had exercised toward her, absolved her from all consideration
of their displeasure, otherwise than as it might affect herself; but this was a
conviction, which it were now probably useless to admit.

Olivia not only expressed the tenderest interest in her welfare but seemed
deeply affected with her situation; and, whether it was, that the nun's
misfortunes bore some resemblance to Ellena's, or from whatever cause, it is
remarkable that her eyes were often filled with tears, while she regarded her
young friend, and she betrayed so much emotion that Ellena noticed it with
surprise. She was, however, too delicate to hint any curiosity on the subject;
and too much engaged by a nearer interest to dwell long upon the circumstance.

When Olivia withdrew, Ellena retired to her turret, to soothe her spirits with
a view of serene and majestic nature, a recourse which seldom failed to elevate
her mind and soften the asperities of affliction. -- It was to her like sweet
and solemn music, breathing peace over the soul -- like the oaten stop of
Milton's Spirit, "Who with his soft pipe, and smooth dittied song,
W^ll kn^w to still the wild winds when they roar
And hash the waving woods."


While she sat before a window, observing the evening light beaming upon the
valley, and touching all the distant mountains with misty purple, a reed as
sweet, though not as fanciful, sounded from among the rocks below. The
instrument and the character of the strain were such as she had been
unaccustomed to hear within the walls of San Stefano, and the tone diffused
over her spirits a pleasing melancholy, that rapt all her attention. The liquid
cadence as it trembled and sunk away, seemed to tell the dejection of no vulgar
feelings, and the exquisite taste, with which the complaining notes again
swelled, almost convinced her, that the musician was Vivaldi.

On looking from the lattice, she perceived a person perched on a point of the
cliff below, whither it appeared almost impracticable for any human step to
have climbed, and preserved from the precipice only by some dwarf shrubs that
fringed the brow. The twilight did not permit her immediately to ascertain
whether it was Vivaldi, and the situation was so dangerous that she hoped it
was not he. Her doubts were removed, when, looking up, he perceived Ellena, and
she heard his voice.

Vivaldi had learned from a lay-brother of the convent, whom Paulo had bribed,
and who when he worked in the garden, had sometimes seen Ellena at the window,
that she frequented this remote turret; and, at the hazard of his life, he had
now ventured thither, with a hope of conversing with her.

Ellena, alarmed at his tremendus situation, refused to listen to him, but he
would not leave the spot till he had communicated a plan concerted for her
escape, and, entreating that she would confide herself to his care, assured her
she would be conducted wherever she judged proper. It appeared that the brother
had consented to assist his views, in consideration of an ample reward, and to
admit him within the walls on this evening, when, in his pilgrim's habit, he
might have an opportunity of again seeing Ellena. He conjured her to attend, if
possible, in the convent parlour during supper, explaining, in a few words, the
motive for this request, and the substance of the following particulars:

The Lady-abbess, in observance of the custom upon high festivals, gave a
collation to the Padre-abate, and such of the priests as had assisted at the
vesper-service. A few strangers of distinction and pilgrims were also to
partake of the entertainments of this night, among which was included a concert
to be performed by the nuns. At the collation was to be displayed a profusion
of delicacies, arranged by the sisters, who had been busy in preparing the
pastry and confectionary during several days, and who excelled in these
articles no less than in embroid^ry and other ingenious arts. This supper was
to be given in the abbess's outer parlour, while she herself, attended by some
nuns of high rank, and a few favorites, was to have a table in the inner
apartment, where, separated only by the grate, she could partake of the
conversation of the holy fathers. The tables were to be ornamented with
artificial flowers, and a variety of other fanciful devices upon which the
ingenuity of the sisters had been long employed, who prepared for these
festivals with as much vanity, and expected them to dissipate the gloomy
monotony of their usual life, with as much eagerness of delight, as a young
beauty anticipates a first ball.

On this evening, therefore, every member of the convent would be engaged
either by amusement or business, and to Vivaldi, who had been careful to inform
himself of these circumstances, it would be easy, with the assistance of the
brother, to obtain admittance, and mingle himself among the spectators,
disguised in his pilgrim's habit. He entreated, therefore, that Ellena would
contrive to be in the abbess's apartment this evening, when he would endeavor
to convey to her some further particulars of the plan of escape, and would have
mules in waiting at the foot of the mountain, to conduct her to the villa
Altieri, or to the neighboring convent of the Santa della Pieta. Vivaldi
secretly hoped that she might be prevailed with to give him her hand on
quitting San Stefano, but he forbore to mention this hope, lest it should he
mistaken for a condition, and that Ellena might be either reluctant to accept
his assistance, or, accepting it, might consider herself bound to grant a hasty
consent.

To his mention of escape she listened with varying emotion; at one moment
attending to it with hope and joy, as promising her the only chance of
liberation from an imprisonment, which was probably intended to last for her
life, and of restoring her to Vivaldi; and at another, recoiling from the
thought of departing with him, while his family was so decidedly averse to
their marriage. Thus, unable to form any instant resolution on the subject, and
entreating that he would leave his dangerous station before the thickening
twilight should increase the hazard of his descent, Ellena, added, that she
would endeavor to obtain admittance to the apartment of the abbess, and to
acquaint him with her final determination. Vivaldi understood all the delicacy
of her scruples, and though they afflicted him, he honored the good sense and
just pride that suggested them.

He lingered on the rock till the last moments of departing light, and then,
with a heart fluttering with hopes and fears, bade Ellena farewell, and
descended; while she watched his progress through the silent gloom, faintly
distinguishing him gliding along ledges of the precipice, and making his
adventurous way from cliff to cliff, till the winding thick^^s concealed him
from her view. Still anxious, she remained at the lattice, but he appeared no
more; no voice announced disaster; and, at length, she returned to her cell, to
deliberate on the subject of her departure.

Her considerations were interrupted by Olivia, whofe manner indicated
something extraordinary; the usual tranquillity of her countenance was gone, and
an air of grief mingled with apprehension appeared there. Before she spoke, she
exammined the passage and looked round the cell. "It is as I feared," said she
abruptly; "my suspicions are justified, and you, my child, are sacrificed,
unless it were possible for you to quit the convent this night."

"What is it that you mean?" said the alarmed Ellena.

"I have just learned," resumed the nun, "that your conduct this morning, which
is understood to have thrown a premeditated insult upon the abbess, is to be
punished with what they call imprisonment; alas! why should I soften the truth
-- with what I believe is death itself, for who ever returned alive from that
hideous chamber!"

"With death!" said Ellena, aghast; "Oh, heavens! how have I deserved death?"

"That is not the question, my daughter, but how you may avoid it. Within the
deepest recesses of our convent, is a stone chamber, secured by doors of iron,
to which such of the sisterhood as have been guilty of any heinous offense
have, from time to time, been consigned. This condemnation admits of no
reprieve; the unfortunate captive is left to languish in chains and darkness,
receiving only an allowance of bread and water just sufficient to prolong her
sufferings, till nature at length, sinking under their intolerable pressure,
obtains refuge in death. Our records relate several instances of such horrible
punishment, which has generally been inflicted upon nuns, who, weary of the
life which they have chos^n under the first delusions of the imagination, or
which they have been compelled to accept by the rigor or a^^rice of parents,
have been detected in escaping from the con^ent."

The nun paused, but Ellena remaining rapt in silent thought, she resumed: "One
miserable instance of this severity has occurred within my memory. I saw the
wretched victim enter that apartment -- never more to quit it alive! I saw,
also, her poor remains laid at rest in the convent garden! During nearly two
years she languished upon a bed of straw, denied even the poor consolation of
conversing through the grate with such of the sisters as pitied her; and who of
us was there that did not pity her! A severe punishment was threatened to
those, who should approach with any compassionate intention; thank God! I
incurred it, and I endured it, also with secret triumph."

A gleam of satisfaction passed over Olivia's countenance as she spoke this; it
was the sweetest that Ellena had ever observed there. With a sympathetic
emotion, she threw herself on the bosom of the nun, and wept; for some moments
they were both silent. Olivia, at length said, "Do you not believe, my child,
that the officious and offended abbess will readily seize upon the circumstance
of your disobedience, as a pretense for confining you in that fatal chamber?
The wishes of the Marchesa will thus surely be accomplished, without the
difficulty of exacting your obedience to the vows. Alas! I have received proof
too absolute of her intention, and that tomorrow is assigned as the day of
your sacrifice; you may, perhaps, be thankful that the business of the festival
has obliged her to defer executing the sentence even till tomorrow."

Ellena replied only with a groan as her head still drooped upon the shoulder
of the nun; she was not now hesitating whether to accept the assistance of
Vivaldi, bu^ desponding lest his utmost efforts for her deliverance should be
vain.

Olivia, who mistook the cause of her silence, added, "Other hints I could
give, which are strong as they are dreadful, but I will forbear. Tell me how it
is possible I may assist you; I am willing to incur a second punishment, in
endeavoring to relieve a second sufferer."

Ellena's tears flowed fast at this new instance of the nun's generosity. "But
if they should discover you in assisting me to leave the convent," she said in
a voice convulsed by her gratitude, -- "O! if they should discover you!" --

"I can ascertain the punishment," Olivia replied with firmness, "and do not
fear to meet it."

"How nobly generous this is!" said the weeping Ellena; "I ought not to suffer
you to be thus careless of yourself!"

"My conduct is not wholly disinterested," the nun modesty replied; "for I
think I could endure any punishment with more fortitude than the sickening
anguish of beholding such suffering as I have witnessed. What are bodily pains
in comparison with the subtle, the exquisite tortures of the mind! Heaven
knows I can support my own afflictions, but not the view of those of others
when they are excessive. The instruments of torture I believe I could endure,
if my spirit was invigorated with the consciousness of a generous purpose; but
pity touches upon a nerve that vibrates instantly to the heart, and subdues
resistance. Yes, my child, the agony of pity is keener than any other, except
that of remorse, and even in remorse, it is, perhaps, the mingling unavailing
pity, that points the sting. But while I am indulging this egotism, I am,
perhaps, increasing your danger of the suffering I deprecate."

Ellena, thus encouraged by the generous sympathy of Olivia, mentioned
Vivaldi's proposed visit of this evening; and consulted with her on the
probability of procuring admittance for herself to the abbess's parlour.
Reanimated by this intelligence, Olivia advised her to repair not only to the
suppe^-room, but to attend the previous concert, to which several strangers
would be admitted, among whom might probably be Vivaldi, When to this Ellena
objected her dread of the abbess's observation, and of the immediate seclusion
that would follow, Olivia soothed her sears of discovery, by offering her the
disguise of a nun's veil, and promising not only to conduct her to the
apartment, but to afford her every possible assistance toward her escape.

"Among the crowd of nuns, who will attend in that spacious apartmen^," Olivia
added, "it is improbable you would be distinguished, even if the sisters were
less occupied by amusement, and the abbess were at leisure to scrutinize. As it
is, you will hazard little danger of discovery; the Superior, if she thinks of
you at all, will believe that you are still a prisoner in your cell, but this
is an evening of too much importance to her vanity for any consideration,
distinct from that emotion, to divide her attention. Let hope, therefore,
support you, my child, and do you prepare a few lines to acquaint Vivaldi with
your consent to his proposal, and with the urgency of your circumstances; you
may, perhaps, find an opportunity of conveying them through the grate."

They were still conversing on this subject, when a particular chime sounded,
which Olivia said summoned the nuns to the concert-room; and she immediately
hastened for a black veil, while Ellena wrote a few lines that were necessary
for Vivaldi.

CHAP. XII.
The lawn concea^s her beauty
As the thin (...), just silvered by the rays,
The trembling moon: think ye it is shrouded from
The curious eye?

WRAPPED in Olivia's veil, Ellena descended to the music-room, and mingled with
the nuns, who were assembled within the grate. Among the monks and pilgrims
without it, were some strangers in the usual dress of the country, but she did
not perceive any person who resembled Vivaldi; and she considered, that, if he
were present, he would not venture to discover himself, while her nun's veil
concealed her as effectually from him as from the lady abbess. It would be
necessary, therefore, to seek an opportunity of withdrawing it for a moment at
the grate, an expedient, which must certainly expose her to the notice of
strangers.

On the entrance of the lady Abbess, Ellena's fear of observation rendered her
insensible to every other consideration; she fancied, that the eyes of the
Superior were particularly directed upon herself. The veil seemed an
insufficient protection from their penetrating glances, and she almost sunk
with terror of instant discovery.

The Abbess, however, passed on, and, having conversed for a few moments with
the padre Abate and some visitors of distinction, took her chair; and the
performance immediately opened with one of those solemn and impressive airs,
which the Italian nuns know how to give with so much taste and sweetness. It
rescued even Ellena for a moment from a sense of danger, and she resigned
herself to the surrounding scene, of which the coup-d' ^il, was striking and
grand. In a vaulted apartment of considerable extent, lighted by innumerable
tapers, and where even the ornaments, though pompous, partook of the solemn
character of the institution, were assembled about fifty nuns, who, in the
interesting habit of their order, appeared with graceful plainness. The
delicacy of their air, and their beauty, softened by the lawn that thinly
veiled it, were contrasted by the severe majesty of the lady Abbess, who,
seated on an elevated chair, apart from the audience, seemed the empress of the
scene, and by the venerable figures of the Father Abate, and his attendant
monks, who were arranged without that screen of wire-work, extending the whole
breadth of the apartment, which is called the grate. Near the holy father were
placed the strangers of distinction, dressed in the splendid Neapolitan habit,
whose gay coloring and airy elegance opposed well with the dark drapery of the
ecclesiastics; their plumed hats loftily overtopping the half-cowled heads and
gray locks of the monks. Nor was the contrast of countenances less striking;
the grave, the austere, the solemn, and the gloomy, intermingling with the
light, the blooming, and the debonnaire, expressed all the various tempers,
that render life a blessing or a burden, and, as with the spell of magic,
transform this world into a transient paradise or purgatory. In the back ground
of the picture stood some pilgrims, with looks less joyous and more demure than
they had worn on the road the preceding day; and among them were some inferior
brothers and attendants of the convent. To this part of the chamber Ellena
frequently directed her attention, but did not distinguish Vivaldi; and, though
she had taken a station near the grate, she had not courage indecorously to
withdraw her veil before so many strangers. And thus, if he even were in the
apartment, it was not probable he would venture to come forward.

The concert concluded without his having been discovered by Ellena, and she
withdrew to the apartment where the collation was spread, and where the Abbess
and her guests soon after appeared. Presently she observed a stranger, in a
pilgrim's habit, station himself near the grate; his face was partly muffled in
his cloak, and he seemed to be a spectator rather than a partaker of the feast.

Ellena, who understood this to be Vivaldi, was watchful for an opportunity of
approaching, unseen by the abbess, the place where he had fixed himself.
Engaged in conversation with the ladies around her, the Superior soon favored
Ellena's wish, who, having reached the grate, ventured to lift her veil for one
instant. The stranger, letting his cloak fall, thanked her with his eyes for
her condescension, and she perceived, that he was not Vivaldi! Shocked at the
interpretation which might be given to a conduct apparently so improper, as
much as by the disappointment, which Vivaldi's absence occasioned, she was
hastily retiring, when another stranger approached with quick steps, whom she
instantly knew, by the grace and spirit of his air, to be Vivaldi; but
determined not to expose herself a second time to the possibility of a mistake,
she awaited for some further signal of his identity, before she discovered
herself. His eyes were fixed upon her in earnest attention for some moments,
before he drew aside the cloak from his face. But he soon did so; -- and it was
Vivaldi himself.

Ellena, perceiving that she was known, did not raise her veil, but advanced a
few steps toward the grate. Vivaldi there deposited a small folded paper, and
before she could venture to deliver her own billet, he had retired among the
crowd. As she st^pped forward to secure his letter, she observed a nun hastily
approach the spot where he had laid it, and she paused. The garment of the
Recluse wafted it from the place where it had been partly concealed; and when
Ellena perceived the nun's foot rest upon the paper, she with difficulty
disguised her apprehensions.

A friar, who from without the grate addressed the sister, seemed with much
earnestness, yet with a certain air of secresy, communicating some important
intelligence. The fears of Ellena suggested that he had observed the action of
Vivaldi, and was making known his suspicions; and she expected, every instant,
to see the nun lift up the paper, and deliver it to the abbess.

From this immediate apprehension, however, she was released when the sister
pushed it gently aside, without examination, a circumstance that not less
surprised than relieved her. But, when the conference broke up, the friar,
hastily retreating among the crowd, disappeared from the apartment, and the nun
approached and whispered the Superior, all her terrors were renewed. She
scarcely doubted that Vivaldi was detected, and that his letter was designedly
left where it had been deposited, for the purpose of alluring her to betray
herself. Trembling, dismayed, and almost sinking with apprehension, she watched
the countenance of the Abbess, while the nun addressed her, and thought she
read her own fate in the frown that appeared there.

Whatever might be the intentions or the directions of the Superior, no active
measure was at present employed; the Recluse, having received an answer,
retired quietly among the sisters, and the Abbess resumed her usual manner.
Ellena, however, supposing she was now observed, did not dare to seize the
paper, though she believed it contained momentous information, and feared that
the time was now escaping which might facilitate her deliverance. Whenever she
ventured to look round, the eyes of the Abbess seemed pointed upon her, and she
judged from the position of the nun, for the veil concealed her face, that she
also was vigilantly regarding her.

Above an hour had elapsed in this state of anxious suspense, when the
collation concluded, and the assembly broke up; during the general bustle of
which, Ellena ventured to the grate, and secured the paper. As she concealed it
in her robe, she scarcely dared to enquire by a hasty glance whether she had
been observed, and would have withdrawn immediately to examine the contents,
had she not perceived, at the same instant, the Abbess quitting the apartment.
On looking round for the nun, Ellena discovered that she was gone.

Ellena followed distantly in the Abbess's train; and, as she drew nearer to
Olivia, gave a signal, and passed on to her cell. There, once more alone, and
having secured the door, she sat down to read Vivaldi's billet, trying to
command her impatience, and to understand the lines, over which her sight
rapidly moved, when, in the eagerness of turning over the paper, the lamp dropped
from her trembling hand and expired. Her distress now nearly reached despair.
To go forth into the convent for a light was utterly impracticable, since it
would betray that she was no longer a prisoner, and not only would Olivia
suffer from a discovery of the indulgence she had granted, b^t she herself
would be immediately confined. Her only hope rested upon Olivia's arrival
before it might be too late to practice the instructions of Vivaldi, if, indeed
they were still practicable; and she listened with intense solicitude for an
approaching footstep, while she yet h^ld, ignorant of its contents, the billet,
that probably would decide her fate. A thousand times she turned about the
eventful paper, and endeavored to trace the lines with her singer, and to
guess their import, thus enveloped in mystery; while she experienced all the
various torture that the consciousness of having in her hand the information,
on a timely knowledge of which her life, perhaps, depended, without being able
to understand it, could inf^ict.

Presently she heard advancing steps, and a light gleamed from the passage
before she considered they might be some other than Olivia's; and that it was
prudent to conceal the billet she held. The consideration, however, came too
late to be acted upon; for before the rustling paper was disposed of, a person
entered the cell, and Ellena beheld her friend. Pale, trembling, and silent,
she took the lamp from the nun, and eagerly running over Vivaldi's note,
learned that at the time it was written, brother Jeronimo was in waiting
without the gate of the nun's garden, where Vivaldi designed to join him
immediately, and conduct her by a private way beyond the walls. He added, that
horses were stationed at the foot of the mountain, to convey her wherever she
should judge proper; and conjured her to be expeditious, since other
circumstances, besides the universal engagement of the Recluses, were at that
moment particularly favorable to an escape.

Ellena, desponding and appalled, gave the paper to Olivia, requesting she
would read it hastily, and advise her how to act. It was now an hour and a half
since Vivaldi had said, that success depended upon expedition, and that he had
probably watched at the appointed place; in such an interval, how many
circumstances might have occurred to destroy every possibility of a retreat,
which it was certain the engagement of the Abbess and the sisters no longer
favored.

The generous Olivia, having read the billet, partook of all her young friend's
distress, and was as willing, as Ellena was anxious, to dare every danger for
the chance of obtaining deliverance.

Ellena could feel gratitude for such goodness even at this moment of agonizing
apprehension. After a pause of deep consideration, Olivia said, "in every
avenue of the convent we are now liable to meet some of the nuns; but my veil,
though thin, has hitherto protected you, and we must hope it may still assist
your purpose. It will be necessary, however, to pass through the refectory,
where such of the sisters as did not partake of the colation, are assembled at
supper, and will remain so till the first mattin calls them to the chapel. If
we wait till then, I fear it will be to no purpose to go at all."

Ellena's fears perfectly agreed with those of Olivia; and entreating that
another moment might not be lost in hesitation, and that she would lead the way
to the nun's garden, they quitted the cell together.

Several of the sisters passed them, as they descended to the refectory, but
without particularly noticing Ellena; who, as she drew near that alarming
apartment, wrapped her viel closer, and leaned with heavier pressure upon the arm
of her faithful friend. At the door they were met by the Abbess, who had been
overlooking the nuns assembled at supper, and missing Olivia had enquired for
her. Ellena shrunk back to allude observation and to let the Superior pass; but
Olivia was obliged to answer to the summons, Having, however, unveiled herself,
she was permitted to proceed; and Ellena, who had mingled with the crowd that
surrounded the Abbess, and thus escaped detection, followed Olivia with
faltering steps, through the refectory. The nuns were luckily too much engaged
by the entertainment at this moment, to look round them, and the fugitive
reached, unsuspected, an opposite door.

In the hall, to which they descended, the adventurers were frequently crossed
by servants bearing dishes from the refectory to the kitchen; and, at the very
moment when they were oppening the door, that led into the garden, a sister,
who had observed them, demanded whether thy had yet heard the mattin-bell,
since they were going toward the chapel.

Terrified at this critical interruption, Ellena pressed Olivia's arm, in
signal of silence, and was hastening forward, when the latter, more prudent,
paused, and calmly answering the question, was then suffered to proceed.

As they crossed the garden toward the gate, Ellena's anxiety lest Vivaldi
should have been compelled to leave it, increased so much, that she had
scarcely power to proceed. "O if my strength should fail before I reach it!"
she said softly to Olivia, "or if I should reach it too late!"

Olivia tried to cheer her, and pointed out the gate, on which the moonlight
fell; "At the end of this walk only," said Olivia, "see! -- where the shadows
of the trees open, is our goal."

Encouraged by the view of it, Ellena fled with lighter steps along the alley;
but the gate seemed to mock her approach, and to retreat before her. Fatigue
overtook her in this long alley, before she could overtake the spot so
anxiously sought, and, breathless and exhausted, she was once more compelled to
stop, and once more in the agony of terror exclaimed -- "O, if my strength
should fail before I reach it! -- O, if I should drop even while it is in my
view."

The pause of a moment enabled her to proceed, and she s^^pped not again till
she arrived at the gate; when Olivia suggested the prudence of ascertaining who
was without, and of receiving an answer to the signal, which Vivaldi had
proposed, before they ventured to make themselves known. She then struck upon
the wood, and, in the anxious pause that followed whispering voices were
distinctly heard from without, but no signal spoke in reply to the nun's.

"We are betrayed!" said Ellena softly, "but I will know the worst at once;"
and she repeated the signal, when to her unspeakable joy, it was answered by
three smart raps upon the gate. Olivia, more distrustful, would have checked
the sudden hope of her friend, till some farther proof ^ad appeared that it was
Vivaldi who waited without, but her precaution came too late; a key already
grated in the lock; the door opened, and two persons muffled in their garments
appeared at it. Ellena was hastily retreating, when a well known voice recalled
her, and she perceived, by the rays of a half-hooded lamp, which Jeronimo held,
Vivaldi.

"O heaven!" he exclaimed, in a voice tremulous with joy, as he took her hand,
"is it possible that you are again my own! If you could but know what I have
suffered during this last hour?" -- Then observing Olivia, he drew back till
Ellena expressed her deep sense of obligation to the nun.

"We have no time to loose," said Jeronimo sullenly; "we have stayed too long
alr^^dy, as you will find, perhaps."

"Farewell, dear, Ellena!" said Olivia, "may the protection of heaven never
leave you!"

The fears of Ellena now gave way to affectionate sorrow, as weeping on the
bosom of the nun; she said "farewell; O farewell, my dear, my tender friend! I
must never, never see you more, but I shall always love you; and you have
promised, that I shall hear from you; remember the convent della Pieta!"

"You should have settled this matter within," said Jeronimo, "we have been
here these two hours already."

"Ah Ellena!" said Vivaldi, as he gently disengaged her from the nun, "do I
then hold only the second place in your heart?"

Ellena, as she dismissed her tears, replied with a smile more eloquent than
words; and when she had again and again bade adieu to Olivia, she gave him her
hand, and quitted the gate.

"It is moonlight," observed Vivaldi to Jeronimo, "your lamp is useless, and
may betray us."

"It will be necessary in the church," replied Jeronimo, "and in some
circuitous avenues we must pass, for I dare not lead you out through the great
gates, Signor, as you well know."

"Lead on, then," replied Vivaldi, and they reached one of the cypress walks,
that extended to the church; but, before they entered it, Ellena paused and
looked back to the garden gate, that she might see Olivia once more again. The
nun was still there, and Ellena perceived her faintly in the moonlight, waving
her hand in signal of a last adieu. Ellena's heart was full; she wept, and
lingered, and returned the signal, till the gentle violence of Vivaldi withdrew
her from the spot.

"I envy your friend those tears," said he "and feel jealous of the tenderness
that excites them. Weep no more, my Ellena."

"If you knew her worth," replied Ellena, "and the obligation I owe her!" --
Her voice was lost in sighs, and Vivaldi only pressed her hand in silence.

As they traversed the gloomy walk, that led to the church, Vivaldi said, "Are
you certain, father, that not any of the brothers are doing penance at the
shrines in our way."

"Doing penance on a festival, Signor! they are more likely, by this time, to
be taking down the ornaments."

"That would be equally unfortunate for us," said Vivaldi; "cannot we avoid the
church, father?"

Jeronimo assured him, that this was impossible; and they immediately entered
one of its lonely aisles, where he unhooded the lamp, for the tapers, which had
given splendour, at an earlier hour, to the numerous shrines, had expired,
except those at the high altar, which were so remote, that their rays faded
into twilight long before they reached the part of the church where the
fugitives passed. Here and there indeed, a dying lamp shot a tremulous gleam
upon the shrine below, and vanished again, serving to mark the distances in the
long perspective of arches, rather than to enlighten the gloomy solitude; but
no sound, not even of a whisper, stole along the pavement.

They crossed to a door communicating with the court, and with the rock, which
enshrined the image of our Lady of mount Carmel. There the sudden glare of
tapers issuing from the cave, alarmed the fugitives, who had begun to retreat,
when Jeronimo, stepping forward to examine the place, assured them, there was
no symptom of any person being within, and that lights burned day and night
around the sh^ine.

Revived by this explanation, they followed into the cave, where their
conductor opened a part of the wirework enclosing the saint, and led them to
the extremity of the vault, sunk deep within which appeared a small door. While
Ellena trembled with apprehension, Jeronimo applied a key, and they perceived,
beyond the door, a narrow passage winding away into the rock. The monk was
leading on, but Vivaldi, who had the suspicions of Ellena, paused at the
entrance, and demanded whither he was conducting them.

"To the place of your des^^^ation," replied the brother, in a hollow voice; an
answer which alarmed Ellena, and did not satisfy Vivaldi. "I have given myself
to your guidance," he said, "and have confided to you what is dearer to me than
existence. Your life," pointing to the short sword concealed beneath his
pilg^im's vest, "your life, you may rely upon my word, shall answer for your
treachery. If your purpose is evil, pause a moment, and repent, or you shall
not quit this passage alive."

"Do you menace me!" replied the brother, his countenance darkening. "Of what
service would be my death to you? Do you not know that every brother in the
convent would rise to avenge i^?"

"I know only that I will make sure of one traitor, if there be one," said
Vivaldi, "and defend this lady against your host of monks; and, since you also
know this, proceed accordingly."

At this instant it occuring to Ellena, that the passage in question probably
led to the prison chamber, which Olivia had described as situated within some
deep recess of the convent, and that Je^onimo had certainly betrayed them, she
refused to go further. "If your purpose is honest," said she, "why do you not
conduct us through some direct gate of the convent? why are we brought into
these subterraneous labyrinths?"

"There is no direct gate but that of the portal," Jeronimo replied, "and this
is the only other avenue leading beyond the walls." "And why can we not go out
through the portal?" Vivaldi asked.

"Becuse it is beset with pilgrims, and lay brothers," replied Jeronimo. "And
though you might pass them safely enough, what is to become of the lady? But
all this you knew before, and was willing enough to trust me, then. The passage
we are entering opens upon the cliffs, at some distance. I have run hazard
enough already, and will waste no more time; for if you do not choose to go
forward, I will leave you, and you may act as you please."

He concluded with a laugh of derision, and was relocking the door, when
Vivaldi, alarmed for the probable consequence of his resentment, and somewhat
reassured by the indifference he discovered as to their pursuing the avenue or
not, endeavored to appease him, as well as to encourage Ellena; and he
succeeded in both.

As he fellowed in silence through the gloomy passage, his doubts were,
however, not so wholly vanquished, but that he was prepared for attack, and
while he supported Ellena with one hand, he held his sword in the other.

The avenue was of considerable length, and before they reached its extremity,
they heard music from a distance, winding along the rocks. -- "Hark!" cried
Ellena, "Whence come those sounds? Listen!"

"From the cave we have left," replied Jeronimo, "and it is midnight by that;
it is the last chaunt of the pilgrims at the shrine of our Lady. Make haste,
Signor, I shall be called for."

The fugitives now perceived, that all retreat was cut off, and that, if they
had lingered only a few moments longer in the cave, they should have been
surprised by those devotees, some one of whom, however, it appeared possible
might wander into this avenue, and still interrupt their escape. When Vivaldi
told his apprehensions, Jeromino, with an arch sneer, affirmed there was no
danger of that, "for the passage," he added, "is known only to the brothers of
the convent."

Vivaldi's doubts vanished when he further understood, that the avenue led only
from the cliffs without to the cave, and was used for the purpose of conveying
secretly to the shrine, such articles as were judged necessary to excite the
superstitious wonder of the devotees.

While he proceeded in thoughtful silence, a distant chime sounded hollowly
through the chambers of the rock. "The mattin-bell strikes!" said Jeronimo, in
seeming alarm, "I am summoned. Signora, quicken your steps;" an unnecessary
request, for Ellena already passed with her utmost speed; and she now rejoiced
on perceiving a door in the remote winding of the passage, which she believed
would emancipate her from the convent. But, as she advanced, the avenue
appeared extended beyond it; and the door, which stood a little open allowed
her a glimpse of a chamber in the cliff, duskily lighted.

Vivaldi, alarmed by the light, enquired, when he had passed, whether any
person was in the chamber, and received an equivocal answer from Jeronimo, who,
however, soon after pointed to an arched gate that terminated the avenue. They
proceeded with lighter steps, for hope now cheared their hearts, and, on
reaching the gate, all apprehension vanished. Jeronimo gave the lamp to
Vivaldi, while he began to unbar and unlock the door, and Vivaldi had prepared
to reward the brother for his fidelity, before they perceived that the door
refused to yield. A dreadful agitation seized on Vivaldi. Jeronimo turning
round, coolly said, "I fear we are betrayed; the second lock is shot! I have
only the key of the first."

"We are betrayed," said Vivaldi, in a resolute tone, "but do not suppose that
your dissimulation conceals you. I understand by whom we are betrayed.
Recollect my late assertion, and consider once more, whether it is your
interest to intercept us."

"My Signor," replied Jeronimo, "I do not deceive you when I protest by our
holy Saint, that I have not caused this gate to be fastened, and that I would
open it if I could. The lock, which holds it, was not shot an hour ago. I am
the more surprised at what has happened, because this place is seldom passed,
even by the holiest footstep; and I fear, whoever has passed now, has been led
hither by suspicion, and comes to intercept your ^light."

"Your wily explanation, brother, may serve you for an inferior occasion, but
not on this," replied Vivaldi, "either, therefore, unclose the gate, or prepare
for the worst. You are not now to learn, that, however slightly I may estimate
my own life, I will never abandon this lady to the horrors which your community
have already prepared for her."

Ellena, summoning her fleeting spirits, endeavored to calm the indignation of
Vivaldi, and to prevent the consequence of his suspicions, as well as to
prevail with Jeronimo to unfasten the gate. Her efforts were, however, followed
by a long altercation; but, at length, the art or the innocence of the brother,
appeased Vivaldi, who now endeavored to force the gate, while Jeronimo in vain
represented its strength, and the certain ruin that must fall upon himself, if
it should be discovered he had concurred in destroying it.

The gate was immovable; but, as no other chance of escaping appeared, Vivaldi
was not easily prevailed with to desist; all possibility of retreating too was
gone, since the church and the cave were now crowded with devotees, attending
the mattin service.

Jeronimo, however, seemingly did not despair of effecting their release, but
he acknowledged that they would probably be compelled to remain concealed in
this gloomy avenue all night, and perhaps the next day. At length, it was
agreed, that he should return to the church, to examine whether a possibility
remained of the fugitives passing unobserved to the great portal; and, having
conducted them back to the chamber, of which they had taken a passing glimpse,
he proceeded to the shrine.

For a considerable time after his departure, they were not without hope; but,
their confidence diminishing as his delay increased, their uncertainty at
length became terrible; and it was only for the sake of Vivaldi, from whom she
s^rupulously concealed all knowledge of the particular fate, which she was
aware must await her in the convent, that Ellena appeared to endure it with
calmness. Notwithstanding the plausibility of Jeronimo, suspicion of his
treachery returned upon her mind. The cold and earthy air of this chamber was
like that of a sepulcher; and when she looked round, it appeared exactly to
correspond with the description given by Olivia of the prison where the nun had
languished and expired. It was walled and valuted with the rock, had only one
small grated aperture in the roof to admit air, and contained no furniture,
except one table, a bench, and the lamp, which dimly showed the apartment. That
a lamp should be found burning in a place so remote and solitary, amazed her
still more when she recollected the assertion of Jeronimo, -- that even holy
steps seldom passed this way; and when she considered also, that he had
expressed no surprise at a circumstance, according to his own assertion, so
unusual. Again it appeared, that she had been, betrayed into the very prison,
designed for her by the Abbess; and the horror, occasioned by this supposition
was so great, that she was on the point of disclosing it to Vivaldi, but an
apprehension of the distraction, into which his desperate courage might
precipitate him, restrained her.

While these considerations occupied Ellena, and it appeared that any certainty
would be less painful than this suspense, she frequently looked round the
chamber in search of some object, which might contradict or confirm her
suspicion, that this was the death-room of the unfortunate nun. No such
circumstance appeared, but as her eyes glanced, with almost phrenzied
^agerness, she perceived something shadowy in a remote corner of the floor; and
on approaching, discovered what seemed a dreadful hieroglyphic, a mattrass of
straw, in which she thought she beheld the deathbed of the miserable recluse;
nay more, that the impression it still retained, was that which her form had
left there.

While Vivaldi was yet entreating her to explain the occasion of the horror she
betrayed, the attention of each was withdrawn by a hollow sigh, that rose near
them, Ellena caught unconsciously the arm of Vivaldi, and listened, aghast, for
a return of the sound, but all remained still.

"It surely was not fancied!" said Vivaldi, after a long pause, "you heard it
also?"

"I did!" replied Ellena.

"It was a sigh, was it not!" he added.

"O yes, such a sigh!"

"Some person is concealed near us," observed Vivaldi, looking round; but be
not alarmed, Ellena, I have a sword."

"A sword! alas! you know not -- But hark! there, again!"

"That was very near us!" said Vivaldi. "This lamp burns so fickly!" -- and he
held it high, endeavoring to penetrate the furthest gloom of the chamber.
"Hah! who goes there?" he cried, and stepped suddenly forward; but no person
appeared, and a silence as of the tomb, returned.

"If you are in sorrow, speak!" Vivaldi, at length, said; "from
fellow sufferers you will meet with sympathy. If your designs are evils --
tremble, for you shall find I am desperate."

Still no answer was returned, and he carried forward the lamp to the opposite
end of the chamber, where he perceived a small door in the rock. At the same
instant he heard from within, a low tremulous sound, as of a person in prayer,
or in agony. He pr^ssed against the door, which, to his surprise, yielded
immediately, and discovered a figure kneeling before a crucific, with an
attention so wholly engaged, as not to observe the presence of a stranger, till
Vivaldi spoke. The person then rose from his knees, and turning, showed the
silver temples and pale features of an aged monk. The mind and sorrowful
character of the countenance, and the lambent luster of his eyes, which seemed
still to retain somewhat of the sire of genius, interested Vivaldi, and
encouraged Ellena, who had followed him.

An unaffected surprise appeared in the air of the monk; but Vivaldi,
notwithstanding the interesting benignity of his countenance, feared to answer
his enquiries, till the father hinted to him, that an explanation was
necessary, even to his own safety. Encouraged by his manner, rather than
intimidated by his hint, and perceiving that his situation was desperate,
Vivaldi confided to the friar some partial knowledge of his embarrassment.

While he spoke, the father listened with deep attention, looked with
compassion alternately upon him and Ellena; and some harrassing objection
seemed to contend with the pity which urged him to assist the strangers. He
enquired how long Jeronimo had been absent, and shook his head significantly
when he learned that the gate of the avenue was fastened by a double lock. "You
are betrayed my children," said he, "you have trusted with the simplicity of
youth, and the cunning of age has deceived you."

The terrible conviction affected Ellena to tears; and Vivaldi, scarcely able
to command the indignation which a view of such treachery excited, was unable
to offer her any consolation.

"You, my daughter, I remember to have seen in the church this morning,"
observed the friar; "I remember too, that you protested against the vows you
were brought thither to seal. Alas! my child were you aware of the consequence
of such a proceeding?"

"I had only a choice of evils," Ellena replied.

"Holy father," said Vivaldi, "I will not believe, that you are one of those
who either assisted in or approved the persecution* of innocence. If you were
acquainted with the misfortunes of this lady, you would pity, and save her; but
there is now no time for detail; and I can only conjure you, by every sacred
consideration, to assist her to leave the convent! If there were leisure to
inform you of the unjustifiable means, which have been employed to bring her
within these walls -- if you knew that she was taken, an orphan, from her home
at midnight -- that armed ru^^ians brought her hither -- and at the command of
strangers -- that she has not a single relation surviving to assert her right
of independence, or reclaim her o^ her persecutors -- O, holy father, if you
knew all this!" -- Vivaldi was unable to proceed.

The friar again regarded Ellena with compassion, but still in thoughtful
silence. "All this may be very true," at length he said, "but" -- and he
hesitated.

"I understand you, father," said Vivaldi -- "you require proof; but how can
proof be adduced here? You must rely upon the honor of my word. And, if you
are inclined to assist us, it must be immediately! -- while you hesitate, we
are lost. Even now I think I hear the footsteps of Jeronimo."

He stepped softly to the door of the chamber, but all was yet still. The
friar, too, listened, but he also deliberated; while Ellena, with clasped hands
and a look of eager supplication and terror, awaited his decision.

"No one is approaching," said Vivaldi, "it is not yet too late! -- Good
father! -- If you would serve us, dispatch."

"Poor innocent!" said the friar, half to himself, "in this chamber -- in this
fatal place!" --

"In this chamber!" exclaimed Ellena, anticipating his meaning. "It was in this
chamber, then, that a nun was suffered to perish! and I, no doubt, am conducted
hither to undergo a similar fate!"

"In this chamber!" re-echoed Vivaldi, in a voice of desperation. "Holy father,
if you are indeed disposed to assist us, let us act this instant; the next,
perhaps, may render your best intentions unavailing!"

The friar, who had regarded Ellena while she mentioned the nun, with the
utmost surprise, now withdrew his attention; a few tears fell on his cheek, but
he hastily dried them, and seemed struggling to overcome some grief, that was
deep in his heart.

Vivaldi, finding that entreaty had no power to hasten his decision, and
expecting every moment to hear the approach of Jeronimo, paced the chamber in
agonizing perturbation, now pausing at the door to listen, and then calling,
though almost hopelessly, upon the humanity of the friar. While Ellena, looking
round the room in shuddering horror, repeatedly exclaimed, "On this very spot!
in this very chamber! O what sufferings have these walls witnessed! what are
they yet to witness!"

Vivaldi now endeavored to soothe the spirits of Ellena, and again urged the
friar to embrace this critical moment in saving her; "O heaven!" said he, "if
she is now discovered, her fate is certain!"

"I dare not say what that fate would be," interrupted the father, "or what my
own, should I consent to assist you; but, though I am old, I have not quite
forgotten to feel for others! They may oppress the few remaining years of my
life, but the blooming days of youth should flourish; and they shall flourish,
my children, if my power can aid you. Follow me to the gate; we will see
whether my key cannot unfasten all the locks that hold it."

Vivaldi and Ellena immediately followed the feeble steps of the old man, who
frequently stopped to listen whether Jeronimo, or any of the brothers, to whom
the latter might have betrayed Ellena's situation, were approaching; but not an
echo wandered along the lonely avenue, till they reached the gate, when distant
footsteps beat upon the ground.

"They are approaching, father!" whispered Ellena. "O, if the key should not
open th^se look^ instantly, we are lost! Har^, now I hear their voice -- they
call upon my name! Already they have discovered we have left the chamber."

While the friar, with trembling hands, applied the key, Vivaldi endeavored at
once to assist him, and to encourage Ellena.

The locks gave way, and the gate opened at once upon the moonlight mountains.
Ellena heard once more, with the joy of liberty, the midnight breeze passing
among the pensile branches of the palms, that loftily overshadowed a rude
platform before the gate, and rustling with fainter sound among the pendent
shrubs of the surrounding cliffs.

"There is no leisure for thanks, my children," said the friar, observing they
were about to speak, "I will fasten the gate, and endeavor to delay your
pursuers, that you may have time to escape. My blessing go with you!"

Ellena and Vivaldi had scarcely a moment to bid him "farewell!" before he
closed the door, and Vivaldi, taking her arm, was hastening toward the place
where he had ordered Paulo to wait with the horses, when on turning an angle of
the convent wall, they perceived a long train of pilgrims issuing forth from
the portal, at a little distance.

Vivaldi drew back; yet dreading every moment, that he lingered near the
monestery, to hear the voice of Jeronimo, or other persons, from the avenue, he
was sometimes inclined to proceed at any hazard. The only practicable path
leading to the base of the mountain, however, was now occupied by these
devotees, and to mingle with them was little less than certain destruction. A
bright moonlight showed distincttly every figure, that moved in the scene, and
the fugitives kept within the shadow of the walls, till, warned by an
approaching footstep, they crossed to the feet of the cliffs that rose beyond
some palmy hillocks on the right, whose dusky recesses promised a temporary
shelter. As they passed with silent steps along the winding rock, the
tranquillity of the landscape below afforded an affecting contrast with the
tumult and alarm of their minds.

Being now at some distance from the monastery, they rested under the shade of
the cliffs; till the procession of devotees, which were traced descending among
the thickets and hollows of the mountain, should be sufficiently remote. Often
they looked back to the convent, expecting to see lights issue from the avenue,
or to the portal; and attended in mute anxiety for the sullen murmurs of
pursuit; but none came on the breeze; nor did any gleaming lamp betray the
steps of a spy.

Released, at length, from immediate apprehension, Ellena listened to the
mattin-hymn of the pilgrims, as it came upon the still air and ascended toward
the cloudless heavens. Not a sound mingled with the holy strain, and even in
the measured pause of voices only the trembling of the foliage above was
distinguished. The responses, as they softened away in distance, and swelled
again on the wafting breeze, appeared like the music of spirits, watching by
night upon the summits of the mountains, and answering each other in celestial
airs, as they walk their high boundary, and overlook the sleeping world.

"How often, Ellena, at this hour," said Vivaldi, "have I lingered round your
dwelling consoled by the consciousness of being near you! Within those walls, I
have said, she reposes; they enclosed my world, all without is to me a de^art.
Now, I am in your presence! O Ellena! now that you are once more restored to
me, suffer not the caprice of possibility again to separate us! Let me lead you
to the first altar that will confirm our vows.

Vivaldi forgot, in the anxiety of a stronger interest, the delicate silence he
had resolved to impose upon himself, till Ellena should be in a place of safety.

"This is not a moment," she replied, with hesitation, "for conversation; our
situation is yet perilous, we tremble on the very brink of danger."

Vivaldi immediately rose; into what imminent danger," said he, "had my folly
nearly precipitated you! We are lingering in this alarming neighborhood, when
that feeble strain indicates the pilgrims to be sufficiently remote to permit
us to proceed!"

As he spoke, they descended cautiously among the cliffs, often looking back to
the convent, where, however, no light appeared, except what the moon shed over
the spires and tall windows of its cathedral. For a moment, Ellena fancied she
saw a taper in her favorite turret, and a belief, that the nuns, perhaps the
Abbess herself, were searching for her there, renewed ^er terror and her speed.
But the rays were only those of the moon, striking through opposite casements
of the chamber; and the fugitives reached the base of the mountain without
further alarm, where Paulo appeared with horses. "Ah! Signor mio," said the
servant, "I am glad to see you alive and merry; I began to fear, by the length
of your stay, that the monks had clapped you up to do penance for life. How
glad I am to see you Maestro!"

"Not more so than I am to see you, good Paulo. But where is the pilgrim's
cloak I bade you provide?"

Paulo displayed it, and Vivaldi, having wrapped it round Ellena, and placed her
on horseback, they took the road toward Naples, Ellena, designing to take
refuge in the convent della Pieta. Vivaldi, however, apprehending that their
enemies would seek them on this road, proposed leaving it as soon as
practicable, and reaching the neighborhood of villa Altieri by a circuitous
way.

They soon arrived at the tremendous pass, through which Ellena had approached
the monastery, and whose horrors were considerably heightened at this dusky
hour, for the moonlight fell only partially upon the deep barriers of the
gorge, and frequently the precipice, with the road on its brow, was entirely
shadowed by other cliffs and woody points that rose above it. But Paulo, whose
spirits seldom owned the influence of local scenery, jogged merrily along,
frequently congratulating himself and his master on their escape, and carolling
briskly to the echoes of the rocks, till Vivaldi, apprehensive for the
consequence of this loud gaiety desired him to desist.

"Ah Signor mio! I must obey you," said he, "but my heart was never so full in
my life; and I would fain sing, to unburden it of some of this joy. That scrape
we got into in that dungeon there, at what is the name of the place? was bad
enough, but it was nothing to this, because here I was left out of it; and you,
Maestro, might have been murdered again and again, while I, thinking of nothing
at all, was quietly airing myself on the mountain by moonlight. -- But what is
that yonder in the sky, Signor? It looks for all the world like a bridge; only
it is perched so high, that nobody would think of building one in such an out
of the way place, unless to cross from cloud to cloud, much less would take the
trouble of clambering up after it, for the pleasure of going over.

Vivaldi looked forward, and Ellena perceived the Alpine bridge, she had
formerly crossed with so much alarm, in the moonlight perspective, airily
suspended between tremendous cliffs, with the river far below, tumbling down
the rocky chasm. One of the supporting ^^^ffs, with part of the bridge, was in
deep shade, but the other feathered with foliage, and the rising surges at its
foot, were strongly illumined; and many a thicket wet with the spray sparkled
in contrast to the dark rock it overhung Beyond the arch, the longdrawn
prospect faded into misty light.

"Well, to be sure! exclaimed Paulo, "to see what curiosity will do! If there
are not some people have found their way up to the bridge already."

Vivaldi now perceived figures upon the slender arch, and, as their indistinct
forms glided in the moonshine, other emotions than those of wonder disturbed
him, l^st th^se might be pilgrims going to the shrine of our Lady, and who
would give information of his route. No possibility, however, appeared of
avoiding them, for the precipices that rose immediately above, and fell below,
forbade all excursion, and the road itself was so narrow, as scarcely to admit
of two horses passing each other.

"They are all off the bridge now, and without having broken their necks,
perhaps!" said Paulo, "where, I wonder, will they go next! Why surely, Signor,
this road does not lead to the bridge yonder; we are not going to pick our way
in the air too? The roar of those waters has made my head dizzy already; and
the rocks here are as dark as midnight, and seem ready to tumble upon one; they
are enough to make one despair to look at them; you need not have checked my
mirth, Signor."

"I would fain check your loquacity," replied Vivaldi. "Do, good Paulo, be
silent and circumspect; those people may be near us, though we do not yet see
them."

"The road does lead to the bridge then, Signor!" said Paulo dolorously. "And
see! there they are again; winding round that rock, and coming toward us."

"Hush! they are pilgrims," whispered Vivaldi, "we will linger under the shade
of these rocks while they pass. Remember Paulo, that a single indiscreet wo^d
may be fatal; and that if they hail us, I alone am to answer."

"You are obeyed, Signor."

The fugitives drew up close under the cliffs, and proceeded slowly, while the
words of the devotees, as they advanced, became audible.

"It gives one some comfort, said Paulo, "to hear cheerful voices, in such a
place as this. Bless their merry hearts! theirs seems a pilgrimane of pleasure;
but they will be demure enough, I warrant, by and by. I wish I" --

"Paulo have you so soon forgot?" said Vivaldi sharply.

The devotees, on perceiving the travelers, became suddenly silent; till he
who appeared to be the Father Director, as they passed said "Hail! in the name
of Our Lady of mount Carmel!" and they repeated the salutation in chorus.

"Hail!" replied Vivaldi, "the first mass is over," and he passed on.

"But if you make haste, you may come in for the second," said Paulo, jogging
after.

"You have just left the shrine, then?" said one of the party, "and can tell
us" -- "Poor pilgrims, like yourselves," replied Paulo, "and can tell as
little. Good morrow, fathers, yonder peeps the dawn!"

He came up with his master, who had hurried forward with Ellena, and who now
severely reproved his indiscretion; while the voices of the Carmelites, singing
the mattin-hymn, sunk away among the rocks, and the quietness of solitude
returned.

"Thank heaven! we are quit of this adventure," said Vivaldi.

"And now we have only the bridge to get over," rejoined Paulo, "and, hope, we
shall all be safe."

They were now at the entrance of it; as they passed the trembling planks, and
looked up the glen, a party of people appeared advancing on the road the
fugitives had left, and a chorus of other voices than those of the Carmelites,
were heard mingling with the hollow sound of the waters.

Ellena, again alarmed, hastened forward, and Vivaldi, though he endeavored to
appease her apprehension of pursuit, encouraged her speed.

"These are nothing but more pilgrims, Signor," said Paulo, "or they would not
send such loud shouts before them; they must needs think we can hear."

The travelers proceeded as fast as the broken road would permit; and were
soon beyond the reach of the voices; but as Paulo turned to look whether the
party was within sight, he perceived two persons, wrapped in cloaks, advancing
under the brow of the cliffs, and within a few paces of his horse's heels.
Before he could give notice to his master, they were at his side.

"Are you returning from the shrine of our Lady?" said one of them.

Vivaldi, startled by the voice, looked round, and demanded who asked the
question?

"A brother pilgrim," replied the man, "one who has toiled up th^se steep
rocks, till his limbs will scarcely bear him further. Would that you would take
compassion on him, and give him a ride."

However compassionate Vivaldi might be to the sufferings of others, this was
not a moment when he could indulge his disposition, without endangering the
safety of Ellena; and he even fancied that the stranger spoke in a voice of
dissimulation. His suspicions strengthened when the traveller, not repulsed by
a refusal, inquired the way he was going, and proposed to join his party: "For
these mountains, they say, are infested with banditti," he added, "and a large
company is less likely to be attacked than a small one."

"If you are so very weary, my friend," said Vivaldi, "how is it possible you
can keep pace with our horses? though I acknowledge you have done wonders in
overtaking them."

"The fear of these banditti," replied the stranger, "urged us on."

"You have nothing to apprehend from robbers," said Vivaldi, "if you will only
moderate your pace; for a large company of pilgrims are on the road, who will
soon overtake you."

He then put an end to the conversation, by clapping spurs to his horse, and
the strangers were soon left far behind. The inconsistency of their complaints
with their ability, and the whole of the^ manner, were serious subjects of
alarm to the fugitives; but when they had lost sight of them, they lost also
their apprehensions; and having, at length, emerged from the pass, they quitted
the high road to Naples, and struck into a solitary one that led westward
toward Aquila.

CHAP. XII.
"Thus sang the unlettered Swain to the oaks and rills,
While the still morn went forth with sandals gray,
And now the sun had stretched out all the hills,
And now was dropped into the western bay."
MILTON.
FROM the summit of a mountain, the morning light showed the travelers the
distant lake of Celano, gleaming at the feet of other lofty mountains of the
Appennine, far in the south. Thither Vivaldi judged it prudent to direct his
course, for the lake lay so remote from the immediate way to Naples, and from
the neighborhood of San Stefano, that its banks promised a secure retreat. He
considered, also, that among the convents scattered along those delightful
banks, might easily be found a priest, who would solemnize their nuptials,
should Ellena consent to an immediate marriage.

The travelers descended among the olive woods, and soon after were directed
by some peasants at work, into a road that leads from Aquila to the town of
Celano, one of the very few roads which intrudes among the wild mountains, that
on every side sequester the lake. As they approached the low grounds, the scent
of orange blossoms breathed upon the morning air, and the spicy myrtle sent
forth all its fragrance from among the cliffs, which it thickly tufted. Bowers
of lemon and orange spread along the valley; and among the cabins of the
peasants, who cultivated them, Vivaldi hoped to obtain repose and refreshment
for Ellena.

The cottages, however, at which Paulo enquired, were unoccupied, the owners
being all gone forth to their labor: and the travelers, again ascending,
found themselves soon after among the mountains inhabited by flocks, where the
scent of the orange was exchanged for the aromatic perfume of the pasturage.

"My Signor!" said Paulo, "is not that a shepherd's horn sounding at a
distance? If so, the Signora may yet obtain some refreshment."

While Vivaldi listened, a hautboy and a pastoral drum were heard considerably
nearer.

They followed the sound over the turf, and came within view of a cabin,
sheltered from the sun by a tuft of almond trees. It was a dairy-cabin
belonging to some shepherds, who at a short distance were watching their
flocks, and, stretched beneath the shade of chestnuts, were amusing themselves
by playing upon these rural instruments; a scene of Arcadian manners frequent
at this day, upon the mountains of Abbruzzo. The simplicity of their
appearance, approaching to wildness, was tempered by a hospitable spirit. A
venerable man, the chief shepherd, advanced to meet the strangers: and,
learning their wants, conducted them into his cool cabin, where cream, cheese
made of goat's milk, honey extracted from the delicious herbage of the
mountains, and dried sigs, were quickly placed before them.

Ellena, overcome with fatigue of anxiety, rather than that of traveling,
retired, when she had taken breakfast, for an hour's repose, while Vivaldi
rested on the bench before the cottage, and Paulo, keeping watch, discussed his
breakfast, together with the circumstances of the late alarm, under the shade
of the almond trees.

When Ellena again appeared, Vivaldi proposed that they should rest here during
the intense heat of the day; and, since he now considered her to be in a place
of temporary safety, he ventured to renew the subject nearest his heart; to
represent the evils that might overtake them, and to urge an immediate
solemnization of their marriage.

Thoughtful and dejected, Ellena attended for some time in silence to the
arguments and pleadings of Vivaldi. She secretly acknowledged the justness of
his representations, but she shrunk, more than ever, from the indelicacy, the
degradation of intruding herself into his family; a family, too, from whom she
had not only received proofs of strong dislike, but had suffered terrible
injustice, and been menaced with still severer cruelty. These latter
circumstances, however, released her from all obligations of delicacy or
generosity, so far as concerned only the authors of her suffering; and she had
now but to consider the happiness of Vivaldi and herself. Yet she could not
decide thus precipitately on a subject, which so solemnly involved the fortune
of her whole life; nor forbear reminding Vivaldi, affectionately, gratefully,
as she loved him, of the circumstances that withheld her decision.

"Tell me yourself," said she, "whether I ought to give my hand, while your
family -- your mother" -- She paused, blushed, and burst into tears.

"Spare me the view of these tears," said Vivaldi, "and a recollection of the
circumstances, that excite them. O, let me not think of my mother, while I see
you weep! Let me not remember, that her injustice and cruelty destined you to
perpetual sorrow!"

Vivaldi's features became slightly convulsed while he spoke; he rose, paced
the room with quick steps, and then quitted it, and walked under the shade of
the trees in the front of the cabin.

In a few moments, however, he commanded his emotion and returned. Again he
placed himself on the bench beside Ellena, and taking her hand, said solemnly,
and in a voice of extreme sensibility, "Ellena, you have long witnessed how
dear you are to me; you cannot doubt my love; you have long since promised --
solemnly promised, in the presence of her who is now no more, but whose spirit
may even at this moment look down upon us, -- of her, who bequeathed you to my
tenderest care, to be mine for ever. By these sacred truths, by these affecting
recollections! I conjure you abandon me not to despair, nor in the energy of a
just resentment, sacrifice the son to the cruel and mistaken policy of the
mother! You, nor I, can conjecture the machinations, which may be spread for
us, when it shall be known that you have left San Stefano. If we delay to
exchange our vows, I know, and I feel -- that you are lost to me for ever!"

Ellena was affected, and for some moments unable to reply. At length, drying
her tears, she said tenderly, "Resentment can have no influence on my conduct
toward you; I think I feel none toward the Marchesa -- for she is your
mother. But pride, insulted pride, has a right to dictate, and ought to be
obeyed; and the time is now, perhaps, arrived when, if I would respect myself,
I must renounce you." --

"Renounce me!" interrupted Vivaldi, "renounce me! And is it, then, possible
you could renounce me?" he repeated, his eyes still fixed upon her face with
eagerness and consternation, "Tell me at once, Ellena, is it possible?"

"I fear it is not," she replied.

"You fear! alas! if you fear, it is too possible, and I have lost you already!
Say, O! say but, that you hope it is not, and I, too, will hope again."

The anguish, with which he uttered this, awakened all her tenderness, and,
forgetting the reserve she had imposed upon herself, and every half-formed
resolution, she said, with a smile of ineffable sweetness, "I will neither fear
nor hope in this instance; I will obey the dictates of gratitude, of affection,
and believe that I never can renounce you, while you are unchanged."

"Believe!" repeated Vivaldi, "only believe! And why that mention of gratitude;
and why that unnecessary reservation? Yet even this assurance, feebly as it
sustains my hopes, is extorted; you see my misery, and from pity, from
gratitude, not affection, would assuage it. Besides, you will neither fear, nor
hope! Ah, Ellena! did love ever yet exist without fear -- and without hope? O!
never, never! I fear and hope with such rapid transition; every assurance,
every look of yours gives such force either to the one, or to the other, that I
suffer unceasing anxiety. Why, too, that cold, that heartbreaking mention of
gratitude? No Ellena! it is too certain that you do not love me! -- My mother's
cruelty has estranged your heart from me!

"How much you mistake!" said Ellena. "You have already received sacred
testimonies of my regard; if you doubt their sincerity, pardon me, if I so far
respect myself as to forbear entreating you will believe them."

"How calm, how indifferent, how circumspect, how prudent!" exclaimed Vivaldi
in tones of mournful reproach. "But I will not distress you; forgive me for
renewing this subject at this time. It was my intention to be silent till you
should have reached a place of more parmanent security than this; but how was
it possible, with such anxiety pressing upon my heart, to persevere in that
design! And what have I gained by departing from it? -- increase of anxiety --
of doubt -- of fear!"

"Why will you persist in such self-inflictions?" said Ellena. "I cannot endure
that you should doubt my affection, even for a moment. And how can you suppose
it possible, that I ever can become insensible of yours; that I can ever
forget the imminent danger you have voluntarily incurred for my release, or
remembering it, can cease to feel the warmest gratitude?

"That is the very word which tortures me beyond all others!" said Vivaldi; "is
it then, only a sense of obligation you own for me? O! rather say you hate me,
than suffer me to deceive my hopes with assurances of a sentiment so cold, so
circumscribed, so dutiful as that of gratitude!"

"With me the word has a very different acception, replied Ellena smiling. "I
understand it to imply all that is tender and generous in affection; and the
sense of duty which you say it includes, is one of the sweetest and most sacred
feelings of the human heart."

"Ah Ellena! I am too willing to be deceived, to examine your definition
rigorously; yet I believe it is your smile, rather than the accuracy of your
explanation, that persuades me to a confidence in your affection; and I will
trust, that the gratitude you feel is thus tender and comprehensive. But, I
beseech you name the word no more! Its sound is like the touch of the Torpedo,
I perceive my confidence chilled even while I listen to my own pronunciation of
it."

The entrance of Paulo interrupted the conversation, who advancing with an air
of mystery, and alarm, said in a low voice,

"Signor! as I kept watch under the almond trees, who should I see mounting up
the road from the valley yonder but the two barefooted Carmelites, that
overtook us in the pass of Chiari! I lost them again behind the woods, but I
dare say they are coming this way, for the moment they spy out this dairy-hut,
they will guess something good is to be had here; and the shepherds would
believe their flocks would all die if" --

"I see them at this moment emerging from the woods," said Vivaldi, "and now,
they are leaving the road and crossing this way. Where is our host, Paulo!

"He is without, at a little distance, Signor. Shall I call him?"

"Yes," replied Vivaldi, "or stay; I will call him myself. Yet, if they see me"
--

"Aye, Signor; or, for that matter, if they see me. But we cannot help
ourselves now; for if we call the host, we shall betray ourselves, and, if we
do not call him, he will betray us; so they must find us out, be it as it may."

"Peace! peace! let me think a moment," said Vivaldi. While Vivaldi undertook
to think, Paulo was peeping about for a hiding place, if occasion should
require one.

"Call our host immediately," said Vivaldi, "I must speak with him."

"He passes the lattices at this instant," said Ellena.

Paulo obeyed, and the shepherd entered the cabin.

"My good friend," said Vivaldi, "I must entreat that you will not admit those
friars whom you see coming this way, nor suffer them to know what g^ests you
have. They have been very troublesome to us already on the road; I will reward
you for any loss their sudden departure may occasion you."

"Nay for that matter, friend," said Paulo, "it is their visit only that can
occasion you loss, begging the Signor's pardon; their departure never
occasioned loss to any body. And to ^ell you the truth, for my master will not
speak out, we were obliged to look pretty sharply about us, while they bore us
company, or we have reason to think our pockets would have been the lighter.
They are designing people, friend, take my word for it; banditti perhaps, in
disguise. The dress of a Carmelite would suit their purpose, at this time of
the pilgrimage. So be pretty blunt with them, if they want to come in here; and
you will do well, when they go, to send somebody to watch which way they take,
and see them clear off, or you may lose a stray lamb perhaps."

The old shepherd lifted up his eyes and hands, "to see how the world goes!"
said he. "But thank you, Maestro, for your warning; they shall not come within
my threshold, for all their holy seeming, and its the first time in my life I
ever said nay to one of their garb, and mine has been a pretty long one, as you
may guess, perhaps, by my face. How old, Signor, should you take me to be? I
warrant you will guess short of the matter though; for one of these high
mountains" --

"I will guess when you have dismissed the travelers," said Vivaldi, "after
having given them some hasty refreshment without, they must be almost at the
door by this time. Dispatch, friend."

"If they should fall foul upon me, for refusing them entrance," said the
shepherd, "you will come out to help me, Signor? for my lads are at some
distance."

Vivaldi assured him that they would, and he left the cabin.

Paulo ventured to peep at the lattice, on what might be going forward without.
"They are gone round to the door, Signor, I fancy," said he, "for I see nothing
of them this way; if there was but another window! What foolish people to build
a cottage with no window near the door! But I must listen."

He stepped on tip-toe to the door, and bent his head in attention.

"They are certainly spies from the monstery," said Ellena to Vivaldi, "they
follow us so closely! If they were pilgrims, it is improbable, too, that their
way should lie through this unfrequented region, and still more so, that they
should not travel in a larger party. When my absence was discovered, these
people were sent, no doubt, in pursuit of me, and having met the devotees whom
we passed, they were enabled to follow our route."

"We shall do well to act upon this supposition," replied Vivaldi, "but though
I am inclined to believe them emissaries from San Stefano, it is not improbable
that they are only Carmelites returning to some convent on the lake of Celano."

"I cannot hear a syllable, Signor," said Paulo. "Pray do listen yourself! and
there is not a single chink in this door to afford one consolation. Well! if
ever I build a cottage, there shall be a window near -- "

"Listen!" said Vivaldi.

"Not a single word, Signor!" cried Paulo, after a pause, "I do not even hear a
voice! -- But now I hear steps, and they are coming to the door, too; they
shall find it no easy matter to open it, though;" he added, placing himself
against it. "Ay, ay, you may knock, friend, till your arm aches, and kick and
lay about you -- no matter for that."

"Silence! let us know who it is," said Vivaldi, and the old shepherd's voice
was heard without. "They are gone, Signor," said he, "you may open the door."

"Which way did they go," asked Vivaldi, when the man entered. "I cannot say,
as to that, Signor, because I did not happen to see them at all; and I have
been looking all about, too."

"Why, I saw them myself, crossing this way from the wood yonder," said Paulo.

"And there is nothing to shelter them from our view between the wood and this
cottage, friend," added Vivaldi; "What can they have done with themselves?"

"For that matter, gone into the wood again, perhaps," said the shepherd.

Paulo gave his master a significant look, and added, "It is likely enough,
friend; and you may depend upon it they are lurking there for no good purpose.
You will do well to send somebody to look after them; your flocks will suffer
for it else. Depend upon it, they design no good."

"We are not used to such sort of folks in these parts," replied the shepherd,
"but if they mean us any harm, they shall find we can help ourselves. As he
concluded he took down a horn from the roof, and blew a shrill blast that made
the mountains echo; when immediately the younger shepherds were seen running
from various quarters toward the cottage.

"Do not be alarmed friend," said Vivaldi, "these travelers mean you no harm,
I dear say, whatever they may design against us. But, as I think them
suspicious persons, and should not like to overtake them on the road, I will
reward one of your lads if you will let him go a little ways toward Celano,
and examine whether they are lurking on that route."

The old man consented, and when the shepherds came up, one of them received
directions from Vivaldi.

"And be sure you do not return till you have found them," added Paulo.

"No, master," replied the lad, "and I will bring them safe here you may trust
me."

"If you do, friend, you will get your head broke for your trouble. You are
only to discover where they are, and to watch where they go," said Paulo.

Vivaldi, at length, made the lad comprehend what was required of him, and he
departed; while the old shepherd went out to keep guard.

The time of his absence was passed in various conjectures by the party in the
cabin, concerning the Carmelites. Vivaldi still inclined to believe they were
honest people returning from a pilgrimage, but Paulo was decidedly against this
opinion. "They are waiting for us on the road, you may depend upon it, Signor,"
said the latter. "You may be certain they have some great design in hand, or
they would never have turned their steps from this dairy-house when once they
had spied it, and that they did spy it, we are sure."

"But if they have in hand the great design you speak of Paulo," said Vivaldi,
"it is probable that they have spied us also, by their taking this obsure road.
Now it must have occurred to them when they saw a dairy-hut, in so solitary a
region, that we might probably be found within -- yet they have not examined.
It appears, therefore, they have no design against us. What can you answer to
this, Paulo! I trust the apprehensions of Signora di Rosalba are unfounded."

"Why! do you suppose, Signor, they would attack us when we are safe housed, and
had these good shepherds to lend us a helping hand? No, Signor, they would not
even have shown themselves if they could have helped it; and being once sure we
were here, they would skulk back to the woods, and lurk for us in the road they
knew we must go, since, as it happens, there is only one."

"How is it possible," said Ellena, "that they can have discovered us here,
since they did not approach the cabin to enquire?"

"They came near enough for their purpose, Signora, I dare say; and, if the
truth were known, they spied my face looking at them through the lattice."

"Come, come," said Vivaldi, "you are an ingenious tormentor, indeed, Paulo, Do
you suppose they saw enough of thy face last night by moonlight, in that dusky
glen to enable them to recollect it again at a distance of forty yards? Revive,
my Ellena, I think every appearance is in our favor."

"Would I could think so too!" said she with a sigh.

"O! for that matter, Signora," rejoined Paulo, "there is nothing to be afraid
of; they should find tough work of it, if they thought proper to attack us,
lady."

"It is not an open attack that we have to fear," replied Ellena, "but they may
surround us with their snares, and defy resistance."

However Vivaldi might accede to the truth of this remark, he would not appear
to do so; but he tried to laugh away her apprehensions; and Paulo was silenced
for a while by a significant look from his master.

The shepherd's boy returned much sooner than they had expected, and he
probably saved his time that he might spare his labor, for he brought no
intelligence of the Carmelites. "I looked for them among the woods along the
road side in the hollow, yonder," said the lad, "and then I mounted the hill
further on, but I could see nothing of them far or near, nor of a single soul,
except our goats, and some of them do stray wide enough, sometimes; they lead
me a fine dance often. They sometimes, Signor, have wandered as far as Monte
Nuvola, yonder, and got to the top of it, up among the clouds, and the crags,
where I should break my neck if I climbed; and the rogues seemed to know it,
too, for when they have seen me coming, scrambling up, puffing and blowing,
they have ceased their capering, and stood peeping over a crag so fly, and so
quiet, it seemed as if they were laughing at me; as much as to say, "Catch us
if you can."

Vivaldi, who during the latter part of this speech had been consulting with
Ellena, whether they should proceed on their way immediately, asked the boy
some further questions concerning the Carmelites; and becoming convinced that
they had either not taken the road to Celano, or, having taken it, were at a
considerable distance, he proposed setting out, and proceeding leisurely; "For
I have now little apprehension of these people," he added, "and a great deal
lest night should overtake us before we reach the place of our destination,
since the road is mountainous and wild, and, further, we are not perfectly
acquainted with it."

Ellena approving the plan, they took leave of the good shepherd, who could
with difficulty be prevailed with to accept any recompense for his trouble, and
who gave them some further directions as to the road; and their way was long
cheered by the sound of the tabor, and the sweetness of the hautboy, wafted
over the wild.

When they descended into the woody hollow mentioned by the boy, Ellena sent
forth many an anxious look beneath the deep shade; while Paulo, sometimes
silent, and at others whistling and singing loudly, as if to overcome his
fears, peeped under every bough that crossed the road, expecting to discover
his friends the Carmelites lurking within its gloom.

Having emerged from this valley, the road lay over the mountains covered with
flocks, for it was now the season when they had quitted the plains of Apulia,
to feed upon the herbage for which this region is celebrated; and it was near
sunset, when, from a summit to which the travelers had long been ascending,
the whole lake of Celano, with its vast circle of mountains, burst at once upon
their view.

"Ah Signor!" exclaimed Paulo, "what a prospect is here! It reminds me of home;
it is almost as pleasant as the bay of Naples! I should never love it like that
though, if it were an hundred times finer."

The travelers stopped to admire the scene, and to give their horses rest,
after the labor of the ascent. The evening sun, shooting athwart a clear
expanse of water, between eighteen and twenty leagues in circumference, lighted
up all the town and villages, and towered castles, and spiry convents, that
enriched the rising shores; brought out all the various tints of cultivation,
and colored with beamy purple the mountains which on every side formed the
majestic background of the landscape. Vivaldi pointed out to Ellena the
gigantic Velino in the north, a barrier mountain, between the territories of
Rome and Naples. Its peaked head towered far above every neighboring summit,
and its white precipices were opposed to the verdant points of the Majella,
snow crowned, and next in altitude, loved by the flocks. Westward near woody
hills, and rising immediately from the lake, appeared Monte Salviano, covered
with wild sage, as its name imports, and once pompous with forests of chestnut;
a branch from the Appennine extended to meet it. "See," said Vivaldi, "where
Monte-Corno stands like a russian, huge, seared, threatening, and horrid! --
and in the south, where the sullen mountain of San Nicolo shoots up, barren and
rocky! From thence, mark how other overtopping ridges of the mighty Appennine
darken the horizon far along the east, and circle to approach the Velino in the
north!"

"Mark too," said Ellena, "how sweetly the banks and undulating plains repose
at the feet of the mountains; what an image of beauty and elegance they oppose
to the awful grandeur that overlooks and guards them? Observe, too, how many a
delightful valley, opening from the lake, spreads its rice and corn fields,
shaded with groves of the almond far among the winding hills; how gaily
vineyards and olives alternately chequer the acclivities, and how gracefully
the lofty palms bend over the higher cliffs."

"Ay, Signora!" exclaimed Paulo, "and have the goodness to observe how like are
the fishing boats, that sail toward the hamlet below, to those one sees upon
the bay of Naples. They are worth all the rest of the prospect, except indeed
this fine sheet of water, which is almost as good as the bay, and that
mountain, with its sharp head, which is almost as good as Vesuvius -- if it
would but throw out fire!"

"We must despair of finding a mountain in this neighborhood, so good as to do
that, Paulo," said Vivaldi, smiling at this stroke of nationalty; "though,
perhaps, many that we now see, have been volcanic."

"I honor them for that Signor; and look at them with double satisfaction; but
our mountain is the only mountain in the world. O! to see it of a dark night!
what a blazing it makes! and what a height it will shoot to! and what a light
it throws over the sea! No other mountain can do so. It seems as if the waves
were all on fire. I have seen the reflection as far as Capri, trembling all
across the gulf, and showing every vessel as plain as at noon day; ay, and
every sailor on the deck. You never saw such a sight, Signor."

"Why you do, indeed, seem to have forgotten that I ever did, Paulo, and also
that a volcano can do any mischief. But let us return, Ellena, to the scene
before us. Yonder, a mile or two within the shore, is the town of Celano,
whither we are going."

The clearness of an Italian atmosphere permitted him to discriminate the
minute through very distant features of the landscape; and on an eminence
rising from the plains of a valley, opening to the west, he pointed out the
modern Alba, crowned with the ruins of its ancient castle still visible upon
the splendour of the horizon, the prison and the tomb of many a Prince, who,
"fallen from his high estate," was sent from Imperial Rome to finish here the
sad reverse of his days; to gaze from the bars of his tower upon solitudes
where beauty or grandeur administered no assuaging feeling to him, whose life
had passed amidst the intrigues of the world and the feverish contentions of
disappointed ambition; to him, with whom reflection brought only remorse, and
anticipation despair; whom, no horizontal beam enlivened in the crimson evening
of life's dusty day."

"And such a scene as this," said Vivaldi, "a Roman emperor came, only for the
purpose of witnessing the most barbarous exhibition; to indulge the most savage
delights! Here, Claudius celebrated the accomplishment of his arduous work, an
aqueduct to carry the overflowing waters of the Celano to Rome, by a naval
fight, in which hundreds of wretched slaves perished for his amusement! Its
pure and polished surface was stained with human blood, and roughened by the
plunging bodies of the slain, while the gilded galleys of the Emperor floated
gaily around, and these beautiful shores were made to echo with applauding
yells, worthy of the furies!"

"We scarcely dare to trust the truth of history ^n some of its traits of human
nature," said Ellena.

"Signor," cried Paulo, "I have been thinking that while we are taking the air,
so much at our ease, here, those Carmelites may be spying at us from some hole
or corner that we know nothing of, and may swoop upon us, all of a sudden,
before we can help ourselves. Had we not (...) go on, Signor?"

"Our horses are, perhaps, sufficiently rested," replied Vivaldi, "but, if I
had not long since dismissed all suspicion of the evil intention of those
strangers, I should not willingly have stopped for a moment."

"But pray let us proceed," said Ellena.

"Ay, Signora, it is best to be of the safe side," observed Paulo. "Yonder,
below, is Celano, and I hope we shall get safe housed, there, before it is
quite dark, for here we have no mountain, that will light us on our way! Ah! if
we were within twenty miles of Naples now -- and it was an illumination night!"
--

As they descended the mountain, Ellena, silent and dejected, abandoned herself
to reflection. She was too sensible of the difficulties of her present
situation, and too apprehensive of the influence, which her determination must
have on all her future life, to be happy, though escaped from the prison of San
Stesano, and in the presence of Vivaldi, her beloved deliverer and protector.
He observed her dejection with grief, and not understanding all the finer
scruples that distressed her, interpreted her reserve into indifference toward
himself. But he forbore to disturb her again with a mention of doubts, or
fears; and he determined not to urge the subject of his late entreaties, till
he should have placed her in some secure asylum, where she might feel herself
at perfect liberty to accept or reject his proposal. By acting with an honor so
delicate, he unconsciously adopted a certain means of increasing her esteem and
gratitude, and deserved them the more, since he had to endure the apprehension
of losing her by the delay thus occasioned to their nuptials.

They reached the town of Celano before the evening closed; when Vivaldi was
requested by Ellena to enquire for a convent, where she might be lodged for the
night. He left her at the inn, with Paulo for her guard, and proceeded on his
search. The first gate he knocked upon belonged to a convent of Carmelites. It
appeared probable, that the pilgrims of that order, who had occasioned him so
much disquietude, were honest brothers of this house; but as it was probable
also, that if they were emissaries of the Abbess of San Stefano, and came to
Celano, they would take up their lodgings with a society of their own class, in
preference to that of any other, Vivaldi thought it prudent to retire from
their gates without making himself known. He passed on, therefore, and soon
after arrived at a convent of Dominicans, where he learned, that there were
only two houses of nuns in Celano, and that these admitted no other boarders
than permanent ones.

Vivaldi returned with this intelligence to Ellena, who endeavored to
reconcil^ herself to the necessity of remaining where she was; but Poulo, ever
active and zealous, brought intelligence, that at a little fishing town, at
some distance, on the bank of the lake, was a convent of Ursalines, remarkable
for their hospitality of strangers. The obscurity of so remote a place, was
another reason for prefering it to Celano, and Vivaldi proposing to remove
thither, if Ellena was not too weary to proceed, she readily assented, and they
immediately set off.

"It happens to be a fine night," said Paulo, as they left Celano, "and so,
Signor, we cannot well lose our way; besides, they say, there is but one. The
town we are going to lies yonder on the edge of the lake, about a mile and a
half off. I think I can see a gray steeple or two, a little to the right of
that wood where the water gleams so."

"No, Paulo," replied Vivaldi, after looking attentively. "I perceive what you
mean; but those are not the points of steeples, they are only the tops of some
tall cypresses."

"Pardon me, Signor, they are too tapering for trees; that must surely be the
town. This road, however, will lead us right, for there is no other to puzzle
us, as they say."

"This cool and balmy air revives me," said Ellena; "and what a soothing shade
prevails over the scene! How softened, yet how distinct, is every near object;
how sweetly dubious are the more removed ones; while the mountains beyond
character themselves sublimely upon the still glowing horizon."

"Observe, too," said Vivaldi, "how their broken summits, tipped with the beams
that have set to our lower region, exhibit the portraiture of towers and
castles, and embattled ramparts, which seemed designed to guard them against
the enemies, that may come by the clouds."

"Yes," replied Ellena, "the mountains themselves display a sublimity, that
seems to belong to a higher world; their besiegers ought not to be of this
earth; they can be only spirits of the air."

"They can be nothing else, Signora," said Paulo, "for nothing of this earth
can reach them. See! lady, they have some of the qualities of your spirits,
too; see! how they change their shapes and colors, as the sunbeams sink. And
now, how gray and dim they grow! See but how fast they vanish?"

"Every thing reposes," said Vivaldi. "Who would willingly travel in the day,
when Italy has such nights as this!"

"Signor, that is the town before us," said Paulo, "for now I can discern,
plain enough, the spires of convents; and there goes a light! Hah! hah! and
there is a bell, too, chiming from one of the spires! The monks are going to
mass; would we were going to supper, Signor!"

"That chime is nearer than the place you point to, Paulo, and I doubt whether
it comes from the same quarter."

"Hark! Signor, the air wafts the sound! and now it is gone again."

"Yes, I believe you are right, Paulo, and that we have not far to go."

The travelers descended the gradual slopes, toward the shore; and Paulo,
some time after, exclaimed, "See, Signor, where another light glides along!
See! it is reflected on the lake."

"I hear the faint dashing of waves, now," said Ellena, "and the sound of oars,
too. But observe, Paulo, the light is not in the town, it is in the boat that
moves yonder."

"Now it retreats, and trembles in a lengthening line upon the waters," said
Vivaldi. "We have been too ready to believe what we wish, and have yet far to
go"

The shore they were approaching formed a spacious bay for the lake immediately
below. Dark woods seemed to spread along the banks, and ascend among the
cultivated slopes toward the mountains; except where, here and there, cliffs,
bending over the water, were distinguished through the twilight by the
whiteness of their limestone precipices. Within the bay, the town became
gradually visible; lights twinkled between the trees, appearing and vanishing,
like the stars of a cloudy night; and, at length was heard the melancholy song
of boatmen, who were fishing near the shore.

Other sounds soon after struck the ear. "O, what merry notes!" exclaimed
Paulo, "they make my heart dance. See! Signora, there is a groupe, footing it
away so gaily on the bank of the lake yonder, by those trees. O, what merry
set! Would I were among them! that is, I mean, if you, Maestro, and the Signora
were not here."

"Well corrected, Paulo."

"It is a festival, I fancy," observed Vivaldi. -- These peasants of the lake
can make the moments (...) as gaily as the voluptuaries of the city, it seems."

"O! what merry music!" repeated Paulo. "Ah! how often I have footed it as
joyously on the beach at Naples, after sunset, of a fine night, like this;
with such a pleasant fresh breeze to cool one! Ah! there are none like the
fishermen of Naples for a dance by moonlight; how lightly they do trip it! O!
if I was ^ut there now! That is, I mean, if you, Maestro, and the Signora were
there too. O! what merry notes!"

"We thank you, good Signor Paulo," said Vivaldi, "and I trust we shall all be
there soon; when you shall trip it away, with as joyous a heart as the ^est of
them."

The travelers now entered the town, which consisted of one street, straggling
along the margin of the (...); and having enquired for the Ursaline convent,
were directed to its gates. The portress appeared immediately upon the ringing
of the bell, and carried a message to the Abbess, who as quickly returned an
invitation to Ellena. She alighted, and followed the portress to the parlour,
while Vivaldi remained at the gate, till he should know whether she approved of
her new lodging. A second invitation induced him also to alight; he was
admitted to the grate, and offered refreshment, which, however, he declined
staying to accept, as he had yet a lodging to seek for the night. The Abbess,
on learning this circumstance, courteously recommended him to a neighboring
society of Benedictines, and desired him to mention her name to the Abbot.

Vivaldi then took leave of Ellena, and, though it was only for a few hours, he
left her with dejection, and with some degree of apprehension for her safety,
which, though circumstances could not justify him in admitting, he could not
entirely subdue. She shared his dejection, but not his fears, when the door
closed after him, and she found herself once more among strangers. The
forlornness of her feelings could not be entirely overcome by the attentions of
the Abbess; and there was a degree of curiosity, and even of scrutiny,
expressed in the looks of some of the sisters, which seemed more than was due
to a stranger. From such examination she eagerly escaped to the repose from
which she had so long been withheld.

Vivaldi, meanwhile, had found an hospitable reception with the Benedictines,
whose sequestered situation made the visit of a stranger a pleasurable novelty
to them. In the eagerness of conversation, and, yielding to the satisfaction
which the mind receives from exercising ideas that have long slept in dusky
indolence, and to the pleasure of admitting new ones, the Abbot and a few of
the brothers sat with Vivaldi to a late hour. When, at length, the traveller
was suffered to retire, other subjects than those, which had interested his
host, engaged his thoughts; and he revolved the means of preventing the misery
that threatened him, in a serious separation from Ellena. Now, that she was
received into a respectable asylum, every motive for silence upon this topic
was done away. He determined, therefore, that on the following morning, he
would urge all his reasons and entreaties for an immediate marriage; and among
the brothers of the Benedictines, he had little doubt of prevailing with one to
solemnize the nuptials, which he believed would place his happiness and
Ellena's peace, beyond the influence of malignant possibilities.

CHAP. XIII.
"I under fair pretense of friend'y ends,
And well placed words of glozing courtesy,
Baited with reasons not unplausible,
Wind me into the easy-hearted man,
And hug him into snares."
MILTON.
WHILE Vivaldi and Ellena were on the way from San Stefano, the Marchese
Vivaldi was suffering the utmost vexation, respecting his son; and the Marchesa
felt not less apprehension, that the abode of Ellena might be discovered; yet
this fear did not withhold her from mingling in all the gaieties of Naples. Her
assemblies were, as usual, among the most brilliant of that voluptuous city,
and she patronized, as zealously as before, the strains of her favorite
composer. But, notwithstanding this perpetual dissipation, her thoughts
frequently withdrew themselves from the scene, and dwelt on gloomy forebodings
of disappointed pride.

A circumstance, which rendered her particularly susceptible to such
disappointment at this time, was, that overtures of alliance had been lately
made to the Marchese, by the father of a lady, who was held suitable, in every
consideration, to become his daughter; and whose wealth rendered the union
particularly desirable at a time, when the expenses of such an establishment as
was necessary to the vanity of the Marchesa, considerably exceeded his income,
large as it was.

The Marchesa's temper had been thus irritated by the contemplation of her
son's conduct in an affair, which so materially affected the fortune, and, as
she believed, the honor of his family; when a courier from the Abbess of San
Stefano brought intelligence of the flight of Ellena with Vivaldi. She was in a
disposition, which heightened disappointment into fury; and she forfeited, by
the transports to which she yielded, the degree of pity that otherwise was due
to a mother, who believed her only son to have sacrificed his family and
himself to an unworthy passion. She believed, that he was now married, and
irrecoverably lost. Scarcely able to endure the agony of this conviction, she
sent for her ancient adviser Schedoni, that she might, at least, have the
relief of expressing her emotion; and of examining whether there remained a
possibility of dissolving these long-dreaded nuptials. The phrenzy of passion,
however, did not so far overcome her circumspection as to compel her to
acquaint the Marchese with the contents of the Abbess's letter, before she had
consulted with her Confessor. She knew that the principles of her husband were
too just, upon the grand points of morality, to suffer him to adopt the
measures she might judge necessary; and she avoided informing him of the
marriage of his son, until the means of counteracting it should have been
suggested and accomplished, however desperate such means might be.

Schedoni was not to be found. Trifling circumstances increase the irritation
of a mind in such a state as was here is. The delay of an opportunity for
unburthening her heart to Schedoni, was hardly to be endured; another and
another messenger were dispatched to her Confessor.

"My mistress has committed some great sin, truly!" said the servant, who had
been twice to the convent within the last half hour. "It must lie heavy on her
conscience, in good truth, since she cannot support it for one half hour. Well!
the rich have this comfort, however, that, let them be ever so guilty, they can
buy themselves innocent again, in the twinkling of a ducat. Now a poor man
might be a month before he recovered his innocence, and that, too, not till
after many a bout of hard flogging."

In the evening Schedoni came, but it was only to confirm her worst fear. He,
too, had heard of the escape of Ellena, as well as that she was on the lake of
Celano, and was married to Vivaldi. How he had obtained this information he did
not choose to disclose, but he mentioned so many minute circumstances in
confirmation of its truth, and appeared to be so perfectly convinced of the
facts he related, that the Marchesa believed them, as implicitly as himself;
and her passion and despair transgressed all bounds of decorum.

Schedoni observed, with dark and silent pleasure, the turbulent excess of her
feelings; and perceived that the moment was now arrived, when he might command
them to his purpose, so as to render his assistance indispensable to her
repose: and probably so as to accomplish the revenge he had long mediated
against Vivaldi, without hazarding the favor of the Marchesa. So far was he
from attempting to sooth her sufferings, that he continued to irr^ate her
resentment, and exasperate her pride; effecting this, at the same time, with
such imperceptible art, that he appeared only to be palliating the conduct of
Vivaldi, and endeavoring to console his distracted mother.

"This is a rash step, certainly," said the Confessor; "but he is young, very
young, and therefore, does not foresee the consequence to which it leads. He
does not perceive how seriously it will affect the dignity of his house; -- how
much it will depreciate his consequence with the court, with the nobles of his
own rank, and even with the plebeians, with whom he has condescended to connect
himself. Intoxicated with the passions of youth, he does not weigh the value of
those blessings, which wisdom and the experience of maturer age know how to
estimate. He neglects them only because he does not perceive their influence ^n
society, and that lightly to resign them, is to regard himself in the view of
almost every mind. Unhappy young man! he is to be pitied fully as much as
blamed."

"Your excuses, reverend father," said the tortured Marchesa, "prove the
goodness of your heart; but they illustrate, also, the degeneracy of his mind,
and detail the full extent of the effects which he has brought upon his family.
It affords me no consolation to know, that this degradation proceeds from his
head, rather than his heart; it is sufficient that he has incurred it, and that
no possibility remains of throwing off the misfortune."

"Perhaps that is affirming too much," observed Schedoni.

"How, father!" said the Merchesa.

"Perhaps a possibility does remain," said he.

"Point it out to me, good father! I do not perceive it."

"Nay, my lady," replied the subtle Schedoni, corecting himself, "I am by no
means assured, that such possibility does exist. My solicitude, for your
tranquillity, and for the honor of your house, makes me so unwilling to
relinquish hope, that, perhaps, I only imagine a possibility in your favor.
Let me consider. -- Alas! the misfortune, severe as it is, must be endured;
there remain no means of escaping from it."

"It was cruel of you, father, to suggest a hope which you could not justify,"
observed the Marchesa.

"You must excuse my extreme solicitude, then," replied the confessor." "But
how is it possible for me to see a family of your ancient estimation brought
into such circumstances; its honors blighted by the folly of a thoughtless
boy, without feeling sorrow and indignation, and looking round for even some
desperate means of delivering it from disgrace." He paused.

"Disgrace!" exclaimed the Marchesa, "father, you -- you -- Disgrace! -- The
word is a strong one, but -- it is, alas! just. And shall we submit to this? --
Is it possible we can submit to it?"

"There is no remedy," said Schedoni, coolly.

"Good God! exclaimed the Marchesa "that there should be no law to prevent, or,
at least, to punish such criminal marriages?"

"It is much to be lamented," replied Schedoni.

"The woman who obtrudes herself upon a family, to dishonor it," continued the
Marchesa, "deserves a punishment nearly equal to that of a state criminal,
since she injures those who best support the state. She ought to suffer" --

"Not nearly, but quite equal," interrupted the confessor, "she deserves --
death!"

He paus^d, and there was a moment of profound silence, till he added -- "for
death only can obliviate the degradation she has occasioned; her death alone
can restore the original splendour of the line she would have sullied."

He paused again, but the Marchesa still remaining silent, he added, "I have
often marvelled that our lawgivers should have failed to perceive the justness,
nay the necessity, of such punishment!"

"It is astonishing," said the Marchesa, thoughtfully, "that a regard for their
own honor did not suggest it."

"Justice does not the less exist, because her laws are neglected," observed
Schedoni. "A sense of what she commands lives in our breasts; and when we fail
to obey that sense, is is to weakness, not to virtue, that we yield."

"Certainly," replied the Marchesa, "that truth never yet was doubted."

"Pardon me, I am not so certain as to that," said the Confessor; "when justice
happens to oppose prejudice, we are apt to believe it virtuous to disobey her.
For instance, though the law of justice demands the death of this girl, yet
because the law of the land forbears to enforce it, you, my daughter, even you!
though possessed of a man's spirit, and his clear perceptions, would think that
virtue bade her live, when it was only fear!"

"Ha!" exclaimed the Marchesa, in a low voice, "What is that you mean? You
shall find I have a man's courage also."

"I speak without disguise." replied Schedoni, "my meaning requires none."

The Marchesa mused, and remained silent.

"I have done my duty," resumed Schedoni, at length. "I have pointed out the
only way that remains for you to escape dishonor. If my zeal is displeasing --
but I have none."

"No, good father, no," said the Marchesa; you mistake the cause of my emotion.
New ideas, new prospects, open! -- they confuse, they distract me My mind has
not yet attained sufficient strength to encounter them; some woman's weakness
still lingers at my heart."

"Pardon my inconsiderate zeal," said Schedoni, with affected humility, "I have
been to blame. If yours is a weakness, it is, at least, an amiable one, and,
perhaps, deserves to be encouraged, rather than conquered."

"How, father! If it deserves encouragement, it is not a weakness, but a
virtue."

"Be it so," said Schedoni, coolly, "the interest I have felt on this subject,
has, perhaps, misled my judgment, and has made unjust. Think no more of it, or,
if you do, let it be only to pardon the zeal I have testified."

"It does not deserve pardon, but thanks," replied the Marchesa, "not thanks
only, but reward. Good father, I hope it will some time be in my power to prove
the sincerity of my words."

The Confessor bowed his head.

"I trust that the services you have rendered me, shall be gratefully repaid --
rewarded, I dare not hope, for what benefit could possibly reward a service so
vast, as it may, perhaps, be in your power to confer upon my family! What
recompense could be balanced against the benefit of having rescued the honor of
an ancient house!"

"Your goodness is beyond my thanks, or my desert," said Schedoni, and he was
again silent.

The Marchesa wished him to lead her back to the point, from which she herself
had deviated, and he seemed determined, that she should lead him thither. She
mused, and hesitated. Her mind was not yet familiar with attrocious guilt; and
the crime which Schedoni had suggested, somewhat alarmed her. She seared to
think, and still more to name it; yet, so acutely susceptible was her pride, so
stern her indignation, and so profound her desire of vengeance, that her mind
was tossed as on a tempestuous ocean, and these terrible feelings threatened to
overwhelm all the residue of humanity in her heart. Schedoni observed all its
progressive movements, and, like a gaunt tiger, lurked in silence, ready to
spring forward at the moment of opportunity.

"Is it your advice, then, father," resumed the Marchesa, after a long pause,
-- "is it your opinion -- that Ellena" -- She hesitated, desirous that Schedoni
should anticipate her meaning; but he chose to spare his own delicacy rather
than that of the Marchesa.

"You think, then, that this insidious girl deserves" -- She paused again, but
the Confessor, still silent, seemed to wait with submission for what the
Marchesa should deliver.

"I repeat, father, that it is your opinion this girl deserves severe
punishment." --

Undoubtedly replied Schedoni, "It is not also your own?"

"That not any punishment can be too severe?" continued the Marchesa. "That
justice, equally with necessity, demands -- her life? Is not this your opinion
too?"

"O! pardon me," said Schedoni, "I may have erred; that only was my opinion;
and when I formed it, I was probably too much under the influence of zeal to be
just. When the heart is warm, how is it possible that the judgment can be cool?"

"It is not then, your opinion, holy father," said the Marchesa with
displeasure.

"I do not absolutely say that," replied the Confessor -- "But I leave it to
your better judgment to decide upon its justness."

As he said this, he rose to depart. The Marchesa was agitated and perplexed,
and requested he would stay; but he excused himself by alleging that it was
the hour he must attend a particular mass.

"Well then holy father, I will occupy no more of your valuable moments at
present; but you know I highly estimate your advice, and will not refuse, when
I shall at some future time request it."

"I cannot refuse to accept an honor," replied the Confessor, with an air of
meekness, "but the subject you allude to is delicate," --

"And therefore I must value, and require your opinion upon it," rejoined the
Marchesa.

"I would wish you to value your own," replied Schedoni; "you cannot have a
better director."

"You flatter, father."

"I only reply, my daughter."

"On the evening of tomorrow, said the Marchessa, gravely, "I shall be at
vespers in the church of San Nicolo; if you should happen to be there, you will
probably see me, when the service is over, and the congregation is departed, in
the north cloister. We can there converse on the subject nearest my heart, and
without observation. -- Farewell!"

"Peace be with you, daughter! and wisdom counsel your thoughts!" replied
Schedoni, I will not fail to visit San Nicholo."

He folded his hands upon his breast, bowed his head, and left the apartment
with the silent foot-step, that indicates weariness and conscious duplicity.

The Marchesa remained in her closet, shaken by ever verying passions, and
ever-fluctuating opinions; meditating misery for others, and inflicting it only
upon herself.

CHAP. XIV.
Along the roofs sonds the low peal of Death,
And conscience trembles to the boading note;
She views his dim form floating over the aisles,
She hears mysterious murmurs in the air,
And voices, strange and potent hint in the crime
That dwell in thought within her secret sou^.

THE Marchesa repaired, according to her appointment, to the church of San
Nicolo, and, ordering her servants to remain with the carriage at a side-door,
entered the choir attended only by her woman.

When vespe^^s had concluded, she lingered till nearly every person had quitted
the choir, and then walked through the solitary aisle, to the north cloister.
Her heart was as heavy as her step; for when is it that peace and evil passions
dwell together? As she slowly paced the cloisters, she perceived a monk passing
between on the pillars, who, as he approached, lifted his crowl, and she knew
him to be Schedoni.

He instantly observed the agitation of her spirits, and that her purpose was
not yet determined according to his hope. But, though his mind became clouded,
his countenance remained unaltered; it was grave and thoughtful. The sternness
of his vulture-eye was, however, somewhat softened, and its lids were
contracted by subtlety.

The Marchesa bade her woman walk apart, while she conferred with her Confessor.

"This unhappy boy" said she, when the attendant was at some distance, "How
much suffering does his folly inflict upon ^^s family! My good father, I have
need of all your advice and consolation. My mind is perpetually haunted by a
sense of my misfortune; it has no respite; awake, or in my dream, this
ungrateful son alike pursues me! The only relief my heart receives is when
conversing with you -- my only counselor, my only disinterested friend."

The Confessor bowed. "The Marchesa is no doubt, equally afflicted with
yourself," said he; "but he is notwithstanding, much more competent to advise
you on this delicate subject than I am."

"The Marchesa has prejudices, father, as you well know; he is a sensible man,
but he is sometimes mistaken, and he is incorrigible in error. He has the
faults of a mind that is merely well disposed; he is destitute of the
descernment and the energy which would make it great. If it is necessary to
adopt a conduct, that departs in the smallest degree from those common rules of
morality which he has cherished, without examining them, from his infancy, he
is shocked, and shrinks from action. He cannot discrimnate the circumstances,
that render the same action virtuous or vicious. How then, father, are we to
suppose he would approve of the bold inflictions we meditate?"

"Most true!" said the artful Schedoni, with an air of admiration,

"We therefore, must not consult him," continued the Marchesa, "lest he should
now, as formerly, advance and maintain objections, to which we cannot yield.
What passes in conversation with you, father, is sacred, it goes no farther,"

"Sacred as a confession!" said Schedoni, crossing himself.

"I know not," -- resumed the Marchesa, and hesitated; "I know not" -- she
repeated in a yet lower voice, "how this girl may be disposed of; and this it
is which distracts my mind."

"I marvel much at that," said Schedoni. "With opinions so singularly just,
with a mind so accurate, yet so bold as you have displayed, is it possible that
you can hesitate at what is to be done! You, my daughter, will not prove
yourself one of those ineffectual declaimers, who can think vigorously, but
cannot act so! One way, only, remains for you to pursue, in the present
instance; it is the same which your superior sagacity pointed out, and taught
me to approve. Is it necessary for me to persuade her, by whom I am convinced?
There is only one way."

"And on that I have been long meditating," replied the Marchesa, "and, shall I
own my weakness? I cannot yet decide."

"My daughter! can it be possible that you should want courage to soar above
vulgar prejudice, in action, though not in opinion?" said Schedoni, who,
perceiving that his assistance was necessary to fix her fluctuating mind,
gradually began to steal forth from the prudent reserve, in which he had taken
shelter.

"If this person was condemned by the law," he continued, "you would pronounce
her sentence to be just; yet you dare not, I am humbled while I repeat it, you
dare not dispense justice yourself."

The Marchesa, after some hesitation, said, "I have not the shield of the law
to protect me, father: and the boldest virtue may pause, when it reaches the
utmost verge of safety."

"Never!" replied the Confessor, warmly; "virtue never trembles; it is her
glory, and sublimest attribute to be superior to danger, to despise it. The
best principle is not virtue till it reaches this elevation."

A philosopher might, perhaps, have been surprised to hear two persons
seriously defining the limits of virtue, at the very moment in which they
meditated the most atrocious crime; a man of the world would have considered it
to be mere hypocrisy; a supposition which might have disclosed his general
knowledge of manners, but would certainly have betrayed his ignorance of the
human heart.

The Marchesa was for some time silent and thoughtful, and then repeated,
deliberately, "I have not the shield of the law to protect me."

"But you have the shield of the church," replied Schedoni; "you should not
only have protection, but absolution."

"Absolution! -- Does virtue -- justice, require absolution father?"

"When I mention absolution for the action which you perceive to be so just and
necessary," replied Schedoni, "I accommodated my speech to vulgar prejudice,
and to vulgar weakness. And, forgive me, that since you, my daughter, descended
from the loftiness of your spirit to regret the shield of the law, I
endeavored to console you, by offering a shield to conscience. But enough of
this; let us return to argument. This girl is put out of the way of committing
more mischief, of injuring the peace and dignity of a distinguished family; she
is sent to an eternal sleep, before her time. -- Where is the crime, where is
the evil of this? On the contrary, you perceive, and you have convinced me,
that it is only strict justice, only selfdefence."

The Marchesa was attentive, and the confessor adde^ "She is not immortal; and
the few years more, (...) might have been allotted her, she deserves to
forfeit, since she would have employed them in cankering the honor of an
illustrious house."

"Speak low, father," said the Marchesa, though he spoke almost in a whisper;
"the cloister appears solitary, yet some person may lurk behind those pillars.
Advise me how this business may be managed; I am ignorant of the particular
means."

"There is some hazard in the accomplishment of it I grant," replied Schedoni,
"I know not whom you may confide in. -- The men who make a trade of blood" --

"Hush!" said the Marchesa, looking round through the twilight -- "a step!"

"It is the Friar's, yonder, who crosses to the choir," replied Schedoni.

They were watchful for a few moments, and then he resumed the subject,
"Mercenaries ought not to be trusted," --

"Yet who but mercenaries" -- interrupted the Marchesa, and instantly checked
herself. But the question thus implied, did not escape the Confessor.

"Pardon my astonishment," said he, "at the inconsistency, or, what shall I
venture to call it? of your opinions! After the acuteness you have displayed on
some points, is it possible you can doubt, that principle may both prompt and
perform the deed? Why should we hesitate to do what we judge to be right?"

"Ah! reverend father," said the Marchesa, with emotion, "but where shall we
find another like yourself -- another, who not only can perceive with justness,
but will act with energy?"

Schedoni was silent.

"Such a friend is above all estimation; but where shall we seek him?"

"Daughter!" said the monk, emphatically, "my zeal for your family is above all
calculation."

"Good father," replied the Marchesa, comprehending his full meaning, "I know
not how to thank you."

"Silence is sometimes eloquence," said Schedoni, significantly.

The Marchesa mused, for her conscience also was eloquent. She tried to
overcome its voice, but it would be heard; and sometimes such starts of
horrible conviction came over her mind, that she felt as one who, awaking from
a dream, opens his eyes only to measure the depth of the precipice on which he
totters In such moments she was astonished, that she had paused for an instant
upon a subject so terrible as that of murder. The sophistry of the confessor,
together with the inconsistencies he had betrayed, and which had not escaped
the notice of the Marchesa, even at the time they were uttered, though she had
been unconscious of her own, then became more strongly apparent, and she almost
determined to suffer the poor Ellena to Live. But returning passion, like a
wave that has recoiled from the shore, afterward came with recollected energy,
and swept from her feeble mind, the barriers, which reason and conscience had
begun to rear.

"This confidence with which you have thought proper to honor me," said
Schedoni, at length, and paused; "This affair so momentous" --

"Ay, this affair," interrupted the Marchesa, in a hurried manner, -- "but
when, and where, good father? Being once convinced, I am anxious to have it
settled."

"That must be as occasion offers," replied the Monk, thoughtfully. -- "On the
shore of the Adriatic, in the province of Apulia; not far from Manfredonia, is
a house that might suit the purpose. It is a lone dwelling on the beach, and
concealed from travelers, among the forests which spread for many miles along
the coast."

"And the people?" said the Marchesa.

"Ay, daughter, or why travel so far as Apulia? It is inhabited by one poor
man, who sustains a miserable existence by fishing. I know him, and could
unfold the reason of his solitary life; -- but no matter, it is sufficient that
I know him."

"And would trust him, father?"

"Ay, lady, with the life of this girl -- though scarcely with my own."

"How! If he is such a villian he may not be trusted! think further. But now,
you objected to a mercenary, yet this man is one!"

"Daughter, he may be trusted, when it is in such a case; he is safe and sure.
I have reason to know him."

"Name your reasons, father."

The Confessor was silent and his countenance assumed a very peculiar
character; it was more terrible than usual, and overspread with a dark,
cadaverous ^ue of mingled anger and guilt The Marchesa started involuntarily
as, passing by a window, the evening gleam that fell there, discovered it; and
for the first time she wished, that she had not committed herself so wholly to
his power. But the die was now cast; it was too late to be prudent; and she
again demanded his reasons.

"No matter," said Schedoni, in a stifled voice -- "she dies!"

"By his hands?" asked the Marchesa, with strong emotion. "Think, once more,
father."

They were both again silent and thoughtful The Marchesa, at length, said,
"Father, I rely upon your integrity and prudence;" and she laid a very
flattering emphasis upon the word integrity. "But I conjure you to let this
business be finished quickly; suspense is to me the purgatory of (...) world,
and not to trust the accomplishment of it to a second person." She paused and
then added, "I would not willingly owe so vast a debt of obligation to any
other than yourself."

"Your request, daughter, that I would not confide this business to a second
person, said Schedoni, with displeasure, "cannot be accorded to. Can you
suppose, that I myself" --

"Can I doubt that principle may both prompt and perform the deed," interrupted
the Marchesa with quicness, and anticipating his meaning, while she retorted
upon him his former words. "Why should we hesitate to do what we judge to be
right?"

The silence of Schedoni alone indicated his displeasure, which the Marchesa
immediately understood.

"Consider, good father," she added significantly, "how painful it must be to
me, to owe so infinite an obligation to a stranger, or to any other than so
highly valued a friend as yourself."

Schedoni, while he detected her meaning, and persuaded himself that he
despised the flattery, with which she so thinly veiled it, unconsciously
suffered his self-love to be soothed by the compliment. He bowed his head, in
signal of consent to her wish.

"Avoid violence, if that be possible," she added, immediately comprehending
him, "but let her di^ quickly! The punishment is due to the crime."

The Marchesa happened, as she said this, to cast her eyes upon the inscription
over a Confessional, where appeared, in black letters, these awful words, "God
hears thee!" It appeared an awful warning. Her countenance changed; it had
struck upon her heart. Schedoni was too much engaged by his own thoughts to
observe, or understand her silence. She soon recovered herself; and considering
that this was a common inscription for Confessionals, disregarded what she at
first considered as a peculiar admonition; yet some moments elapsed, before she
could renew the subject.

"You were speaking of a place, father," resumed the Marchesa -- "you mentioned
a" --

"Ay," muttered the Confessor, still musing -- "in a chamber of that house
there is" --

"What noise is that?" said the Marchesa, interrupting him. They listened. A
few low and querulous notes of the organ sounded at a distance, and stopped
again.

"What mournful music is that?" said the Marchesa in a faultering voice, "It
was touched by a fearful hand! Vespers were over long ago."

"Daughter," said Schedoni, somewhat sternly, "you said a man's courage. Alas!
you have a woman's heart."

"Excuse me father; I know not why I feel this agitation, but I will command
it. That chamber?" --

"In that chamber," resumed the Confessor, "is a secret door, constructed long
ago." --

"And for what purpose constructed?" said the fearful Marchesa.

"Pardon me daughter; it is sufficient that it is there: we will make a good use
of it. Through that door -- in the night -- when she sleeps" --

"I comprehend you," said the Marchesa, "I comprehend you. But why, you have
your reasons, no doubt, but why the necessity of a secret door in a house which
you say is so lonely -- inhabited by only one person?"

"A passage leads to the sea," continued Schedoni, without replying to the
question. "There, on the shore, when darkness covers it; there, plunged amidst
the waves, no stain shall hint of" --

"Hark!" interrupted the Marchesa, starting, "that note again!"

The organ sounded faintly from the choir, and paused, as before. In the next
moment a flow chaunting of voices was heard, mingling with the rising peal, in
a strain particularly melancholy and solemn.

"Who is dead?" said the Marchesa, changing countenance; "it is a requiem!"

"Peace be with the departed!" exclaimed Schedoni, and crossed himself; "Peace
rest with his soul!"

"Hark! to that chaunt!" said the Marchesa, in a trembling voice; "it is a
first requiem; the soul has but just quitted the body!"

They listened in silence. The Marchesa was much affected; her complexion
varied at every instant; her breathings were short and interrupted, and she
even shed a few tears, but they were those of despair, rather than of sorrow.
"That body is now cold," said she to herself, "which but an hour ago was warm
and animated! Those fine senses are closed in death! And to this condition
would I reduce a being like myself! Oh, wretched, wretched mother! to what has
the folly of a son reduced thee."

She turned from the Confessor, and walked alone in the cloister. Her agitation
increased; she wept without restraint, for her veil and the evening gloom
concealed her, and her sighs were lost amidst the music of the choir,

Schedoni was scarcely less disturbed, but his were emotions of apprehension
and contempt. "Behold, what is woman!" said he -- "The slave of her passions,
the dupe of her senses! When pride and revenge speak in her breast, she defies
obstacles, and laughs at crimes! Assail but her senses, let music, for
instance, touch the feeble chord of her heart, and echo to her fancy, and lo!
all her perceptions change: -- she shrinks from an act she had but an instant
before believed meritorious, yields to some new emotion, and sinks -- the
victim of a sound! O, weak and contemptible being!"

The Marchesa, at least seemed to justify his observations. The desperate
passions, which had resisted every remonstrance of reason and humanity, were
vanquished only by other passions; and her senses touched by the mournful
melody of music, and her superstitious fears awakened by the occurrence of a
requiem for the dead, at the very moment when she was planning murder, she
yielded, for a while, to the united influence of pity and terror. Her agitation
did not subside; but she returned to the Confessor.

"We will converse on this business at some future time." said she; "at
present, my spirits are disordered. Good night, father! Remember me in your
orisons."

"Peace, be with you, Lady!" said the confessor, bowing gravely. "You shall not
be forgotten. Be resolute, and yourself."

The Marchesa beckoned her woman to approach, when, drawing her veil closer
and, leaning upon the attendant's arm, she left the cloister, Schedoni remained
for a moment on the spot, looking after her, till her figure was lost in the
gloom of the long perspective; he then with thoughtful steps, quitted the
cloister by another door. He was disappointed, but he did not despair.

CHAP. XV.
"The lonely mountains over
And the resounding shore,
A voice of weeping heard, and loud lament!
From haunted spring, and dale,
Edged with poplar pale,
The parting genius is with sighing sent;
With flower-inwoven tresses torn
The nymphs in twilight shade of tangled thicket mourn."
MILTON.
WHILE the Marchesa and the monk were thus meditating conspiraces against
Ellena, she was still in the Ursaline convent on the lake of Celano. In this
obscure sanctuary, indisposition, the consequence of the long and severe
anxiety she had suffered, compelled her to remain. A fever was on her spirits,
and an universal lassitude prevailed over her frame; which became the more
effectual, from her very solicitude to conquer it. Every approaching day she
hoped she should be able to pursue her journey homeward, yet every day found
her as incapable of traveling as the last, and the second week was already
gone, before the fine air of Celano, and the tranquillity of her asylum, began
to revive her. Vivaldi who was her daily visitor at the grate of the convent,
and who, watching, over her with intense solicitude, had hitherto forborne to
renew a subject, which, by agitating her spirits, might affect her health, now,
that her health strengthened, ventured gradually to mention his fears lest the
place of her retreat should be discovered, and lest he yet might irrecoverably
lose her, unless she would approve of their speedy marriage. At every visit he
now urged the subject, represented the dangers that surrounded them; and
repeated his arguments and entreaties; for now, when he believed that time was
pressing forward fatal evils, he could no longer attend to the delicate
scruples, that bade him be sparing in entreaty. Ellena, had she obeyed the
dictates of her heart, would have rewarded his attachment and his services by a
frank approbation of his proposal; but the objections which reason exhibited
against such a concession, she could neither overcome or disregard.

Vivaldi, after he had again represented their present dangers, and claimed the
promise of her hand, received in the presence of her deceased relative, Signora
Bianchi, gently ventured to remind her, that an event as sudden as lamentable,
had first deferred their nuptials, and that if Bianchi had lived, Ellena would
have bestowed, long since, the vows he now solicited. Again he entreated her,
by every sacred and tender recollection, to conclude the fearful uncertainty of
their fate, and to bestow upon him the right to protect her, before they
ventured forth from this temporary asylum.

Ellena immediately admitted the sacredness of the promise, which she had
formerly given, and assured Vivaldi that she considered herself as indissolubly
bound to wed him as if it had been given at the altar; but she objected to a
confirmation of it, till his family should seem willing to receive her for
their daughter; when forgetting the injuries she had received from them, she
would no longer refuse their alliance. She added, that Vivaldi ought to be more
jealous of the dignity of the woman, whom he honored with his esteem, than to
permit her making a greater concession..

Vivaldi felt the full force of this appeal; he recollected, with anguish,
circumstances of which she was happily ignorant, but which served to strengthen
with him the justness of her reproof. And, as the aspersions which the Marchesa
had thrown upon (...), crowed to his memory, pride and indignation swelled his
heart, and so far overcame apprehension of hazard, that he formed a momentary
resolution to abandon every other consideration, to that of asserting the
respect which was due to Ellena, and to forbear claiming her for his wife, till
his family should make an acknowledgment of their error, and willingly admit
her in the rank of their child. But this resolution was as transient as
plausible; other considerations, and former fears pressed upon him. He
perceived the strong improbability, that they would ever make a voluntary
sacrifice of their pride to his love; or yield mistakes, nurtured by prejudice,
and by willing indulgence, to truth and a sense of justice. In the mean time,
the plans, which would be formed for separating him from Ellena, might succeed,
and he should lose her for ever. Above all, it appeared, that the best, the
only method, which remained for confuting the daring aspersions that had
affected her name, was, by proving the high respect he himself felt for her,
and presenting her to the world in the sacred character of his wife. These
considerations quickly determined him to persevere in his suit; but it was
impossible to urge them to Ellena, since the circumstances they must unfold,
would not only shock her delicacy and afflict her heart, but would furnish the
proper pride she cherished with new arguments against approaching a family, who
had thus grossly insulted her.

While these considerations occupied him, the emotion they occasioned did not
escape Ellena's observation; it increased, as he reflected on the impossibility
of urging them to her, and on the hopelessness of prevailing with her, unless
he could produce new arguments in his favor. His unaffected distress awakened
all her tenderness and gratitude; she asked herself whether she ought any
longer to assert her own rights, when by doing so, she sacrificed the peace of
him, who had incurred so much danger for her sake, who had rescued her from
severe oppression, and had so long and so well proved the strength of his
affection.

As she applied these questions, she appeared to herself an unjust and selfish
being, unwilling to make any sacrifice for the tranquillity of him, who had
given her liberty, even at the risk of his life. Her very virtues, now that
they were carried to excess, seemed to her to border on vices; her sense of
dignity appeared, to be narrow pride; her delicacy weakness; her moderated
affection cold ingratitude; and her circumspection, little less than prudence
degenerated into meanness.

Vivaldi, as apt in admitting hope as fear, immediately perceived her
resolution beginning to yield, and he urged again every argument which was
likely to prevail over it. But the subject was too important for Ellena, to be
immediately decided upon; he departed with a faint assurance of encouragement;
and she forbade him to return till the following day, when she would acquaint
him with her final determination.

This interval was, perhaps, the most painful he had ever experienced. Alone,
and on the banks of the lake, he passed many hours in alternate hope and fear;
in endeavoring to anticipate the decision, on which seemed suspended all his
future peace, and abruptly recoiling from it, as often as imagination
represented it to be adverse.

Of the walls, that enclosed her he scarcely ever lost sight; the view of them
seemed to cherish his hopes, and, while he gazed upon their rugged surface,
Ellena alone was pictured on his fancy; till his anxiety to learn her
disposition toward him arose to agony, and he would abruptly leave the spot.
But an invisible spell still seemed to attract him back again, and evening
found him pacing slowly beneath the shade of those melancholy boundaries that
concealed his Ellena.

Her day was not more tranquil. Whenever prudence and decorous pride forbade
her to become a member of the Vivaldi family, as constantly did gratitude,
affection, irresistible tenderness plead the cause of Vivaldi. The memory of
past times returned; and the very accents of the deceased seemed to murmur from
the grave, and command her to fulfill the engagement, which had soothed the
dying moments of Bianchi.

On the following morning, Vivaldi was at the gates of the convent, long before
the appointed hour, and he lingered in dreadful impatience, till the clock
struck the signal for his entrance.

Ellena was already in the parlour; she was alone, and rose in disorder on his
approach. His steps faultered, his voice was lost, and his eyes only, which he
fixed with a wild earnestness on here is, had power to inquire her resolution.
She observed the paleness of his countenance, and his emotion, with a mixture
of concern and approbation. At that moment, he perceived her smile, and hold
out her hand to him; and fear, care, and doubt vanished at once from his mind.
He was incapable of thanking her, but sighed deeply as he pressed her hand,
and, overcome with joy, supported himself against the grate that separated them.

"You are, then, indeed my own!" said Vivaldi, at length recovering his voice
-- "We shall be no more parted -- you are mine for ever! But your countenance
changes! O heaven! surely I have not mistaken! Speak! I conjure you, Ellena;
relieve me from these terrible doubts!"

"I am yours, Vivaldi," replied Ellena faintly, "oppression can part us no
more."

She wept, and drew her veil over her eyes,

"What mean those tears?" said Vivaldi, with alarm. "Ah! Ellena," he added in a
softened voice, "should tears mingle with such moments as these! ^ould your
tears fall upon my heart now! They tell me, that your consent is given with
reluctance -- with grief; that your love is feeble, your heart -- yes Ellena!
that your whole heart is no longer mine!"

"They ought rather to tell you," replied Ellena, "that it is all your own;
that my affection never was more powerful than now, when it can overcome every
consideration with respect to your family, and urge me to a step which must
degrade me in their eyes. -- and, I fear, in my own,"

"O retract that cruel assertion!" interrupted Vivaldi, "Degrade you in your
own! -- degrade you in their eyes!" He was much agitated; his countenance was
flushed, and air of more than usual dignity dilated his figure,

"The time shall come, my Ellena." he added with energy, "when they shall
understand your worth, and acknowledge your excellence. O! that I were an
Emperor, that I might show to all the world how much I love and honor you!"

Ellena gave him her hand, and, withdrawing her veil, smiled on him through her
tears, with gratitude and reviving courage.

Before Vivaldi retired to the convent, he obtained her consent to consult with
an aged Benedictine, whom he had engaged in his interest, as to the hour in
which the marriage might be solemnized with least observation. The priest
informed him, that at the conclusion of the vesper-service, he should be
disengaged for several hours; and that, as the first hour after sunset was
more solitary than any other, the brotherhood being then assembled in the
refactory, he would meet Vivaldi and Ellena at that time, in a chapel on the
edge of the lake, a short distance from the Benedictiue convent, to which it
belonged, and celebrate their nuptials.

With this proposal, Vivaldi immediately returned to Ellena; when it was agreed
that the party should assemble by the hour mentioned by the priest. Ellena, who
had thought it proper to mention her intention to the Abbess of the Ursalines,
was, by her parmission, to be attended by a lay-sister; and Vivaldi was to meet
her without the walls, and conduct her to the altar. When the ceremony was
over, the fujitives were to embark in a vessel, hired for the purpose, and
crossing the lake, proceed toward Naples. Vivaldi again withdrew to engage a
boat, and Ellena to prepare for the continuance of her journey.

As the appointed hour drew near, her spirits sunk, and she watched with
melancholy foreboding, the sun retiring amidst stormy clouds, and his rays
fading from the highest points of the mountains, till the gloom of twilight
prevailed over the scene. She then left her apartment, took a grateful leave of
the hospitable Abbess, and, attended by the lay-sister, quitted the convent.

Immediately without the gate she was met by Vivaldi, whose looks, as he put
her arm within his, gently reproached her for the dejection of her air.

They walked in silence toward the chapel of San Sebastian. The scene appeared
to sympathize with the spirits of Ellena. It was a gloomy evening, and the
lake, which broke in dark waves upon the shore, mingled its hollow sounds with
those of the wind, that bowed the lofty pines, and swept in gusts among the
rocks. She observed with alarm the heavy thunder clouds, that rolled along the
sides of the mountains and the birds circling swiftly over the waters, and
scudding away to their nests among the cliffs; and she noticed to Vivaldi,
that, as a storm seemed approaching, she wished to avoid crossing the lake. He
immediately ordered Paulo to dismiss the boat, and to be in waiting with a
carriage, that, if the weather should become clear, they might not be detained
longer than was otherwise necessary.

As they approached the chapel, Ellena fixed her eyes on the mournful cypresses
which waved over it, and sighed. "Those," she said, "are funeral mementos --
not such as should grace the altar of marriage! Vivaldi, I could be
superstitious. -- Think you not they are portentous of future misfortune? But
forgive me my spirits are weak,"

Vivaldi endeavored to soothe her mind, and tenderly reproached her for the
sadness she indulged. Thus they entered the chapel. Silence, and a kind of
gloomy sepulchral light prevailed within. The venerable Benedictine, with a
brother, who was to serve as guardian to the bride, were already there, but
they were kneeling, and engaged in prayer.

Vivaldi led the trembling Ellena to the altar, where they waited till the
Benedictines should have finished, and these were moments of great emotion. She
often looked round the dusky chapel, in fearful expectation of discovering some
lurking observer; and though she knew it to be very improbable, that any person
in this neighborhood could be interested in interrupting the ceremony, her
mind involuntarily admitted the possibility of it. Once, indeed, as her eyes
glanced over a casement, Ellena fancied she distinguished a human face laid
close to the glass, as if to watch what was passing within; but when she looked
again, the apparition was gone. Notwithstanding this, she listened with anxiety
to the uncertain sounds without, and sometimes started as the surges of the
lake dashed over the rock below, almost believing she heard the steps and
whispering voices of men in the avenues of the chapel. She tried, however, to
subdue apprehension, by considering, that if this were true, an harmless
curiosity might have attracted some inhabitants of the convent hither, and her
spirits became more composed, till she observed a door open a little way, and a
dark countenance looking from behind it. In the next instant it retreated, and
the door was closed.

Vivaldi, who perceived Ellena's complexion change, as she laid her hand on his
arm, followed her eyes to the door, but no person appearing, he enquired the
cause of her alarm.

"We are observed," said Ellena, "some person appeared at that door!"

"And if we are observed, my love," replied Vivaldi, "who is there in this
neighborhood whose observation we can have reason to fear? Good father,
dispatch," he added, turning to the priest, "you forget that we are waiting."

The officiating priest made a signal that he had nearly concluded his orison;
but the other brother rose immediately, and spoke with Vivaldi, who desired
that the doors of the chapel might be fastened to prevent intrusion.

"We dare not bar the gates of this holy temple," replied the Benedictine, "it
is a sanctuary, and never may be closed."

"But you will allow me to repress idle curiosity," said Vivaldi, "and to
enquire who watches beyond that door? The tranquillity of this lady demands thus
much."

The brother assented, and Vivaldi stepped to the door; but perceiving no
person in the obscure passage beyond, it, he returned with lighter steps to the
altar, from which the officiating priest now rose.

"My children," said he, "I have made you wait, -- but an old man's prayers are
not less important than a young man's vows, though this is not a moment when
you will admit that truth."

"I will allow whatever you please, good father." replied Vivaldi, "if you will
administer those vows, without further delay; -- time presses."

The venerable priest took his station at the altar, and opened the book.
Vivaldi placed himself on his right hand, and with looks of anxious love,
endeavored to encourage Ellena, who with a dejected countenance, which her
veil but ill concealed, and eyes fixed on the ground, learned on her attendant
sister. The figure and homely features of this sister; the tall stature and
harsh visage of the brother, clothed in the gray habit of his order; the
silvered head and placid physiognomy of the officiating priest, enlighted by a
gleam from the lamp above, opposed to the youthful grace and spirit of Vivaldi,
and the milder beauty and sweetness of Ellena, formed altogether a group worthy
of the pencil.

The priest had begun the ceremony, when a noise from without again alarmed
Ellena, who observed the (...) once cautiously opened, and a man bend forward
his gigantic figure from behind it. He carried a ^orch, and its glare, as the
door gradually enclosed, discovered other persons in the passage beyond,
looking forward over his shoulder into the chapel. The (...) of their dress
instantly convinced Ellena that they were not inhabitants of the Benedictine
convent, but some terrible messengers of evil. Her half-stifled shriek alarmed
Vivaldi, who caught her before she fell to the ground: but, as he had not faced
the door, he did not understand the occasion of her terror, till the sudden
rush of footsteps made him turn, when he observed several men armed, and very
singularly habited, advancing toward the altar.

"Who is he that intrudes upon this sanctuary?" he demanded sternly, while he
half rose from the ground where Ellena had sunk.

"What sacrilegious footsteps," cried the priest, "thus rudely violate this
holy place?"

Ellena was now insensible; and the men continuing to advance, Vivaldi drew his
sword to protect her.

The priest and Vivaldi now spoke together, but the words of neither could be
distinguished, when a voice, tremendous from his loudness, like bursting
thunder, dissipated the cloud of mystery."

"You Vincentio di Vivaldi, and of Naples." it said, "and you Ellena di
Rosalba, of the Villa Altieri, we summon you to surrender, in the name of the
most holy Inquisition!"

"The Inquisition!" exclaimed Vivaldi, scarcely believing what he heard. "Here
is some mistake!"

The official repeated the summons, without deigning to reply.

Vivaldi, yet more astonished, added, "Do not imagine you can so far impose
upon my credulity, as that I can believe myself to have fallen within the
cognizance of the Inquisition."

"You may believe what you please, Signor," replied the chief Officer, "but you
and that lady are our prisoners."

"Begone, impostor!" said Vivaldi, springing from the ground, where he had
supported Ellena, or my sword shall teach you to repent your audacity!"

"Do you insult an officer of the inquisition!" exclaimed the ruffian. "That
holy Community will inform you what you incur by resisting its mandate."

The priest interrupted Vivaldi's retort. "If you are really officers of that
tremendous tribunal," he said, "produce some proof of your office. Remember
this place is sanctified, and tremble for the consequence of imposition. You do
wrong to believe, that will deliver up to you persons who have taken refuge
here, without an unequivocal demand from that dread power."

"Produce your form of summons," demanded Vivaldi, with haughty impatience.

"It is here," replied the official, drawing forth a black scroll, which he
delivered to the priest, "Read and be satisfied!"

The Benedictine started the instant he beheld the scroll, but he received and
deliberately examined it. The kind of parchment, the impression of the seal,
the particular form of words, the private signals, understood only by the
initiated -- all announced this to be a true instrument of arrestation from the
Holy Office. The scroll dropped from his hand, and he fixed his eyes, with
surprise and unalterable compassion, upon Vivaldi, who stopped to reach the
parchment, when it was snatched by the official.

"Unhappy young man!" said the priest, "it is too true; you are summoned by
that awful power, to answer to your crime, and I am spared from the commission
of a terrible offense!"

Vivaldi appeared thunderstruck. "For what crime, holy father, am I called upon
to answer? This is some bold and artful imposture, since it can delude even
you? What crime -- what offense?"

"I did not think you had been thus hardened in guilt!" replied the priest.
"Forbear! add not the audacity of falsehood to the headlong passions of youth.
You understand too well your crime."

"Falsehood!" retorted Vivaldi, "But your years, old man, and those sacred
vestments, protect you. For these ruffians, who have dared to implicate that
innocent victim," pointing to Ellena, "in the charge, they shall have justice
from my vengeance."

"Forbear! forbear?" said the priest, seizing his arm, "have pity on yourself
and on her. Know you not the punishment you in^ur from resistance!"

"I know not, nor care," replied Vivaldi, "but I will defend Ellena di Rosalba
to the last moment. Let them reproach if they dare."

"It is on her, on her who lies senseless at your feet," said the priest, "that
they will wreak their vengeance for these insults; on her -- the partner of
your guilt."

"The partner of my guilt!" exclaimed Vivaldi, with mingled astonishment and
indignation -- "of my guilt."

"Rash young man! does not the very veil she wears betray it? I marvel how it
could pass my observation!"

"You have stolen a nun from her convent," said the chief officer, "and must
answer for the crime. When you have wearied yourself with these heroics,
Signor, you must go with us; our patience is wearied already."

Vivaldi observed, for the first time, that Ellena was shrouded in a nun's
veil; it was the one which Olivia had lent, to conceal her from the notice of
the Abbess, on the night of her departure from San Stefano, and which, in the
hurry of that departure, she had forgotten to leave with the nun. During this
interval, her mind had been too entirely occupied by cares and apprehension to
allow her once to notice, that the veil she wore was other than her usual one;
but it had been too well observed by some of the Ursaline sisters.

Though he knew not how to account for the circumstance of the veil, Vivaldi
began to perceive others which gave color to the charge brought against him,
and to ascertain the wide circumference of the snare that was spread around
him. He fancied, too, that he perceived the hand of Schedoni employed upon it,
and that his dark spirit was now avenging itself for the exposure he had
suffered in the church of the Spirito Santo, and for all the consequent
mortifications. As Vivaldi was ignorant of the ambitious hopes which the
Marchesa had encouraged in father Schedoni, he did not see the improbability,
that the Confessor would have dared to hazard her favor by this arrest of her
son; much less could he suspect, that Schedoni, having done so, had secrets in
his possession, which enabled him safely to defy her resentment, and bind her
in silence to his decree.

With the conviction, that Schedoni was the master-hand that directed the
present maneuver, Vivaldi stood aghast, gazing in silent unutterable anguish
on Ellena, who, as she began to revive, stretched forth her helpless hands, and
called upon him to save her, "Do not leave me," said she in accents the most
supplicating, "I am safe while you are with me."

At the sound of her voice, he started from his trance, and turning fiercely on
the ruffians, who stood in sullen watchfulness around, bade them depart, or
prepare for his fury. At the same instant they all drew their swords, and the
shrieks of Ellena, and the supplications of the officiating priest, were lost
amidst the tumult of the combatants.

Vivaldi, most unwilling to shed blood, stood, merely on the defensive, till
the violence of his antagonists compelled him to exert all his skill and
strength. He then disabled one of the ruffians; but his skill was insufficient
to repel the other two, and he was nearly overcome, when steps were heard
approaching, and Paulo rushed into the chapel. Perceiving his master beset, he
drew his sword, and came furiously to his aid. He fought with unconquerable
audacity and fierceness, till nearly at the moment when his adversary fell,
other ruffians entered the chapel, and Vivaldi with his faithful servant was
wounded, and, at length disarmed.

Ellena, who had been withheld from throwing herself between the combatants,
now, on observing that Vivaldi was wounded, renewed her efforts for liberty,
accompanied by such agony of supplication and complaint, as almost moved to
pity the hearts of the surrounding ruffians.

Disabled by his wounds, and also held by his enemies, Vivaldi was compelled to
witness her distress and danger, without a hope of rescuing her. In frantic
accents he called upon the old priest to protect her.

"I dare not oppose the orders of the Inquisition," replied the Benedictine,
"even if I had sufficient strength to defy its officials. Know you not, unhappy
young man, that it is death to resist them?"

"Death!" exclaimed Ellena, "death!"

"Ay lady, too surely so?"

"Signor, it would have been well for you," said one of the officers, "if you
had taken my advice: you will pay dearly for what you have done," pointing to
the ruffian who lay severely wounded on the ground.

"My master will not have that to pay for, friend," said Paulo, "for if you
must know, that is a piece of my work; and, if my arms were now at liberty, I
would try if I could not match it among one of you, though I am so flashed,"

"Peace, good Paulo! the deed was mine," said Vivaldi; then addressing the
official, "For myself I care not, I have done my duty -- but for her! -- Can
you, look upon her, innocent and helpless as she is, and not relent! Can you,
will you, barbarains! drag her, also to destruction upon a charge too so
daringly false?"

"Our relenting would be of no service to her," replied the official, we must
do our duty. Whether the charge is true or false, she must answer to it before
her judges."

"What charge demanded Ellena.

"The charge of having broken your nun's vows." replied the priest.

Ellena raised her eyes to heaven; "Is it even so!" she exclaimed.

"You hear she acknowledges the crime," said one of the ruffians.

"She acknowledges no crime," replied Vivaldi; "she only perceives the extent
of the malice that persecutes her. O! Ellena must, I then abandon you to their
power! leave you for ever!"

The agony of this thought re-animated him with momentary strength; he burst
from the grasp of the officials, and once more clasped Ellena to his bosom,
who, unable to speak, wept, with the anguish of a breaking heart, as her head
sunk upon his shoulder. The ruffians around them so far respected their grief,
that, for a moment, they did not interrupt it.

Vivaldi's exertion was transient; faint from sorrow, and from loss of blood,
he became unable to support himself, and was compelled again to relinquish
Ellena.

"Is there no help?" said she, with agony; "will you suffer him to expire on
the ground?"

The priest directed, that he should be conveyed to the Benedictine convent,
where his wounds might be examined, and medical aid administered. The disabled
ruffians were already carried thither; but Vivaldi refused to go, unless Ellena
might accompany him. It was contrary to the rules of the place, that a woman
should enter it, and before the priest could reply, his Benedictine brother
eagerly said that they dared not transgress the law of the convent.

Ellena's fears for Vivaldi entirely overcame those for herself, and she
entreated, that he would suffer himself to be conveyed to the Benedictines; but
he could not be prevailed with to leave her. The officials, however, prepared
to separate them; Vivaldi in vain urged the useless cruelty of dividing him
from Ellena, if, as they had hinted, she also was to be carried to the
Inquisition; and as ineffectually demanded, whither they really designed to
take her.

"We shall take good care of her, Signor," said an officer, "that is sufficient
for you, It signifies nothing whether you are going the same way, you must not
go together."

"Why, did you ever hear, Signor, of arrested persons being suffered to remain
in company?', said another ruffian, "Fine plots they would lay; I warrant ^hey
would not contradict each other's evidence a title."

"You shall not separate me from my master though," vociferated Paulo; "I
demand to be sent to the Inquisition with him, or to the devil, but all is one
for that."

"Fair and softly," replied the officer; "you shall be sent to the Inquisition
first, and to the devil afterward; you must be tried before you are condemned.'

"But waste no more time," he added to his followers, and pointing to Ellena,
"away with her."

As he said this they lifted Ellena in their arms. -- "Let me loose!" cried
Paulo, when he saw they were carrying her from the place, "let me loose, I
say!" and the violence of his struggles burst asunder the cords which held him;
a vain release, for he was instantly seized again.

Vivaldi, already exhausted by the loss of blood and the anguish of his mind,
made however, a last effort to save her; he tried to raise himself from the
ground, hut a sudden film came over his sight, and his senses forsook him,
while yet the name of Ellena faultered on his lips,

As they bore her from the chapel, she continued to call upon Vivaldi, and
alternately to supplicate that she might once more behold him, and take one
last adieu. The ruffians were inexorable and she heard his voice no more, for
he no longer heard -- no longer was able to reply to here is.

"O! once again!" she cried in agony, "One word, Vivaldi! Let me hear the sound
of your voice yet once again!" But it was silent.

As she quitted the chapel, with eyes still bent toward the spot where he lay,
she exclaimed in the piercing accents of despair, "Farewell, Vivaldi! -- O! for
ever -- ever, farewell!"

The tone, in which she pronounced the last "farewell!" was so touching, that
even the cold heart of the priest could not resist it; but he impatiently wiped
away the few tears, that rushed into his eyes, before they were observed.
Vivaldi heard i^ -- it seemed to arouse him from death! -- he heard her
mournful voice for the last time, and turning his eyes, saw her veil floating
away through the portal of the chapel. All suffering, all efforts, all
resistance were vain; the ruffians bound him bleeding as he was, and conveyed
him to the Benedictine convent, together with the wounded Paulo, who
unceasingly vociferated on the way thither. "I demand to be sent to the
Inquisition!" I demand to be sent to the Inquisition!"

CHAP. XVI.
"In earliest Greece to thee, with partial, choice
The grief-full Muse addressed her infant tongue;
The mails and matrons on on her awful voice,
Silent and pa^e, in wild amazement hung."
COLLINS'S Ode to Fear.
THE wounds of Vivaldi, and of his servant, were pronounced by the Benedictine,
who had examined and dressed them, not to be dangerous, but those of one of the
ruffians were declared doubtful. Some few of the brothers displayed much
compassion and kindness toward the prisoners; but the greater part seemed
fearful of expressing any degree of sympathy for presons who had fallen within
the cognizance of the Holy Office, and even kept aloof from the chamber, in
which they were confined. To this self-restriction, however, they were not long
subjected; for Vivaldi and Paulo were compelled to begin their journey as soon
as some short rest had sufficiently revived them. They were placed in the same
carriage, but the presence of two officers prevented all interchange of
conjecture as to the destination of Ellena, and with respect to the immediate
occasion of their misfortune. Paulo, indeed, now and then hazarded a surmise,
and did not scruple to affirm, that the Abbess of San Stefano was their chief
enemy; that the Carmelite friars, who had overtaken them on the road, were her
agents; and that having traced their route, they had given intelligence where
Vivaldi and Ellena might be found.

"I guessed we never should escape the Abbess," said Paulo, "though I would not
disturb you Signor Mio, nor the poor lady Ellena, by saying so. But your
Abbessess are as cunning as Inquisitors, and are so fond of governing that they
had rather, like them, send a man to the devil, than send him no where.

Vivaldi gave Paulo a significant look, which was meant to repress his
imprudent loquacity, and then sunk again into silence and the abstractions of
deep grief. The officers, mean while, never spoke, but were observant of all
that Paulo said, who perceived their watchfulness, but because he despised them
as spies, he thoughtlessly despised them also as enemies, and was so far from
concealing opinions, which they might repeat to his prejudice, that he had a
pride in exaggerating them, and in daring the worst, which the exasperated
tempers of these men, shut up in the same carriage with him, and compelled to
hear whatever he chose to say against the institution to which they belonged,
could effect. Whenever Vivaldi, recalled from his abstractions by some bold
assertion, endeavored to check his imprudence, Paulo was contented to solace
his conscience, instead of protecting himself, by saying, "It is their own
fault; they would thrust themselves into my company; let them have enough of
it; and if ever they take me before their reverences, the Inquisitiors, they
shall have enough of it too. I will play up such a tune in the Inquisition, as
is not heard there every day. I will jingle all the bells on their fool's caps,
and tell them a little honest truth, if they make me smart for it ever so."

Vivaldi, aroused once more, and seriously alarmed for the consequences which
honest Paulo might be drawing upon himself, now insisted on his silence, and
was obeyed.

They traveled during the whole night, stopping only to change horses. At
every post house, Vivaldi looked for a carriage that might enclose Ellena, but
none appeared, nor any sound of wheels told him that she followed.

With the morning light he perceived the dome of St. Peter appearing faintly
over the plains that surrounded Rome and he understood, for the first time,
that he was going to the prisons of the Inquisition in that city. The
travelers descended upon the Campania, and then rested for a few hours at a
small town on its borders.

When they again set forward, Vivaldi perceived that the guard was changed, the
officer who had remained with him in the apartment of the inn, only appearing
among the new faces which surrounded him, The dress and manners of these men
differed considerably from those of the other. Their conduct was more
temperate, but their countenances expressed darker cruelty, mingled with a sly
demureness, and a solemn self-importance, that announced them at once as
belonging to the Inquisition. -- They were almost invariably silent; and when
they did speak, it was only in a few sententious words. To the abounding
questions of Paulo, and the few earnest entreaties of his master, to be
informed of the place of Ellena's destination, they made not the least reply;
and listened to all the flourishing speeches of the servant against Inquisitors
and the Holy Office with the most profound gravity.

Vivaldi was struck with the circumstance of the guard being changed, and still
more with the appearance of the party, who now composed it. When he compared
the manners of the late, with those of the present guard, he thought he
discovered in the first the mere ferocity of ruffians; but in the latter, the
principles of cunning and cruelty, which seemed particularly to characterize
Inquisitors; he was inclined to believe, that a stratagem had enthralled him,
and that now, for the first time, he was in the custody of the Holy Office.

It was near midnight when the prisoners entered the Porto del Popolo, and
found themselves in the midst of the Carnival at Rome. The Corso, through which
they were obliged to pass, was crowded with gay carriages masks, with
processions of musicians, monks, and mountebanks, was lighted up with
innumerable flambeaux, and resounded with the heterogeneous rattling of wheels,
the music of serenaders, and the jokes and laughter of the revellers, as they
sportively threw about their sugar-plumbs. The heat of the weather made it
necessary to have the windows of the coach open; and the prisoners, therefore,
saw all that passed without. It was a scene which contrasted cruelty with the
feelings and circumstances of Vivaldi; torn as he was from her he most loved,
in dreadful uncertainty as to her fate, and himself about to be brought before
a tribunal, whose mysterious and terrible proceedings appalled even the bravest
spirits. Altogether, this was one of the most striking examples, which the
chequer-work of human life could show, or human feelings endure. Vivaldi,
sickened as he looked upon the splendid crowd, while the carriage made its way
slowly with it; but Paulo, as he gazed, was reminded of the Corso of Naples,
such as it appeared at the time of Carnival, and, comparing the present scene
with his native one, he found fault with every thing he beheld. The dresses
were tasteless, the equipages without splendour, the people without spirit; yet,
such was the propensity of his heart to sympatize with whatever was gay, that,
for some moments, he forgot that he was a prisoner on his way to the
Inquisition; almost forgot that he was a Neapolitan; and while he exclaimed
against the dullness of a Roman Carnival, would have sprung through the
carriage window to partake of its spirit, if his ^etters and his wounds had not
withheld him. A deep sigh from Vivaldi recalled his wandering imagination; and
when he noticed again the sorrow in his master's look, all his lightly joyous
spirits fled.

"My maestro my dear maestro!" -- he said, and knew not how to finish what he
wished to express.

At that moment they passed the theater of San Carlo, the doors of which were
thronged with equipages, where Roman ladies, in their gala habits, courtiers ^n
their fantastic dresses, and masks of all descriptions, were hastening to the
opera. In the midst of this gay bustle, where the carriage was unable to
proceed, the officials of the Inquisition looked on in solemn silence, not a
muscle of their features relaxing in sympathy, or yielding a single wrinkle of
the self-importance that lifted their brows; and, while they regarded with
secret contempt, those who could be thus lightly pleased, the people, in
return, more wisely, herhaps, regarded with contempt the proud moroseness, that
refused to partake of innocent pleasures, because they were trifling, and
shrunk from countenances furrowed with the sternness of cruelty. But when their
office was distinguished, part of the crowd pressed back from the carriage in
affright, while another part advanced with curiosity; through, as the majority
retreated, space was left for the carriage to move on. After quitting the
Corso, it proceeded for some miles through dark and deserted streets, were only
here and there a lamp, hung on high before the image of a saint, shed its
glimmering light, and where a melancholy and universal silence prevailed. At
intervals, indeed, the moon, as the clouds passed away, showed, for a moment,
some of those mighty monuments of Rome's eternal name, those sacred ruins,
those gigantic skeletons which once enclosed a soul, whose energies governed a
world! Even Vivaldi could not behold with indifference the grandeur of these
relics, as the rays fell upon the hoary walls and columns, or pass among
these scences of ancient story, without feeling a melancholy awe, a sacred
enthusiasm, that withdrew him from himself. But the illusion was transient; his
own misfortunes pressed too heavily upon him to be long unfelt, and his
enthusiasm vanished like the moon light.

A returning gleam lighted up, soon after, the rude and extensive area, which
the carriage was crossing. It appeared, from its desolation, and the ruins
scattered distantly along its skirts, to be a part of the city entirely
abandoned by the modern inhabitants to the relics of its former granduer. Not
even the shadow of a human being crossed the waste, nor any building appeared,
which might be supposed to shelter one. The deep tone of a bell, however,
rolling on the silence of the night, announced the haunts of man to be not far
off; and Vivaldi perceived in the distance, to which he was approaching, an
extent of lofty walls and towers, that, as far as the gloom would permit his
eye to penetrate, bounded the horizon. He judged these to be the prisons of the
inquisition. Paulo pointed them out at the same moment. "Ah, Signor!' said he
despondingly, "that is the place! what strength! If, my Lord, the Marchese were
but to see where we are going! Ah!" --

He concluded with a deep sigh, and sunk again into the state of apprehension
and mute expectation, which he had suffered from the moment that he quit-th^
Corso.

The carriage having reached the walls, followed their bendings to a
considerable extent. These walls, of immense height, and strengthened by
innumerable massy bulwarks, exhibited neither window or grate, put a vast and
dreary blank; a small round tower only, perched here and there upon the summit,
breaking their monotony,

The prisoners passed what seemed to be the principal entrance, from the
granduer of its portal, and the gigantic loftiness of the towers that rose over
it; and after the carriage stopped at an arch-way in the walls, strongly
barricadoed. One of the escort alighted, and having struck upon the bars, a
folding door within was immediately opened, and a man, bearing a torch appeared
behind the barricado, whose countenance, as he looked through it, might have
been copied for the "Grim-visaged comfortless Despair"
of the poet.

No words were exchanged between him and the guard; but on perceiving who were
without, he opened the iron gate, and the prisoners having alighted, passed
with the two officials beneath the arch, the guard following with a torch. --
They descended a flight of broad steps, at the foot of which another iron gate
admitted them to a kind of hall; such, however, it at first appeared to
Vivaldi, as his eyes glanced through its gloomy extent, imperfectly
ascertaining it by the lamp, which hung from the center of the roof. No person
appeared, and a death like silence prevailed; for neither the officials nor the
guard yet spoke; nor did any distant sound contradict the notion, that they
were traversing the chambers of the dead. To Vivaldi it occurred, that this was
one if the burial vaults of the victims, who suffered in the Inquisition, and
his whole frame thrilled with horror. Several avenues, opening from the
apartment, seemed to lead to distant quarters of this immense fabric, but still
no footstep whispering along the pavement, or voice murmuring through the
arched roofs, indicated it to be the residence of the living.

Having entered one of the passages, Vivaldi perceived a person clothed in
black, and who bore a lighted taper, crossing silently in the remote
perspective, and he understood too well from his habit, that he was a member of
this dreadful tribunal.

The sound of footsteps seemed to reach the stranger, for he turned, and, then
paused while the officers advanced. They then made signs to each other, and
exchanged a few words, which neither Vivaldi or his servant could understand,
when the stranger, pointing with his taper along another avenue, passed away.
Vivaldi followed him with his eyes, till a door at the extremity of the passage
opened, and he saw the Inquisitor enter an apartment, whence a great light
proceeded, and where several other figures habited like himself, appeared
waiting to receive him. The door immediately closed; and, whether the
imagination of Vivaldi was affected, or that the sounds were real, he thought,
as it closed, he distinguished half-stifled groans, as of a person in agony.

The avenue, through which the prisoners passed, opened at length, into an
apartment gloomy like the first they had entered, but more extensive. The roof
was supported by arches, and long arcades branched off from every side of the
chamber, as from a central point, and where lost in the gloom, which the rays
of the small lamps, suspended in each, but feebly penenetrated.

They rested here, and a person soon after advanced, who appeared to be the
jailor, into whose hands Vivaldi and Paulo were delivered. A few mysterious
words having been exchanged, one of the officials crossed the hall and ascended
a wide staircase, while the other, with the jailor and the guard, remained
below as if awaiting his return.

A long interval elapsed, during which the stillness of the place was sometimes
interrupted by a closing door, and, at others, by indistinct sounds, which yet
appeared to Vivaldi like lamentations and extorted groans. Inquisitors, in
their long black robes, issued from time to time from the passages, and crossed
the hall to other avenues. They eyed the prisoners with curiosity, but without
pity. Their visages, with few exceptions, seemed stamped with the characters of
demons. Vivaldi could not look upon the grave cruelty, or the ferocious
impatience, their countenances severally expressed, without reading in them the
fate of some fellow creature, the fate which these men seemed going, even at
this moment, to confirm; and as they passed with soundless steps, he shrunk
from observation, as if their very look^ possessed some supernatural power, and
could have struck death. But he followed their fleeting figures, as they
proceeded on their work of horror, to where the last glimmering ray faded into
darkness, expecting to see other doors of other chambers open to receive them.
While meditating upon these horrors, Vivaldi lost every selfish consideration
in astonishment and indignation of the sufferings, which the frenzied
wickedness of man prepares for man, who, even at the moment of infliction,
insults his victim with assertions of the justice and necessity of procedure.
"Is this possible!" said Vivaldi internally: "Can this be in human nature! --
Can such horrible perversion of right be permitted! Can man, who calls himself
endowed with reason, and immeasurably superior to every other created being,
argue himself into the commission of such horrible folly, such inveterate
cruelty, as exceeds all the acts of the most irrational and ferocious brute.
Brutes do not deliberately slaughter their species; it remains for man only,
man, proud of his prerogative of reason, and boasting of his sense of justice,
to unite the most terrible extremes of folly and wickedness!"

Vivaldi had been no stranger to the existence of this tribunal; he had long
understood the nature of the establishment, and had often received particular
accounts of its customs and laws; but, though he had believed before, it was
now only that conviction appeared to impress his understanding. A new view of
human nature seemed to burst, at once, upon his mind, and he could not have
experienced greater astonishment, if this had been the first moment, in which
he had heard of the institution -- But, when he thought of Ellena, considered
that she was in the power of this tribunal, and that it was probable she was,
at this moment within the same dreadful walls, grief, indignation, and despair
irritated him almost to frenzy. He seemed suddenly animated with supernatural
strength and ready to attempt impossibilities for her deliverance. It was by a
strong effort for self-command, that he forbore bursting the bonds, which held
him, and making a desperate attempt to seek her through the vast extent of
these prisons. Reflection, however, had not so entirely forsaken him, but that
he saw the impossibility of succeeding in such an effort the moment he had
conceived it, and he forbore to rush upon the certain destruction to which it
must have led. His passions, thus restrained, seemed to become virtues, and to
display themselves in the energy of his courage and his fortitude. His soul
became stern and vigorous in despair, and his manner and countenance assumed a
calm dignity, which seemed to awe, in some degree, even his guards. The pain of
his wounds was no longer felt; it appeared as if the strength of his
intellectual self had subdued the infirmities of the body, and, perhaps, in
these moments of elevation, he could have endured the torture without shrinking.

Paulo, meanwhile, mute and grave, was watchful of all that passed; he observed
the revolutions in his masters mind, with grief first, and then with surprise,
but he could imitate the noble fortitude, which now gave weight and steadiness
to Vivaldi's thoughts. And when he looked on the power and gloom around him.
and on the visages of the passing inquisitors, he began to repent, that he had
so freely delivered his opinion of this tribunal, in the presence of it is
agents, and to perceive, that if he played up the kind of tune he had
threatened, it would probably be the last he should ever be permitted to
perform in this world.

At length, the chief officer descended the staircase, and immediately bade
Vivaldi follow him. Paulo was accompanying his master, but was withheld by the
guard, and told he was to be disposed of in a different way. This was the
moment of his severest trial; he declared he would not be separated from his
master.

"What did I demand to be brought here for," he cried, "if it was not that I
might go shares with the signor in all his troubles? This is not a place to
come for pleasure, I warrant; and I can promise ye, gentlemen, I would not have
come within a hundred miles of you, if it had not been for my master's sake."

The guards roughly interrupted him, and were carrying him away, when Vivaldi's
commanding voice arrested them. He returned to speak a few words of consolation
to his faithful servant, and since they were to be separated, to take leave of
him.

Paulo embraced his knees, and, while he wept, and his words were almost
stifled by sobs, declared no force should drag him from his master, while he
had life; and repeatedly appealed to the guards, with -- "what did I demand to
be brought here for? Did ever any body come here to seek pleasure? What right
have you to prevent my going shares with my master in his troubles?"

"We do not intend to deny you that pleasure, friend," replied one of the
guards.

"Don't you? Then heaven bless you!" cried Paulo, springing from his knees, and
shaking the man by the hand with a violence, that would nearly have dislocated
the shoulder of a person less robust.

"So, come with us," added the guard, drawing him away from Vivaldi. Paulo now
become outrageous, and, struggling with the guards, burst from them, and again
fell at the feet of his master, who raised and embraced him, endeavoring to
prevail with him to submit quietly to what was inevitable, and to encourage him
with hope.

"I trust that our separation will be short," said Vivaldi, "and that we shall
meet in happier circumstances, My innocence must soon appear."

"We shall never, never meet again, Signor-mio, in this world," said Paulo,
sobbing violently, "so don't make me hope so. That old Abbess knows what she is
about too well to let us escape; or she would not have catched us up so
cunningly as she did; so, what signifies innocence! O! if my old lord, the
Marchese, did but know where we are!"

Vivaldi interrupted him, and turning to the guards, said, "I recommend my
faithful servant to your compassion; he is innocent. It will some time,
perhaps, be in my power to recompense you for any indulgence, you may allow
him, and I shall value it a thousand times more highly, than any you could show
to myself! Farewell, Paulo, -- farewell! Officer, I am read."

"O stay! Signor, for one moment -- stay," said Paulo.

"We can wait no longer," said the guard, and again drew Paulo away, who
looking piteously after Vivaldi, alternately repeated, Farewell, dear maestro!
farewell dear, dear maestro!" and "What did I demand to be brought here for? --
What did I demand to be brought here for? -- what was it for, if not to go
shares with my maestro?" till Vivaldi was beyond the reach of sight and of
hearing.

Vivaldi, having followed the Officer up the staircase, passed through a
gallery to an antichamber, where, being delivered into the custody of some
persons in waiting, his conductor disappeared beyond a folding door, that led
to an inner apartment. Over this door was an inscription in Hebrew characters,
traced in blood-colour. Dante's inscription on the entrance of the infernal
regions, would have been suitable to a place, where every circumstance and
feature seemed to say, "Hope, that comes to all, comes not here!"

Vivaldi conjectured that in this chamber, they were preparing for him the
instruments which were to extort a confession; and though he knew little of the
regular proceedings of this tribunal, he had always understood, that the
torture was inflicted upon the accused person, till he made confession of the
crime, of which he was suspected. By such a mode of proceeding, the innocent
were certain of suffering longer than the guilty; for, as they had nothing to
confess, the Inquisitor, mistaken innocence for obstinacy, persevered in his
inflictions, and it frequently happened that he compelled the innocent to
become criminal, and assert a falsehood, that they might be released from
anguish, which they could no longer sustain. Vivaldi considered this
circumstance undauntedly; every faculty of his soul was bent up to firmness and
endurance. He believed that he understood the extent of the charge, which would
be brought against him, a charge as false, as a specious confirmation of it,
would be terrible in its consequence both to Ellena and himself. Yet every art
would be practiced to bring him to an acknowledgement of having carried off a
nun, and he knew also, that, since the prosecutor and the witnesses are never
confronted with the prisoner in cases of severe accusation, and since their
very names are concealed from him, it would be scarcely possible for him, to
prove his innocence. But he did not hesitate an instant whether to sacrifice
himself for Ellena, determining rather to expire beneath the merciless
inflictions of the Inquisitors, than to assert a flasehood, which must involve
her in destruction.

The officer, at length, appeared, and, having beckoned Vivaldi to advance,
uncovered his head, and bared his arms. He then led him forward through the
folding door into the chamber; having done which, he immediately withdrew, and
the door, which shut out Hope, closed after him.

Vivaldi found himself in a spacious apartment, where only two persons were
visible, who were seated at a large table, that occupied the center of the
room. They were both habited in black; the one, who seemed by his piercing eye,
and extraordinary physiognomy, to be an Inquisitor, wore on his head a kind of
black turban, which heightened the natural ferocity of his visage; the other
was uncovered, and his arms bared to the elbows. A book, with some instruments
of singular appearance lay before him. Round the table were several unoccupied
chairs, on the backs of which appeared figurative signs, at the upper end of
the apartment, a gigantic crucifix stretched nearly to the vaulted roof; and,
at the lower end, suspended from an arch in the wall, was a dark curtain, but
whether it veiled a window, or shrouded some object or person, necessary to the
designs of the Inquisitor, there were little means of judging. It was, however,
suspended from an arch such as sometimes contains a casement, or leads to a
deep recess.

The Inquisitor called on Vivaldi to advance, and when he had reached the
table, put a book into his hands, and bade him swear to reveal the truth, and
keep for ever secret whatever he might see or hear in the apartment.

Vivaldi hesitated to obey so unqualified a command. The Inquisitor reminded
him, by a look, not to be mistaken, that he was absolute here; but Vivaldi
still hesitated. "Shall I consent to my own condemnation?" said he to himself,
"The malice of demons like these may convert the most innocent circumstances
into matter of accusation, for my destruction, and I must answer whatever
questions they choose to ask. And shall I swear, also, to conceal whatever I
may witness in this chamber, when I know that the most diabolical cruelties are
hourly practiced here?"

The Inquisitor, in a voice which would have made a heart, less fortified than
was Vivaldi's tremble, again commanded him to swear; at the same time, he made
a signal to the person, who sat at the opposite end of table, and who appeared
to be an inferior officer.

Vivaldi was still silent, but he began to consider that, unconscious as he was
of crime, it was scarcely possible for his words to be tortured into
self-accusation; and that, whatever he might witness, no retribution would be
prevented, no evil withheld by the oath, which bound him to secresy, since his
most severe denunciation could avail nothing against the supreme power of the
tribunal. As he did not perceive any good, which could arise from refusing the
oath; and saw much immediate evil from resistance, he consented to receive it.
Notwithstanding this, when he put the book to his lips, and uttered the
tremendous vow prescribed to him, hesitation and reluctance returned upon his
mind, and an icy coldness struck to his heart. He was so much affected, that
circumstances, apparently the most trivial, had at this moment influence upon
his imagination. As he accidentally threw his eyes upon the curtain, which he
had observed before without emotion, and now thought it moved, he almost
started in expectation of seeing some person, an Inquisitor perhaps, as
terrific as the one before him, or an accuser as malicious as Schedoni, steal
from behind it

The Inquisitor having administered the oath, and the attendant having noted it
in his book, the examination began. After demanding, as is usual, the names and
titles of Vivaldi and his family, and his place of residence, to which he fully
replied, the Inquisitor asked, whether he understood the nature of the
accusation on which he had been arrested.

"The order for my arrestation informed me," replied Vivaldi.

"Look to your words!" said the Inquisitor, "and remember your oath. What was
the ground of accusation?"

"I understood," said Vivaldi, "that I was accused of having stolen a nun from
her sanctuary."

A faint degree of surprise appeared on the brow of the Inquisitor. "You
confess it, then?" he said, after a pause of a moment, and making a signal to
the Secretary, who immediately noted Vivaldi's words.

"I solemnly deny it," replied Vivaldi: "the accusation is false and malicious."

"Remember the oath you have taken! repeated the Inquisitor: learn, also, that
mercy is shown to such as make full confession; but that the torture is applied
to those, who have the folly and obstinacy to withhold the truth."

"If you torture me till I acknowledge the justness of this accusation," said
Vivaldi, "I must expire under your inflictions, for suffering never shall
compel me to assert a falsehood. It is not the truth, which you seek; it is not
the guilty whom you punish; the innocent, having no crimes to confess, are the
victims of your cruelty, or, to escape from it, become criminal, and proclaim a
lie."

"Recollect yourself," said the Inquisitor, sternly. "You are not brought
hither to accuse, but to answer accusation. You say you are innocent; yet
acknowledge yourself to be acquainted with the subject of the charge which is
to be urged against you! How could you know this, but from the voice of
conscience?"

"From the words of your own summons," replied Vivaldi, "and from those of your
officials who arrested me."

"How!" exclaimed the Inquisitor: "note that," pointing to the Secretary, "he
says by the words of our summous; now we know, that you never read that
summons. He says also by the words of our officials; it appears, then, he is
ignorant, that death would follow such a breach of confidence."

"It is true, I never did read the summons," replied Vivaldi, "and as true,
that I never a^^^ted I did; the friar, who read it, told of what it accused me,
and your officials confirmed the testimony."

"No more of this equivocation!" said the Inquisitor, "Speak only to the
question."

"I will not suffer my assertions to be misrepresented," replied Vivaldi, "or
my words to be perverted against myself. I have sworn to speak the truth only;
since you believe I violate my oath, and doubt my direct and simple words, I
will speak no more,"

The Inquisitor half rose from his chair, and his countenance grew paler.
"Audacious heretic!" he said, "will you dispute, insult, and disobey, the
commands of our most holy tribunal! You will be taught the consequence of your
desperate impiety To the torture with him!"

A stern smile was on the features of Vivaldi; his eyes were calmly fixed on
the Inquisitor, and his attitude was undaunted and firm. His courage, and the
cool contempt, which his looks expressed, seemed to touch his examiner, who
perceived that he had not a common mind to operate upon. He abandoned,
therefore, for the present, terrific measures, and, resuming his usual manner
proceeded in the examination.

"Where were you arrested?"

"At the chapel of San Sebastian on the lake of Celano."

You are certain as to this?" asked the Inquisitor, "you are sure it was not at
the village of Legano, on the high road between Celano and Rome?"

Vivaldi while he confirmed his assertion, recollected, with some surprise,
that Legano was the place where the guard had been changed, and he mentioned
the circumstance. The Inquisitor, however, (...) in his questions, without
appearing to notice it. "Was any person arrested with you?"

"You cannot be ignorant," replied Vivaldi, "that Signora di Rosalba, was
seized at the same time, upon the false charge of being a nun, who had broken
her vows, and eloped from her convent; nor that Paulo Mendrico, my faithful
servant! was also made a prisoner, though upon what pretense he was arrested I
am utterly ignorant."

The Inquisitor remained for some moments in thoughtful silence, and then
enquired slightly concerning the family of Ellena, and her usual place of
residence. Vivaldi, fearful of making some assertion that might be prejudicial
to her, referred him to herself; but the inquiry was repeated.

"She is now within these walls," replied Vivaldi, hoping to learn from the
manner of his examiner whether his fears were just," and can answer these
questions better than myself."

The Inquisitor merely bade the notary write down her name, and then remained
for a few moments meditating. At length, he said, "Do you know where you now
are?"

Vivaldi, smiling at the question, replied, "I understand that I am in the
prisons of the Inquisition at Rome."

"Do you know what are the crimes that subject persons to the cognizance of the
Holy Office?"

Vivaldi was silent.

"Your conscience informs you, and your silence confirms me. Let me admonish
you, once more, to make a full confession of your guilt; remember that this is
a merciful tribunal, and shows favor to such as acknowledge their crimes?"

Vivaldi smiled; but the Inquisitor proceeded.

"It does not resemble some severe, yet just courts, where immediate execution
follows the confession of a criminal. No! it is merciful, and though it
punishes guilt, it never applies the torture but in cases of necessity, when
the obstinate silence of the prisoner requires such a measure, You see,
therefore, what you may avoid, and what expect."

"But if the prisoner has nothing to confess?" said Vivaldi. -- "Can your
tortures make him guilty? They may force a weak mind to be guilty of falsehood;
to ^^^ape present anguish, a man may unwarily condemn himself to the death! You
will find that I am not such an one."

"Young man," replied the Inquisitor, "you will understand too soon, that we
never act, but upon sure authority; and will wish, too late, that you had made
an honest confession. Your silence cannot keep from us a knowledge of your
offenses; we are in possession of facts; and your obstinacy can neither wrest
from us the truth, or pervert it. Your most secret offenses are already written
on the table^s of the Holy Office; your conscience cannot reflect them more
justly. -- Tremble therefore, and revere. But understand, that, though we have
sufficient proof of your guilt, we require you to confess; and that the
punishment of obstinacy is as certain, as that of any other offense."

Vivaldi made no reply, and the Inquisitor, after a momentary silence, added,
"Was you ever in the church of the Spirito Santo, at Naples!"

"Before I answer the question," said Vivaldi "I require the name of my
accuser."

"You are to recollect, that you have no right to demand any thing in this
place," observed the (...), "not can o^ be ignorant that the name of the (...)
is always kept sacred from the knowledge of the accused. Who would (...) to do
his duty, if his name was arbitrarily to be exposed to the veng^ance of the
criminal against whom he informs? It is only in a particular process that the
accuser is brought forward."

The names of the Witnesses?" demanded Vivaldi. "The same justice conceals them
also from the knowledge of the accused," replied the Inquisitor.

"And is no justice left for the Accused," said Vivaldi, "Is he to be tried and
condemned without being confronted with either his Prosecutor or the Witnesses!"

"Your questions are too many," said the Inquisitor, "and your answers too few.
The Informer is not also the Prosecutor; the Holy Office before which the
information is laid, is the Prosecutor, and the dispenser of justice; its
Public Accuser lays the circumstances, and the testimonies of the Witnesses,
before the Court. But too much of this."

"How!" exclaimed Vivaldi, "is the tribunal at once the Prosecutor, Witness and
Judge! What can private malice wish for more, than such a court of justice, at
which to arraign its enemy? The stiletto of the Assassin is not so sure, or so
fatal to innocence. I now perceive, that it avails me nothing to be guiltless;
a single enemy is sufficient to accomplish my destruction."

"You have an enemy then?" observed the Inquisitor.

Vivaldi was too well convinced that he had one, but there was not sufficient
proof, as to the person of this enemy, to justify him in asserting that it was
Schedoni. The circumstance of Ellena having been arrested, would have compelled
him to suspect another person as being at least accessory to the designs of the
Confessor; had not credulity started in horror from the supposition, that a
mother's resentment could possibly betray her son into the prisons of the
Inquisition, though this mother had exhibited a temper of remorseless cruelty
toward a stranger, who had interrupted her views for that son.

"You have an enemy then?" repeated the Inquisitor.

"That I am her^ sufficiently proves it," replied Vivaldi. "But I am so little
any man's enemy, that I know not who to call mine."

"It is evident, then, that you have no enemy," observed the subtle Inquisitor,
"and that this accusation is brought against you by a respecter of truth, and a
faithful servant of the Roman interest."

Vivaldi was shocked to perceive the insidious art, by which he had been
betrayed into a declaration apparently so harmless, and the cruel dexterity
with which it had been turned against him. A lofty and contemptuous silence was
all that he opposed to the treachery of his examiner, on whose countenance
appeared a smile of triumph and self congratulation, the life of a
fellow creature being, in his estimation, of no comparative importance with the
self-applauses of successful art; the art, too, upon which he most valued
himself -- that of his profession.

The Inquisitor proceeded, "You persist, then, in withholding the truth?" He
paused, but Vivaldi making no reply, he resumed.

"Since it is evident, from your own declaration, that you have no enemy, whom
private resentment might have instigated to accuse you; and, from other
circumstances which have occured in your conduct, that you are conscious of
more than you have confessed -- it appears, that the accusation which has been
urged against you, is not a malicious slander. I exhort you, therefore, and
once more conjure you, by our how faith, to make an ingenuous confession of
your offenses, and to save yourself from the means, which must of necessity be
enforced to obtain a confession before your trial commences. I adjure you,
also, to consider, that by such open conduct only, can mercy b^ won to soften
the justice of this most righteous tribunal!"

Vivaldi, perceiving that it was now necessary for him to reply, once more
solemnly asserted his innocence of the crime alleged against him in the
summons, and of the consciousness of any act, which might lawfully subject him
to the notice of the Holy Office.

The inquisitor again demanded what was the crime alleged, and, Vivaldi having
repeated the accusation, he again bade the Secretary note it; as he did which,
Vivaldi thought he perceived upon his features something of a malignant
satisfaction, for which he knew not how to account. When the Secretary had
finished, Vivaldi was ordered to subscribe his name and quality to the
depositions, and he obeyed.

The Inquisitor then bade him consider of the admonition he had received, and
prepare either to confess on the morrow, or to undergo the question. As he
concluded, he gave a signal, and the officer, who had conducted Vivaldi into
the chamber, immediately appeared.

"You know your orders, said the Inquisitor, "receive your prisoner, and see
that they are obeyed."

The official bowed, and Vivaldi followed him from the apartment in melancholy
silence.

THE ITALIAN, OR, THE CONFESSIONAL OF THE Black Penitents. A ROMANCE.

BY ANN RADCLIFFE, AUTHOR OF THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, ROMANCE OF THE FOREST,
CICILIAN ROMANCE, etc.

He, wrapped in clouds of mystery and silence,
Broods over his passions, bodies them in deeds,
And sends them forth on wings of fate to others
Like the invisible Will, that guides us,
Unheard, unknown, unsearchable!
IN TWO VOLUMES. VOL. II.

MOUNT-PLEASANT: PRINTED BY W. DURELL, FOR R. MAGILL, S. CAMPBELL, E. DUYCKINCK
and co, GAIN and TENEYCK, N. JUDAH, P. A. MESIER, J. HARRISSON, T. GREENLEAF,
and THOMAS ANDREWS and PENNIMAN. 1797.

THE ITALIAN.
CHAP. I.
Call up the Spirit from the ocean, bid
Him raise the storm! The waves begin to heave.
To curl to foam; the white surges run far
Upon the dark'ning waters, and mighty
Sounds of strife are heard. Wrapped in the midnight
Of the clouds, sits Terror, meditating
Woe. Her doubtful form appears and fades,
Like the shadow of death, when he mingles
With the gloom of the sepulcher, and broods
In lonely silence. Her spirits are abroad!
They do her bidding! Hark, to that shriek!
The echoes of the shore have heard!

ELLENA, meanwhile, when she had been carried from the chapel of San Sebastian,
was placed upon a horse in waiting, and, guarded by the two men who had seized
her, commenced a journey, which continued with little interruption during two
nights and days. She had no means of judging whither she was going, and
listened in vain expectation, for the feet of horses, and the voice of Vivaldi,
who, she had been told was following on the same road.

The steps of travelers seldom broke upon the silence of these regions, and
during the journey, she was met only by some market people passing to a
neighboring town, or now and then by the vine-dressers or laborers in the
olive grounds; and she descended upon the vast plains of Apulia, still ignorant
of her situation. An encampment, not of warriors, but of shepherds, who were
leading their flocks to the mountains of Abruzzo, enlivened a small tract of
these levels, which were shadowed on the north and east by the mountainous
ridge of the Garganus, streching from the Apennine far into the Adriatic.

The appearance of the shepherds was nearly as wild and savage as that of the
men, who conducted Ellena; but their pastoral instruments of flageolets and
tabors spoke of more civilized feelings, as they sounded sweetly over the
desert. Her guards rested, and refreshed themselves with goats milk, barley
cakes, and almonds, and the manners of these shepherds, like those she had
formerly met with on the mountains, proved to be more hospitable than their air
had indicated.

After Ellena had quitted this pastoral camp, no vestage of a human residence
appeared for several leagues, except here and there the towers of a decayed
fortress, perched upon the lofty acclivities she was approaching, and half
concealed in the woods. The evening of the second day was drawing on, when her
guards drew near the forest, which she had long observed in the distance,
spreading over the many-rising steeps of the Garganus, They entered by a track,
a road it could not be called, which led among oaks and gigantic chestnuts,
apparently the growth of centuries, and so thickly interwoven, that their
branches formed a canopy which seldom admitted the sky. The gloom which they
threw around, and the thickets of cystus, juniper, and lenticus, which
flourished beneath the shade, gave a character of fearful wildness to the scene.

Having reached an eminence, where the trees were more thinkly scattered,
Ellena perceived the forests spreading on all sides among hills and valleys,
and descending toward the Adriatic, which bounded the distance in front. The
coast, bending into a bay, was rocky and bold. Lofty pinacles, wooded to their
summits, rose over the shores, and cliffs of naked marble of such gigantic
proportions, that they were awful even at a distance, obtruded themselves far
into the waves, breasting their eternal fury. Beyond the margin of the coast,
as far as the eye could reach, appeared pointed mountains, darkened with
forests, rising ridge over ridge, in many successions. Ellena, as she surveyed
this wild scenery, felt as if she was going into eternal banishment from
society. She was tranquil, but it was with the quietness of exhausted grief,
not of resignation; and she looked back upon the past, and awaited the future,
with a kind of out breathed despair.

She had traveled for some miles through the forest, her guards only now and
then uttering to each other a question, or an observation concerning the
changes which had taken place in the bordering scenery, since they last past
it, when night began to close in upon them

Ellena perceived her approach to the sea, only by the murmurs of its surge
upon the rocky coast, till having reached an eminence, which was, however, no
more than the base of two woody mountaims that towered closely over it, she saw
dimly its gray surface spreading in the bay below. She now ventured to ask how
much farther she had to go, and whether she was to be taken on board one of the
little vessels, apparently fishing smacks, that she could just discern at
anchor.

"You have not far to go now," replied one of the guards, furlily; "you will
soon be at the end of your journey, and at rest."

They descended to the shore, and presently came to a lonely dwelling, which
stood so near the margin of the sea, as almost to be washed by the waves. No
light appeared at any of the lattices; and, from the silence that reigned
within, it seemed to be uninhabited. The guard had probably reason to know
otherwise, for they halted at the door, and shouted with all their strength. No
voice, however, answered to their call, and, while they persevered in efforts
to rouse the inhabitants, Ellena anxiously examined the building, as exactly as
the twilight would permit. It was of an ancient and peculiar structure, and
though scarcely important enough for a mansion, had evidently never been
designed for the residence of peasants.

The walls of unhewn marble, were high, and strengthened by bastions; and the
edifice had turreted corners, which, with the porch in front, and the sloping
roof, were falling fast into numerous symtoms of decay. The whole building,
with its dark windows and soundless avenues, had an air strikingly forlorn and
solitary. A high wall surrounded the small court in which it stood, and
probably had once served as a defense to the dwelling; but the gates, which
should have closed against intruders, could no longer perform their office; one
of the folds had dropped from its fastenings, and lay on ^he ground almost
concealed in a deep bed of weeds, and the other creaked on its hinges to every
blast, at each swing seeming ready to follow the fate of its companion.

The repeated calls of the guard were at length answered by a rough voice from
within; when the door of the porch was lazily unbarred, and opened by a man,
whose visage was so misery-struck, that Ellena could not look upon it with
indifference, though wr^pt in misery of her own. The lamp he held threw a gleam
athwart it, and showed the gaunt ferocity of famine, to which the shadow of his
(...) eyes added a terrific wildness. Ellena shrunk while she gazed. She had
never before seen villainy and suffering so strongly pictured on the same face,
and she observed him with a degree of thrilling curiosity, which for a moment
excluded from her mind all consciousness of the evils to be apprehended from
him.

It was evident that this house had not been built for his reception; and she
conjectured that he was he servant of some cruel agent of the Marchesa di
Vivaldi.

From the porch she followed into an old hall, ruinous and destitute of any
kind of furniture. It was not extensive but lofty, for it seemed to ascend to
the roof of the edifice, and the chambers above opened around it into a
corridor.

Some half-sullen salutations were exchanged between the guard and the
stranger, whom they called Spalatro, as they passed into a chamber, where it
appeared that he had been sleeping on a mattress laid in a corner. All the
other furniture of the place were two or three broken chairs and a table. He
eyed Ellena with a shrewd contracted brow, and then looked significantly at the
guard, but was silent, till he desired them all to sit down, adding, that he
would dress some fish for supper. Ellena discovered that this man was the
master of the place; it appeared also that he was the only inhabitant; and,
when the guard soon after informed her their journey conluded here, her worst
apprehensions were confirmed. The efforts she made to sustain her spirits, were
no longer successful. It seemed that she was brought hither by ruffians to a
lonely house on the seashore inhabited by a man, who had "villain" engraved in
every line of his face, to be the victim of enexorable pride and an insatiable
desire of revenge. After considering these circumstances, and the words, which
had just told her she was to go no further, conviction struck like lightning
upon her heart; and, believing she was brought hither to be assassinated,
horror chilled all her frame, and her senses forsook her.

On recovering, she found herself surrounded by the guard and the stranger, and
she would have supplicated for their pity, but that she feared to exasperate
them by betraying her suspicions. She complained of fatigue, and requested to
be shown to her room. The men looked upon one another, hesitated, and then
asked her to partake of the fish that was preparing. But Ellena having declined
the invitation with as good a grace as she could assume, they consented that
she should withdraw. Spalatro, taking the lamp, lighted her across the hall, to
the corrodor above, where he opened the door of a chamber, in which he said she
was to sleep.

"Where is my bed?" said the afflicted Ellena, fearfully as she looked round.

"It is there -- on the floor," replied Spalatro, pointing to a miserable
mattress, over which hung the tattered curtain^ of what had once been a canopy.
"If you want the lamp," he added, "I will leave it, and come for it in a minute
or two."

"Will you not let me have a lamp for the night?" she said in a supplicating
and timid voice.

"For the night!" said the man gruffly; "What! to set fire to the house."

Ellena still entreated that he would allow her the comfort of a light.

"Aye, aye." replied Spalatro, with a look she could not comprehend, "it would
be a great comfort to you, truly! You do not know what you ask."

"What is it that you mean?" said Ellena, eagerly; "I conjure you, in the name
of our holy church, to tell me!"

Spalatro stepped suddenly back, and looked upon her with surprise, but without
speaking.

"Have mercy on me!" said Ellena, greatly alarmed by his manner; "I am
friendless, and without help!"

"What do you fear," said the man, recovering himself; and then, without
waiting her reply, added -- "Is it such and an unmerciful deed to take away a
lamp?"

Ellena, who again feared to betray the extent of her suspicions, only replied,
that it would be merciful to leave it, for that her spirits were low, and she
required light to cheer them in a new abode.

"We do not stand upon such conceits here," replied Spalatro, "we have other
matters to mind. Besides. it is the only lamp in the house, and the company
below are in darkness while I am losing time here. I will leave it for two
minutes, and no more." Ellena made a sign for him to put down the lamp; and,
when he left the room, she heard the door barred upon her.

She employed these two minutes in examining the chamber, and the possibility
it might afford of an escape. It was a large apartment, unfurnished and unswept
of the cobwebs of many years. The only door she discovered was the one, by
which she had entered, and the only window a lattice, which was grated. Such
preparation for preventing escape seemed to hint how much there might be to
escape from.

Having examined the chamber, without finding a single circumstance to
encourage hope, tried the strength of the bars, which she could not shake, and
sought in vain for an inside fastening to her door, she placed the lamp beside
it, and awaited the return of Spalatro. In a few moments he came and offered
her a cup of sour wine with a slice of bread; which, being somewhat soothed by
this attention, she did not think proper to reject.

Spalatro then quitted the room, and the door was again barred. Left once more
alone, she tried to overcome apprehension by prayer; and after offering up her
vespers with a fervent heart, she became more confiding and composed.

But it was impossible that she could so far forget the dangers of her
situation as to seek sleep, however wearied she might be, while the door of her
room remained unsecured against the intrusion of the ruffians below; and, as
she had no means of fastening it, she determined to watch during the whole
night. Thus left to solitude and darkness, she seated herself upon the mattress
to await the return of morning, and was soon lost in sad reflection; every
minute occurrence of the past day, and of the conduct of her guards, moved in
review before her judgment: and, combining these with the circumstances of her
present situation, scarcely a doubt as to the fate designed for her remained.
It seemed highly improbable that the Marchesa di Vivaldi had sent her hither
merely for imprisonment, since she might have confined her in a convent with
much less trouble; and still more so when Ellena considered the character of
the Marchesa, such as she had already experienced it. The appearance of this
house, and of the man who inhabited it, with the circumstance of no woman being
found residing here, each and all of these signified, that she was brought
hither not for long imprisonment, but for death. Her utmost efforts for
fortitude or resignation could not overcome the cold tremblings, the sickness
of heart, the faintness and universal horror that assailed her. How often, with
tears of mingled terror and grief, did ^he call upon Vivaldi -- Vivaldi, alas!
far distant -- to save her; how often exclaim in agony, that she should never,
never see him more!

She was spared, however, the horror of believing that he was an inhabitant of
the inquisition, Having detected the imposition which had been practiced
toward herself, and that she was neither on the way to the Holy Office, nor
conducted by persons belonging to it, she concluded, that the whole affair of
Vivaldi's arrest, had been planned by the Marchesa, merely as a pretense for
confining him till she should be placed beyond the reach of his assistance. She
hoped, therefore, that he had only been sent to some private residence
belonging to his family, and that, when her fate was decided, he would be
released, and she be the only victim. This was the sole consideration that
afforded any degree of assuagement to her sufferings. --

The people below sat till a late hour. She listened often to their distant
voices, as they were distinguishable in the pauses of the surge, that broke
loud and hollow on the shore; and every time the creaking hinges of their room
door moved, apprehended they were coming to her. At length it appeared they had
left the apartment, or had fallen asleep there, for a profound stillness
reigned whenever the murmur of the waves sunk. Doubt did not long deceive her,
for, while she yet listened, she distinguished footsteps ascending to the
corridor. She heard them approach her chamber, and stop at the door; she heard,
also, the low whispering of their voices, as they seemed consulting on what was
to be done, and she scarcely ventured to draw breath, while she intensely
attended to them. Not a word, however, distinctly reached her, till, as one of
them was departing, another called out in a half whisper, "It is below on the
table, in my girdle; make haste." The man came back, and said something in a
lower voice, to which the other replied, "she sleeps," or Ellena was deceived
by the hissing consonants of some other words. He then descended the stairs;
and its a few minutes she perceived his comrade also pass away from the door;
she listened to his retreating steps, till the roaring of the sea was alone
heard in their stead.

Ellena's terrors were relieved only for a moment Considering the import of the
words, it appeared that he man who had descended, was gone for the stiletto of
the other, such an instrument being usually worn in the girdle, and from the
assurance, "she sleeps," he seemed to fear that his words had been overheard;
and she listened again for their steps; but they came no more.

Happily for Ellena,s peace, she knew not that her chamber had a door, so
contrived as to open without sound, by which assassins might enter
unsuspectedly at any hour of the night. Believing that the inhabitants of this
house had now retired to rest, her hopes and her spirits began to revive; but
she was yet sleepless and watchful. She measured the chamber with unequal
steps, often starting as the old boards shook and groaned where she passed; and
often pausing to listen whether all was yet still in the corridor. The gleam
which a rising moon threw between the bars of her window, now began to show
many shadowy objects in the chamber, which she did not recollect to have
observed while the lamp was there. More than once, she fancied she saw
something glide along toward the place where the mattress was laid, and,
almost congealed with terror, she stood still to watch it; but the illusion, if
such it was, disappeared where the moonlight faded, and even her fears could
not give shape to it beyond. Had she not known that her chamber door remained
strongly barred, she would have believed this was an assassin stealing to the
bed where it might be supposed she slept. Even now the thought occurred to her,
and, vague as it was, had power to strike an anguish, almost deadly, through
her heart, while she considered that her immediate situation was nearly as
perilous as the one she had imaged.

Again she listened, and scarcely dared to breathe; but not the lighest sound
occurred in the pauses of the waves, and she believed herself convinced that no
person except herself was in the room, That she was deceived in this belief,
appeared from her unwillingness to approach the mattress, while it was yet
involved in shade. Unable to overcome her reluctance, she took her station at
the window, till the strengthening rays should allow a clearer view of the
chamber, and in some degree restore her confidence; and she watched the scene
without as it gradually became visible. The moon, rising over the ocean, showed
its restless surface spreading to the wide horizon; and the waves, which broke
in foam upon the rocky beach below, retiring in long white lines far upon the
waters. She listened to their measured and solemn sound, and, somewhat soothed
by the solitary grandeur of the view, remained at the lattice till the moon had
risen high into the heavens; and even till morning began to dawn upon the sea,
and purple the eastern clouds.

Re-assured by the light that now prevaded her room, she returned to the
mattress; where anxiety at length yielded to her weariness, and she obtained a
short repose.

CHAP. II.
"And yet I fear you; for you are fatal;
Then your eyes roll so --
Alas! why gnaw you so your nether lip?
Some bloody passion shakes your very frame:
These are p^rtents; but yet I hope, I hope,
They do not point on me"
SHAKESPEARE.
ELLENA was awakened from profound sleep, by a loud noise at the door of her
chamber; when starting from her mattress, she looked around her with surprise
and dismay, as imperfect recollections of the past began to gather on her mind.
She distinguished the undrawing of iron bars, and the countenance of Spalatro
at her door, before she had a clear remembrance of her situation -- that she
was a prisoner in a house on a lonely shore, and that this man was her jailor.
Such sickness of the heart returned with these convictions, such faintness and
terror, that unable to support her trembling frame, she sunk again upon the
mattress, without demanding the reason of this abrupt intrusion. --

"I have brought you some breakfast," said Spalatro, "if you are awake to take
it; but you seem to be asleep yet. Surely you have had sleep sufficient for one
night; you went to rest soon enough."

Ellena made no reply, but, deeply affected with a sense of her situation,
looked with beseeching eyes at the man, who advanced, holding forth an oaten
cake and basin of milk. "Where shall I set them?" said he," you must need be
glad of them, since you had no supper."

Ellena thanked him, and desired he would place them on the floor, for there
was neither table nor chair in the room. As he did this, she was struck with
the expression of his countenance, which exhibited a strange mixture of
archness and malignity. -- He seemed congratulating himself upon his ingenuity,
and anticipating some occasion of triumph; and she was so much interested, that
her observation never quitted him while he remained in the room. As his eyes
accidentally met here is, he turned them away, with the abruptness of a person
who is conscious of evil intentions, and fears lest they should be detected;
nor once looked up till he hastily left the chamber, when she heard the door
secured as formerly.

The impression, his look had left on her mind, so wholly engaged her in
conjecture, that a considerable time elapsed before she remembered that he had
brought the refreshment she so much required; but, as she now lifted it to her
lips, a horrible suspicion arrested her hand; it was not however, before she
had swallowed a small quantity of the milk. The look of Spalatro, which
occasioned her surprise, had accompanied the setting down of the breakfast, and
it occured to her, that poison was infused in this liquid. She was thus
compelled to refuse the sustenance, which was become necessary to her, for she
feared to taste even of the oaten cake, since Spalatro had offered it, but the
little milk she had unwarily taken, was so very small that she had no
apprehension concerning it.

The day, however, passed in terror, and almost in despondency; she could
neither doubt the purpose, for which she had been brought hither, nor discover
any possibility of escaping from her persecutors; yet that propensity to hope,
which buoys up the human heart, even in the severest hours of trial, sustained,
in some degree, her fainting spirits.

During these miserable hours of solitude, and suspense, the only alleviation
to her suffering arose from a belief, that Vivaldi was safe, at least from
danger, though not from grief; but she now understood too much of the dexterous
contrivances of the Marchesa, his mother, to think it was practicable for him
to escape from her designs, and again restore her to liberty.

All day Ellena either leaned against the bars of her window, lost in reverie,
while her unconscious eyes were fixed upon the ocean, whose murmurs she no
longer heard; or she listened for some sound from within the house, that might
assist her conjectures, as to the number of persons below, or what might be
passing there. The house, however, was profoundly still, except where now and
then a footstep sauntered along a distant passage, or a door was heard to
close; but not the hum of a single voice arose from the lower room, nor any
symptom of there being more than one person, beside herself, in the dwelling.
Though she had not heard her former guards depart, it appeared certain that
they were gone, and that she was left alone in this place with Spalatro. What
could be the purport of such a proceeding, Ellena could not imagine; if her
death was designed, it seemed strange that one person only should be left to
the hazard of the deed, when three must have rendered the completion of it
certain. But this surprise vanished, when her suspicion of poison returned; for
it was probable, that these men had believed their scheme to be already nearly
accomplished, and had abandoned her to die alone, in a chamber from whence
escape was impracticable, leaving Spalatro to dispose of her remains. All the
incongruities she had separately observed in their conduct, seemed now to
harmonize and unite in one plan; and her death, designed by poison, and that
poison to be conveyed in the disguise of nourishment, appeared to have been the
object of it, Whether it was that the strength of this conviction affected her
fancy, or the cause was real, Ellena, remembering at this moment that she had
tasted the milk, was siezed with an universal shuddering, and thought she felt
that the poison had been sufficiently potent to affect her, even in the
inconsiderable quantity she might have taken.

While she was thus agitated, she distinguished footsteps loitering near the
door, and attentively listening, became convinced, that some person was in the
corridor. The steps moved softly, sometimes stopping for an instant, as if to
allow time for listening, and soon after passed away.

"It is Spalatro!" said Ellena; "he believes that I have taken the poison, and
he comes to listen for my dying groans! Alas! he is only come somewhat too
soon, perhaps!"

As this horrible suposition occurred, the shuddering returned with increased
violence, and she sunk almost fainting, on the mattress; but the fit was not of
long continuance. When it gradually left her, and recollection revived, she
perceived, however, the prudence of suffering Spalatro to suppose she had taken
the beverage he brought her, since such belief would at least procure some
delay of further schemes, and every delay afforded some possibility for hope to
rest upon. Ellena, therefore, poured through the bars of her window, the milk
which she believed Spalatro had designed should be fatal in its consequence.

It was evening, when she again fancied footsteps were lingering near her door,
and the suspicion was confirmed, when, on turning her eyes, she perceived a
shade on the floor, underneath it, as of some person stationed without.
Presently the shadow glided away, and at the same time she distinguished
departing steps treading cautiously.

"It is he!" said Ellena; "he still listens for my moans!"

This further confirmation of his designs affected her nearly as much as the
first; when anxiously turning her looks toward, ^he corridor, the shadow again
appeared beneath the door, but she heard no step. Ellena now watched it with
intense solicitude and expectation: fearing every instant that Spalatro would
conclude her doubts by entering the room. "And O! when he discovers that I
live," thought she, "what may I not expect during the first moments of his
disappointment! what less than immediate death!"

The shadow, after remaining a few minutes stationary, moved a little, and then
glided away as before. But it quickly returned, and a low sound followed, as of
some person endeavoring to unfasten bolts without noise. Ellena heard one bar
gently undrawn, and then another; she observed the door begin to move, and then
to give way, till it gradually unclosed, und the face of Spalatro presented
itself from behind it. Without immediately entering, he threw a glance round
the chamber, as if he wished to ascertain some circumstance before he ventured
further. His look was more than usually haggard as it rested upon Ellena, who
apparently reposed on her mattress.

Having gazed at her for an instant, he ventured toward the bed with quick and
unequal steps; his countenance expressed at once impatience, alarm, and the
consciousness of guilt. When he was within a few paces, Ellena raised herself,
and he started back as if a sudden spectre had crossed him. The more than usual
wildness and wanness of his looks, with the whole of his conduct, seemed to
confirm all her former terrors; and when he roughly asked her how she did,
Ellena had not the sufficient presence of mind to answer that she was ill. For
some moments he regarded her with an earnest and sullen attention, and then a
sly glance of scrutiny, which he threw round the (...) her that he was
inquiring whether she had taken the poison. On perceiving that the baso^ was
empty, he lifted it from the floor, and Ellena fancied a gleam of satisfaction
passed over his visage.

"You have had no dinner," said he, "I forgot you; but supper will soon be
ready; and you may walk up the beach till then, if you will,"

Ellena, extremly surprised and perplexed by this offer of a seeming
indulgence, knew not whether to accept or reject it. She suspected that some
treachery lurked within it. The invitation appeared to be only a stratagem to
lure her to destruction, and she determined to decline accepting it; when again
she considered, that to accomplish this, it was not necessary to withdraw her
from the chamber, where she was already sufficiently in the power of her
persecutors. Her situation could not be more desperate than it was at present,
and almost any change might make it less so.

As she descended from the corridor, and passed through the lower part of the
house, no person appeared but her conductor; and she ventured to enquire,
whether the men who had brought her hither were departed. Spalatro did not
return an answer, but led the way in silence to the court, and, having passed
the ga^es, he pointed toward the west, and said she might walk that way.

Ellena bent her course toward the "many sounding waves," followed at a short
distance by Spalatro, and, wrapped in thought, pursued the windings of the shore,
scarcely noticing the objects around her, till, on passing the foot of a rock,
she lifted her eyes to the scene that unfolded beyond, and observed some huts
scattered at a considerable distance, apparently the residence of fishermen.
She could just distinguish the dark sails of some skiffs turning the cliffs,
and entering the little bay, where the hamlet margined the beach; but, though
she saw the sails lowered, as the boats approached the shore, they were too far
off to allow the figures of the men to appear. To Ellena, who had believed that
no human habitation, except her prison, interrupted the vast solitudes of these
forests and shores, the view of the huts, remote as they were, imparted a
feeble hope, and even somewhat of joy. She looked back, to observe whether
Spalatro was near: he was already within a few paces; and, casting a wistful
glance forward to the remote cottages, her heart sunk again.

It was a lowering evening, and the sea was dark and swelling; the screams of
the sea birds too, as they wheeled among the clouds, and ^ought their high
nests in the rocks, seemed to indicate an approaching storm. Ellena was not so
wholly engaged by selfish sufferings, but that she could sympathise with those
of others, and she rejoiced that the fishermen, whose boats she had observed,
had escaped the threatening tempest, and were safely sheltered in their little
homes, where as they heard the loud waves break along the coast, they could
look with keener pleasure upon the social circle, and the warm comforts around
them. From such considerations, however, she returned again to a sense of her
own forlorn and friendless situation.

"Alas!" said she, "I have no longer a home, a circle to smile welcomes upon
me! I have no longer even one friend to support, to rescue me! I -- a miserable
wanderer on a distant shore! tracked, perhaps, by the footsteps of the
assassin, who at this instant eyes his victim with silent watchfulness, and
awaits the moment of opportunity to sacrifice her!"

Ellena shuddered as she said this, and turned again to observe whether
Spalatro was near. He was not within view, and while she wondered, and
congratulated herself on a possibility of escaping, she perceived a Monk
walking silently beneath the dark rocks that overbrowed the beach, His black
garments were folded round him; his face was inclined toward the ground, and he
had the air of a man in deep meditation.

"His, no doubt, are worthy musings!" said Ellena, as she observed him, with
mingled hope and surprise. "I may address myself, without fear, to one-of his
order. It is probably as much his wish, as it is his duty, to succor the
unfortunate. Who could have hoped to find on this sequestered shore so sacred a
protector! his convent cannot be far off!"

He approached, his face still bent toward the ground, and Ellena advanced
slowly, and with trembling steps, to meet him. As he drew near, he viewed her
askance, without lifting his head; but she perceived his large eyes looking
from under the shade of his cowl, and the upper part of his peculiar
countenance. Her confidence in his protection began to fail, and she faultered,
unable to speak, and scarcely daring to meet his eyes. The Monk stalked past
her in silence, the lower part of his visage still muffled in his drapery, and,
as he passed her, looked neither with curiosity, nor surprise.

Ellena paused, and determined, when he should be at some distance, to
endeavor to make her way to the hamlet, and throw herself upon the humanity of
its in habitants, rather than solicit the pity of this forbidding stranger. But
in the next moment she heard a step behind her, and, on turning, saw the Monk
again approaching. He stalked by as before, surveying her, however with a sly
and scrutinizing glance from the corners of his eyes. His air and countenance
were equally repulsive, and still Ellena could not summon courage enough to
attempt engaging his compassion; but shrunk as from an enemy. -- There was
something also terrific in the silent stalk of so gigantic a form; it announced
both power and treachery. He passed slowly on to some distance, and disappeared
among the rocks.

Ellena turned once more with an intention of hastening toward the distant
hamlet, before Spalatro should observe her, whose strange absence she had
scarcely time to wonder at; but she had not proceeded far, when suddenly she
perceived the Monk again at her shoulder. She started, and almost shrieked;
while he regarded her with more attention than before. He paused a moment, and
seemed to hesitate; after which he again passed on in silence. The distress of
Ellena increased; he was gone the way she had designed to run, and she feared
almost equally to follow him, and to return to her prison. Presently he turned,
and passed her again, and Ellena hastened forward. But, when fearful of being
pursued, she again looked back, she observed him conversing with Spalatro. They
appeared to be in consultation, while they slowly advanced, till, probably
observing her rapid progress, Spalatro called on her to stop, in a voice that
echoed among all the rocks. It was a voice, which would not be disobeyed. She
looked hopelessly at the still distant cottages, and slackened her steps. --
Presently the Monk again passed before her, and Spalatro had again disappeared.
The frown with which the former now regarded Ellena, was so terrific, that she
shrunk trembling back, though she knew him not for her persecutor, since she
had never consciously seen Schedoni. He was agitated, and his look became
darker.

"Whither go you?" said he, in a voice that was stifled by emotion.

"Who is it, father, that asks the question?" said Ellena, endeavoring to
appear composed.

"Whither go you, and who are you!" repeated the Monk more sternly.

"I am an unhappy orphan," replied Ellena, sighing deeply; "If you are, as your
habit denotes, a friend to the charities, you will regard me with compassion."

Schedoni was silent, and then said -- "Who and what is that you fear?"

"I fear even for my life," replied Ellena, with hesitation. She observed a
darker shade pass over his countenance. "For your life!" said he, with apparent
surprise, "who is there that would think it worth the taking."

Ellena was struck with these words.

"Poor insect!" added Schedoni, "who would crush thee?"

Ellena made no reply; she remained with her eyes fixed in amazement upon his
face. There was something in his manner of pronouncing this, yet more
extraordinary than in the words themselves. Alarmed by his manner, and awed by
the increasing gloom, and swelling surge, that broke in thunder on the beach,
she at length turned away, and again walked toward the hamlet which was yet
very remote.

He soon overtook her; when rudely seizing her arm, and gazing earnestly on her
face, "Who is it, that you fear?" said he, "say who!"

"That is more then I dare say," replied Ellena, scarcely able to sustain
herself.

"Hah! is it even so!" said the Monk, with increased emotion. His visage now
became so terrible, that Ellena struggled to liberate her arm, and supplicated
that he would not detain her. He was silent, and still gazed upon her, but his
eyes, when she had ceased to struggle, assumed that fixed and vacant glare of a
man, whose thoughts have retired within themselves, and who is no longer
conscious to surrounding objects.

"I beseech you to release me!" repeated Ellena, "it is late, and I am far from
home."

"That is true," muttered Schedoni, still grasping her arm, and seeming to
reply to his own thoughts rather than to her words, -- "that is very true."

"The evening is closing fast," continued Ellena, "and I shall be overtaken by
the storm."

Schedoni still mused, and then muttered -- "The storm, say you? Why ay, let it
come."

As he spoke, he suffered her arm to drop, but still held it, and walked slowly
toward the house. Ellena, thus compelled to accompany him, and yet more
alarmed both by his looks, his incoherent answers, and his approach to her
prison, renewed her supplications and her efforts for liberty, in a voice of
piercing distress, adding "I am far from home, father; night is coming on. See
how the rocks darken! I am far from home, and shall be waited for."

"That is false!" said Schedoni, with emphasis; "and you know it to be so."

"Alas! I do," replied Ellena, with mingled shame and grief, "I have no friends
to wait for me!"

"What do those deserve, who deliberately utter falsehoods," continued the
Monk, "who deceive, and flatter young men to their destruction?"

"Father!" exclaimed the astonished Ellena.

"Who disturb the peace of families -- who trepan with wanton arts, the heirs
of noble houses -- who -- hah! what do such deserve!"

Overcome with astonishment and terror, Ellena remained silent. She now
understood that Schedoni, so far from being likely to prove a protector, was an
agent of her worst, and as she had believed, her only enemy; and an
apprehension of the immediate and terrible vengeance, which such an agent
seemed willing to accomplish, subdued her senses; she tottered, and sunk upon
the beach. The weight, which strained the arm Schedoni held, called his
attention to her situation.

As he gazed upon her helpless and faded form, he became agitated. He quitted
it, and traversed the beach in short turns, and with hasty steps; came back
make his way between them when, Vivaldi demanded who passed. No answer was
returned, and a long silence followed.

"We are observed," said Bonarmo, at length, "and are even now, perhaps, almost
beneath the poniard of the assassin: let us be gone.

"O that my heart were as secure from the darts of love, the assassin of my
peace," exclaimed Vivaldi, "as yours is from those of bravos! My friend, you
have little to interest you, since your thoughts have so much leisure for
apprehension."

"My fear is that of prudence, not of weakness," retorted Bonarmo, with
acrimony; "you will find, perhaps, that I have none, when you most wish me to
possess it."

"I understand you," replied Vivaldi "let us finish this business, and you
shall receive reparation, since you believe yourself injured: I am as anxious
to repair an offense, as jealous of receiving one."

"Yes," replied Bonarmo, "you would repair the injury you have done your friend
with his blood.

"Oh! never, never!" said Vivaldi, falling on his neck. "Forgive my hasty
violence; allow for the distraction of my mind."

Bonarmo returned the embrace, "It is enough," said he; "no more, no more! I
hold again my friend to my heart."

While this conversation passed, they had quitted the orangery, and reached the
walls of the villa, where they took their station under a balcony that overhung
the lattice, through which Vivaldi had seen Ellena on the preceding night. They
tuned their instruments, and opened the serenade with a duet.

Vivaldi's voice was a fine tenor, and the same susceptibility, which made him
passionately fond of music, taught him to modulate its cadence with exquisite
delicacy, and to give his emphasis with the most simple and pathetic
expression, His soul seemed to breathe in the sounds, -- so tender, so
imploring, yet so energetic. On this night, enthusiasm inspired him with the
highest eloquence, perhaps, which music is capable of attaining; what might be
its effect on Ellena he had no means of judging, for she did not appear either
at the balcony or the lattice, nor give any hint of applause. No sounds stole
on the stillness of the night, except those of the serenade, nor did any light
from within the villa break upon the obscurity without; once, indeed, in a
pause of the instruments Bonarmo fancied he distinguished voices near him, as
of persons who feared to be heard, and he listened attentively, but without
ascertaining the truth. Sometimes they seemed to sound heavily in his ear, and
then a death-like silence prevailed. Vivaldi affirmed the sound to be nothing
more than the confused murmur of the distant multitude on the shore, but
Bonarmo was not thus easily convinced.

The musicians, unsuccessful in their first endeavor to attract attention,
removed to the opposite side of the building, and placed themselves in front of
the portico, but with as little success, and, after having exercised their
powers of harmony and of patience for above an hour, they resigned all further
effort to win upon the obdurate Ellena. Vivaldi, notwithstanding the feebleness
of his first hope of seeing her, now suffered an agony of disappointment; and
Bonarmo, alarmed for the consequence of his despair, was as anxious to persuade
him that he had no rival, as he had lately been pertinacious in affirming that
he had one.

At length they left the gardens, Vivaldi, protesting that he would not rest
until he had discovered the stranger, who so wantonly destroyed his peace, and
had compelled him to explain his ambiguous warnings; and Bonarmo remonstrating
on the imprudence and difficulty of the search, and representing that such
conduct would probably be the means of spreading a report of his attachment,
where most he dreaded it should be known,

Vivaldi refused to yield to remonstrance or considerations of any kind. "We
shall see," said he, "whether this demon in the garb of a monk, will haunt me
again at the accustomed place; if he does, he shall not escape my grasp; and if
he does not, I will watch as vigilantly for his return, as he seems to have
done for mine. I will lurk in the shade of the ruin, and wait for him, though
it be till death!"

Bonarmo was particularly struck by the vehemence which he pronounced the last
words, but he no longer opposed his purpose, and only bade him consider whether
he was well armed, "For" he added, "you may have need of arms there, though you
had no use for them at the villa Altieri. Remember that the stranger told you
that your steps were watched."

"I have my sword," replied Vivaldi, "and the dagger which I usually wear; but
I ought to enquire what are your weapons of defense."

"Hush!" said Bornarmo, as they turned the foot of a rock that overhung the
road," we are approaching the spot; yonder is the arch!" It appeared duskily in
the perspective, suspended between two cliffs, where the road wound from sight,
on one of which were the ruins of the Roman fort it belonged to, and on the
other, shadowing pines, and thickets of oak that tufted the rock to its base.

They proceeded in silence, treading lightly, and often throwing a suspicious
glance around, expecting every instant that the monk would steal out upon them
from some recess of the cliffs. But they passed on unmolested to the arch-way.
"We are here before him, however," said Vivaldi as they entered the darkness,
"Speak low* my friend," said Bonarmo, "others besides ourselves may be shrouded
in this obscurity. I like not the place."

"Who but ourselves would choose so dismal a retreat?" whispered Vivaldi,
"unless indeed, it were banditti; the savageness of the spot would, in truth,
suit their humor, and it suits well also with my own."

"It would suit their purpose too, as well as their humor," observed Bonarmo.
"Let us remove from this deep shade, into the more open road, where we can as
closely observe who passes.

Vivaldi objected that in the road they might themselves be observed, "and if
we are seen by my unknown tormentor, our design is defeated, for he comes upon
us suddenly, or not at all, lest we should be prepared to detain him.

Vivaldi, as he said this, took his station within the thickest gloom of the
arch, which was of considerable depth, and near a flight of steps that was cut
in the rock, and ascended to the fortress. His friend stepped close to his
side. After a pause of silence, during which Bonarmo was meditating, and
Vivaldi was impatiently watching, "do you really believe," said the former,
"that any effort to detain him would be effectual? He glided past me with a
strange facility, it was surely more than human!"

"What is it you mean?" enquired Vivaldi.

"Why, I mean that I could be superstitious. This place, perhaps, infects my
mind with congenial gloom, for I find that, at this moment, there is scarcely a
superstition too dark for my credulity."

Vivaldi smiled. "And you must allow," added Bonarmo, "that he has appeared
under circumstances somewhat extraordinary. How should he know your name, by
which you say he addressed you at the first meeting? How should he know from
whence you came, or whether you designed to return? By what magic could he
become acquainted with your plans?"

"Nor am I certain that he is acquainted with them," observed Vivaldi; "but if
he is, there was no necessity for superhuman means to obtain such knowledge."

"The result of this evening surely ought to convince you that he is acquainted
with your designs," said Bonarmo. Do you believe it possible that Ellena could
have been insensible to your attentions, if her heart had not been pre-engaged,
and that she would not have shown herself at a lattice?"

"You do not know Ellena," replied Vivaldi, "and therefore I once more pardon
you the question. Yet had she been disposed to accept my addresses, surely some
sign of approbation," -- he checked himself.

"The stranger warned you not to go to the villa Altieri," resumed Bonarmo, "he
seemed to anticipate the reception which awaited you, and to know a danger,
which hitherto you have happily escaped."

"Yes, he anticipated too well that reception," said Vivaldi, losing, his
prudence in passionate exclamation; "and he is himself, perhaps, the rival,
whom he has taught me to suspect. He has assumed a disguise only the more
effectually to impose upon my credulity, and do (...) me from addressing
Ellena. And shall I tamely lie in wait for his approach? Shall I lurk like a
guilty assassin for his rival?"

"For heaven's sake!" said Bonarmo, "moderate these transports; consider where
you are. This surmise of yours is in the highest degree improbable." He gave
his reasons for thinking so, and these convinced Vivaldi, who was prevailed
upon to be once more patient.

They had remained watchful and still for a considerable time, when Bonarmo saw
a person approach the end of the arch-way nearest to Altieri. He heard no step,
but he perceived a shadowy figure station itself at the entrance of the arch,
where the twilight of this brilliant climate was, for a few paces, admitted.
Vivaldi's eyes were fixed on the road leading toward Naples, and he,
therefore, did not perceive the object of Bonarmo's attention, who, fearful of
his friend's precipitancy, forbore to point out immediately what he observed,
judging it more prudent to watch the motions of this unknown person, that he
might ascertain whether it really were the monk. The size of the figure, and
the dark drapery in which it seemed wrapped, induced him, at length, to believe
that this was the expected stranger; and he seized Vivaldi's arm to direct his
attention to him, when the form glided forward disappeared in the gloom, but
not before Vivaldi had understood the occasion of his friend's gesture and
significant silence. They heard no footstep pass them, and, being convinced
that this person, whatever he was, had not left the arch-way, they kept their
station in watchful stillness. Presently they heard a rustling, as of garments,
near them, and Vivaldi, unable longer to command his patience, started from his
concealment, and with arms extended to prevent any one from escaping, demanded
who was there.

The sound ceased, and no reply was made. Bonarmo drew his sword, protesting he
would stab the air till he found the person who lurked there; but if the latter
would discover himself, he should receive no injury. This assurance Vivaldi
confirmed by his promise. Still no answer was returned; but as they listened
for a voice, they thought something passed them, and the avenue was not narrow
enough to have prevented such a circumstance. Vivaldi rushed forward, but did
not perceive any person issue from the arch into the highway, where the
stronger twilight must have discovered him.

"Somebody certainly passed," whispered Bonarmo, "and I think I hear a sound
from yonder steps, that lead to the fortress."

"Let us follow," cried Vivaldi, and he began to ascend.

"Stop, for heaven's sake stop!" said Bonarmo; "consider what you are about! Do
not brave the utter darkness of these ruins; do not pursue the assassin to his
den!"

"It is the monk himself! exclaimed Vivaldi, still ascending; "he shall not
escape me!"

Bonarmo paused a moment at the foot of the steps, and his friend disappeared;
he hesitated what to do, till ashamed of suffering him to encounter danger
alone, he sprang to the flight, and not without difficulty surmounted the
rugged steps.

Having reached the summit of the rock, he found himself on a terrace, that ran
along the top of the archway and had once been fortified; this, crossing the
road, commanded the defile each way. Some remains of massy walls, that still
exhibited loops for archers, were all that now hinted of its former use. It led
to a watchtower almost concealed in thick pines, that crowned the opposite
cliff, and had thus served not only for a strong battery over the road, but
connecting the opposite sides of the defile, had formed a line of communication
between the fort and this out-post.

Bonarmo looked round in vain for his friend, and the echoes of his own voice
only, among the rocks, replied to his repeated calls. After some hesitation
whether to enter the walls of the main building, or to cross to the
watchtower, he determined on the former, and entered a rugged area, the walls
of which, following the declivities of the precipice, could scarcely now be
traced. The citadel, a round tower, of majestic strength, with some Roman
arches scattered near, was all that remained of this once important fortress;
except, indeed, a mass of ruins near the edge of the cliff, the construction of
which made it difficult to guess for what purpose it had been designed.

Bonarmo entered the immense walls of the citadel, but the utter darkness
within checked his progress, and, contenting himself with calling loudly on
Vivaldi, he returned to the open air.

As he approached the mass of ruins, whose singular form had interested his
curiosity, he thought he distinguished the low accents of a human voice, and
while he listened in anxiety, a person rushed forth from a door-way of the
ruin, carrying a drawn sword. It was Vivaldi himself. Bonarmo sprang to meet
him; he was pale and breathless, and some moments elapsed before he could
speak, or appeared to hear the repeated enquiries of his friend.

"Let us go," said Vivaldi, "let us leave this place."

"Most willingly," replied Bonarmo, "but where have you been, and who have you
seen, that you are thus affected?"

"Ask me no more questions, let us go," repeated Vivaldi.

They descended the rock together, and when having reached the arch way,
Bonarmo enquired, half sportively, whether they should remain any longer on the
watch, his friend answered, "No!" with an emphasis that startled him. They
passed hastily on the way to Naples, Bonarmo repeating enquiries which Vivaldi
seemed reluctant to satisfy, and wondering no less at the cause of this sudden
reserve, than anxious to know whom he had seen.

"It was the monk, then," said Bonarmo; "you secured him at last?"

"I know not what to think," replied Vivaldi, "I am more perplexed than ever."

"He escaped you then?"

"We will speak of this in future," said Vivaldi; "but be it as it may, the
business rests not here. I will return in the night of tomorrow with a torch;
dare you venture yourself with me?"

"I know not," replied Bonarmo, "whether I ought to do so, since I am not
informed for what purpose?"

"I will not press you to go," said Vivaldi; my purpose is already known to
you."

"Have you really failed to discover the stranger -- have you still doubts
concerning the person you pursued?"

I have doubts, which tomorrow night, I hope will dissipate."

"This is very strange!" said Bonarmo, "It was but now that I witnessed the
horror, with which you left this fortress of Puluzzi, and already you speak of
returning to it!. And why at night -- why not in the day, when less danger
would beset you?"

"I know not as to that," replied Vivaldi, "you are to observe that daylight
never pierces within the recess, to which I penetrated; we must search the
place with torches at whatsoever hour we would examine it."

"Since this is necessary," said Bonarmo, "how happens it that you found your
way in total darkness?"

"I was too much engaged to know how; I was led on, as by an invisible hand."

"We must, notwithstanding," observed Banarmo* "go in daytime, if not by
daylight, provided I accompany you. It would be little less than insanity to
go twice to a place, which is probably infested with robbers, and at their own
hour of midnight."

"I shall watch again in the accustomed place," replied Vivaldi, "before I use
my last resource, and this cannot be done during the day. Besides, it is
necessary that I should go at a particular hour, the hour when the monk has
usually appeared.

"He did escape you, then?" said Bonarmo, "and you are still ignorant
concerning who he is?"

Vivaldi rejoined only with an enquiry whether his friend would accompany him.
"If not," he added* "I must hope to find another companion."

Bonarmo said, that he must consider of the proposal, and would acquaint him
with his determination before the following evening.

While this conversation concluded, they were in Naples, and at the gates of
the Vivaldi palace, where they separated for the remainder of the night.

He opened it, and proceeded along the silent passages, toward the private
staircase, often pausing to listen and then stepping more lightly; -- the
terrific Schedoni, in this moment of meditative guilt, feared even the feeble
Ellena. At the foot of the staircase, he again stopped to listen. "Do you here
any thing?"' said he in a whisper.

"I hear only the sea," replied the man.

"Hush! it is something more!" said Schedoni; "that is the murmur of voices!"

They were silent. After a pause of some length, "It is, perhaps, the voice of
the specter I told you of, Signor," said Spalatro, with a sneer. "Give me the
dagger," said Schedoni.

Spalatro, instead of obeying, now grasped the arms of the Confessor, who,
looking at him for an explanation of this extraordinary action, was still more
surprised to observe the paleness and horror of his countenance. His starting
eyes seemed to follow some object along the passage, and Schedoni, who began to
partake of his feelings, looked forward to discover what occasioned this
dismay, but could not perceive any thing that justified it. "What is it you
fear?" said he at length.

Spaltro's eyes were still moving in horror. "Do you see nothing!" said he
pointing. Schedoni looked again, but did not distinguish any object in the
remote gloom of the passage, whether Spalatro's sight was now fixed.

"Come, come," said he, ashamed of his own weakness, "this is not a moment for
such fancies. Awake from this idle dream."

Spalatro withdrew his eyes, but they retained all their wildness "It was no
dream," said he in the voice of a man who is exhausted by pain, and begins to
breathe somewhat more freely again "I saw it as plainly as I now see you."

"Dotard! what did you see!" enquired the Confessor.

"It came before my eyes in a moment, and showed itself distinctly and
outspread."

"What (...) itself? repeated Schedoni."

"And then it beckoned -- yes it beckoned me, with that blood-stained finger!
and glided away down the passage still beckoning -- till it was lost in the
darkness."

"This is very frenzy!" said Schedoni, excessively agitated. "Arouse yourself,
and be a man!

"Frenzy! would it were, Signor. I saw that dreadful hand -- I see it now -- it
is there again! -- there!"

Schedoni, shocked, embarrassed, and once more infected with the strange
emotions of Spalatro, looked forward, expecting to discover some terrific
object, but, still nothing was visible to him, and he soon recovered himself
sufficiently to endeavor to appease the fancy of this conscience-struck
ruffian. But Spalatro was insensible to all he could urge, and the Confessor,
fearing that his voice, though weak and stifled, would awaken Ellena, tried to
withdraw him from the spot, to the apartment they had quitted.

"The wealth of San Loretto, should not make me go that way, Signor," replied
he, shuddering -- "that was they way it beckoned, it vanished that way!"

Every emotion now yielded with Schedoni, to that of apprehension, lest Ellena,
being awakened, should make his task more horrid by a struggle, and his
embarrassment increased at each instant, for neither command, menace or
entreaty could prevail with Spalatro to retire, till the Monk luckily
remembered a door which opened beyond the staircase, would conduct them by
another way to the opposite side of the house. The man consented so to depart,
when Schedoni, unlocking a suit of rooms, of which he had always kept the keys,
they passed in silence through an extent of desolate chambers, till they
reached the one which they had lately left.

Here, relieved from apprehension respecting Ellena, the Confessor expostulated
more freely with Spalatro; but neither argument nor menace could prevail, and
the man persisted in refusing to return to the staircase, though protesting,
at the same time, that he would not remain alone in any part of the house, till
the wine, with which the Confessor abundantly supplied him, began to overcome
the terrors of his imagination. At length, his courage was so much reanimated,
that he consented to resume his station, and await at the foot of the stairs
the accomplishment of Schedoni's dreadful errand, with which agreement they
returned thither by the way they had lately passed. The wine, with which
Schedoni also had found it necessary to strengthen his own resolution, did not
secure him from severe emotion, when he found himself again near Ellena; but he
made a strenous effort for self subjection, as he demanded the dagger of
Spalatro.

"You have it, already, Signor," replied the man.

"True," said the Monk;" ascend softly, or our steps may awaken her."

"You said I was to wait at the foot of the stairs, Signor, while you" --

"True, true, true!" muttered the Confessor, and had begun to ascend, when his
attendant desired him to stop. "You are going in darkness, Signor, you have
forgotten the lamp. I have another here."

Schedoni took it angrily, without speaking, and was again ascending, when he
hesitated, and once more paused. "The glare will disturb her," thought he, "it
is better to go in darkness -- Yet -- "He considered, that he could nor strike
with certainty without light to direct his hand, and he kept the lamp, but
returned once more to charge Spalatro not to stir from the foot of the stairs
till he called, and to ascend to the chamber upon the first signal.

"I will obey, Signor, if you, on your part, will promise not to give the
signal till all is over."

"I do promise," replied Schedoni. "No more!"

Again he ascended, nor stopped till he reached Ellena's door, where he
listened for a sound; but all was as silent as if death already reigned in the
chamber. This door was from long disuse, difficult to be opened; formerly it
would have yielded without sound, but now Schedoni was fearful of noise from
every effort he made to move it. After some difficulty, however, it gave way,
and he perceived, by the stillness within the apartment, that he had not
disturbed Ellena. He shaded the lamp with the door for a moment, while he threw
an enquiring glance forward, and when he did venture farther, held part of his
dark drapery before the light to prevent the rays from spreading through the
room.

As he approached the bed, her gentle breathings informed him that she still
slept, and the next moment he was at herside. She lay in deep and peaceful
^lumber, and seemed to have thrown herself upon the mattress, after having been
wearied by her griefs; for, though (...) pressed heavily upon her eyes, their
lids were yet wet with tears.

While Schedoni gazed for a moment upon her innocent countenance, a faint smile
stole over it. He stepped back." She smiles in her murderer's face!" said he,
shuddering, "I must be speedy."

He searched for the dagger, and it was some time before his trembling hand
could disengage it from the folds of his garment; but, having done so, he again
drew near, and prepared to strike. Her dress perplexed him; it would interrupt
the blow, and he stopped to examine whether he could turn her robe asid without
waking her. As the light passed over her face, he perceived that the smile had
vanished -- the visions of her sleep were changed, for tears stole from beneath
her eye lids, and her features suffered a slight convulsion. She spoke!
Schedoni, apprehending that the light had disturbed her, suddenly drew back,
and again irresolute, shaded the lamp and concealed himself behind the curtain,
while he listened. But her words were inward and indistinct, and convinced him
that she still slumbered.

His agitation and repugnance to strike, increased with every moment of delay,
and as often as he prepared to plunge the poignard in her bosom, a shuddering
horror restrained him. Astonished at his own feelings, and indignant at what he
termed a dastardly weakness, he found it necessary to argue with himself, and
his rapid thoughts said, "Do I not feel the necessity of this act? Does not
what is dearer to me than existence -- does not my consequence depend on the
execution of it? Is she not also beloved by the young Vivaldi? -- have I
already forgotten the church of the Spirito Santo?" This consideration
reanimated him; vengeance nerved his arm, and drawing aside the lawn from her
bosom, he once more raised it to strike; when after gazing for an instant, some
new cause of horror seemed to seize all his frame, and he stood for some
moments aghast and motionless like a statue. His respiration was short and
laborious, chilly drops stood on his fore hand, and all his faculties of the
mind seemed supended. When he recovered, he stooped to examine again the
miniature, which had occasioned this revolution, and which had lain concealed
beneath the lawn that he withdrew. The terrible certainty was almost confirmed,
and forgetting, in his impatience to know the truth, the imprudence of suddenly
discovering himself to Ellena at this hour of the night, and with a dagger at
his feet, he called loudly. "Awake! awake! Say, what is your name! Speak speak
quickly!

Ellena, aroused by a man's voice, started from her mattress, when, perceiving
Schedoni, and by the pale glare of the lamp, his haggard countenance, she
shrieked, and sunk back on the pillow. She had not fainted; and believing that
he came to murder her, she now exerted herself to plead for mercy. The energy
of her feelings enabled her to rise and throw herself at his feet. "Be
merciful, O father! be merciful! said she, in a trembling voice.

"Father, interrupted Schedoni* with earnestness; and then seeming to restrain
himself, he added, with unaffected surpise, "Why are you thus terrified?" for
he had lost, in new interests and emotions, all consciousness of evil
intention, and of the singularity of his situation. "What do you fear?" he
repeated.

"Have pity, holy father!" exclaimed Ellena in agony.

"Why do you not say whose portrait that is?" demanded he, forgetting that he
had not asked the question before.

"Whose portrait?" repeated the Confessor in a loud voice.

"Whose portrait!" said Ellena, with extreme surprise.

"Ay, how came you by it? Be quick -- whose resemblance is it?"

"Why should you wish to know?" said Ellena.

"Answer my question," repeated Schedoni, with increasing sternness.

"I cannot part with it, holy father," replied Ellena, pressing it to her
bosom, "you do not wish me to part with!"

"Is it impossible to make you answer my question!" said he, in extreme
perturbation, and turning away from her, "has fear utterly confounded you!"
Then, again stepping toward her, and seizing her wrist, he epeated the demand
in a tone of desperation.

"Alas! he is dead! or I should not now want a protector, replied Ellena,
shrinking from his grasp, and weeping.

"You trifle," said Schedoni, with a terrible look, "I once more demand an
answe^ -- whose picture?" --

Ellena lifted it, gazed upon it for a momemt, and then pressing it to ^er
lips, "This was my father."

"Your father!" he repeated in an inward voice, "your father!" and shuddering
turned away.

Ellena looked at him with surprise. "I never knew a father's care," she said,
nor till lately did I perceive the want of it. -- But now." --

"His name?" interrupted the Confessor.

"But now," continued Ellena -- "if you are not as a father to me -- to whom
can I look for protection?"

"His name," repeated Schedoni, with sterner emphasis.

"It is sacred," replied Ellena, "for he was unfortunate!"

"His name?" demanded the Confessor, furiously,

"I have promised to conceal it, father."

"On your life, I charge you tell it; remember, on your life!"

Ellena trembled, was silent, and with supplicating looks implored him to
desist from enquiry, but he urged the question more irresistibly. "His name
than," said she. "was Marinella."

Schedoni groaned and turned away; but in a few seconds, struggling to command
the agitation that shattered his whole frame, he returned to Ellena, and raised
her from her knees, on which she had thrown herself to implore mercy.

"The place of his residence?" said the Monk.

"It was far from hence," she replied; but he demanded an unequivocal answer,
and she reluctantly gave one.

Schedoni turned away as before, groaned heavily, and paced the chamber without
speaking; while Ellena in her turn, enquired the motive of his questions, and
^e occasion of his agitation. But he seemed not to notice any thing she said,
and, wholl gi^en up to his feelings, was inflexibly silent, while he stalked,
with measured steps along the room, and his face half hid by his cowl, was bent
toward the ground.

Ellena's terror began to yield to astonishment, and this emotion increased,
when Schedoni approaching her, she perceived tears swell in his eyes, which
were fixed on here is and his countenance soften from the wild disorder that had
marked it. Still he could not speak. At length he yielded to the fullness of
his heart, and Schedoni, the stern Schedoni wept and sighed! He seated himself
on the mattress beside Ellena, took her hand, which, she affrighted, attempted
to withdraw, and when he could command his voice, said, "Unhappy child! --
behold your more unhappy father!" As he concluded, his voice was evercome by
groans, and he drew the cowl entirely over his face.

"My father!" exclaimed the astonished and doubting Ellena -- "my father!" and
fixed her eyes upon him. He gave no reply, but when, a moment after, he lifted
his head, "Why do you reproach me with those looks! said the conscious Schedoni.

"Reproach you! -- reproach my father!" repeated Ellena, in accents softening
into tenderness, Why should I reproach my father!

"Why?" exclaimed Schedoni, starting from his seat, "Great God!"

As he moved, he stumbled over the dagger at his foot; at that moment it might
be said to strike into his heart. He pushed it hastily from his sight, Ellena
had not observed it; but she observed his laboring breast, his distracted
looks, and quick steps as he walked to and fro in the chamber; and she asked,
with the most soothing accents of compassions, and looks of anxious gentleness,
what made him so unhappy, and tried to assuage his sufferings. They seemed to
increase with every wish she expressed to dispel them; at one moment he would
pause to gaze upon her, and in the next would quit her with a frenzied start.

"Why do you look so piteously upon me, father?" Ellena said, "why are you so
unhappy? Tell me, that I may comfort you,"

This appeal renewed all the violence of remorse and grief, and he pressed her
to his bosom, and wetted her cheek with his tears. Ellena wept to see him weep
till her doubts began to take alarm. Whatever might be the proofs, that had
convinced Schedoni of the relationship between them, he had not explained these
to her, and, however strong was the eloquence of nature which she witnessed, it
was not sufficient to justify an entire confidence in the assertion he had
made, or to allow her to permit his caresses without trembling. She shrunk, and
endeavored to disengage herself; when, immediately understanding her, he said,
"Can you doubt the cause of these emotions? these signs of paternal affection?"

"Have I not reason to doubt," replied Ellena, timidly "since I never witnessed
them before?"

He withdrew his arms, and fixing his eyes earnestly on hers, regarded her for
some moments, in expressive silence, "Poor Innocent!" said he, at length, "you
know not how much your words convey! -- It is too true, you never have known a
father's tenderness till now!"

His countenance darkened while he spoke, and he rose again from his seat.
Ellena, meanwhile, astonished, terrified and oppressed by a variety of emotoins
and no power to demand his reasons for the belief that so much agitated him, or
any explanation of his conduct; but she appealed to the portrait, and
endeavored by tracing some resemblance between it and Schedoni, to decide her
doubts. The countenance of each was as different in character as in years. The
miniature displayed a young man, rather handsome, of a gay and smiling
countenance; yet the smile expressed triumph, rather than sweetness, and his
whole air and features were distinguished by a consciousness of superiority
that rose even to haughtiness.

Schedoni, on the contrary, advanced in years, exhibited a severe physiognomy,
furrowed by thought, no less than by time, and darkened by the habitual
indulgence of morose passions. He looked as if he had never smiled since the
portrait was drawn; and it seemed as if the painter, prophetic of Schedoni's
future disposition, had arrested and embodied that smile to prove, hereafter,
that cheerfulness had once played upon his features.

Though the expression was so different between the countenance, which Schedoni
formerly owned, and that he now wore the same character of haughty pride was
visible in both; and Ellena did trace a resemblance in the bold outline of the
features, but not sufficient to convince her, without farther evidence, that
each belonged to the same person, and that the Confessor had ever been the
young cavalier in the portrait. In the first tumult of her thoughts, she had
not had leisure to dwell upon the singularity of Schedoni's visiting her at
this deep hour of the night, or to urge any questions, except vague ones,
concerning the truth of her relationship to him. But now, that her mind was
somewhat recollected, and that his looks were less terrific, she ventured to
ask a fuller explanation of these circumstances, and his reasons for the late
extraordinary assertion. "It is past midnight, father said Ellena, "you may
judge then how anxious I am to learn, what motive led you to my chamber at this
lonely hour?"

Schedoni made no reply.

"Did you come to warn me of my danger?" she continued, "had you discovered the
cruel designs of Spalatro? Ah! when I supplicated for your compassion on the
shore this evening, you little thought what perils surrounded me! or you would
--."

"You say true! interrupted he, in a hurried manner, "but name the subject no
more. Why will you persist in returning to it?"

His words surprised Ellena, who had not even alluded to the subject till now;
but the returning wildness of his countenance, made her fearful of dwelling
upon the topic, even so far as to point out his error.

Another deep pause succeeded, during which Schedoni continued to pace the
room, sometimes stopping for an instant, to fix his eyes on Ellena, and
regarding her with an earnestness that seemed to partake of frenzy, and then
gloomily withdrawing his regards, and sighing heavily, as he turned away to a
distant part of the room. She, meanwhile, agitated with astonishment at his
conduct, as well as at her own circumstances, and with the fear of offending
him by further questions, endeavored to summon courage to solicit the
explanation which was so important to her tranquillity. At length she asked,
how she might venture to believe a circumstance so surprising, as that of which
he had just assured her, and to remind him that he had not yet disclosed his
reason for admitting the belief.

The Confessor's feelings were eloquent in reply; and, when at length they were
sufficiently subdued, to permit him to talk coherently, he mentioned some
circumstances concerning Ellena's family, that proved him at least to have been
intimately acquainted with it; and others, which she believed were known only
to Bianchi and herself, that removed every doubt of his identity.

This, however, was a period of his life too big with remorse, horror, and the
first pangs of parental affection, to allow him to converse long; deep solitude
was necessary for his soul. He wished to plunge where no eye might restrain his
emotions or observe the overflowing anguish of his heart. Having obtained
sufficient proof to convince him that Ellena was indeed his child, and assured
her that she should be removed from this house on the following day, and be
restored to her home, he abruptly left the chamber.

As he descended the staircase, Spalatro stepped forward to meet him, the
cloak which had been designed to wrap the mangled form of Ellena, when it
should be carried to the shore. "Is it done?" said the ruffian, in a stiffled
voice; "I am ready;" and he spread forth the cloak, and began to ascend.

"Hold! villian, hold! said Schedoni, lifting up his head for the first time,
"Dare to enter that chamber, and your life shall answer for it."

"What!" exclaimed the man, shinking back astonished -- "will not here is satisfy
you?"

He trembled for the consequence of what he had said, when he observed the
changing countenance of the (...). But Schedoni spoke not: the tumult in (...)
breast was too great for utterance, and he pressed hastily forward. Spalatro
followed. "Be pleased to tell me what I am to do," said he, again holding forth
the cloak.

"Avaunt!" exclaimed the other, turning fiercely upon him; "leave me."

"How!" sai^ the man, whose spirit was now a roused, "has your courage failed
too, Signor? If so, I will prove myself no dastard, though you called me one;
I Will do the business myself."

"Villian! fiend! (...) cried Schedoni, seizing the ruffian by the throat, with
a grasp that seemed intended to annihilate him; when, recollecting that the
fellow was only willing to obey the very instructions he had himself but lately
delivered to him, or other emotions succeeded to that of rage; he slowly
liberated him, and in accents broken, and softening from sternness, bade him
retire to rest. "Tomorrow," he added, "I will speak further with you. As for
this night -- I have changed my purpose. Begone!"

Spalatro was about to express the indignation, which astonishment and fear had
hitherto overcome, but his employer repeated his command in a voice of thunder,
and closed the door of his apartment with violence, as he shut out a man whose
presence was become hateful to him. He felt relieved by his absence, and began
to breathe more freely, till remembering that this accomplice had just boasted
that he was no dastard, he dreaded lest by way of proving the assertion, he
should attempt to commit the crime, from which he had lately shrunk. Terrified
at the possibility, and even apprehending that it might already have become a
reality, he rushed from the room, and found Spalatro in the passage leading to
the private staircase; but, whatever might have been his purpose, the
situation and looks of the latter were sufficiently alarming. At the approach
of Schedoni, he turned his sullen (...) malignant countenance toward him,
without answering the call, or the demand as to his business there; and with
slow steps obeyed the order of his master, that he should withdraw to his room.
Thither Schedoni followed, and, having locked him in it for the night, he
reparied to the apartment of Ellena, which he secured from the possibility of
intrusion. He then returned to his own, not to sleep, but to abandon himself to
the agonies of remorse and horror; and he yet shuddered, like a man who has
just recoiled from the brink of a precipice, but who still me sures the gulf
with his eye.

CHAP. III.
-- But their way
Lies through the perplexed paths of this drear wood,
The nodding horror of whose shady brows
Threats the forlorn and wandering passenger.
MILTON.
EELLENA, when Schedoni had left her, recollected all the particulars, which he
had thought proper to reveal concerning her family, and comparing them with
such circumstances as the late Bianchi had related on the same subject, she
perceived nothing that was contradictory between the two accounts But she knew
not even yet enough of her own story, to understand why Bianchi had been silent
as to some particulars, which had just been disclosed. From Bianchi she had
always understood, that her mother had married a nobleman of the duchy of
Milan, and of the house of Marinella; that the marriage had been unfortunate;
and that she herself, even before the death of the Countess, had been committed
to the care of Bianchi, the only sister of that lady. Of this event, or of her
mother, Ellena had no remembrance; for the kindness of Bianchi had obliterated
from her mind the loss and the griefs of her early infancy; and she recollected
only the accident which had discovered to her, in Bianchi's cabinet, after the
death of the latter, the minature and the name of her father. When she had
enquired the reason of this injunction Bianchi replied, that the degraded
fortune of her house rendered privacy desirable; and answered her further
questions concerning her father, by relating, that he had died while she was an
infant. The picture, which Ellena had discovered, Bianchi had found among the
trinkets of the departed Countess, and designed to present it at some future
perid to Ellena, when her discretion might he trusted with a knowledge of her
family. This was the whole of what Signora Bianchi had judged it necessary to
explain, though in her last hours it appeared that she wished to reveal more;
but it was then too late.

Though Ellena perceived that many circumstances of the relations given by
Schedoni, and by Signora Bianchi, coincided, and that none were contradictory,
except that of his death, she could not yet subdue her amazement at this
discovery or even the doubts which occasionally recurred to her as to its
truth. Schedoni, on the contrary, had not even appeared surprised, when she
assured him, that she always understood her father had been dead many years;
though when she asked if her mother too was living, both his distress and his
assurances confirmed the relations made by Bianchi.

When Ellena's mind became more tranquil she noticed again the singularity of
Schedoni's visit to her apartment at so sacred an hour; and her thoughts
glanced back involuntarily to the scene of the preceding evening on the
seashore, and the image of her father appeared in each, in the terrific
character of an agent of the Marchesa di Vivaldi. The suspicions, however,
which she had formerly admitted, respecting his designs, were now impatiently
rejected, for she was less anxious to discover truth, than to release herself
from horrible suppositions; and she willingly believed that Schedoni having
misunderstood her character, had only designed to assist in removing her beyond
the reach of Vivaldi -- The ingenuity of hope suggested also, that, having just
heard from her conducters, or from Spalatro, some circumstances of her story,
he had been led to a suspicion of the relationship between them, and that in
the first impatience of parental anxiety, he had disregarded the hour and come,
though at midnight, to her apartment to ascertain the truth.

While she soothed herself with this explanation of a circumstance, which had
occasioned her considerable surprise, she perceived on the floor the point of a
dagger peeping from beneath the curtains! Emotions almost too horrible to be
sustained, followed this discovery; she took the instrument, and gazed upon it
aghast, and trembling; for a suspicion of the real motive of Schedoni's visit
glanced upon her mind. But it was only for a moment; such a supposition was too
terrible to be willingly endured; she again believed that Spalatro alone had
meditated her destruction, and she thanked the Confessor as her deliverer,
instead of shrinking from him as an assassin. She now understood that Schedoni,
having discovered the ruffian's design, had rushed into the chamber to save a
stranger from his murderous poignard, and had unconscionslly rescued his own
daughter, when the portrait at her bosom informed him of the truth. With this
conviction, Ellena's eyes overflowed with gratitude, and her heart was hushed
to peace.

Schedoni, meanwhile, shut up in his chamber, was agitated by feelings of a
very opposite nature. When their first excess was exhausted, and his mind was
calm enough to reflect, the images that appeared on it struck him with solemn
wonder. In pursuing Ellena as the criminal instigation of the Marchesa di
Vivaldi, it appeared that he had been persecuting his own child; and in thus
consenting to conspire against the innocent, he had, in the event, been only
punishing the guilty, and preparing mortification for himself on the exact
subject to which he had sacrificed his conscience. Every step that he had
taken, with a view of gratifying his ambition was r^t^ograde, and while he had
been wickedly intent to serve the Merchesa and himself, by preventing the
marriage of Vivaldi and Ellena, he had been labouriously counteracting his own
fortune. An alliance with the illustrious house of Vivaldi, was above his
loftiest hope of advancement, and this event he had himself nearly prevented by
the very means which had been adopted, at the expense of every virtuous
consideration, to obtain an inferior promotion. Thus, by a singular
retribution, his own crimes had recoiled upon himself.

Schedoni perceived the many obstacles, which lay between him and his
newly-awakened hopes, and that much was to be overcome before those nuptials
could be publicly solemnized, which he was now still more anxious to promote,
then he had lately been to prevent. The approbation of the Marchesa was, at
least, desirable, for she had much at her disposal, and without it, though his
daughter might be the wife of Vivaldi, he himself would be no otherwise
benefited at present than by the honor of the connection. He had some peculiar
reasons for believing, that her consent might be obtained, and, though there
was hazard in delaying the nuptials till such an experiment had been made, he
resolved to encounter it, rather than forbear to solicit her concurrence. But,
if the Marchesa should prove inexorable, he determined to bestow the hand of
Ellena, without her knowledge; and in doing so he well knew that he incurred
little danger from her resentment, since he had secrets in his possession, the
consciousness of which must awe her into a speedy neutrality. The consent of
the Marchese, as he despaired of obtaining it, he did not mean to solicit, and
the influence of the Marchesa was such, that Schedoni did not regard that as
essential.

The first steps, however, to be taken, were those that might release Vivaldi
from the Inquisition, the tremendous prison into which Schedoni himself, little
foreseeing that he should so soon wish for his liberation, had caused him to be
thrown. He had always understood, indeed, that if the Informer forbore to
appear against the Accused in this Court, the latter would of course, be
liberated, and he also believed, that Vivaldi's freedom could be obtained
whenever be should think proper to apply to a person at Naples, whom he knew to
be connected with the Holy Office of Rome. How much the Confessor had suffered
his wishes to deceive him, may appear hereafter. His motives for having thus
confined Vivaldi, were partly those of self-defence. He dreaded the discovery
and the vengeance, which might follow the loss of Ellena, should Vivaldi be at
liberty immediately to pursue his enquiries. But he believed that all trace of
her must be loft, after a few weeks had elapsed, and that Vivaldi's sufferings,
from confinement in the Inquisition, would have given interests to his mind,
which must weaken the one he left for Ellena. Yet, though in this instance,
self-defence had been a principal motive with Schedoni, a desire of revenging
the insult he had received in the church of the Spirito Santo, and all the
consequent mortifications he experienced had been a second; and, such was the
blackness of this hatred, and the avarice of his revenge, that he had not
considered the suffering, which the loss of Ellena would occasion Vivaldi, as
sufficient retaliation.

In adopting a mode of punishment so extraordinary as that of imprisonment in
the Inquisiton, it appears, therefore, that Schedoni was influenced, ^partly by
the difficulty of otherwise confining Vivaldi, during the period of which
confinement was absolutely necessary to the success of his own schemes, and
partly by a desire of inflicting the tortures of terror. He had also been
encouraged by his discovery of this opportunity for conferring new obligations
on the Marchesa. The very conduct, that must have appeared to the first glance
of an honest mind fatal to his interests, he thought might be rendered
beneficial to them, and that his dexterity could so command the business, as
that the Marchesa should eventually thank him as the deliverer of her son,
instead of discovering and execrating him as his Accuser; a scheme favored by
the unjust and cruel rule enacted by the tribunal he approached, which
permitted anonymous Informers.

To procure the arrestation of Vivaldi, it had been only necessary to send a
written accusation, without a name, to the Holy Office, with a mention of the
place where the accused person migh be seized; but the suffering, in
consequence of this, did not always proceed further than the question; since,
if the Informer failed to discover himself to the inquisitors, the prisoner
after many examinations, was released, unless he happened unwarily to criminate
himself. Schedoni, as he did not intend to prosecute, believed, therefore, that
Vivaldi would, of course, be discharged after a certain period, and supposing
it also utterly impossible that he could ever discover his Accuser, the
Confessor determined to appear anxious and active in effecting his release.
This character of a deliverer, he knew he should be the better enabled to
support by means of a person officially connected with the Holy Office, who had
already unconsciously assisted his views. In the apartment of this man,
Schedoni had accidently seen a formula of arrestation against a person
suspected of Heresy, the view of which had not only suggested to him the plan
he had since adopted, but had, in some degree, assisted him to carry it into
effect. He had seen the scroll only for a short time, but his observations were
so minute, and his memory so clear, that he was able to copy it with at least
sufficient exactness to impose upon the Benedictine priest, who had, perhaps,
seldom, or never seen a real instrument of this kind, Schedoni had employed
this artifice for the purpose of immediately securing Vivaldi, apprehending
that, while the Inquisitors were slowly deliberating upon his arrest, he might
quit Celano, and elude discovery. If the deception succeeded, it would enable
him also to seize Ellena, and to mislead Vivaldi respecting her destination.
The charge of having carried off a nun, might appear to be corroborated by many
circumstances, and Schedoni would probably have made these the subject of real
denunciation, had he not forseen the danger and the trouble in which it might
implicate himself; and that, as the charge could not be substantiated, Ellena
would finally escape. As far as his plan ow went, it had been successful; some
of the bravoes whom he hired to personate officiels, had conveyed Vivaldi to
the town, when the real officers of the Inquisition were appointed to receive
him; while the others carried Ellena to the shore of the Adriatic. Schedoni had
much applauded his own ingenuity, in thus contriving, by the matter of the
forged accusation, to throw an impenetrable veil over the fate of Ellena, and
to secure himself from the suspicions or vengeance of Vivaldi, who, it
appeared, would always believe that she had died, or was still confined in the
unsearchable prisons of the Inquisition.

Thus he had betrayed himself in endeavoring to betray Vivaldi, whose release,
however, he yet supposed could be easily obtained; but how much his policy had,
in this instance, outrun his sagacity, now remained to be proved.

The subject of Schedoni's immediate perplexity, was the difficulty of
conveying Ellena back to Naples; since, not choosing to appear, at present, in
the character of her father, he could not decorously accompany her thither
himself, nor could he prudently entrust her to the conduct of any person (...)
he knew in this neighborhood. It was, however, necessary to form a speedy
determination, for he could neither endure to pass another day in a scene which
must continually impress him with the horrors of the preceding night, nor that
Ellena should remain in it; and the morning-light already gleamed upon his
casements.

After some further deliberation, he resolved to be himself her conductor, as
far, at least, as through the forests of the Garganus, and at the first town
where conveniences could be procured, to throw aside his Monk's habit, and,
assuming the dress of a layman, accompany her in this disguise toward Naples,
till he should either discover some secure means of sending her forward to that
city, or a temporary asylum for her in a convent on the way.

His mind was scarcely more tranquil, after having formed this determination,
than before, and he did not attempt to repose himself even for a moment. The
circumstances of the late discovery were almost perpetually recurring to his
affrighted conscience, accompanied by a fear that Ellena might suspect the real
purpose of his midnight visit; and he alternately formed and rejected plausible
falsehoods, that might assuage her curiosity, and delude her apprehension.

The hour arrived, however, when it was necessary to prepare for departure, and
found him still undecided as to the explanation he should form.

Having released Spalatro from his chamber, and given him directions to procure
horses and a guide immediately from the neighboring hamlet, he repaired to
Ellena's room, to prepare her for this hasty removal. On approaching it, a
remembrance of the purpose, with which he had last passed through these same
passages and staircase, appealed so powerfully to his feelings, that he was
unable to proceed, and he turned back to his own apartment to recover some
command over himself. A few moments restored to him his usual address, though
not his tranquillity, and he again approached the chamber; it was now, howe^er
by way of the corridor. As he unbarred the door, his hand trembled; but, when
he entered the room, his countenance and manner had resumed their usual
solemnity, and his voice only would have betrayed, to an attentive observer,
the agitation of his mind.

Ellena was considerably affected on seeing him again, and he examined with a
jealous eye the emotions he witnessed. The smile with which she met him was
tender, but he perceived it pass away from her features, like the aerial
coloring that illumines a mountain's brow; and the gloom of doubt and
apprehension again overspread them. As he advanced, he held forth his hand for
here is, when suddenly perceiving the dagger he had left in the chamber, he
involuntarily withdrew his proffered courtesy, and his countenance changed.
Ellena, whose eyes followed his to the object that attracted them, pointed to
the instrument, took it up, and approached him, said, "This dagger I found last
night in my chamber! O my father!" --

"That dagger!" said Schedoni, with affected surprise.

"Examine it," continued Ellena, while she held it up, "Do you know to whom it
belongs? and who brought it hither?"

"What is it you mean?" asked Schedoni, betrayed by his feelings.

"Do you know, too, for what purpose it was brought?" said Ellena mournfully.

The Confessor made no reply, but irresolutely attempted to seize the
instrument.

"O yes, I perceive you know too well," continued Ellena, "here, my father,
while I slept." --

"Give me the dagger," interrupted Schedoni, in a frightful voice.

"Yes, my father, I will give it as an offering of my gratitude," replied
Ellena, but as she raised her eyes, filled with tears, his look and fixed
attitude terrified her, and she added with a still more persuasive tenderness,
"Will you not accept the offering of your child, for having preserved her from
the poignard of an assassin.

Schedoni's looks became yet darker; he took the dagger in silence, and threw
it with violence to the furthest end of the chamber, while his eyes remained
fixed on here is. The force of the action alarmed her; "Yes, it is in vain that
you would conceal the truth," she added, weeping unrestrainedly, "your goodness
cannot avail; I know the whole." --

The last words aroused Schedoni again from his trance, his features became
convulsed, and his look furious. "What do you know?" he demanded in a subdue
voice, that seemed ready to burst in thunder.

"All that I owe you," replied Ellena, that last night, while I slept upon this
mattress, unsuspicious of what was designed against me, an assassin entered the
chamber with that instrument in his hand, and -- "

A stifled groan from Schedoni checked Ellena; she observed his rolling eyes,
and trembled; till believing that his agitation was occasioned by indignation
against the assassin, she resumed, "Why should you think it necessary to
conceal the danger which has threatened me, since it is to you that I owe my
deliverence from it? O! my father, do not deny me the pleasure of shedding
these tears of gratitude, do not refuse the thanks which are due to you! While
I slept upon that couch, while a ruffian stole upon my ^lumber -- it was you,
yes! can I ever forget that it was my father, who saved me from his poignard!"

Schedoni's passions were changed, but they were not less violent; he could
scarcely control them, while he said, in a tremulous tone -- " It is enough,
say no more; and he raised Ellena, but turned away without embracing her.

His strong emotion, as he paced in silence, the furthest end of the apartment,
excited her surprise, but she then attributed it to a remembrance of the
perilous moment, from which he had rescued her.

Schedoni, meanwhile, to whom her (...) were daggers, was trying to subdue the
feelings of remorse that tore his heart; and was so enveloped in a world of his
own, as to be for some time unconcious of all around him. He continued to stalk
in gloomy silence along the chamber, till the voice of Ellena, entreating him
rather to rejoice that he had been permitted to save her than so deeply to
consider dangers which were past, again touched the cord that vibrated to his
conscience, and recalled him to a sense of his situation. He then bid her
prepare for immediate departure, and abruptly quitted the room.

Vainly hoping that in flying from the scene of his mediated crime, he should
leave with it the acuteness of remembrance, and the agonizing stings of
remorse, he was now more anxious than ever to leave this place. Yet he should
still be accompanied by Ellena, and her innocent looks, her affectionate
thanks, inflicted an anguish which was scarcely endurable. Sometimes, thinking
that her hatred, or what to him would be still severer, her contempt, must be
more tolerable than this gratitude, he almost resolved to undeceive her
respecting his conduct, but as constantly and impatiently repelled the thought
with horror, and finally determined to suffer her to account for his late
extraordinary visit in the away she had chosen.

Spalatro, at length, returned from the hamlet with horses, but without having
procured a guide to conduct the travelers through a tract of the
long-devolving forests of the Garganus, which it was necessary for them to
pass. No person had been willing to undertake so arduous a task; and Spalatro,
who was well acquainted with all the labyrinths of the way, now offered his
services

Schedoni, though he could scarcely endure the presence of this man, had no
alternative but to accept him, since he had dismissed the guide who had
conducted him hither. Of personal violence Schedoni had no apprehension, though
he too well understood, the villainy of his proposed companion; for he
considered that he himself should be well armed, and he determined to ascertain
that Spalatro was without weapons, he knew, also, that in case of a contest,
his own superior stature would easily enable him to overcome such an antagonist.

Every thing being now ready for departure, Ellena was summoned, and the
Confessor led her to his own apartment, where a slight breakfast was prepared.

Her spirits being revived by the speed of this departure, she would again have
expressed her thanks, but he peremptorily interrupted her, and forbade any
further mention of gratitude.

On entering the court where the horses were in waiting and perceiving
Spalatro, Ellena shrunk and put her arm within Schedoni's for protection. "What
recollections does the presence of that man revive!" said she, "I can scarcely
venture to believe myself safe, even with you, when he is here."

Schedoni made no reply, till the remark was repeated, "You have nothing to
fear from him," muttered the Confessor, while he hastened her forward, "and we
have no time to lose in vague apprehension."

"How?" exclaimed Ellena, "is not he the assassin from whom you saved me? I
cannot doubt, that you know him to be such, though you would spare me the pain
of believing so."

"Well, well, be it so," replied the Confessor; "Spalatro lead the horses this
way."

The party were soon mounted, when, quitting this eventful mansion, and the
shore of the Adriatic, as Ellena hoped for ever, they entered upon the gloomy
wilderness of the Garganus. She often turned her eyes back upon the house with
emotions of inexpressible awe, astonishment, and thankfulness, and gazed while
a glimpse of its turretted walls could be caught beyond the dark branches,
which, closing over it, at length shut it from her view. The joy of this
departure however, was considerably abated by the presence (...) Spalatro, and
her fearful countenance enquired (...) Schedoni the meaning of his being
suffered to accompany them. The Confessor was reluctant to speak concerning a
man, of whose very existence he would willingly have ceased to think. Ellena
guided (...) horse still closer to Schedoni's, but forbearing to (...) the
enquiry otherwise than by looks, she received (...) reply, and endeavoring to
quiet her apprehensions, (...) considering that he would not have permitted
this (...) to be their guide, unless he had believed he might (...) trusted.
This consideration, though it relieved (...) fears, increased her perplexity
respecting the late (...) signs of Spalatro, and her surprise that Schedoni,
(...) he had really understood them to be evil, should (...) his presence.
Every time she stole a glance (...) the dark countenance of this man, rendered
still da^^er by the shade of the trees, she thought "assassin was written on
each line of it, and could scarcely (...) that he, and not the people who had
conducted her (...) the mansion, had dropped the dagger in her chamber*
Whenever she looked round through the deep glade^ and on the forest mountains
that on every side close^ the scene, and seemed to exclude all cheerful haunt
(...) man, and then regarded her companions, her hear sunk, notwithstanding the
reasons she had for believing herself in the protection of a father. Nay the
very looks of Schedoni himself, more than (...) reminding her of his appearance
on the seashore, renewed the impressions of alarm and even of dismay which she
had there experienced, At such moment it was sarcely possible for her to
consider him as he parent, and, in spite of every late appearance, strang^ and
unaccountable doubts began to gether on (...) mind.

Schedoni, meanwhile, lost in thought, broke not, by a single word, the deep
silence of the solitudes through which they passed. Spalatro was equally mute
and equally engaged by his reflections on the sudden change in Schedoni's
purpose, and by wonder as to the motive, which could have induced him to lead
Ellena in safety, from the very spot whither she was brought by his express
command to be destroyed. He, however, was not so wholly occupied, as to be
unmindful of his situation, or unwatchful of an opportunity of serving his own
interests, and retaliating upon Schedoni for the treatment he had received on
the preceding night.

Among the various subjects that distracted the Confessor, the difficulty of
disposing of Ellena, without betraying at Naples that she was his relative, was
not the least distressing. Whatever might be the reason which could justify
such feelings, his fears of a premature discovery of the circumstance to the
society with whom he lived, were so strong, as often to produce the most
violent effect upon his countenance, and it was, perhaps, when he was occupied
by this subject, that its terrific expression revived with Ellena the late
scence upon the shore. His embarrassment was not less, as to the excuse to be
offered the Marchesa, for having failed to fulfill his engagement, and
respecting the means by which he might interest her in favor of Ellena, and
even dispose her to approve the marriage, before she should be informed of the
family of this unfortunate young woman. Perceiving all the necessity for
ascertaining the probabilities of suc^ consent, before he ventured to make an
avowal of her origin, he determined not to reveal himself till he should be
perfectly sure that the discovery would be acceptable to the Marchesa. In the
mean time, as it would be necessary to say something of Ellena's birth, he
meant to declare, that he had discovered it to be noble, and her family worthy
in every respect, of a connection with that of the Vivaldi,

An interview with the Marchesa, was almost equally wished for and dreaded by
the Confessor. He shuddered at the expectation of meeting a woman, who had
instigated him to the murder of his own child, which though he had been happily
prevented from committing it, was an act that would still be wished for by the
Marchesa. How could he endure her reproaches, when we should discover that he
had failed to accomplish her will! How conceal the indignation of a father, and
dissimulated all a father's various feelings, when, in reply to such
reproaches, he must form excuses, and act humility, from which his whole soul
would revolt! Never could his arts of dissimulation have been so severely
tried, not, even in the late scenes with Ellena, never have returned upon
himself in punishment so severe, as in that which awaited him with the
Marchesa. And from its approach the (...) and politic Schedoni often shrunk in
such horror, that he almost determined to avoid it at any hazard, and secretly
to unite Vivaldi and Ellena, without even soliciting the consent of the
Marchesa.

A desire, however, of the immediate preferment so necessary to his pride,
constantly checked this scheme, and finally made him willing to subject every
honest feeling, and submit to any meanness, however, vicious, rather than
forego the favorite object of his erroneous ambition. Never, perhaps, was the
paradoxical union of pride and abjectness, more strongly exibited than on this
occasion.

While thus the travelers silently proceeded, Ellena's thoughts often turned
to Vivaldi, and she considered, with trembling anxiety, the effect which the
late discovery was likely to have upon their future lives. It appeared to her,
that Schedoni must approve of a connection thus flattering to the pride of a
father, though he would probably refuse his, conent to a private marriage. And,
when she further considered the revolution, which a knowledge of her family
might occasion toward herself in the minds of the Vivaldi, her prospects
seemed to brighten, and her cares began to dissipate. Judging that Schedoni
must be acquainted with the present situation of Vivaldi she was continually on
the point of mentioning him, but was as constantly restrained by timidity,
though, had she suspected him to be an inhabitant of the Inquisition, her
scruples would have vanished before an irresistible interest. As it was,
believing that he like herself, had been imposed upon by the Marchesa's agents,
in the disguise of officials, she concluded, as has before appeared, that he
now suffered a temporary imprisonment by order of his mother, at one of the
family vilas. When, however, Schedoni awaking from his reverie, abruptly
mentioned Vivaldi, her spirits fluttered with impatience to learn his exact
situation, and she enquired respecting it.

"Im no stranger to your attachment," said Schedoni, evading the question, "but
I wish to be informed of some circumstances relative to its commencement."

Ellena, confused, and not knowing what to reply, was for a moment silent, and
then repeated her enquiry.

"Where did you first meet?" said the Confessor, still disregarding her
question. Ellena related, that she had first seen Vivaldi, when attending her
aunt from the church of San Lorenzo. For the present she was spared the
embarrassment of further explanation by Spalatro, who riding up to Schedoni,
informed him they were approaching the town of Zanti. On looking foward, Ellena
perceived houses peeping from among the forest-trees, at a short distance, and
presently heard the cheerful bark of a dog, that sure herald and faithful
servant of man!

Soon after the travelers entered Zanti, a small town surrounded by the
forest, where, however, the poverty of the inhabitants seemed to forbid a
longer stay than was absolutely necessary for repose, and (...) slight
refreshment. Spalatro led the way to a cabin, in which the few persons, that
journied this road were usually entertained. The appearance of the people, who
owned it, was as wild as their country, and the interior of the dwelling was so
dirty and comfortless, that Schedoni, preferring to take his repast in the open
air, a table was spread under the luxuriant shade of the forest-trees, at a
little distance. Here, when the host had withdrawn, and Spalatro had been
dispatched to examine the posthorses, and to procure a lay-habit for the
Confessor, the latter, once more alone with Ellena, began to experience again
somewhat of the embarrassments of conscience; and Ellena, whenever her eyes
glanced upon him, suffered a solemnity of fear that rose almost to terror. He,
at length, terminated this emphatic silence, by renewing his mention of
Vivaldi, and his command that Ellena should relate the history of their
affection. Not daring to refuse, she obeyed, but with as much brevity as
possible, and Schedoni did not interrupt her by a single observation. However
eligible their nuptials now appeared to him, he forebore to give any hint of
approbation, till he should have extricated the object of her regards from his
perilous situation. But, with Ellena, this very silence implied the opinion it
was meant to conceal, and, encouraged by the hope it imparted, she ventured
once more to ask, by whose order Vivaldi had been arrested; whither he had been
conveyed, and the circumstance of his present situation.

Too politic to entrust her with a knowledge of his actual condition, the
Confessor spared her the anguish of learning that he was a prisoner in the
Inquisition. He affected ignorance of the late transaction at Celano, but
ventured to believe, that both Vivaldi and herself had been arrested by order
of the Marchesa, who, ^e conjectured, had thrown him into temporary
confinement, a measure which she, no doubt, had meant to enforce also toward
Ellena.

"And you, my father," observed Ellena, "what brought you to my prison, -- you
who was not informed with the Marchesa's designs? -- What accident conducted
you to that remote solitude, just at the moment when you could save your child!"

"Informed of the Marchesa's designs!" said Schedoni, with embarrassment and
displeasure: "Have you ever imagined that I could be accessory -- that I could
consent to assist, I mean could consent to be a confident of such atrocious" --
Schedoni, bewildered, confounded, and half betrayed, checked himself.

"Yet you^ have said, the Marchesa meant only to confine me!" observed Ellena;
"was that design so atrocious? Alas, my father! I know too well that her plan
was more atrocious, and since you had too much reason to know this, why do you
say that imprisonment only was intended for me? But your solicitude for my
tranquillity leads you to?" --

"What means," interrupted the suspicious Schedoni, "can I particularly have of
understanding the Marchesa's schemes? I repeat, that I am not her confident;
how, then, is it to be supposed I should know that they extended further than
to imprisonment?"

"Did you not save me from the arm of the assassin!" said Ellena tenderly; "did
not you wrench the very dagger from his grasp!"

"I had forgotten, I had forgotten," said the Confessor, yet more embarrassed.

"Yes, good minds are ever thus apt to forget the benefits they confer,"
replied Ellena. "But you shall find, my father, that a greatful heart is
equally tenacious to remember them; it is the indelible register of every act
that is dismissed from the memory of the benefactor."

"Mention no more of benefits." said Schedoni, impatiently; "let silence on
this subject henceforth indicate your wish to oblige me."

He r^se, and joined the host, who was at the door of his abin. Schedoni wished
to dismiss Spalatro as soon as possible, and he enquired for a guide to conduct
him through that part of the forest, which remained to be traversed. In this
poor town, a person willing to undertake that office was easily to be found,
but the host went inquest of a neighbor whom he had recommended.

Meanwhile Spalatro returned, without having succeeded in his commission. Not
any lay-habit could be procured, upon so short a notice, that suited Schedoni.
He was obliged, therefore, to continue his journey to the next town at least,
in his own dress, but the necessity was not very serious to him, since it was
improbable that he should be known in this obscure region.

Presently the host appeared with his neighbor, when Schedoni, having received
satisfactory answers to his questions, engaged him for the remainder of the
forest-road and dismissed Spalatro, The ruffian departed with sullen reluctance
and evident ill will, circumstances which the Confessor scarcely noticed, while
occupied by the satisfaction of escaping from the presence of the atrocious
partner of his conscience. But Ellena, as he passed her, observed the maligant
disappointment of his look, and it served only to heighten the thankfulness his
departure occasioned her.

It was ofternoon before the travelers proceeded. Schedoni had calculated that
they could easily reach the town, at which they designed to pass the night,
before the close of evening, and he had been in no haste to depart during the
heat of the day. Their track now lay through a country less savage, though
scarcely less wild than that they had passed in the morning. It emerged from
the interior toward the border of the forest; they were no longer enclosed by
impending mountains; the with drawing shades were no longer impenetrable to the
eye, but now and then opened to gleams of sunshi^e-landscape, and blue
distances; and in the immediate scene, many a green glade spread its bosom to
the sun. The grandeur of the trees, however, did not decline; the plane, the
oak, and the chestnut still threw a pomp of foliage round these smiling spots,
and seemed to consecrate the mountain streams, that descended beneath their
solemn shade.

To the harrassed spirits of Ellena the changing scenery was refreshing and she
frequently yielded her cares to the influence of majestic nature. Over the
gloom of Schedoni, no scenery had, at any moment, power; the shape and paint of
external imagery gave neither impression nor color to his fancy. He contemned
the sweet illusions, to which other spirits are liable, and which often confer
a delight more exquisite and not less innocent, than any, which deliberative
reason can bestow.

The same thoughtful silence, that had wrapped him at the beginning of the
journey, he still preserved, except when occasionally he asked a question of
the guide concerning the way, and received answers too loquacious for his
humor. This loquacity, however, was not easily oppressed, and the peasant had
already begun to relate some terrible stories of murder, committed in these
forests upon people, who had been hardy enough to venture into them without a
guide, before the again abstracted Schedoni even noticed that he spoke. Though
Ellena did give much credit to these narratives, they had some effect upon her
fears, when soon after she entered the deep shades of a part of the forest,
that lay along a narrow defile, whence every glimpse of cheerful landscape was
again excluded by precipices, which towered on either side. The stilness was
not less effectual than the gloom, for no sounds were heard, except such as
seemed to characterize solitude, and impress its awful power more deeply on the
heart, -- the hollow dashing of torrents descending distantly, and the deep
sighings of the wind, as it passed among trees, which threw their broad arms
over the cliffs, and crowned the highest summits. Onward, through the narrowing
winding of the defile, no living object appeared; but, as Ellena looked
fearfully back, she thought she distinguished a human figure, advancing beneath
the dusky umbrage that closed the view. She communicated her suspicion to
Schedoni, though not her fears, and they stopped for a moment, to observe
further. The object advanced slowly, and they perceived the stature of a man,
who, having continued to approach, suddenly paused, and then glided away behind
the fol^age that crossed the perspective, but not before Ellena fancied she
discriminated the figure of Spalatro. None but a purpose the most desperate,
she believed, could have urged him to follow into this, instead of returning,
as he had pretended, to his home. Yet it appeared improbable, that he alone
should be willing to attack two armed persons, for both Schedoni and the guide
had weapons of defense. This consideration afforded* her only a momentary
respite from apprehension, since it was possible that he might not be alone,
though only one person had yet been seen among the shrouding branches of the
woods. "Did you not think he resembled Spalatro?" said Ellena to the Confessor,
"was he not of the same stature and air? You are well armed, or I should fear
for you, as well as for myself."

"I did not observe a resemblance," replied Schedoni, throwing a glance back,
"but whoever he is, you have nothing to apprehend from him, for he has
disappeared."

"Yes, Signor, so much the worse," observed the guide, "so much the worse, if
he means us any harm, for he can steal along the rocks behind these thickets,
and strike out upon us before we are aware of him. Or, if he knows the path
that runs among those old oaks yonder, on the left where the ground rises, he
has us sure at the turning of the next cliff."

"Speak lower," said Schedoni, "unless you mean that he should benefit by your
instructions."

Though the Confessor said this without any suspicion of evil intention from
the guide, the man immediately began to justify himself, and added, "I Will give
him a hint of what he may expect, however, if he attacks us." As he spoke, he
fired his trombone in the air, when every rock reverberated the sound, and the
faint and fainter thunder retired in murmurs through all the windings of the
defile. The eagerness, with which the guide had justified himself, produced an
effect upon Schedoni contrary to what he designed; and the Confessor, as he
watched him suspiciously observed, that after he had fired, he did not load his
peace again. "Since you have given the enemy sufficient intimation where to
find us," said Schedoni, "you will do well to prepare for his reception; load
again, friend. I have arms too, and they are ready."

While the man sullenly obeyed, Ellena, again alarmed, looked back in search of
the stranger, but not any person appeared beneath the gloom, and no foot-step
broke upon the stilness. When, however, she suddenly heard a rustling noise,
she looked to the bordering thickets, almost expecting to see Spalatro break
from among them, before she perceived that it was only the sounding pinions of
birds, which, startled by the report of the trombone from their high nests in
the cliffs, winged their way from danger.

The suspicions of the Confessor had, probably, been slight, for they were
transient; and when Ellena next addressed him, he had again retired within
himself. He was ruminating upon an excuse to be offered the Marchesa, which
might be sufficient both to assuage her disappointment and baffle her
curiosity, and he could not, at present, fabricate one that might soothe her
resentment without risk of betraying his secret.

Twilight had added its gloom to that state of the rocks, before the travelers
distinguished the town, at which they meant to pass the night. It terminated
the defile, and its gray houses could scarely be discerned from the precipice
upon which they hung, or from the trees that embosomed them. A rapid stream
rolled below, and over it a bridge conducted the wonderers to the little inn,
at which they were to take up their abode. Here, quietly lodged, Ellena
dismissed all present apprehension of Spalatro, but she still believed she had
seen him and her suspicions, as to the motive of his extraordinary journey,
were not appeased.

As this was a town of ampler accommodation than the one they had left,
Schedoni easily procured a lay-habit, that would disguise him for the remainder
of the journey; and Ellena was permitted to lay aside the nun's veil, for one
of a more general fashion; but, in dismissing it, she did not forget that it
had been the veil of Olivia, and she preserved it as a sacred relic of her
favorite recluse.

The distance between this town and Naples was still that of several days
journey, according to the usual mode of traveling; but the most dangerous part
of the way was now overcome, the road having emerged from the forests; and when
Schedoni, on the following morning was departing, he would have discharged the
guide, had not the host assured him, he would find one still ncessary in the
open, but wild, country through which he must pass. Schedoni's distrust of this
guide had never been very serious, and, as the result of the preceding evening
proved favorable, he had restored him so entirely to his confidence, as
willingly to engage him for the present day. In this confidence, however,
Ellena did not perfectly coincide; she had observed the man while he loaded the
trombone on Schedoni's order, and his evident reluctance had almost persuaded
her, that he was in league with some person who designed to attack them; a
conjecture, perhaps, the more readily admitted while her mind was suffering
from the impression of having seen Spalatro. She now ventured to hint her
distrust to the Confessor, who paid little attention to it, and reminded her,
that sufficient proof of the man's honesty had appeared, in their having been
permitted to pass in safety, a defile so convenient for the purpose of rapine
as that of yesterday. To a reply apparently so reasonable, Ellena could oppose
nothing, had she even dared to press the topic; and she re-commenced the
journey with gayer hopes.

CHAP. V.
Mark where yon ruin frowns upon the steep,
The giant-spectre of departed power!
Within those shadowy walls and silent chambers,
Have stalked the crimes of days long p^st!

ON this day, Schedoni was more communicative than on the preceding one. While
they rode apart from the guide, he conversed with Ellena on various topics
relative to herself, but without once alluding to Vivaldi; and even
condescended to mention his design of disposing of her in a convent at some
distance from Naples, till it should be convenient for him to acknowledge her
for his daughter. But the difficulty of finding a suitable situation
embarrassed him, and he was disconcerted by the aukwardness of introducing her
himself to strangers, whose curiosity would be heightened by a sense of their
interest.

These circumstances induced him the more easily to attend to the distress of
Ellena, on her learning, that she was again to be placed at a distance from her
home, and among strangers; and the more willingly to listen to the account she
gave of the convent of Santa Maria della Pieta, and to her request of returning
thither. But in whatever-degree he might be inclined to approve, he listened
without consenting, and Ellena had only the consolation of perceiving that he
was not absolutely determined to adopt his first plan.

Her thoughts were too deeply engaged upon her future prospects to permit
leisure for present fears, or probably she would have suffered some return of
those of yesterday, in traversing the lonely plains and rude valleys, through
which the road lay. Schedoni was thankful to the landlord, who had advised him
to keep the guide, the road being frequently obscured amongst the wild heaths
that stretched around, and the eye often sweeping over long tracts of country,
without perceiving a villiage or any human dwelling. -- During the whole
morning, they had not met one traveller, and they continued to proceed beneath
the heat of noon, because Schedoni had been unable to discover even a cottage,
in which shelter and repose might be obtained,

It was late in the day when the guide pointed out the gray walls of an edifice
which crowned the acclivity they were approaching. But this was so shrouded
among woods, than no feature of it could be distinctly seen, and it did but
slightly awaken their hopes of approaching a convent, which might receive them
with hospitality.

The high banks overshadowed with thickets, between which the road ascended,
soon excluded even (...) glimpse of the walls, but, as the travelers turned
the next projection, they perceived a person on the summit of the road,
crossing as if toward some place of residence, and concluded that the edifice
they had seen was behind the trees, among which he had disappeared.

A few moments brought them to the spot, where, retired at a short distance
mong the woods that browed the hill, they discovered the extensive remains of
what seemed to have been a villa, and which, from the air of desolation it
exhibited, Schedoni would have judged to be wholly deserted, had he not already
seen a person enter. Wearied and exhausted, he determined to ascertain whether
any refreshment could be procured from the inhabitants within, and the party
alighted before the portal of a deep and broad avenue of arched stone, which
seemed to have been the grand approach to the villa. The entrance was
obstructed by fallen fragments of columns, and by the underwood that had taken
root amongst them. The travelers, however, easily overcame these
interruptions: but as the avenue was of considerable extent, and as its only
light proceeded from the portal, except what a few narrow loops in the walls
admitted, they soon found themselves involved in an obscurity that rendered the
way difficult, and Schedoni endeavored to make himself heard by the person he
had seen. The effort was unsuccessful, but as they proceeded, a bend in the
passage showed a distant glimmering of light, which served to guide them to the
opposite entrance, where an arch opened immediately into a court of the villa.
Schedoni paused here in disappointment, for every object seemed to bear
evidence of abandonment and desolation; and he looked, almost hopelessly, round
the light colonnade which ran along three sides of the court, and to the trees
that waved over the fourth, in search of the person, who had been seen from the
road. No human figure stole upon the vacancy; yet the apt fears of Ellena
almost imagined the form of Spalatro gliding behind the columns, and she
started as the air shook over the wild plants that wreathed them, before she
discovered that is was not the sound of steps, At the extravagance of her
suspicions, however, and the weakness of her terrors, she blushed, and
endeavored to resist that propensity to fear, which nerves long pressed upon
had occasioned in her mind.

Schedoni, meanwhile, stood in the court, like the evil spirit of the place,
examining its desolation, and endeavoring to ascertain whether any person
lurked in the interior of the building. -- Several door-ways in the colonade
appeared to lead in chambers of the villa, and, after a short hesitation,
Schedoni, having determined to pursue his enquiry, entered one of them, and
passed through a marble hall to a suite of rooms, whose condition told how long
it was since they had been inhabited. The roofs had entirely vanished, and even
portions of the walls had fallen, and lay in masses amongst the woods without.

Perceiving that it was as useless as difficult to proceed, the Confessor
returned to the court, where the shade of the palmetos, at least, offered an
hospitable shelter to the wearied travelers. They reposed themselves beneath
the branches, on some fragments of a marble fountain, whence the court opened
to the extensive landscape, now mellowed by the evening beams, and partook of
the remains of a repast, which had been deposited in the wallet of the guide.

"This place appears to have suffered from an earthquake, rather than from
time," said Schedoni, "for the walls, though shattered, do not seem to have
decayed, and, much that has been strong, lies in ruin, while what is
comparatively slight remains uninjured; these are certainly symptoms of partial
shocks of the earth. Do you know any thing of the history of this place,
friend?"

"Yes, Signor," replied the guide.

"Relate it, then,"

"I shall never forget the earthquake that destroyed it Signor; for it was felt
all through the Garganus. I was then about sixteen, and I remember it was near
an hour before midnight that the great shock was felt. The weather had been
almost stifling for several days, scarcely a breath of air had stirred, and
slight tremblings of the ground were noticed by many people. I had been out all
day, cutting wood in the forest with my father, and tired enough we were, when
-- "

"This is the history of yourself," said Schedoni, interrupting him, "Who did
this place belong to?"

"Did any person suffer here?" said Ellena.

"The Barone di Cambrusa lived here," replied the guide,

"Hah! the Barone!" repeated Schedoni, and sunk into one of his accustomary
fits of abstraction.

"He was a Signor little loved in the country," continued the guide, "and some
people said it was a judgment upon him for -- "

"Was it not rather a judgment upon the country," interrupted the Confessor,
lifting up his head, and then sinking again into silence.

"I know not for that, Signor, but he had committed crimes enough to make one's
hair stand on end. It was here that he -- "

"Fools are always wondering at the actions of those above them," said
Schedoni, testily; "Where is the Barone now.

"I cannot tell, Signor, but most likely where he deserves to be, for he has
never been heard of since the night of the earthquake, and it is believed he
was buried under the ruins."

"Did any other person suffer?" repeated Ellena.

"You shall hear, Signora," replied the peasant, "I happen to know something
about the matter, because a cousin of our's lived in the family at that time,
and my father has often told me all about it, as well as of the late lords
goings-on. It was near midnight when the great shock came, and the family,
thinking of nothing at all, had supped and been asleep some time, Now it
happened that the Barone's chamber was in a tower of the old building, at which
people often wonderered, because, said they, why should he choose to sleep in
the old part where there are so many fine rooms in the new villa? but so it
was."

"Come, dispatch your meal," said Schedoni, awakeing from his deep musing,"
"the sun is setting, and we have yet far to go."

"I will finish the meal and the story together, Signor, with your leave,"
replied the guide. -- Schedoni did not notice what he said, and as the man was
not forbidden, he proceeded with his relation.

"Now it happened that the Barone's chamber was in that old tower, -- if you
will look this way, Signora, you may see what is left of it."

Ellena turned her attention to where the guide pointed, and perceived the
shattered remains of a tower rising beyond the arch, through which she had
entered the court.

"You see that corner of a window-case left, in the highest part of the wall,
Signora," continued the guide, "just by that tuft of ash, that grows out of the
stone."

"I observe," said Ellena.

"Well, that was one of the windows of the very chamber, Signora, and you see
scarcely any thing else is left of it. Yes, there is the door-case, too, but
the door itself is gone; that little staircase, which you see beyond it, led
up to another story, which nobody now would guess had ever been; for roof and
flooring, and all are fallen. I wonder how that little staircase in the corner
happened to hold so fast!"

"Have you almost done?" inquired Schedoni, who had not apparently attended to
any thing the man said, and now alluded to the refreshment he was taking.

"Yes, Signor, I have not a great deal more to tell, or to eat either, for that
matter," replied the guide; "but you shall hear. Well, yonder was the very
chamber, Signora, at that door-case, which is still in the wall, the Barone
came in, ah! he little thought, I warrant, that he should never more go out at
it! How long he had been in the room I do not know, nor whether he was a sleep
or awake, for there is nobody that can tell; but when the great shock came, it
split the old tower at once, before any other part of the buildings. You see
that heap of ruins, yonder, on the ground, Signora, there lie there mains of
the chamber; the Barone, they say, was buried under them!"

Ellena shuddered while she gazed upon this destructive mass. A groan from
Schedoni startled her and she turnned toward him, but, as he appeared shrouded
in meditation, she again directed her attention to this awful memorial. As her
eye passed upon the neighboring arch, she was struck with the grandeur of its
proportions, and with its singular appearance, now that the evening rays
glanced upon the overhanging shrubs, and darted a line of partial light athwart
the avenue beyond. But what was her emotion, when she perceived a person
gliding away in the perspective of the avenue, and, as he crossed where the
gleam fell, distinguished the figure and countenance of Spalatro! She had
scarcely power, faintly to exclaim, "Steps go there!" before he had
disappeared; and, when Schedoni looked round, the vacuity and silence of
solitude every where prevailed.

Ellena now did not scruple positively to affirm that she had seen Spalatro,
and Schedoni fully sensible, that if her imagination had not deluded her, the
purpose of his thus tracing their route must be desperate, immediately rose,
and, followed by the peasant, passed into the avenue to ascertain the truth,
leaving Ellena alone in the court. He had scarcely disappeared before the
danger of his adventuring into that obscure passage. where an assassin might
strike unseen, forcibly occurred to Ellena, and she loudly conjured him to
return. She listened for his voice, but heard only his retreating steps; when,
too anxious to remain where she was, she hastened to the entrance of the
avenue. But all was now hushed; neither voice, nor steps were distinguished.
Awed by the gloom of the place, she feared to venture further, yet almost
equally dreaded to remain alone in any part of the ruin, while a man so
desperate as Spalatro was hovering about it.

As she yet listened at the entrance of the avenue, a faint cry, which seemed
to issue from the interior of the villa, reached her. The first dreadful
surmise that struck Ellena was, that they were murdering her father, who had
probably been decoyed, by another passage, back into some chamber of the ruin;
when, instantly forgetting every fear for herself, she hastened toward the
spot whence she judged the sound to have issued. She entered the hall, which
Schedoni had noticed, and passed on through a suit of apartments beyond. Every
thing here, however, was silent, and the place apparently deserted. The suit
terminated in a passage, that seemed to lead to a distant part of the villa,
and Ellena, after a momentary hesitation, determined to follow it.

She made her way with difficulty between the half-demolished walls, and was
obliged to attend so much to her steps, that she scarcely noticed whither she
was going, till the depening shade of the place recalling her attention, she
perceived herself among the ruins of the tower, whose history had been related
by the guide; and, on looking up, observed she was at the foot of the
staircase, which still wound up the wall, that had led to the chamber of the
Barone.

At a moment less anxious, the circumstance would have affected her; but now
she could only repeat her calls upon the name of Schedoni, and listen for some
signal that he was near. Still receiving no answer, nor hearing any further
sound of distress, she began to hope that her fears had deceived her, and
having ascertained that the passage terminated here, she quitted the spot.

On regaining the first chamber, Ellena rested for a moment to recover breath;
and, while she leaned upon what had once been a window, opening to the court,
she heard a distant report of firearms. The sound swelled, and seemed to
revolve along the avenue through which Schedoni had disappeared. -- Supposing
that the combatants were engaged at the farthest entrance, Ellena was preparing
to go thither, when a sudden step moved near her, and on turning, she
discovered with a degree of horror that almost depriv^^ her of recollection,
Spalatro himself, stealing along the very chamber in which she was.

That part of the room which he stood in fell into a kind of recess; and
whether it was this circumstance that prevented him from immediately perceiving
her, or that, his chief purpose being directed against another object, he did
not choose to pause here, he passed on with skulking steps; and, before Ellena
had determined whither to go, she observed him cross the court before her, and
enter the avenue. As he had passed, he looked up at the window; and it was
certain he then saw her, for he instantly faultered, (...) in the next moment
proceeded swiftly, and disappear in the gloom.

It seemed that he had not yet encountered Schedoni, but it also occured to
Ellena that he was gone into the avenue for the purpose of waiting to
assassinate him in the darkness. While she was meditating some means of giving
the Confessor a timely alarm of his danger, she once more distinguished his
voice. It approached from the avenue, and Ellena immediately calling aloud that
Spalatro was there, entreated him to be on his guard. In the next instant a
pistol was ^ired there.

Among the voices that succeeded the report, Ellena thought she distinguished
groans. Schedoni's voice was in the next moment heard again, but it seemed
faint and low, The courage which she had before exerted was now exhausted; she
remained fixed to the spot, unable to encounter the dreadful spectacle that*
probably awaited her in the avenue, and almost sinking beneath the expectation
of it.

All was now hushed; she listened for Schedoni's voice, and even for a
footstep, in vain. To endure this state of uncertainty much longer was scarcely
possible, and Ellena was edenavouring to collect fortitude to meet a knowledge
of the worst, when suddenly a feeble groaning was again heard. It seemed near,
and to be approaching still nearer. At that moment, Ellena, on looking toward
the avenue, perceived a figure covered with blood, pass into the court. A film,
which drew over her eyes, prevented her noticing farther, she tottered a few
paces back, and caught at the fragment of a pillar, by which she supported
herself. The weakness was transient; immediate assistance appeared necessary to
the wounded person, and pity soon predominating over horror, she recalled her
spirits, and hastened to the court.

When on reaching it, she looked round in search of Schedoni, he was no where
to be seen; the court was again solitary and silent, till she awakened all its
echoes with the name of father. While she repeated her calls, she hastily
examined the colonnade, the separated chamber which opened immediately from it,
and the shadow ground beneath the palmetos, but without discovering any person.

As she turned toward the avenue, however, a tract of blood on the ground told
her too certainly where the wounded person had passed. It guided her to the
entrance of a narrow passage, that seemingly led to the foot of the tower; but
here she hesitated, fearing to trust the obscurity beyond. For the first time,
Ellena conjectured, that not Schedoni, but Spalatro might be the person she had
seen, and that, though he was wounded, vengeance might give him, strength to
strike his stilletto at the heart of whomsoever approached him, while the
duskiness of the place would favor the deed.

She was yet at the entrance of the passage fearful to enter, and reluctant to
leave it, listening for a sound, and still hearing at intervals, swelling
though feeble groans; when quicksteps were suddenly heard advancing up the
grand avenue, and presently her own name was repeated loudly in the voice of
Schedoni. His manner was hurried as he advanced to meet her, (...) he threw an
eager glance round the court. "We must be gone," said he, in a low tone, and
taking her arm within his. "Have you seen any one pass!"

"I have seen a wounded man enter the court," replied Ellena, "and feared he
was yourself."

"Where? -- Which way did he go!" inquired Schedoni, eagerly, while his eyes
glowed* and his countenance became fell,

Ellena instantly comprehending his motive for the question, would not
acknowledge that she knew whither Spalatro had withdrawn; and, reminding him
(...)of the danger of their situation, she entreated that they might quit the
villa immediately.

"The sun is already set," she added. "I tremble at what may be the perils of
this place at such an obscure hour, and even at what may be those of our road
at a later!"

"You are sure he was wounded?" said the Confessor.

"Too sure," replied Ellena, faintly.

"Too sure!" sternly exclaimed Schedoni.

"Let us depart, my father; O let us go this instant!" repeated Ellena.

"What is the meaning of all this!" asked Schedoni, with anger. You cannot,
surely, have the weakness to pity this fellow!"

"It is terrible to see any one suffer," said Ellena. "Do not, by remaining
here, leave me a possibility of grieving for you. What anguish it would
occasion you to see me bleed; judge then, what must be mine, if you are wounded
by the dagger of an assassin!"

Schedoni stifled the groan which swelled from his heart, and abruptly turned
away.

"You trifle with me," he said, in the next moment: "you do not know that the
villain is wounded. I fired at him, it is true, at the instant I saw him enter
the avenue, but he has escaped me. What reason have you for your supposition?"

Ellena was going to point to the tract of blood on the ground, at a little
distance, but checked herself; considering that this might guide him on to
Spalatro, and again she entreated they might depart, adding, "O! spare
yourself, and him!"

"What! spare an assassin!" said Schedoni, impatiently,

"An assassin! He has, then, attempted your life?" exclaimed Ellena.

"Why no, not absolutely that," said Schedoni, recollecting himself, -- "but
what does the fellow do here? Let me pass, I will find him.

Ellena still hung upon his garment, while with persuasive tenderness, she
endeavored to awaken his humanity. "O! if you had ever known what it was (...)
expect instant death," she continued, "you would pity this man now, as he,
perhaps has some times pitied others! I have known such suffering, my father,
and can therefore, feel even for him!"

"Do you know for whom you are pleading?" said the distracted Schedoni, while
every word she had uttered seemed to have penetrated his heart. The surprise
which this question awakened in Ellena's countenance, recalled him to a
consciousness of his imprudence: he recollected that Ellena did not certainly
know the office, with which Spalatro had been commissioned against her: and
when he considered that this very Spalatro whom Ellena had with such simplicity
supposed to have, at some time spared a life through pity, had in truth spared
her own, and, yet more, had been eventually a means of preventing him from
destroying his own child, the Confessor turned in horror from his design; all
his passions changed, and he abruptly quitted the court, nor paused till he
reached the farthest extremity of the avenue, where the guide was in waiting
with the horses.

A recollection of the conduct of Spalatro respecting Ellena had thus induced
Schedoni to spare him; but this was all; it did not prevail with him to enquire
into the condition of this man, or to mitigate his punishment; and, without
remorse, he now left him to his fate.

With Ellena it was otherwise; though she was ignorant of the obligation she
owed him, she could not know that any human being was left under such
circumstances of suffering and solitude, without experiencing very painful
emotions; but considering how expeditiously Spalatro had been able to remove
himself, she endeavored to hope that his wound was not mortal.

The travelers, mounting their horses in silence, left the ruin, and were for
some time too much engaged by the impression of the late occurrences, to
converse together. When, at length, Ellena inquired the particulars of what had
passed in the avenue, she understood that Schedoni, on pursu^ing Spalatro, had
seen him there only for a moment. Spalatro had escaped by some way unknown to
the Confessor, and had regained the interior of the ruin, while his pursurers
were yet following the avenue. The cry, which Ellena had imagined to proceed
from the interior, was uttered, as it now appeared, by the guide, who, in his
haste, had fallen over some fragments of the wall that lay scattered in the
avenue: the first report of arms had been from the trombone, which Schedoni had
discharged on reaching the portal; and the last, when he fired a pistol, on
perceiving Spalatro passing from the court.

"We have had trouble enough in running after this fellow," said the guide,
"and could not catch him at last. It is strange, that if he came to look for
us, he should run away so when he had found us! I do not think he meant us any
harm, after all, else he might have done it easily enough in that dark passage;
instead whereof he only took to his heels!"

"Silence!" said Schedoni, "fewer words, friend."

"Well, Signor, he is peppered now, however; so we need not be afraid; his wings
are clipped for one while, so he cannot overtake ^s. We need not be in such a
hurry, Signor, we shall get to the inn in good time yet. It is upon a mountain
yonder, whose top you may see upon that red streak in the west. He cannot come
after us; I myself saw his arm was wounded."

"Did you so?" said Schedoni, sharply:" and pray where was you when you saw so
much? It was more than I saw."

"I was close at your heels, Signor, when you fired the pistol."

"I do not remember to have heard you there," observed the Confessor: "and why
did you not come forward, instead of retreating? And where, also, did you hide
yourself while I was searching for the fellow, instead of assisting me in the
pursuit?"

The guide gave no answer, and Ellena, who had been attentively observing him
during the whole of this conversation, perceived that he was now considerably
emba^rassed; so that her former suspicions as to his integrity began to revive,
notwithstanding the several circumstances, which had occured to render them
improbable. There was, however, at present no opportunity for further
observation, Schedoni having, contrary to the advice of the guide, immediately
quickened his pace, and the horses continuing on the full gallop, till a steep
ascent compelled them to relax their speed.

Contrary to his usual habit, Schedoni now, while they slowly ascended,
appeared desirous of conversing with this man, and asked him several questions
relative to the villa they had left; and, whether it was that he really felt an
interest on the subject, or that he wished to discover if the man had deceived
him in the circumstances he had already narrated, from which he might form a
judgment as to his general character, he pressed his enquiries with a patient
minuteness, that somewhat surprised Ellena. During this conversation, the deep
twilight would no longer permit her to notice the countenances of either
Schedoni, or the guide, but she gave much attention to the changing tones of
their voices, as different circumstances and emotions seemed to affect them. It
is to be observed, that during the whole of this discourse, the guide rode at
the side of Schedoni.

While the Confessor appeared to be musing upon something which the peasant had
related respecting the Barone di Cambrusca, Ellena inquired as to the fate of
the other inhabitants of the villa,

"The falling of the old tower was enough for them," replied the guide; "the
crash waked them all directly, and they had time to get out of the new
buildings, before the second and third shocks laid them also in in ruins. They
ran out into the woods for safety, and found it too, for they happened to take
a different road from the earthquake. Not a soul suffered, except the Barone,
and he deserved it well enough. O! I could tell such things that I have heard
of him! -- "

"What became of the rest of the family?" interrupted Schedoni.

"Why, Signor, they were scattered here and there, and every where; and they
none of them ever returned to the old spot. No! no! they had suffered enough
there already, and might have suffered to this day, if the earthquake had not
happened."

"If it had not happened!" repeated Ellena.

"Aye, Signora, for that put an end to the Barone. If those walls could but
speak, they would tell strange things for they have looked upon sad doings: and
that chamber, which I showed you, Signora, nobody ever went into it but
himself, except the servant to kept it in order, and that he would scarcely
suffer, and always staid in the room the while."

"He had probably treasure secreted there," said Ellena.

"No, Signora, no treasure! He had always a lamp burning there; and sometimes
in the night he has been heard -- Once, indeed, his valet happened to -- "

"Come on," said Schedoni, interrupted him; "keep pace with me. What idle dream
are you relating now?"

"It is about the Barone di Cambrusca, Signor, him that you was asking me so
much about just now. I was saying what strange ways he had, and how that, on
one stormy night in December, as my cousin Francisco told my father, who told
me, and he lived in the family at the time it happened -- "

"What happened?" said Schedoni, hastily.

"What I am going to tell, Signor. My cousin lived there at the time; so,
however unbelievable it may seem, you may depend upon it, it is all true. My
father knows I would not believe it myself till -- "

"Enough of this," said Schedoni; "no more. What family had this Barone -- had
he a wife at the time of this destructive shock?"

"Yes, truly, Signor, he had, as I was going to tell, if you would but
condescend to have patience."

"The Barone had more need of that, friend; I have no wife." -- "The Barone's
wife had most need of it, Signor, as you shall hear. A good soul, they say, was
the Baronessa! but luckily she died many years before. He had a daughter, also,
and, young as she was, she had lived too long, but for the earthquake which set
her free."

"How far is it to the inn?" said the Confessor, roughly.

"When we get to the top of this hill, Signor, you will see it on the next, if
any light is stirring, for there will only be the hollow between us. But do not
be alarmed, Signor, the fellow we left cannot overtake us. Do you know much
about him, Signor?"

Schedoni inquired whether the trombone was chared; and, discovering that it
was not, ordered the man to load immediately.

"Why, Signor, if you knew as much of him as I do, you could not be more
afraid!" said the peasant, while he stopped to obey the order.

"I understood that he was a stranger to you!" observed the Confessor, with
surprise.

"Why, Signor, he is, and he is not; I know more about him than he things for."

"You seem to know a vast deal too much of other persons affairs," said
Schedoni, in a tone that was meant to silence him.

"Why, that is just what he would say, Signor; but bad deeds will out, whether
people like them to be known or not. This man comes to our town sometimes to
market, and nobody knew where he came from for a long while; so they set
themselves to work and found it out at last."

"We shall never reach the summit of this hill," said Schedoni, testily.

"And they found out, too, a great many strange things about him," continued
the guide.

Ellena, who had attended to this discourse with a degree of curiosity that was
painful, now listened impatiently for what might be farther mentioned
concerning Spalatro, but without daring to invite, by a single question, any
discovery on a subject which appeared to be so intimately connected with
Schedoni.

"It was many years ago," rejoined the guide. "that this man came to live in
that strange house on the seashore. It had been shut up ever since -- "

"What are you talking of now?" interrupted the Confessor.

"Why, Signor, you never will let me tell you. You always snap me up so short
at the beginning, and then ask -- what am I talking about! I was going to begin
the story, and it is a pretty long one. But first of all, Signor, who do you
suppose this man belonged to! And what do you think the people determined to
do, when the report was first set a going? only they could not be sure it was
true, and any body would be unwilling enough to believe such a shocking -- "

"I have no curiosity on the subject," replied the Confessor, sternly
interrupting him; "and desire to hear no more concerning it."

"I meant no harm, Signor," said the man; "I did not know it concerned you."

"And who sa^s that it does concern me!"

"Nobody, Signor, only you seemed to be in a bit of a passion, and so I though^
-- But I meant no harm, Signor, only as he happened to be your guide part of
the way, I guessed you might like to know something of him."

"All that I desire to know of my guide is, that he does his duty," replied
Schedoni "that he conducts me safely, and understands when to be silent."

To this the man replied nothing, but slackened his pace, and slunk behind his
reprover.

The travelers reaching, soon after, the summit of this long hill, looked out
for the inn of which they had been told; but darkness now confounded every
object, and no domestic light twinkling, however distantly, through the gloom,
gave signal of security and comfort. They descended dejectedly into the hollow
of the mountains, and found themselves once more immerged in woods. Schedoni
again called the peasant to his side, and bade him to keep abreast of him, but
he did not discourse; and Ellena was too thoughtful to attempt conversation.
The hints which the guide had thrown out respecting Spalatro, had increased her
curiosity on that subject, but the conduct of Schedoni, his impatience, his
embarrassment, and the decisive manner in which he had put an end to the talk
of the guide, excited a degree of surprise, that bordered on astonishment. As
she had, however, no (...) to lead her conjectures to any point, she was
utterly bewildered in surmise, understanding only that Schedoni had been much
more deeply connected with Spalatro than she had hitherto believed.

The travelers having descended into the hollow, (...) commenced the ascent of
the opposite height, without discovering any symptom of a neighboring town,
began again to fear that their conductor* had deceive^ them. It was now so dark
that the road, though the soil was a limestone, could scarcely be discerned,
the woods on either side forming "a close dungeon of innumerous boughs," that
totally excluded the twilight of the stars.

While the Confessor was questioning the man, with some severity, a faint
shouting was heard from a distance, and he stopped the horses to listen from
what quarter it came.

"That comes the way we are going, Signor," said the guide.

"Hark!" exclaimed Schedoni, "those are strains of revelry!"

A confused sound of voices, laughter, and musical instruments, was heard, and,
as the air blew stronger, tamborines and flutes were distinguished.

"Oh! Oh! we are near the end of our journey!" said the peasant; "all this
comes from the town we are going to. But what makes them all so merry I wonder!"

Ellena, revived by this intelligence, followed with alacrity the sudden speed
of the Confessor; and presently reaching a point of the mountain, where the
woods opened a cluster of lights on another summit, a little higher, more
certainly announced the town.

They soon after arrived at the ruinous gates, which had formerly led to a
place of some strength, and passed at once from darkness and desolated walls,
into a marketplace, blazing with light and resounding with the multitude.
Booths, fantastically hung with lamps, and filled with merchandise of every
kind, disposed in the gayest order, were spread on all sides, and peasants in
their holiday clothes, and parties of masks crowded every evenue. Here was a
bank of musicians, and there a group of dancers; on one spot the outre humor
of a zanni provoked the never failing laugh of an Italian rabble, in another
the improvisatore, by the pathos of his story, and the persuasive sensibility
of his strains, was holding the attention of his auditors, as in the bands of
magic. Farther on was a stage raised for a display of fire works, and near this
a theater, where a mimic opera, the "shadow of a shade," was exhibiting, whence
the roar of laughter, excited by the principal buffo within, mingled with the
heterogeneous voices of the venders of ice, maccaroni, sherbet, and diavoloni,
without.

The Confessor looked upon this scene with disappointment and ill-humour, (...)
^^ade the guide go before him, and show the way to the best inn; an office
which the latter undertook with great glee, though he made his way with
difficulty. "To think I should not know it was the time of the fair!" said he,
"though to say truth, I never was at it but once in my life, so it is not so
surprising, Signor."

"Make way through the crowd," said Schedoni.

"After jogging on so long in the dark, Signor, (...) nothing at all to be
seen," continued the man, without attending to the direction, "then to come,
all of a sudden, to such a place as this, why, it is like coming out of
purgatory into paradise! Well! Signor, you have forgot all your quandaries now;
you think nothing now about that old ruinous place where we had such a race
after the man, that would not murder us; but that shot I fired did his
business."

"You fired!" said Schedoni, aroused by the assertion.

"Yes, Signor, as I was looking over your shoulder; I should have thought you
must have heard it*"

"I should have thought so, too, friend."

"Aye, Signor, this fine place has put all that out of your head, I warrant, as
well as what I said about that same fellow; but, indeed Signor, I did not know
he was related to you, when I talked so of him. But, perhaps, for all that you
may not know, the piece of his story I was going to tell you, when you cut me
off so short, though you are better acquainted with one another than I guessed
for; so, when I come in from the fair, Signor, if you please, I will tell it
you; and it is a pretty long history, for I happen to know the whole of it;
though, where you cut me short, when you was in one of those quandaries, was
only just a^ the beginning, but no matter for that, I can begin, it again for
-- "

"What is all this!" said Schedoni, again recalled from one of the thoughtful
moods in which he had so habitually indulged, that even the bustle a round him
had failed to interrupt the course of his mind. He now bade the peasant be
silent; but the man was too happy to be tractable, and proceeded to express all
he felt, as they advanced slowly through the crowd. Every object here was to
him new and delightful; and, nothing doubting that it must be equally so to
every other person, he was continually pointing out to the proud and gloomy
Confessor the trivial subjects of his own admiration. "See, Signor, there is
Punchinello, see! how he eats the hot maccaroni! And look there, Signor! there
is a juggler! O! good Signor, stop one minute, to look at his tricks. See! he
has turned a monk into a devil already, in the twinkling of an eye!"

"Silence! and proceed," said Schedoni.

"That is what I say, Signor: -- silence! for the people make such a noise that
I cannot hear a word you speak. -- Silence, there!"

"Considering that you could not hear, you have answered, wonderfully to the
purpose," said Ellena.

"Ah! Signora! is not this better than those dark woods and hills? But what
have we here? Look, Signor, here is a fine sight!"

The crowd which was assembled round a stage on which some persons grotesquely
dressed, were performing, now, interrupting farther progress, the travelers
were compelled to stop at the foot of the platform. The people above were
acting what seemed to have been intended for a tragedy, but what their strange
gestures, uncouth recitation, and incongruous countenances, had transformed
into a comedy.

Schedoni thus obliged to pause, withdrew his attention from the scene; Ellena
consented to endure it, and the peasant, with gaping mouth and staring eye,
stood like a statue, yet not knowing whether he ought to laugh or cry, till
suddenly turning round to the Confessor, whose horse was, of necessity, close
to his, he seized his arm, and pointing to the stage, called out, "Look!
Signor, see! Signor, what a scoundrel! what a villain! See! he has murdered his
own daughter!"

At these terrible words, the indignation of Schedoni was done away by other
emotions; he turned his eyes upon the stage, and perceived that the actors were
performing the story of Virginia. It was at a moment when she was dying in the
arms of her father, who was holding up the poignard, with which he had stabbed
her. The feelings of Schedoni, at this instant, inflicted a punishment almost
worthy of the crime he had meditated.

Ellena, struck with the action, and with the contrast which it seemed to offer
to what she had believto have been the late conduct of Schedoni toward
herself, looked at him with most expressive tenderness, and as his glance met
here is she perceived, with surprise, the changing emotions of his soul, and the
inexplicable character of his countenance. Stung to the heart, the Confessor
furiously spurred his horse that he might escape from the scene, but the poor
animal was too spiritless and jaded, to force its way through the crowd; and
the peasant, vexed at being hurried from a place, where, almost for the first
time in his life, he was suffering under the strange delights of artificial
grief, and, half angry, to observe a^ animal of which he had the care,
ill-treated, loudly remonstrated, and seized the bridle of Schedoni, who, still
more incensed, was applying the whip to the shoulders of the guide, when the
crowd suddenly fell back and opened a way through which the travelers passed,
and arrived, with little further interruption, at the door of the inn.

Schedoni was not in a humor which rendered him sit to encounter difficulties,
and still less the vulgar squabbles of a place already crowded with guests; yet
it was not without much opposition, that he at length obtained a lodging for
the night. The peasant was not less anxious for the accommodation of his
horses; and when Ellena heard him declare, that the animal, which the Confessor
had so cruelly spurred, should have a double feed, and a bed of straw as high
as his head, if he himself went without one, she gave him, unnoticed by
Schedoni, the only ducat she had left.

CHAP. VI.
"But, if you be afraid to hear the worst,
Then let the worst, unheard, fall on your head."
SHAKESPEARE.
SCHEDONI passed the night without sleep. The incident of the pr^ceding evening
had not only renewed the agonies of remorse, but excited those of pride and
apprehension. There was something in the conduct of the peasant toward him,
which he could not clearly understand, though his suspicions were sufficient to
throw his mind into a state of the utmost perturbation. Under an air of extreme
simplicity, this man had talked of Spalatro, had discovered that he was
acquainted with much of his history, and had hinted, that he knew by whom he
had been employed; yet, at the same time, appeared unconscious, that Schedoni's
was the master-hand, which had directed the principal actions of the ruffian.
At other times, his behavior had seemed to contradict the supposition of his
ignorance on this point; from some circumstances he had mentioned, it appeared
impossible but that he must have known who Schedoni really was, and even his
own conduct had occasionally seemed to acknowledge this, particularly when,
being interrupted in his history of Spalatro, he attempted an apology, by
saying, he did not know it concerned Schedoni: nor could the conscious Schedoni
believe, that the very pointed manner in which the peasant had addressed him at
the representation of Virginia, was merely accidental. He wished to dismiss the
man immediately, but it was first necessary to ascertain what ^e knew
concerning him, and then to decide on the measures to be taken. It was,
however, a difficult matter to obtain this information, without manifesting an
anxiety, which might betray him, if the guide had, at present, only a general
suspicion of the truth; and no less difficult to determine how to proceed
toward him, if it should be evident that his suspicions rested on Spalatro. To
take him forward to Naples, was to bring an informer to his home; to suffer him
to return with his discovery, now that he probably knew the place of Schedoni's
residence, was little less hazardous. His death only could secure the secret,

After a night passed in the tumult of such considerations, the Confessor
summoned the peasant to his chamber, and, with some short preface, told him he
had no further occasion for his services, adding, carelessly, that he advised
him to be on his guard as he passed the villa, lest Spalatro, who might yet
^urk there, should revenge upon him the injury he had received. "According to
your account of him, he is a very dangerous fellow," said Schedoni; "but your
information is, perhaps, erroneous."

The guide began, testily, to justify himself for his assertions, and the
Confessor then endeavored to draw from him what he knew on the subject. But,
whether the man was piqued by the treatment he had lately received, or had
other reasons for reserve, he did not at first appear so willing to communicate
as formerly.

"What you hinted of this man," said Schedoni, "has, in some degree, excited
curiosity: I have now a few moments of leisure, and you may relate, if you
will, something of the wonderful history you talked of."

"It is a long story, Signor, and you would be tired before I got to the end of
it," replied the peasant; "and, craving your pardon, Signor I don't much like
to be snapped up so!"

"Where did this man live?" said the Confessor.

"You mentioned something of a house at the sea side."

"Aye, Signor, there is a strange history belonging to that house, too; but
this man, as I was saying, came there all of a sudden, nobody knew how! and the
place had been shut up ever since the Marchese -- "

"The Marchese!" said Schedoni, coldly, "what Marchese, friend?" -- "Why, I
mean the Barone di Cambrusca, Signor, to be sure, as I was going to have told
you, of my own accord, if you would only have let me. Shut up ever since the
Barone -- I left off there, I think."

"I understood that the Barone was dead!" observed the Confessor.

"Yes, Signor," replied the peasant, fixing his eyes on Schedoni; "but what has
his death to do with what I was telling? This happened before he died."

Schedoni, some what disconcerted by this unexpected remark, forgot to resent
the familiarity of it. "This man, then, this Spalatro, was Connected with the
Barone di Cambrusca?" said he.

"It was pretty well guessed so, Signor."

"How! no more than guessed?"

"No, Signor, and that was more than enough for the Barone's liking, I warrant.
He took too much care for any thing certain to appear against him, and he was
wi^e so to do, for if it had -- it would have been worse for him. But I was
going to tell you the story, Signor."

"What reasons were there for believing this was an agent of the Barone di
Cambrusca, friend?"

"I thought you wished to hear the story, Signor."

"In good time; but first, what were your reasons?"

"One of them is enough, Signor, and if you would only have let me gone
straight on with the story, you would have found it out by this time, Signor."

Schedoni frowned, but did not otherwise reprove the impertinence of the speech.

"It was reason enough, Signor, to my mind," continued the peasant, "that it
was such a crime as nobody but the Barone di Cambrusca could have committed;
there was nobody wicked enough, in our parts, to have done it but him. Why is
not this reason enough, Signor? What makes you look at me so, why the Barone
himself could hardly have looked worse, if I had told him as much!"

"Be less prolix," said the Confessor, in a restrained voice.

"Well then, Signor, to begin at the beginning. It is a good many years ago,
that Marco came first to our town. Now the story goes, that one stormy night --
"

"You may spare yourself the trouble of relating the story," said Schedoni,
abruptly, "Did you ever see the Barone you was speaking of friend?"

"Why did you bid me tell it, Signor, since you know it already! I have been
here all this while, just a-going to begin it, and all for nothing!"

"It is very surprising," resumed the artful Schedoni, without having noticed
what had been said, "that if this Spalatro was known to be the villian you say
he is, not any step should have been taken to bring him to justice! now
happened that? But, perhaps, all this story was nothing more than a report."

"Why, Signor, it was every body's business, and nobody's as one may say; then,
besides, nobody could prove what they had heard, and, though every body
believed the story just the same as if they had seen the whole, yet that, they
said, would not do in law, but they should be made to prove it. Now, it is not
one time in ten that any thing can be proved, Signor, as you well know, yet we
none of us believe it the less for that!"

"So then, you would have had this man punished for a murder, which, probably,
he never committed!" said the Confessor.

"A murder!" repeated the peasant.

Schedoni was silent, but, in the next instant, said "Did you not say it was a
murder?"

"I have not told you so, Signor!"

"What was the crime, then?" resumed Schedoni, after another momentary pause,
"you said it was attrocious, and what more so than -- murder?" His lip quivered
(...) ^ronounced the last word.

The (...) made no reply, but remained with his eyes fixed upon the Confessor,
and, at length repeated, "Did I say it (...) murder, Signor?

"If it was not that, say what it was," demanded the Confessor, haughtily; but
let it be in two words."

"As if a Story could be told in two words Signor!

"Well, well, be brief."

"How can I Signor, when the story is so long!"

"I will waste no more time," said Schedoni, going.

"Well, Signor, I will do my best to make it short. It was one stormy night in
December, that Marco Torma had been out fishing. Marco, Signor, was an old man
that lived in our town when I was a boy; I can but just remember him, but my
father knew him well and loved old Marco, and used often to say -- "

"To the story!" said Schedoni.

"Why I am telling it, Signor, as fast as I can. This old Marco did not live in
our town at the time it happened, but in some place, I have forgot the name of
it, near the sea shore. What can the name be! it is something like -- "

"Well, what happened to this old dotard?"

"You are out there, Signor, he was no old dotard; but you shall hear. At that
time, Signor, Marco lived in this place that I have forgot the name of, and was
a fisherman, but better times turned up after afterward, but that is neither
here nor there. Old Marco had been out fishing; it was a stormy night and he
was glad to get on shore, I warrant. It was quite dark, as dark Signor, as it
was last night, and he was making the best of his way, Signor, with some fish
along the shore, but it being so dark, he lost it notwithstanding. The rain
beat, and the wind blew, and he wandered about a long while, and could see no
light, nor hear any thing, but the surge near him, which sometimes seemed as if
it was coming to wash him away. He got as far off as he could, but he knew
there were high rocks over the beach, and he was afraid he should run his head
against them, if he went too far, I suppose. However at last, he went up close
to them, and as he got a little shelter, he resolved to try no further for the
present. I tell it you, Signor, just as my father told it me, and he had it
from the old man himself."

"You need not be so particular," replied the Confessor: "speak to the point."

"Well, Signor, as old Marco lay snug under the rocks, he thought he heard
somebody coming, and he lifted up his head, I warrant, poor old soul! as if he
could have seen who it was; however he could hear, though it was so dark, and
he heard the steps coming on; but he said nothing yet, meaning to let them come
close up to him, before he discovered himself. Presently he sees a little
moving light, and it comes nearer and nearer, till it was just opposite to him,
and then he saw the shadow of a man on the ground, and then spied the man
himself, with a dark lanthorn, passing along the beach."

"Well well, to the purpose," said Schedoni.

"Old Marco, Signor, my father says, was never stout hearted, and he took it
into his head this might be a robber, because he had the lanthorn, though, for
that matter, he would have been glad enough of a lanthorn himself, and so he
lay quiet. But, presently he was in a rare fright, for the man stopped to rest
(...) load he had upon his back, on a piece of a rock (...) him, and old Marco
saw him throw off a heavy (...), and heard him breathe hard, as if he was
hugely (...). I tell it, Signor, just as my father does.

"What was in the sack?" said Schedoni, coolly.

"All in good time, Signor;" perhaps old (...) never found out; but you shall
hear. He was afraid, when he saw the sack, to stir a limb, for he thought (...)
held booty. But, presently, the man, without saying a word, heaved it on his
shoulders again, and staggered away with it along the beach, and Marco saw
(...) more of him."

"Well! what has he to do with your story, the^*" said the Confessor, "Was this
Spalatro?"

"All in good time, Signor; you put me (...) When the storm was down a little,
Marco crept (...) and thinking there must be a village, or a hamlet, (...) a
cottage, at no great distance, since this man had (...), he thought he would
try a little further. He (...) better have staid where he was, for he wandered
(...) a long while, and could see nothing, and what (...) worse, the storm came
on louder than before, he (...) no rocks to shelter him now. While he was in
the quandary, he sees a light at a distance, and it came into his head this
might be the lanthorn again, but (...) determined to go notwithstanding, for if
it was, he could stop short, and if (...) was not, he should get shelter,
perhaps; so on he went, and I suppose I should have done the same, Signor."

"Well! this history never will have and end?" said Schedoni.

"Well! Signor, he had not gone far when he found out that it was no lanthorn,
but a light at a window. When he came up to the house he knocked softly at the
door, but nobody came."

"What house?" inquired the Confessor, sharply. "The rain beat hard, Signor,
and I warrant poor old Marco waited a long time before he knocked again, for he
was main patient, Signor O! how I have seen him listen to a story, let it be
ever so long!"

"I have need of his patience!" said Schedoni.

"When he knocked again, Signor, the door gave way a little, and he found it
was open, and so, as nobody came, he thought fit to walk in of his own accord"

"The dotard! what business had he to be so curious?" exclaimed Schedoni.

"Curious! Signor, he only sought shelter! He stumbled about in the dark, for a
good while, and could find nobody, nor make nobody hear, but at last, he came
to a room where there was some fire not quite out, upon the hearth, and he went
up to it, to warm himself, till somebody should come."

"What! was there nobody in the house?" said the Confessor.

"You shall hear, Signor. He had not been there, he said, no, he was sure, not
above two minutes, when he heard a strange sort of a noise in the very room
where he was, but the fire gave such a poor light, he could not see whether any
body was there."

"What was the noise?"

"You put me out, Signor. He said he did not much like it, but what could he
do! So he stirred up the fire, and tried to make it blaze a little, but it was
as dusky as ever; he could see nothing. Presently, however, he heard somebody
coming and saw a light and then a man coming toward the room where he was, so
he went up to him to ask shelter."

"Who was this man?" said Schedoni.

"Ask shelter. He, says the man, when he came to the door of the room, turned
as white as a sheet, as well he might, to see a stranger, to find a stranger
there, at that time of the night. I suppose I should have done the same myself.
The man did not seem very willing to let him stay, but asked what he did there
and, such like; but the storm was very loud, and so Marco did not let a little
matter daunt him, and, when he showed the man what fine fish he had in his
basket, and said he was welcome to it, he seemed more willing."

"Incredible!" exclaimed Schedoni, "the blockhead!"

"He had wit enough for that matter, Signor; Marco says he appeared to be main
hungry -- "

"Is that any proof of his wit?" said the Confessor, peevishly.

"You never will let me finish, Signor; main hungry; for he put more wood on
the fire directly, to dress some of the fish. While he was doing this, Morco
says his heart, somehow, misgave him, that this was the man he saw on the
beach, and he looked at hi^ pretty hard, till the other asked him, crossly,
what ^e stared at him so for; but Marco took care not to-tell. While he was
busy making ready the fish, however, Marco had an opportunity of eying him the
more, and every time the man looked round the room, which happened to be pretty
often, he had a notion it was the same,"

"Well, and if it was the same," said Schedoni.

"But when Marco happened to spy the sack, lying in a corner, he had no doubt
about the matter. He says his heart then misgave him sadly, and and he wished
himself safe out of the house and determined, in his own mind, to get away as
soon as he could, without letting the man suspect what he thought of him. He
now guessed, too, what made the man look round the room so often, and though
Marco thought before it was to find out if he had brought any body with him, he
now believed it was to see whether his treasure was safe."

"Aye, likely enough," observed Schedoni.

"Well, old Marco sat not much at his case, while the fish was preparing, and
thought it was "out of the fryingpan into the fire' with him; but what could he
do?"

"Why, get up and walk away to be sure," said the Confessor, 'as I shall do, if
your story lasts much longer'

"You shall hear, Signor; he would have done so, if he had thought this man
would have let him, but -- "

"Well, this man was Spalatro, I suppose," said Schedoni, impatiently, "and
this was the house on the shore you formerly mentioned."

"How well you have guessed it, Signor! though to say truth, I have been
expecting you to find it out this half hour."

Schedoni did not like the significant look, which the peasant assumed while he
said this, but he bade ^im proceed.

"At first, Signor, Spalatro hardly spoke a word, but he came to by degrees,
an^ by the time the fish was nearly ready, he was talkative enough."

Here the Confessor rose, with some emotion, and paced the room.

"Poor old Marco, Signor began to think better of him, and when he heard the
rain at the casements, he was loath to think of stirring. Presently Spalatro
went out of the room for a plate to eat the fish on -- "

"Out of the room?" said Schedoni, and checking his steps.

"Yes, Signor, but he took care to carry the light with him. However, Marco,
who had a deal of curiosity to -- "

"Yes, he appears to have had a great deal, indeed! said the Confessor, and
turning away, renewed his pace.

"Nay, Signor; I am not come to that yet; he has shown none yet; -- a great
deal of curiosity to know what was in the sack, before he consented to let
himself stay much longer, thought this a good opportunity for looking, and as
the fire was now pretty bright, he determined to see. He went up to the sack,
therefore, Signor, and tried to li^t it, but it was too heavy for him though it
did not seem full."

Schedoni again checked his steps, and stood (...) before the peasant.

"He raised it, however, a little, Signor, but it (...) from his hands, and
with such a heavy weight upon the floor, that he was sure it held no common
booty. Just then, he says, he thought he heard Spalatro coming, and the sound
of the sack was enough to have frightened him, and so Marco quitted it; but he
was mistaken, and he went to it again. But you don't seem to hear me, Signor,
for you look as you do when you are are in those quandaries, so busy a
thinking, and I -- "

"Proceed," said Schedoni, sternly, and renewed his steps, "I hear you."

"Went to it again," -- resumed the peasant, cautiously taking up the story at
the last words he had dropped. "He untied the string Signor, that held the
sack, and opened the cloth a little way, but think, Signor, what he must have
thought when he felt -- (...) flesh! O Signor! and when he saw by the light of
the fire, the face of a corpse within!, O, Signor!"

The peasant, in the eagerness with which he related this circumstance, had
followed Schedoni to the other end of the chamber, and he now took hold of his
garment, as if to secure his attention to the remainder of the story. The
Confessor, however, continued his steps, and the peasant kept pace with him,
still loosely holding his garment.

"Marco," he resumed, "was so terrified, as my father says, that he hardly knew
where he was, and I warrant, if one could have seen him, he looked a^ white,
Signor as you do now."

The Confessor abruptly withdrew his garment from the peasant's grasp, and
said, in an inward voice, "(...) I am shocked at the mere mention of such a
spectacle no wonder he was, who beheld it!" After the pause of a moment, he
added, -- "But what followed?"

"Marco says he had no power to tie up the clo^^ again, Signor, (...) when he
came to his thoughts, his only fear was, lest Spalatro should return, though he
had hardly been gone a minute, before he could get out of the house, for he
cared nothing about the storm now. And sure enough he heard him coming, but he
managed to get out of the room, into a passage another way from that Spalatro
was in. And luckily, too it was the same passage he had come in by, and it led
him out of the house. He made no more ado, but ran straight off, without
stoping to choose which way, and many perils and dangers he got into among the
woods, that night, and -- "

"How happened it, that this Spalatro was not taken up, after this discovery?"
said Schedoni. "What was the consequence of it?*

"Why Signor, old Marco had like to have caught his death that night; what with
wet, and what with fright, he was laid up with a fever, and was lightheaded,
and raved of such strange things, that people would not believe any thing he
said when he came to his senses,"

"Aye, said Schedoni, the narrative resembles a delerious dream, more than a
reality; I perfectly accord with them in their opinion of this feverish old
man."

"But you shall hear, Signor; after a while they began to think better of it,
and there was some stir made about it; but what could poor folks do, for
nothing could be proved! The house was searched, but the man was gone, and
nothing could be found! From that time the place was shut up; till many years
after, this Spalatro appeared, and old Marco then said he was pretty sure he
was the man, but he could not swear it, and so nothing could be done."

"Then it appears, after all, that you are not certain that this long history
belongs to this Spalatro!" said the Confessor; "nay not even that the history
itself is any thing more than the vision of a distempered brain!"

"I do not konw Signor, what you may call cert^in; but I know what we all
believe. But the strangest part of the story is to come yet, and that which
nobody would believe, hardly if -- "

"I have heard enough," said Schedoni, "I will hear no more!"

"Well but, Signor, I have not told you half yet; and I am sure when I heard it
myself, it so terrified me.

"I have listened too long to this idle history," said the Confessor, "there
seems to be no rational foundation for it. Here is what I owe you; you may
depart."

"Well, but, Signor, it is plain you know the rest already, or you never would
go without it. But you don't know perhaps, Signor what an unaccountable -- I am
sure it made my hair stand on end to hear of it what an unaccountable -- "

"I will hear no more of this absurdity," interrupted Schedoni, with sternness.
"I reproach myself for having listened so long to such a gossip's tale, and
have no further curiosity concerning it. You may withdraw; and bid the host
attend me."

"Well, Signor, if you are so easily satisfied," replied the peasant, with
disappointment, "there is no more to be said, but -- "

"You may stay, however, while I caution you," said Schedoni, "how you pass the
villa, where this Spalatro may yet linger, for, though I can only smile at the
story you have related -- "

"Related, Signor! why I have not told it half; and if you should only please
to be patient -- "

"Though I can only smile at that simple narrative," -- repeated Schedoni in a
louder tone.

"Nay, Signor, for that matter, you can frown at it too, as I can testify,"
muttered the guide.

"Listen to me!" said the Confessor, in a yet more insisting voice. "I say,
that though I give no credit to your curious history, I think this same
Spalatro appears to be a desperate fellow, and therefore, I would have you be
on your guard. If you see him, you may depend upon it, that he will attempt
your life in revenge of the injury I have done him. I give you, therefore, in
addition to your trombone, this stiletto to defend you."

Schedoni, while he spoke, took an instrument from his bosom, but it was not
the one he usually wore, or, at least, that he was seen to wear. He delivered
it to the peasant, who received it with a kind of stupid surprise, and then
gave him some directions as to the way in which it should be managed.

"Why, Signor," said the man, who had listened with much attention, "I am
kindly obliged to you for thinking about me, but is there any thing in this
stiletto different from others, that it is to be used so?"

Schedoni looked gravely on the peasant for an instant, and then replied,
"Certainly not, friend, I would only instruct you to use it to the best
advantage; farewell!"

"Thank you kindly, Signor, but -- but I think I have no need of it, my
trombone is enough for me."

"This will defend you more adroitly," replied Schedoni, refusing to take back
the stiletto, "and moreover, while you were loading the trombone, your
adversary might use his poignard to advantage. Keep it, therefore, friend; it
will protect you better than a dozen trombones. Put it up."

Perhaps it was Schedoni's particular look, more than his argument, that
convinced the guide of the value of his gift; he received it submissively,
though with a stare of stupid surprise; probable it had been better if it had
been suspicious surprise. He thanked Schedoni again, and was leaving the room,
when the Confessor called out, "Send the landlord to me immediately, I shall
set off for Rome without delay!"

"Yes, Signor," replied the peasant, "you are at the right place, the road
parts here; but I thought you was going for Naples!"

"For Rome," said Schedoni.

"For Rome, Signor! Well, I hope you will get safe, Signor, with all my heart!"
said the guide, and quitted the chamber.

While this dialogue had been passing between Schedoni and the peasant, Ellena,
in solitude, was considering on the means of prevailing with the Confessor to
allow her to return either to Altieri, or to the neighboring cloister of " Our
Lady of Pity," instead of placing her at a distance from Naples, till he should
think proper to acknowledge her. The plan, which he had mentioned, seemed to
her long-harrassed mind to exile her for ever from happiness, and all that was
dear to her affections; it appeared like a second banishment to San Stefano,
and every abbess, except that of the Santa della Pieta, came to her imagination
in the portraiture of an inexorable jailor. While this subject engaged her, she
was summoned to attend Schedoni, whom she found impatient to enter the
carriage, which at this town they had been able to procure. Ellena, on looking
out for the guide, was informed that he had already set off for his home, a
circumstance, for the suddenness of which she knew not how to account.

The travelers immediately proceeded on their journey; Schedoni, reflecting on
the late conversation, said little, and Ellena read not in his countenance any
thing that might encourage her to introduce the subject of her own intended
solicitation. Thus separately occupied, they advanced, during some hours, on
the road to Naples, for thither Schedoni had designed to go, notwithstanding
his late assertion to the guide, whom it appears, for whatever reason, he was
anxious to deceive, as to the place of his actual residence.

They stopped to dine at a town of some consideration, and, when Ellena heard
the Confessor enquire concerning the numerous convents it contained, she
perceived that it was necessary for her no longer to defer her petition. She
therefore represented immediately what must be the forlornness of her state,
and the anxiety of her mind, if she were placed at a distance from the scenes
and the people, which affection and early habit seemed to have consecrated;
especially at this time, when her spirits had scarcely recovered from the
severe pressure of long suffering, and when to sooth and renovate them, not
only quiet, but the consciousness of security, were necessary; a consciousness
which it was impossible, and especially so after her late experience, that she
could acquire among strangers till they should cease to be such.

To these pleadings Schedoni thoughtfully attended, but the darkness of his
aspect did not indicate that his compassion was touched; and Ellena proceeded
to represent, secondly, that, which, had she been more artful, or less
disdainful of cunning, she would have urged the first.

As it was, she had begun with the mention of circumstances, which, though the
least likely to prevail with Schedoni, she felt to be most important to
herself, and she concluded with representing that, which was most interesting
to him. Ellena suggested, that her residence in the neighborhood of Altieri
might be so managed, as that his secret would be as effectually preserved, as
if she were an hundred miles from Naples.

It may appear extraordinary, that a man of Schedoni's habitual coolness, and
exact calculation, should have suffered fear, on this occasion, to obscure his
perceptions, and this instance strongly proved the magnitude of the cause,
which could produce so powerful an effect. While he now listened to Ellena, he
began to perceive circumstances that had eluded his own observation; and he, at
length, acknowledged, that it might be safer to permit her to return to the
Villa Altieri, and that she should from thence go, as she had formerly
intended, to the Santa della Pieta, than to place her in any convent, however
remote, where it would be necessary for himself to introduce her. His only
remaining objection to the neighborhood of Naples, now rested on the chance it
would offer the Marchesa di Vivaldi of discovering Ellena's abode, before he
should judge it convenient to disclose to her his family; and his knowledge of
the Marchesa justified his most horrible suspicion, as to the consequence of
such a premature discovery,

Something, however, it appeared, must be risked in any situation he might
choose for Ellena; and her residence at the Santa della Pieta, a large convent,
well secured, and where, as she had been known to them from her infancy, the
abbess and the sisters might be supposed to be not indifferent concerning her
welfare, seemed to promise security against any actual violence from the malice
of the Marchesa; against her artful duplicity every place would be almost
equally insufficient. Here, as Ellena would appear in the character she had
always been known in, no curiosity could be excited, or suspicion awakened, as
to her family; and here therefore Schedoni's secret would more probably be
preserved, than elsewhere. As this was, after all, the predominant subject of
his anxiety, to which, however unnatural it may seem, even the safety of Ellena
was secondary, he finally determined, that she should return to the Santa della
Pieta; and she thanked him almost with tears, for a consent which she received
as a generous indulgence, but which was in reality little more than an effect
of selfish apprehension.

The remainder of the journey, which was of some days, passed without any
remarkable occurrence: Schedoni, with only short intervals, was still enveloped
in gloom and silence; and Ellena, with thoughts engaged by the one subject of
her interest, the present situation and circumstances of Vivaldi, willingly
submitted to this prolonged stillness.

As, at length, she drew near Naples, her emotions became more various and
powerful; and, when she distinguished the top of Vesuvius peeping over every
intervening summit, she wept as her imagination charactered all the well-known
country it overlooked. But when, having reached an eminence, that scenery was
exhibited to her senses, when the Bay of Naples, stretching into remotest
distance, was spread out before her; when every mountain of that magnificent
horizon, which enclosed her native landscape, that country which she believed
Vivaldi to inhabit, stood unfolded, how affecting, how overwhelming were her
sensations! Every object seemed to speak of her home, of Vivaldi, and of
happiness that was passed! and so exquisitely did regret mingle with hope, the
tender grief of remembrance with the interest of expectation, that it were
difficult to say which prevailed.

Her expressive countenance disclosed to the Confessor the course of her
thoughts and of her feelings, feelings which, while he contemned, he believed
he perfectly comprehended, but of which, having never in any degree experienced
them, he really understood nothing. The callous Schedoni, by a mistake not
uncommon, especially to a mind of his character, substituted words for truths;
not only confounding the limits of neighboring qualities, but mistaking their
very principles. Incapable of perceiving their nice distinctions, he called the
persons who saw them, merely fanciful; thus making his very incapacity an
argument for his superior wisdom. And, while he confounded delicacy of feeling
with satiety of the mind, taste with caprice, and imagination with error, he
yielded, when he most congratulated himself on hi^ sagacity, to illusions, no
less (...), because they were less brilliant, than those which are incident to
sentiment and feeling.

The better to escape observation, Schedoni ha^ contrived not to reach Naples
till the close of the evening, and it was entirely dark before the carriage
stopped at the villa Altieri. Ellena with a mixture of melancholy and
satisfaction, viewed, once more, her long deserted home, and while she waited
till a servant should open the gate, remembered how often she had thus waited
when there was a beloved friend within, to welcome her with smiles, which were
now gone for ever. Beatrice, the old housekeeper, at length, however, appeared,
and received her with an affection as sincere, if not as strong, as that of the
relative for whom she mourned.

Here Schedoni alighted, and, having dismissed the carriage, entered the house
for the purpose of relinquishing also his disguise, and resuming his monk's
habit. Before he departed, Ellena ventured to mention Vivaldi, and to express
her wish to hear of his exact situation; but, though Schedoni was too well
enabled to inform her of it, policy which had hitherto kept him silent on this
subject still influenced him; and he replied only, that if he should happen to
learn the circumstances of his condition, she should not remain ignorant of
them.

This assurance revived Ellena, for two reasons; it afforded her a hope of
relief from her present uncertainty, and it also seemed to express an
approbation of the object of her affection, such as the Confessor never had yet
disclosed. Schedoni added, that he should see her no more, till he thought
proper to acknowledge her for his daughter; but that, if circumstances made it
necessary, he should, in the mean time, write to her; and he now gave her a
direction by which to address him under a fictitious name, and at a place
remote from his convent. Ellena, though assured of the necessity for this
conduct, could not yield to such disguise, without an aversion that was
strongly expressed in her manner, but of which Schedoni took no notice. He bade
her, as she valued her existence, watchfully to preserve the secret of her
birth; and to waste not a single day at Villa Altieri, but to retire to the
Santa della Pieta; and these injunctions were delivered in a manner so solemn
and energetic, as not only deeply to impress upon her mind the necessity of
fulfiling them, but to excite some degree of amazement.

After a short and general direction respecting her further conduct, Schedoni
bade her farewell, and, privately quitting the villa, in his ecclesiastical
dress, repaired to the dominican convent, which he entered as a brother
returned from a distant pilgrimage. He was received as usual, by the society,
and found himself, once more, the austere father Schedoni of the Spirito Sancto.

The cause of his first anxiety was the necessity for justifying himself to the
Marchesa di Vivaldi, for ascertaining how much he might venture to reveal of
the truth, and for estimating what would be her decision, were she informed of
the whole. His second step would be to obtain the release of Vivaldi; and, as
his conduct in this instance would be regulated, in a great degree, by the
result of his conference with the Marchesa, it would be only the second.
However painful it must be to Schedoni to meet her, now that he had discovered
the depth of the guilt, in which she would have involved him, he determined to
seek this eventful conference on the following morning: and he passed this
night partly in uneasy expectation of the approaching day, but chiefly in
inventing circumstances, and arranging arguments, that might bear him
triumphantly toward the accomplishment of his grand design.

CHAP. VII.
" Beneath the silent gloom of Solitude
Though Peace can sit and smile, though meek content
Can keep the cheerful tenor of her soul,
Even in the loneliest shades, yet let not Wrath
Approach, let black Revenge keep far aloof,
Or soon they flame to madness"
ELFRIDA.
SCHEDONI, on his way to the Vivaldi pala^^, again reviewed and arranged every
argument, (...) rather specious circumstance, which might induce the Marchesa's
consent to the nuptials he so much desired. His family was noble, though no
longer wealthy, and he believed that as the seeming want of descent had
hitherto been the chief objection to Ellena, ^he Marchesa might be prevailed
with to overlook (...) wreck of his fortune.

At the palace he was told, the Marchesa was at one of her villas on the bay;
and he was too anxious (...) to follow her thither immediately. This delightful
residence was situated on an airy promontory, that overhung the water, and was
nearly embosomed among the woods, that spread far along the heights, and
descended with great pomp of foliage and coloring, to the very margin of the
waves. It seemed scarcely possible that misery could inhabit so enchanting an
abode; yet the Marchesa was wretched amidst all these luxuri^s of nature and
art, which would have perfected the happiness of an innocent mind. Her heart
was possessed by evil passions, and all her perceptions were distorted and
discolored by them, which, like a dark magician, ha^ power to change
thefairest scenes into those of gloom and desolation.

The servants had orders to admit father Schedoni at all times, and he was
shown into a saloon in which the Marchesa was alone. Every object in this
apartment announced taste, and even magnificence. The hangings were of purple
and gold; the vaulted cieling was designed by one of the first painters of the
Venecian school; the marble statues that adorned the recesses were not less
exquisite, and the whole symmetry and architecture airy, yet rich; gay, yet
chastened; resembled the palace of a fairy, and seemed to possess almost equal
fascinations. The lattices were thrown open, to admit the prospect, as well as
the air loaded with fragrance from an orangery that spread before them. Lofty
palms and plantains threw their green and refreshing tint over the windows, and
on the lawn that sloped to the edge of the precipice, a shadowy perspective,
beyond which appeared the ample waters of the gulf, where the light sails of
feluccas, and the spreading canvass of larger vessels, glided upon the scene
and passed away, as in a camera obscura. Vesuvius and the city of Naples were
seen on the coast beyond, with many a bay and lofty cape of that long tract of
bold and gaily-coloured scenery, which extends toward Cape Campanella, crowned
by fading ranges of mountains, lighted up with all the magic of Italian
sunshine. The Marchesa reclined on a sofa before an open lattice; her eyes were
fixed upon the prospect without, but her attention was wholly occupied by the
visions that evil passions painted to her imagination. On her still beautiful
features was the languor of discontent and indisposition; and, though her
manners, like her dress, displayed the elegant negligence of the graces, they
concealed the movements of a careful, and even a tortured heart. On perceiving
Schedoni, a faint smile lightened upon her countenance, and she held forth her
hand to him; at the touch of which he shuddered.

"My good father, I rejoice to see you," said the Marchesa; "I have felt the
want of your conver^^tion much, and at this moment of indisposition especially."

She waved the attendant to withdraw; while Schedoni, stalking to a window,
could with difficulty conceal the perturbation with which he now, for the first
time, consciously beheld the willing destroyer of his child. Some farther
compliment from the Marchesa recalled him; he soon recovered all his address,
and approaching her, said.

"Daughter! you always send me away a worse Dominican than I come; I approach
you with humility, but depart elated with pride, and am obliged to suffer much
from self-infliction before I can descend to my proper level."

After some other flatteries had been exchanged, a silence of several moments
followed, during which neither of the parties seemed to have sufficient courage
to introduce the subjects that engaged their thoughts, subjects upon which
their interests were now so directly and unexpectedly opposite. Had Schedoni
been less occupied by his own feelings, he might have perceived the extreme
agitation of the Marchesa, the tremor of her nerves, the faint flush that
crossed her che^k, wanness that succeeded, the languid movement of her eyes,
and the laborious ^igh^ that interrupted her breathing, while she wished, yet
dared not ask, whether Ellena was no more and averted her regards from him,
whom she almost believed to be a murderer.

Schedoni, not less affected, though apparently tranquil, as sedulously avoided
the face of the Marchesa, whom he considered with a degree of contempt almost
equal to his in dignotion: his feelings had reversed, for the present, all his
opinions on the subject of their former arguments, and had taught him, for
once, to think justly. Every moment of silence now increased his embarrassment,
and his reluctance even to name Ellena. He feared to tell that she lived, yet
despised himself for suffering such fear, and shuddered at a recollection of
the conduct, which had made any assurance concerning her life necessary. The
insinuation, that he had discovered her family to be such as would not degrade
that of the Marchesa, he knew not how to introduce with such delicacy of
gradation as might win upon the jealousy of her pride, and soothe her
disappointment; and he was still meditating how he might lead to this subject,
when the Marchesa herself broke the silence.

"Father," she said, with a sigh, "I always look to you for consolation, and am
seldom disappointed. You are too well acquainted with the anxiety which has
long oppressed me; may I understand that the cause of it is removed?" She
paused, and then added, "May I hope that my son will no longer be led from the
observance of his duty?"

Schedoni, with his eyes fixed on the ground, remained silent, but, at length,
said, "the chief occasion of your anxiety is certainly removed," -- and he was
again silent.

"How!" exclaimed the Marchesa, with the quickfightedness of suspicion, while
all her dissimulation yielded to the urgency of her fear, "Have you sailed? Is
she not dead?"

In the earnestness of the question, she fixed her eyes on Schedoni's face and
perceiving there symptoms of extraordinary emotion, added, "Relieve me from my
apprehensions, good father, I entreat; tell me that you have succeeded, and
that she has paid the debt of justice."

Schedoni raised his eyes to the Marchesa, but instantly averted them;
indignation had lifted them, and disgust and stifled horror turned them away.
Though very little of these feelings appeared, the Marchesa perceived such
expression as she had never been accustomed to observe in his countenance; and,
her surprise and impatience increasing, she once more repeated the question,
and with a yet more decisive air than before.

"I have not failed in the grand object," replied Schedoni: "your son is no
longer in danger of forming a disgraceful alliance."

"In what, then, have you failed?" asked the Marchesa; for I perceive that you
have not been completely successful."

"I ought not to say that I have failed in any respect," replied Schedoni, with
emotion, "since the honor of your house is preserved, and -- a life is spared."

His voice faultered as he pronounced the last words, and he seemed to
experience again the horror of that moment, when, with an uplifted poignard in
his grasp, he had discovered Ellena for his daughter.

"Spared!" repeated the Marchesa, doubtingly; explain yourself, good father!"

"She lives," replied Schedoni; "but you have nothing, therefore, to apprehend."

The Marchesa, surprised no less by the tone in which he spoke, and shocked at
the purport of his words, changed countenance, while she said, impatiently --
"You speak in enigmas, father,"

"Lady! I speak plain truth -- she lives."

"I understand that sufficiently," said the Marchesa, out when you tell me, I
have nothing to apprehend."

"I tell you truth, also" rejoined; "the Confessor "and the benevolence of your
nature may be permitted to rejoice, for justice no longer has forbade the
exercise of mercy."

"This is all very well in its place," said the Marchesa, betrayed by the
vexation she suffered; such sentiments and such compliments are like gala
suits, to be put on in fine weather. My day is cloudy; let me have a little
plain sense: inform me of the circumstances which have occasioned this change
in the course of your observations, and, good father! be brief."

Schedoni, then unfolded, with his usual art, such circumstances relative to
the family of Ellena as he hoped would soften the aversion of the Marchesa to
the connection, and incline her in consideration of her son's happiness,
finally to approve it; with which disclosure he mingled a plausible relation of
the way, in which the discovery had been made.

The Marchesa's patience would scarcely await the conclusion of his narrative,
or her disappointment submit to the curb of discretion. When at length, he had
finished his history "Is it possible," said she, with fretful displeasure,
"that you have suffered yourself to be deceived by the plausibility of a girl,
who might have been expected to utter any falsehood, which should appear likely
to protect her! Has a man of your discernment given faith to the idle and
improbable tale! Say, rather, father, that your resolution failed in the
critical moment, and that you are now anxious to form excuses to yourself for a
conduct so pusillanimous."

"I am not apt to give an easy faith to appearances," replied Schedoni,
gravely, "and still less to shrink from the performance of any act, which I
judge to be necessary and just. To the last intimation, I make no reply; it
does not become my character to vindicate myself from an implication of
falsehood."

The Marchesa, perceiving that her passion had betrayed her into imprudence,
condescended to apologize for that which she termed an effect of her extreme
anxiety, as to what might follow from an act of such indiscreet indulgence; and
Schedoni as willingly accepted the apology, each believing the assistance of
the other necessary to success.

Schedoni then informed her, that he had better authority for what he advanced
than the assertion of Ellena; and he mentioned some circumstances, which proved
him to he more anxious for the reputation than for the truth of his word.
Believing that his origin was entirely unknown to the Marchesa, he ventured to
disclose some particulars of Ellena's family, without apprehending that it
could lead to a suspicion of his own.

The Marchesa, though neither appeased or convinced, commanded her feelings so
far as to appear tranquil, while the Confessor represented, with the most
delicate address, the unhappiness of her son, and the satisfaction, which must
finally result to herself from an acquiescence with his choice, since the
object of it was known to be worthy of his alliance. He added, that while he
had believed the contrary, he had proved himself as strenuous to prevent, as he
was now sincere in approving their marriage; and concluded with gently blameing
her for suffering prejudice and some remains of resentment to obscure her
excellent understanding. "Trusting to the natural clearness of your
perception," he added, "I doubt not that wh^^ you have maturely considered the
subject, eve^^ objection will yield to a consideration of your son's happiness."

The earnestness with which Schedoni pleaded for Vivaldi, excited some
surprise; but the Marchesa, without condescending to reply either to his
argument or remonstrance inquired whether Ellena had a suspicion of the design,
with which she had been carried into the forests of the Garganus, or concerning
the identity of her persecutor. Schedoni immediately perceiving to what these
questions tended, replied, with the facility with which he usually accommodated
his conscience to his interest, that Ellena was totally ignorant as to who were
her immediate persecutors, and equally unsuspicious of any other evil having
been intended her, than that of a temporary confinement.

The last assertion was admitted by the Marchesa to be probable, till the
boldness of the first made her doubt the truth of each, and occasioned her new
surprise and conjecture as to the motive, which could induce Schedoni to
venture these untruths. She then inquired where Ellena was now disposed of, but
he had too much prudence to disclose the place of her retreat, however
plausible might be the air with which the inquiry was urged; and he endeavored
to call off her attention to Vivaldi. The Confessor did not, however, venture,
at present to give a hint as to the pretended discovery of his situation in the
inquisition, but reserved to a more favorable opportunity such mention,
together with the zealous offer of his services to extricate the prisoner. The
Marchesa, believing that her son was still engaged in pursuit of Ellena, made
many inquiries concerning him, but without expressing any solicitude for his
welfare; resentment appearing to be the only emotion she retained toward him.
While Schedoni replied with circumspection to her questions, he urged inquiries
of his own, as to the manner in which the Marchesa endured the long absence of
Vivaldi; thus endeavoring to ascertain how far he might hereafter venture to
appear in any efforts for liberating him, and how shape his conduct respecting
Ellena. It seemed that the Marchese was not indifferent as to his son's
absence; and though he had at first believed the search for Ellena to have
occasioned it, other apprehensions now disturbed him, and taught him the
feelings of a father. His numerous avocations and interests, however, seemed to
prevent such anxiety from preying upon his mind; and having dismissed persons
in search of Vivaldi, he passed his time in the usual routine of company and
the court. Of the actual situation of his son, it was evident that neither he,
nor the Marchesa, had the least apprehension, and this was a circumstance,
which the Confessor was very careful to ascertain.

Before he took leave he ventured to renew the mention of Vivaldi's attachment,
and gently to plead f^^ him. The Marchesa, however, seemed inattentive (...)
what he represented, till, at length, awaking from (...) reverie, she said --
"Father, you have judged ill -- and, before she concluded the sentence, she
relap^^^ again into thoughtful silence. Believing that he anticipated her
meaning, Schedoni began to repeat hi^ own justification respecting his conduct
toward Ellena.

"You have judged erroniously, father" resumed the Marchesa with the same
considering air, "in placing the girl in such a situation; my son cannot fail
to discover her there."

"Or wherever she may be" replied the Confessor, believing that he understood
the Marchesa's aim, "it may not be possible to conceal her long from his
search."

"The neighborhood of Naples ought at least to have been avoided," observed
the Marchesa,

Schedoni was silent, and she added, "So near, also, to his own residence! How
far is the Santa della Pieta from the Vivaldi palace?"

Though Schedoni had thought that the Marchesa, while displaying a pretended
knowledge of Ellena's retreat, was only endeavoring to obtain a real one, this
mention of the place of her actual residence shocked him; but he replied almost
immediately, "I am ignorant of the distance, for, till now, I was unacquainted
that there is a convent of the name you mention. It appears, however, that this
Santa della Pieta is the place, of all other, which ought to have been avoided.
How could you suspect me, lady, of imprudence thus extravagant!"

While Schedoni spoke, the Marchesa regarded him attentively, and then replied,
"I may be allowed, good father, to suspect your prudence in this instance,
since you have just given me so unequivocal a proof of it in another."

She would then have changed the subject but, Schedoni, believing this
inclination to be the consequence of her having assured herself, that she had
actually discovered Ellena's asylum, and too reasonably suspecting the dreadful
use she designed to make of the discovery, endeavored to unsettle her opinion,
and mislead her as to the place of Ellena's abode. He not only contradicted the
fact of her present residence at the Santa della Pieta, but, without scruple,
made a positive assertion, that she was at a distance from Naples, nameing at
the same time, a fictious place, whose obscurity, he added, would be the best
protection from the pursuit of Vivaldi.

"Very true, father," observed the Marchesa; "I believe that my son will not
readily discover the girl in the place you have named."

Whether the Marchesa believed Schedoni's assertion or not, she expressed no
farther curiosity on the subject, and appeared considerably more tranquil than
before. She now chatted with ease on general topics, while the Confessor dared
no more to urge the subject of his secret wishes; and having supported for some
time, a conversation most uncongenial with his temper, he took his leave, and
returned to Naples. On the way thither, he reviewed with exactness, the late
behavior of the Marchesa, and the result of this examination was a resolution
-- never to renew the subject of their conversation, but to solemnize, without
her consent, the nuptials of Vivaldi and Ellena.

The Marchesa, meanwhile, on the departure of Schedoni, remained in the
attitude in which he had left her, and absorbed by the interest, which his
visit excited. The sudden change in his conduct no less astonished and
perplexed, than disappointed her, She could not explain it by the supposition
of any principle, or motive. Sometimes it occurred to her, that Vivaldi had
bribed him with rich promises, to promote the marriage, which he contributed to
thwart; but, when she considered the high expectations she had herself
encouraged him to cheri^n, the improbability of the conjecture was apparent.
That Schedoni, from whatever cause, was no longer to be trusted in this
business, was sufficiently clear, but she endeavored to console herself with a
hope that a more confidential person might yet be discovered. A part of
Schedoni's resolution she also adopted, which was, never again to introduce the
subject of their late conversation. But while she should silently pursue her
own plans, she determined to conduct herself, toward Schedoni i^ every other
respect, as usual, not suffering him to suspect that she had withdrawn her
confidence, but inducing him to believe that she had relinquished all farther
design against Ellena.

CHAP. VIII.
-- "We
Would learn the private virtues: how to glide
Through shades and plains, along the smoothest stream
Of rural li^e! or snatched away by hope,
Through the dim spaces of futurity,
With earnest eye anticipate those scenes
Of happiness and wonder, where the mind,
In endless growth and infinite ascent,
Rises from state to state, and world to world."
THOMPSON.
ELLENA, obedient to the command of Schedoni, withdrew from her home on the day
that followed her arrival there, to the Santa della Pieta. The Superior, who
had known her from her infancy, and from the acquaintance which such long
observation afforded, had both esteemed and loved her, received Ellena with a
degree of satisfaction proportionate to the concern she had suffered when
informed of her disastrous removal from the Villa Altieri.

Among the quiet groves of this convent, however, Ellena vainly endeavored to
moderate her solicitude respecting the situation of Vivaldi; for, now that she
had a respite from immediate calamity, she thought with more intense anxiety as
to what might be his sufferings, and her fears and impatience increased, as
each day disappointed her expectation of intelligence from Schedoni.

If the soothings of sympathy and the delicate arts of benevolence could have
restored the serenity of her mind, Ellena would now have been peaceful; for all
these were offered her by the abbess and the sisters of the Santa della Pieta.
They were not acquainted with the cause of her sorrow, but they perceived that,
she was unhappy, and wished her to be otherwise. The society of Our Lady of
Pity, was such as a convent does not often shroud; to the wisdom and virtu^ of
the Superior, the sisterhood was principally indebted for the harmony and
happiness which distinguished them. This lady was a shining example to
gove^nesses of religious houses, and a striking instance (...) the influence,
which a virtuous mind may acquire over others, as well as of the extensive good
that it may thus diffuse. She was dignified without haughtiness, religeous
without bigotry, and mild, though dicisive and firm. She possessed penetration
to discover what wa^ just, resolution to adhere to it, and temper to practice
it with gentleness and grace; so that even correction from her, assumed the
winning air of courtesy: (...) person, whom she admonished, wept in sorrow for
the offense, instead of being secretly irritated by the reproof, and loved her
as a mother, rather than feared her as a judge. Whatever might be her failings
they were effectually concealed by the general benevolence of her heart, and
the harmony of her mind; a harmony, not the effect of torpid feelings, but the
accomplishment of correct and vigilant judgment. Her religion was neither
gloomy nor bigoted; it was the sentiment of a grateful heart offering itself
up to a Deity, who delights in the happiness of his creatures and she conformed
to the customs of the Roman church without supposing a faith in all of them to
be necessary to salvation. This opinion, however, she was obliged to conceal,
lest her very virtue should draw upon her the punishment of a crime, from some
fierce ecclesiastics, who contradicted in their practice the very essential
principles, which the christianity they professed would have taught them.

In her lectures to the nuns she seldom touched upon points of faith, but
explained and enforced the moral duties, particularly such as were most
practicable in the society to which she belonged; such as tended to soften and
harmonize the affections, to impart that repose of mind, which persuades to the
practice of sisterly kindness, universal charity, and the most pure and
elevated devotion. When she spoke of religion, it appeared so interesting, so
beautiful, that her attentive auditors revered and loved it as a friend, a
refiner of the heart, a sublime consoler; and experienced somewhat of the meek
and holy ardour, which may belong to angelic natures.

The society appeared like a large family, of which the lady abbess was the
mother, rather than an assemblage of strangers: and particularly when gathered
around her, they listened to the evening sermon, which she delivered with such
affectionate, interest, such persuasive eloquence, and sometimes with such
pathetic energy, as few hearts could resist.

She encouraged in her convent every innocent and liberal pursuit, which might
sweeten the austerities of confinement, and which were generally rendered
instrumental to charity. The Daughters of Pity particularly excelled in music;
not in those difficulties of the art, which display florid graces, and
intricate execution, but in such eloquence of sound as steals upon the heart,
and awakens its sweetest and best affections. It was probably the well
regulated sensibility of their own minds, that enabled these sisters to
diffuse, through their strains a character of such finely tempered taste, as
drew crowds of visitors, on every festival, to the church of the Santa della
Pieta.

The local circumstances of this convent were scarcely less agreeable than the
harmony of its society was interesting. These extensive domains included
olivegrounds, vineyards, and some corn-land; a considerable tract was devoted
to the pleasures of the garden, whose groves supplied walnuts, almonds,
oranges, and citrons, in abundance, and almost every kind of (...) and flower,
which this luxurious climate nurtu^^ These gardens hung upon the slope of a
hill, about mile within the shore, and afforded extensive (...) of the country
round Naples, and of the (...) But from the terraces, which extended along a
(...) circular range of rocks that rose over the convent, (...) formed a part
of the domain, the prospects were infinitely finer. They extended on the south
to the (...) of Capraea, where the gulf expands into the sea; the west
appeared the island of Ischia, distinguished by the white pinnacles of the
lofty mountain Epomeo; and near it Prosida with its many colored cliffs, rose
(...) of the waves. Overlooking many points toward Puazuloli, the eye caught
beyond other promontories, an^ others further still, to the north, a glimpse of
the sea that bathes the now desolate shores of Baia; with Capua, and all the
towns and villas, that speckle the garden-plains between Caserta and Naples.

In the nearer scene were the rocky heights of Pa^^silippo, and Naples itself,
with all its crowded subur^ ascending among the hills, and mingling with
vineyards and overtoping cypress; the castle of San Elmo, conspicuous on its
rock, overhanging the magnificent monastery of the Chartreux; while in the seen
below appeared the Castle Nuovo, with its clustered to^ers, the long-extended
Corso, the mole, with its (...)pharos, and the harbor gay with painted
shipping and full to the brim with the blue waters of the bay Beyond the hills
of Naples, the whole horizon to the north and east was bounded by the mountains
of the Appenine, an amphitheatre proportioned to the grandeur of the plain,
which the gulf spread out below.

These terraces, shaded with acacias and plane trees were the favorite haunt
of Ellena. Between the opening branches, she looked down upon Villa Altieri,
which brought to her remembrance the affectionate Bianchi, with all the
sportive years of her childhood; and where some of her happiest hours had been
passed in the society of Vivaldi. Along the windings of the coast, too, she
could distinguish many places rendered sacred by affection, to which she had
made excursions with her lamented relative and Vivaldi; and though sadness
mingled with the recollections a view of them restored, they were precious to
her heart. Here, alone and unobserved, she frequently yielded to the melancholy
which she endeavored to suppress in society; and at other times tried to
deceive, with books and pencil, the lingering moments of uncertainty concerning
the state of Vivaldi; for day after day still elapsed without bringing any
intelligence from Schedoni. Whenever the late scenes connected with the
discovery of her family recurred to Ellena, she was struck with almost as much
amazement as if she was gazing upon a vision, instead of recalling realities.
Contrasted with the sober truth of her present life, the past appeared like
romance; and there were moments when she shrunk from the relationship of
Schedoni with unconquerable affright. The first emotions his appearance had
excited were so opposite to those of filial tenderness, that she perceived it
was now nearly impossible to love and revere him as her father, and she
endeavored, by dwelling upon all the obligations, which she believed he had
lately conferred upon her, to repay him a gratitude, what was withheld in
affection.

In such melancholy considerations, she often lingered under the shade of the
accacias, till the sun had sunk behind the far distant promontory of Miseno*
and the last bell of vespers summoned her to the convent below.

Among the nuns, Ellena had many favorites, but not one that she admired and
loved equally with Olivia of San Stefano, the remembrance of whom was always
accompanied with a fear lest she should have suffered from her generous
compassion, and a wish that she had taken up her abode with the happy society
of the Daughters of pity instead of being subjected to the tyranny of the
abbess of San Stefano. To Ellena, the magnificent scenes of the Santa della
Pieta seemed to open a secure, and perhaps a last asylum; for, is her present
circumstances, she could not avoid perceiving how menancing and various were
the objections to her marriage with Vivaldi, even should Schedoni prove
propitious to it. The character of the Marchesa di Vivaldi, such as it stood
unfolded by the late occurrences, struck her with dismay, for her designs
appeared sufficiently atrocious, whether they had extended to the utmost limit
of Ellena's suspicions, or had stopped where the affected charity of Schedoni
had pointed out. In either case, the pertinacity of her aversion, and the
vindictive violence of her nature, were obvious. In this view of her character,
however, it was not the inconvenience threatened to those who might become
connected with her, that principally affected Ellena, but the circumstance of
such a woman being the mother of Vivaldi; and to alleviate so afflicting a
consideration, she endeavored to believe all the palliating suggestions of
Schedoni, respecting the Marchesa's late intentions. But if Ellena was grieved
on discovering crime, in the character of Vivaldi's parent, what would have
been her suffering, had she suspected the nature of Schedoni? -- what, if she
had been told that he was the adviser of the Marchesa's plans? -- if she had
known that he had been the partner of her intentional guilt? From such
suffering she was yet spared, as well* as from that which a knowledge of
Vivaldi's present situation and of the result of Schedoni's efforts to procure
a release from the perils, among which he had precipitated him, would have
inflicted. Had she know^ this, it is probable that in the first despondency of
(...) mind, she would have relinquished what is called the world, and sought a
lasting asylum with the society of the holy sisters. Even as it was, she
sometimes endeavored to look with resignation upon the events which might
render such a step desirable; but it was an effort that seldom soothed her even
with a temporary self-delusion. Should the veil, however, prove her final
refuge, it would be by her own choice; for the lady abbess of the Santa della
Pieta employed no art to win a recluse, nor suffered the nuns to seduce
votaries to the order.

CHAP. IX.
" Sullen and sad to fancy's frighted eye
Did shapes of dun and murky hue advance,
In train tumultuous, all of gesture strange,
And passing horrible."
CARACTACUS.
WHILE the late events had been passing in the Garganus, and at Naples, Vivaldi
and his servent Paulo, remained imprisoned in distinct chambers of the
Inquisition. They were again separately interrogated. From the servant no
information could be obtained; he asserted only his master's innocence, without
once remembering to mention his own; clamoured, with more justice than prudence,
against the persons who had occasioned his arrest; seriously endeavoring to
convince the inquisitors, that he himself had no other motive in having
demanded to be brought to these prisons than that he might comfort his master,
he gravely remonstrated on the injustice of separating them, adding, that he
was sure when they knew the rights of the matter, they would order him to be
carried to the prison of Signor Vivaldi.

"I do assure your Serenissimo Illustrussimo," continued Paulo, addressing the
chief inquisitor with profound gravity, "that this is the last place I should
have thought of coming to, on any other account; and if you will only
condescend to ask your officials, who took my master up, they will tell you as
g^od. They knew well enough all along, what I came here for, and if they had
known it would be all in vain' it would have been but civil of them to have
told me as much, and not have brought me; for this is the last place in the
world I would have come to, otherwise, of my own accord."

Paulo was permitted to harangue in his own way, because his examiners hoped
that his prolixity would be a means of betraying circumstances connected with
his master. By this veiw, however, they were misled, for Paulo, with all his
simplicity of heart, was both vigilant and shrewd in Vivaldi's interest. But,
when he perceived them really convinced, that his sole motive for visiting the
Inquisition was that he might console his master, yet still persisting in the
resolution of separately confining him, his indignation knew no bounds. He
depised alike their reprehension, their thundering menaces, and their more
artful exhibitions; told them of all they had to expect both here and
hereafter, for their cruelty to his dear master, and said they might do what
they would with him; he defied them to make him more miserable than he was.

It was not without difficulty that he was removed from the chamber, where he
left his examiners in a state of astonishment at his rashness, and indignation
of his honesty, such as they had, probably never experienced before.

When Vivaldi was again called up to the table of the Holy Office, he underwent
a longer examination than on a former occasion. Several inquisitors attended,
and every art was employed to induce him to confess crimes, of which he was
suspected, and to draw from him a discovery of others which might have eluded
even suspicion. Still the examiners cautiously avoided informing him of the
subject of the accusation on which he had been arrested, and it was, therefore,
only on the former assurances of the Benedictine, and the officials in the
chaple of San Sebastian, that Vivalid understood he was accused of having
carried off a nun. His answers on the present occasion were concise and firm,
and his whole deportment undaunted. He felt less apprehension for himself, than
indignation of the general injustice and cruelty, which the tribunal was
permitted to exercise upon others; and this virtuous indignation gave a
loftiness, a calm heroic granduer to his mind, which never, for a moment, (...)
him, except when he conjectured what might be the sufferings of Ellena. Then,
his fortitude and magnanimity failed, and his tortured spirit rose almost to
fren^^.

On this, his second examination, he was urged by the same dark questions, and
replied to them with the same open sincerity, as during the first. Yet the
simplicity and energy of truth failed to impress conviction on minds, which, no
longer possessing the virtue themselves, were not competent to understand the
symptom^ of it in others, Vivaldi was again threatened wi^^ the torture, and
again dismissed to his prison.

On the way to this dreadful abode, a person passed him in one of the avenues,
of whose air and figure (...) thought he had some recollection; and, as the
stranger stalked away, he suddenly knew him to be the prophetic monk, who had
haunted him among the ruins of Paluzzi. In the first moment of surprise,
Vivaldi lost his presence of mind so far, that he made no attempt to interrupt
him. In the next instance, however, he paused and looked back, with an
intention of speaking; but this mysterious person was already at the extremity
of the avenue. Vivaldi called, and besought him to stop. Without either
speaking or turning his head, however, he immediately disappeared beyond a door
that opened at his approach. Vivaldi on attempting to take the way of the monk,
was withheld by his guards, and, when he inquired who was the stranger he had
seen, the officials asked, in their turn, what stranger he alluded to.

"He who has just passed us," replied Vivaldi.

The officials seemed surprised, "Your spirits are disordered, Signor,"
observed one of them, "I saw no person pass!

"He passed so closely," said Vivaldi, "that it was hardly possible you could
avoid seeing him!"

"I did not even hear a footstep!" added the (...).

"I do not recollect that I did," answered Vivaldi, "but I saw his figure as
plainly as I now see yours; his black garments almost touched me! Was he an
inquisitor?"

The official appeared astonished; and, whether his surprise was real, or
affected for the purpose of concealing his knowledge of the person alluded to,
his embarrassment and awe seemed natural. Vivaldi observed, with almost equal
curiosity and surprise, the fear which his face expressed; but perceived also,
that it would avail nothing to repeat his questions.

As they proceeded along the avenue, a kind of halfstifled groan was sometimes
audible from a distance. "Whence come these sounds?" said Vivaldi, "they strike
to my heart!"

"They should do so," replied the guard.

"Whence come they?" repeated Vivaldi, more impatiently, and shuddering.

"From the place of torture," said the official.

"O God! O God!" exclaimed Vivaldi, with a deep groan,

He passed with hasty steps the door of that terrible chamber, and the guard
did not attempt to stop him. The officials had brought him, in obedience to the
customary orders they had received, within hearing of those doleful sounds for
the purpose of impressing upon his mind the horrors of the punishment, with
which he was threatened, and of inducing him to confess without incurring them.

On the same evening, Vivaldi was visited, in his prison, by a man whom he had
never consciously seen before. He appeared to be between forty and fifty; was
of a grave and observant physiognomy, and of manners, which, though somewhat
austere, were not alarming. The account he gave of himself, and of his motive
for this visit, was curious. He said that he also was a prisoner in the
inquisition, but, as the ground of accusation against him was light, he had
been favored so far as to be allowed some degree of liberty within certain
bounds* that, having heard of Vivaldi's situation, he had asked and obtained
leave to converse with him, which he had done in compassion, and with a desire
of assuaging his sufferings, so far as an expression of sympathy and
commiseration might relieve them.

While he spoke, Vivaldi regarded him with deep attention, and the
improbability that those pretension should be true, did not escape him* but the
suspicion which they occasioned he prudently concealed. The stranger conversed
on various subjects. Vivaldi's answers were cautious and concise; but not even
long pauses of silence wearied the compassionate patience of his visitor. Among
other topics, he, at length, introduced that of religion.

"I have myself, been accused of heresy," said he, "and know how to pity others
in the same situation,"

"It is of heresy, then, that I am accused!" interrupted Vivaldi, "of heresy!"

"It availed me nothing that I asserted my innocence," continued the stranger,
without noticing Vivaldi's exclamation, "I was condemned to the torture. My
sufferings were too terrible to be endured! I confessed my offense -- "

"Pardon me," interrupted Vivaldi, "but allow me to observe, that since your
sufferings were so severe, yours against whom the ground of accusation was
light, what may be the punishment of those, whose offenses are more serious!"

The stranger was somewhat embarrassed. "My offense was slight," he continued,
without giving a full answer.

"Is it possible," said Vivaldi, again interrupting him, "that heresy can be
considered as a slight offense before the tribunal of the (...)."

"It was only of a slight degree of heresy," replied he visitor, reddening with
displeasure, "that I was ^^^ected, and -- "

"Does then the Inquisition allow of degrees in cresy?" said Vivaldi.

"I confessed my offense," added the stranger with ^louder emphasis, and the
consequence of this confesio^ was a remission of punishment. After a trifling
^enance I shall be dismissed, and probably, in a few (...), leave the prison.
Before I left it, I was (...) of administering some degree of consolation to a
(...) sufferer; if you have any friends whom you (...) to inform of your
situation, do not fear to confide (...) names and your message to me."

The latter part of the speech was delivered in a low ^oice, as if the stranger
feared to be overheard. Vivaldi remained silent, while he examined, with closer
attention, the countenance of his visitor. It was of he utmost importance to
him, that his family should ^e made acquainted with his situation; yet he knew
not exactly how to interpret, or to confide in this offer. Vivaldi had heard
that informers sometimes visited the prisoners, and, under the affectation of
kindness and sympathy, drew from them a confession of opinions, which were
afterward urged against them; and obtained discoveries relative to their
connections and friends, who were, by these insidious means, frequently
involved in their destruction. Vivaldi, conscious of his own innocence, had on
his first examination, acquainted the inquisitor with the names and residence
of his family; he had, therefore. nothing new to apprehend from revealing them
to this stranger; but he perceived that if it should be known he had attempted
to convey a message, however concise and harmless, the discovery would irritate
the jealous inquisitors against him, and might be urged as a new presumption of
his guilt. These considerations, together with the distrust which the
inconsistency of his visitor's assertions, and the occasional embarrassment of
his manner, had awakened, determined Vivaldi to resist the temptation now
offered to him; and the stranger, having received his thanks, reluctantly
withdrew, observing however, that should any unforeseen circumstance detain him
in the Inquisition longer than he had reason to expect, he should beg leave to
pay him another visit. In reply to this, Vivaldi only bowed, but he remarked,
that the stranger's countenance changed, and that some dark brooding appeared
to cloud his mind, as he quitted the chamber.

Several days elapsed, during which Vivaldi heard no more of his new
acquaintance. He was then summoned to another examination, from which he was
dismissed as before; and some weeks of solitude and of heavy uncertainty
succeeded, after which he wa^ a fourth time called up to the table of the Holy
Office. It was then surrounded by inquisitors, and a more tha^ usual solemnity
appeared in the proceedings,

As proofs of Vivaldi's innocence had not been detained, the suspicions of the
examiners, of course, were not removed; and, as he persisted in denying the
truth of the charge which he understood would be exhibited against him, and
refused to make any confession of crimes, it was ordered that he should, within
three hours, be put to the question. Till then, Vivaldi was once more dismissed
to his prison chamber. He resolution remained unshaken, but he could not lo^^
unmoved, upon the horrors which might be preparing for him. The interval of
expectation between the sentence and the accomplishment of this preliminary
punishment, was, indeed, dreadful. The seeming ignominy of his situation, and
his ignorance as to (...) degree of torture to he applied, overcame the
calmness he had before exhibited, and as he paced his (...) cold damps, which
hung on his forehead, betrayed the agony of his mind. It was not long, however,
that he suffered from a sense of ignominy; his better judgment showed him, that
innocence cannot suffer disgrace from any situation or circumstance, and he
once more resumed the courage and the firmness which belong to virtue.

It was about midnight, that Vivaldi heard steps approaching, and a murmer of
voices at the door of his cell. He understood these to ^e the persons come to
summon him to the torture. The door was unbarred, and two men, habited in
black, appeared at it. Without speaking, they advanced, and throwing over him a
singular* kind of mantle, led him from the chamber.

Along the galleries, and other avenues through which they passed, not any
person was seen, and, by the profound stillness that reigned, it seemed as if
death had already anticipated his work in these regions of horror, and had
condemned alike the tortured and the torturer.

They descended to the large hall, where Vivaldi had waited on the night of his
entrance, and thence through an avenue, and down a long flight of steps that
led to subterranean chambers. His conductors did not utter a syllable during
the whole progress; Vivaldi knew too well that questions would only subject him
to greater severity, and he asked none.

The doors, through which they passed, regularly opened at the touch of an iron
rod, carried by one of the officials, and without the appearance of any person.
The other man bore a torch, and the passages were so dimly lighted that the way
could scarcely have been found without one. They crossed what seemed to be a
burial vault, but the extent and obscurity of the place (...) not allow it to
be ascertained; and, having reached an iron door, they, stopped. One of the
officials struck upon it three times with the (...) but it did not open as the
others had done. (...) they waited, Vivaldi thought he heard, from wit^ low
intermitting sounds, as of persons in their last ^^tremity, but, though within
they appeared to (...) from a distance. His whole heart was chilled, not (...)
fear, for at that moment he did not remember (...) but with horror.

Having waited a considerable time, during which the official did not repeat
the signal, the door was partly opened by a person whom Vivaldi could not
distinguish in the gloom beyond, and with whom one of his conductors
communicated by signs; after whi^^ the door was closed.

Several minutes had elapsed, when tones of deep voices aroused the attention
of Vivaldi. They were loud and hoarse, and spoke in a language unknown to him.
At the sounds, the official immediately extinguished his torch. The voices drew
nearer, and, the door again unfolding, two figures stood before Vivaldi, which
shown by a glimmering light within struck him with astonishment and dismay.
The^ were clothed, like his conductors, in black, but in a different fashion,
for their habits were made close to the shape. Their faces were entirely
concealed beneath a very peculiar kind of cowl, which descended from the head
to the feet; and their eyes only were visible through small openings contrived
for the sight. It occured to Vivaldi that these men were torturers their
appearance was worthy of demons. Probably they were thus habited, that the
persons whom they afflicted might not know them; or, perhaps, it was only for
the purpose of striking terror upon the minds of the accused, and thus
compelling them to confess without further difficulty. Whatever motive might
have occasioned their horrisic appearance, and whatever was their office,
Vivaldi was delivered into their hands, and, in the same moment, heard the iron
door shut which enclosed him with them in a narrow passage, gloomily lighted by
a lamp suspended from the arched roof. They walked in silence on each side of
their prisoner, and came to a second door which admitted them instantly into
another passage. A third door, at a short distance; admitted them to a third
avenue, at the end of which, one of his mysterious guides struck upon a gate,
and they stopped. The uncertain sounds that Vivaldi had fancied he heard, were
now more audible, and he distinguished, with inexpressible horror, that they
were uttered by persons suffering.

The gate was at length opened by a figure habited like his conductors, and two
other doors of iron, placed very near each other, being also unlocked, Vivaldi
found himself in a spacious chamber, the walls of which were hung with black,
duskily lighted by lamps that gleamed in the lofty vault. Immediately on his
entrance, a strange sound ran along the walls, and echoed among other vaults,
that appeared, by the progress of the sound, to extend far beyond this.

It was not immediately that Vivaldi could sufficiently recollect himself to
observe any object before him; and even when he did so, the gloom of the place
prevented his ascertaining many appearances. Shadowy countenances and uncertain
forms seemed to flit through the dusk, and many instruments, the application of
which he did not comprehend, struck him with horrible suspicions. Still he
heard, at intervals, half suppressed groans, and was looking round to discover
the wretched people from whom they were extorted, when a voice from a remote
part of the chamber, called on him to advance.

The distance, and the obscurity of the spot whence the voice issued, had
prevented Vivaldi from noticing any person there, and he was now slowly
obeying, when on a second summons, his conductors seized his (...) and hurried
him forward.

In a remoet part of this extensive chamber, he perceived three persons seated
under a black canopy, (...) chairs raised several steps from the floor, and who
appeared to preside ^here in the office of either judges (...) examiners, or
directors of the punishments. Below, at a table, sat a secretary, over whom was
suspended, the only lamp that could enable him to commit to paper what should
occur during the examination. Vivaldi now understood, that the three persons
who composed the tribunal were the vicar general, or grand inquisitor, the
advocate of the exchequer, and an ordinary inquisitor, who was seated between
the other two and who appeared more eagerly to engage in the duties of his
cruel office. A portentious obscurity envelloped alike their persons and their
proceedings.

At some distance from the tribunal stood a large iron frame, which Vivaldi
conjectured to be the rack, and near it another, resembling, in shape, a coffin
but, happily, he could not distinguish through the remote obscurity, (...)
person undergoing actual suffering. In the vaults beyond, however, the
diabolical decrees of the inquisitors seemed to be fulfilling; for whenever a
distant door opened for a moment, sounds of lamentation issued forth, and men
whom he judges to be familiars, habited like those who stood beside him were
seen passing to and fro within.

Vivaldi almost believed himself in the infernal regions; the dismal aspect of
this place, the horrible preparation for punishment, and, above all, the
disposition and appearance of the persons that were ready to inflict it,
confirmed the resemblance. That any human being, should afflict a fellow being
who had never injured, or even offended him; that, unswayed by passion, he
should deliberately become the means of torturing him, appeared to Vivaldi
nearly incredible! But when he looked at the three persons who composed the
tribunal, and considered that they had not only voluntarily undertaken the
cruel office they fulfilled, but had probably long regarded it as the summit of
their ambition, his astonishment and indignation were unbounded.

The grand inquisitor having again called on Vivaldi by name, admonished him to
confess the truth, and avoid the suffering that awaited him.

As Vivaldi had, on former examinations, spoken the truth, which was not
believed, he had no chance of escaping present suffering, but by asserting
falsehood: in doing so, to avoid such monstrous injustice and cruelty he might,
^erhaps, have been justified, had it been certain, that such assertion could
affect himself alone; but since he knew that the consequence must extend to
others, and above all, believed that Ellena di Rosalba must be involv^d in it,
he did not hesitate for an instant, to dare whatever torture his firmness might
provoke. But even if morality could have forgiven falsehood in such
extraordinary circumstances as these, policy, after all, would have forbidden
it, since a discovery of the artifice would probably have led to the final
destruction of the accused person.

Of Ellena's situation he would now have asked, however desperate the question;
would again have asserted her innocence, and supplicated for compassion, even
to inquisitors, had he not perceived that, in doing so, he should only furnish
them with a more exquisite means of torturing him than any other they could
apply; for if, when all the terrors of his soul concerning her were understood,
they should threaten to increase her sufferings, as the punishment of what was
termed his obstinacy, they would, indeed, become masters of his integrity, as
well as of his person.

The tribunal again, and repeatedly, urged Vivaldi to confess himself guilty;
and the inquisitor, at length concluded, with saying that the judges were
innocent of whatever consequence might ensue from his ob^^^nacy; so that, if he
expired beneath his suffering himself only, not they, would have occasioned his
(...).

"I am innocent of the charges which I understand are urged against me; said
Vivald, with solemnity. "I repeat, that I am innocent! If to escape the horror
of these moments, I could be weak enough to declare myself guilty, not all your
racks could alter truth, and make me so, except in that assertion. The
consequence of your tortures, therefore, be upon your own heads!

While Vivaldi spoke, the vicar general listened with attention, and when he
had ceased to speak, appeared to meditate; but the inquisitor was irritated by
the boldness of his speech, instead of being convinced by the justness of his
representation and made a signal for the officers to prepare for the question.
While they were obeyiug, Vivaldi observed, notwithstanding the agitation he
suffered. a person cross the chamber, whom he immediately knew to be the same
that had passed him in the avenue of the inquisition on a formernight, and whom
he had then fancied to be the mysterious stranger of Paluzzi. Vivaldi now fixed
his eyes upon him, but his own peculiar situation prevented his feeling the
interest he had formerly suffered concerning him.

The figure, air, and stalk, of this person were striking, and so strongly
resembled those of the monk of Paluzzi, that Vivaldi had no longer a doubt as
to their identity. He pointed him out to one of the officials, and enquired who
he was. While he spoke, the stranger was passing forward, and, before any reply
was given, a door leading to the farther vaults shut him from veiw. Vivaldi,
however, repeated the inquiry which the official appeared unable to answer, and
a reproof from the tribunal reminded him that he must not ask questions there.
Vivaldi observed it was the grand Inquisitor who spoke, and that the manner
(...) the official immediately changed,

The familiars, who were the same that had conducted Vivaldi into the chamber,
having made ready the instrument of torture, approached him, and after taking
off his cloak and vest, bound him with strong cords. They threw over his head
the customary black garment, which entirely enveloped his figure, and prevented
his observing what was farther preparing. In this state of expectation, he was
again interrogated by the inquisitor.

"Was you ever in the church of the Spirito Santo at Naples?" said he.

"Yes," replied Vivaldi.

"Did you ever express there, a contempt for the Catholic faith?"

"Never," said Vivaldi.

"Neither by word or action?" continued the inquisitor.

"Never, by either!"

"Recollect yourself," added the inquisitor. "Did you never insult there, a
minister of our most holy church?"

Vivaldi was silent: he began to perceive the real nature of the charge which
was to be urged against him, and that it was too plausible to permit his escape
from the punishment, which is adjudged for heresy. Questions so direct and
minute had never been put to him here on his former examinations; they had been
reserved for a moment when it was believed he could not evade them; and the
real charge had been concealed from him, that he might not be prepared to elude
it.

"Answer," repeated the inquisitor. --

"Did you ever insult a minister of the Catholic faith, in the church of the
Spirito Santo, at Naples?"

"Did you not insult him while he was performing an act of holy penance?" said
another voice.

Vivaldi started, for he instantly recollected the wellknown tones of the monk
of Paluzzi. "Who asks the question?" demanded Vivaldi.

"It is you who are to answer here," resumed the inquisitor. "Answer to what I
have required."

"I have offended a minister of the church," replied Vivaldi, "but never could
intentionally insult our holy religion. You are not acquainted, fathers, with
the injuries that provoked -- "

"Enough!" interrupted the inquisitor; "speak to the question. Did you not, by
insult and menace, force a pious brother to leave unperformed, the act of
penance in which he had engaged himself? Did you not compel him to quit the
church, and fly for refuge to his convent?"

"No," replied Vivaldi. "It Is true, he left the church, and that in consequence
of my conduct there; but the consequence was not necessary; if he had only
replied to my enquiry, or promised to restore her, of whom he had treacherously
robbed me, he might have remained quietly in the church till this moment, had
that depended upon my forbearance."

"What!" said the vicar general, "would you have compelled him to speak, when
he was engaged in silent penance? You confess, that you occasioned him to leave
the church. That is enough."

"Where did you first see Ellena di Rosalba?" said the voice which had spoken
once before.

"I demand again, who gives the question," answered Vivaldi.

"Recollect yourself," said the inquisitor, "a criminal cannot make a demand."

"I do not perceive the connection between your admonition and your assertion,"
observed Vivaldi.

"You appear to be rather too much at your ease," said the inquisitor. "Answer
to the question which was last put to you, or the familiars shall do their
duty."

"Let the same person ask it," replied Vivaldi.

The question was repeated in the former voice,

"In the church of San L^renzo, at Naples," said Vivaldi, with a heavy sigh, "I
first beheld Ellena di Rosalba."

'Was she then professed?' asked the vicar general.

"She never accepted the veil," replied Vivaldi, "nor ever intended to do so."

"Where did she reside at that period?"

"She lived with a relative at Villa Altieri, and would yet reside there, had
not the ma^inations of a monk occasioned her to be torn from her home, and
confined in a convent, from which I had just assisted to release her when she
was again seized, and upon a charge most false and cruel. -- O reverend
fathers! I conjure, I supplicate -- " Vivaldi restrained himself, for he was
going to have betrayed, to the mercy of inquisitors, all the feelings of his
heart.

"The name of the monk? said the stranger, earnestly.

"If I mistake not," replied Vivaldi, "you are already acquainted with it. The
monk is called father Schedoni. He is of the Dominican convent of the Spirito
Sancto, in Naples, and the same who accuses me of having insulted him in the
church of that name."

"How did you know him for your accuser?" asked the same voice.

"Because he is my only enemy," replied Vivaldi.

"Your enemy!" observed the inquisitor; "a former deposition says, you were
unconscious of having one! You are inconsistent in your replies."

"You were warned not to visit Villa Altieri," said the unknown person. "Why
did you not profit by the warning?"

"I was warned by yourself," answered Vivaldi. "Now I know you well."

"By me!" said the stranger, in a solemn tone.

"By you!" repeated Vivaldi; "you who al^^ foretold the death of Signora
Bianchi; and you are that enemy -- that father Schedoni, by whom I am accused."

"Whence come these questions?" demanded the vicar general. "Who has been
authorized thus to interrogate the prisoner?"

No reply was made. A busy hum of voices from the tribunal succeeded the
silence. At length the murmuring subsided, and the monk's voice was heard again.

"I will declare thus much," it said, addressing Vivaldi; "I am not father
Schedoni."

The peculiar tone and emphasis, with which this was delivered, more than the
assertion itself, persuaded Vivaldi that the stranger spoke truth; and, though
he still recognized the voice of the monk of Paluzzi, he did not know it to be
that of Sche^oni. Vivaldi was astonished! He would have torn the veil from his
eyes, and once more viewed the mysterious stranger, had his hands been at
liberty. As it was, he could only conjure him to reveal his name, and the
motives for his former conduct.

"Who is come among us?" said the vicar general, in the voice of a person who
means to inspire in others the awe he himself suffers.

"Who is come amongst us?" he repeated in a louder tone. Still no answer was
returned; but again a confused murmur sounded from the tribunal, and a general
consternation seemed to prevail. No person spoke with sufficient pre-eminence
to be understood by Vivaldi; something extraordinary appeared to be passing,
and he awaited the issue with all the patience he could command. Soon after he
heard doors opened, and the noise of persons quitting the chamber. A deep
silence followed; but he was certain that the familiars were still beside him,
waiting to begin their work of torture.

After a considerable time had elapsed, Vivaldi heard footsteps advancing, and
a person give orders for his release, that he might be carried back to his cell.

When the veil was removed from his eyes, he perceived that the tribunal was
dissolved, and that the stranger was gone. The lamps were dying away, and the
chamber appeared more gloomily terrific than before.

The familiars conducted him to the spot at which they had received him; whence
the officers who had led him thither, guarded him to his prison. There,
stretched upon his bed of straw, in solitude and in darkness, he had leisure
enough to reflect upon what had passed, and to recollect with minute exactness
every former circumstance connected with the stranger. By comparing those with
the present, he endeavored to draw a more certain conclusion as to the
identity of this person, and his motives for the very extraordinary conduct he
had pursued, The first appearance of this stranger, among the ruins of Paluzzi,
when he had said that Vivaldi's steps were watched, and had cautioned him
against returning to the villa Altieri, was recalled to his mind. Vivaldi
re-considered, also, his second appearance on the same spot, and his second
warning; the circumstances, which had attended his own adventures within the
fortress; -- the monk's prediction of Bianchi's death, and his evil tidings
respecting Ellena, at the very hour when she had been seized and carried from
her home. The longer he considered these several instances, as they were now
connected in his mind, with the certainty of Schedoni's evil disposition
toward him, the more he was inclined to believe, notwithstanding the voice of
seeming truth which had just affirmed the contrary, that the unknown person was
Schedoni himself, and that he had been employed by the Marchesa, to prevent
Vivaldi's visits to the villa Altieri. Being thus an agent in the events of
which he had warned Vivaldi, he was too well enabled to predict them, Vivaldi
paused upon the remembrance of Signora Bianchi's death; he considered the
extraordinary and dubious circumstances that had attended it, and shuddered as
a new conjecture crossed his mind -- The thought was too dreadful to be
permitted, and he dismissed it instantly.

Of the conversation, however, which he had afterward held with the Confessor
in the Marchesa's cabinet, he recollected many particulars that served to renew
his doubts as to the identity of the Stranger; the behavior of Schedoni when
he was obliquely challenged for the monk of Paluzzi, still appeared that of a
man unconscious of disguise; and above all, Vivaldi was struck with the seeming
candor of his having pointed out a circumstance, which removed the probability
that the stranger was a brother of the Santa della Pianto.

Some particulars, also, of the stranger's conduct did not agree with what
might have been expected from Schedoni, even though the Confessor had really
been Vivaldi's enemy; a circumstance which the latter was no longer permitted
to doubt. Nor did those particular circumstances accord, as he was inclined to
believe, with the manner of a being of this world; and when Vivaldi considered
the suddenness and mystery, with which the stranger had always appeared and
retired, he felt disposed to adopt again one of his earliest conjectures, which
undoubtedly the horrors of his present abode disposed his imagination to admit,
as those of his former situation in the vaults of Paluzzi, together with a
youthful glow of curiosity concerning the mavelous, had before contributed to
impress them upon his mind.

He concluded his present reflections as he had began them -- in doubt and
perplexity; but at length found a respite from thought and from suffering in
sleep.

Midnight had been passed in the vaults of the Inquisition: but it was probably
not yet two o'clock, when he was imperfectly awakened by a sound, which he
fancied proceeded from within his chamber. He raised himself to discover what
had occasioned the noise; it was, however, impossible to discern any object,
for all was dark, but he listened for a return of the sound. The wind only was
heard moaning among the inner buildings of the prison, and Vivaldi concluded,
that his dream had mocked him with a mimic voice,

Satisfied with this conclusion, he again laid his head on his pillow of straw,
and soon sunk into a slumber. The subject of his waking thoughts still haunted
his imagination, and the stranger, whose voice he had this night recognized as
that of the monk of Paluzzi, appeared before him. Vivaldi, on perceiving the
figure of this unknown, felt, perhaps, nearly the same degrees of awe,
curiosity, and impatience that he would have suffered, had he beheld the
substance of the shadow. The monk, whose face was still shrouded, he thought
advanced, till, having come within a few paces of Vivaldi, he paused, and
lifting the awful cowl that had hitherto concealed him, disclosed -- not the
countenance of Schedoni, but one of which Vivaldi did not recollect ever having
seen before! It was not less interesting to curiosity, than striking to the
feelings. Vivaldi at the first glance shrunk back; -- something of that strange
and indescribable air, which we attach to the idea of a supernatural being,
prevailed over the features; and the intense and fiery eyes resembled those of
an evil spirit, rather than of a human character. He drew a poignard from
beneath a fold of his garment, and, as he displayed, it, pointed with a stern
frown to the spots which discolored the blade; Vivaldi perceived they were of
blood! He turned away his eyes in horror and, when he again looked round in his
dream the figure was gone.

A groan awakened him but what were his feelings, when on looking up, he
perceived the same figure standing before him! It was not, however, immediately
that he could convince himself the appearance was more than the phantom of his
dream, strongly impressed upon an alarmed fancy. The voice of the monk, for his
face was as usual concealed; recalled Vivaldi from his error; but his emotion
cannot easily be conceived, when the stranger, slowly lifting that mysterious
cowl, discovered to him the same awful countenance, which had characterized the
vision i^ his slumber. Unable to inquire the occasion of this appearance,
Vivaldi gazed in astonishment and terror, and did not immediately observe,
that, instead of a dagger, the monk held a lamp, which gleamed over every deep
furrow of his features, yet left their shadow^ markings to hint the passions
and the history of an extraordinary life.

"You are spared for this night," said the stranger, "but for tomorrow" -- he
paused.

"In the name of all that is most sacred," said Vivaldi, endeavoring to
recollect his thoughts, "who are you, what is your errand?"

"Ask no questions," replied the monk, solemnly; -- "but answer me."

Vivaldi was struck by the tone, with which he said this, and dared not to urge
the inquiry at the present moment.

"How long have you known father Schedoni?" continued the stranger, "Where did
you first meet?"

"I have known him about a year, as my mother's confessor," replied Vivaldi "I
first saw him from a corridor of the Vivaldi palace it was evening, and he was
returning from the Marchesa's closet."

"Are you certain as to this?" said the monk with peculiar emphasis. "It is of
consequence that you should be so."

"I am certain," repeated Vivaldi,

"It is strange," observed the monk, after a pause, "that a circumstance, which
must have appeared trivial to you at the moment, should have left so strong a
mark on your memory! In two years we have time to forget many things!" He
sighed as he spoke.

"I remember the circumstance," said Vivaldi, "because I was struck with his
appearance; the evening was far advanced -- it was dusk, and he came upon me
suddenly. His voice startled me; as he passed he said to himself -- "It is for
vespers." At the same time I heard the bell of the Spirito Santo.

"Do yo^ know who he is?" said the stranger, solemnly.

I "know only what he appears to be," replied Vivaldi.

"Did you never hear any report of his past life?"

"Never," answered Vivaldi.

"Never any thing extraordinary concerning him?" added the monk.

Vivaldi paused a moment; for he now recollected the obscure and imperfect
story, which Paulo had related while they were confined in the dungeon of
Paluzzi, respecting a confession made in the church of the Black Penitents; but
he could not presume to affirm that it concerned Schedoni. He remembered also
the monk's garments stained with blood, which he had discovered in the vaults
of that fort. The conduct of the mysterious being, who now stood before him,
with many other particulars of his own adventures there, passed like a vision
over his memory. His mind resembled the glass of a magician, on which the
apparitions of long buried events arise, and as they fleet away, point
portentiously to shapes half hid in the ^uskiness of futurity. An unusual dread
seized upon him; and a superstition, such as he had never before admitted in an
equal degree, usurped his judgment. He looked up to the shadowy countenance of
the stranger; and almost believed he beheld an inhabitant of the world of
spirits.

The monk spoke again, repeating in a severer tone, "Did you never hear any
thing extraordinary concerning father Schedoni?"

"Is it reasonable," said Vivaldi, recollecting his courage, "that I should
answer the questions, the minute questions of a person who refuses to tell me
even his name?

"My name is passed away -- it is no more remembered," replied the stranger,
turning from Vivaldi, -- "I leave you to your fate."

"What fate?" asked Vivaldi," and what is the purpose of this visit? I conjure
you in the tremendous name of the Inquisition, to say!"

"Yo! will know full soon; have mercy on yourself!"

"What fate?" repeated Vivaldi.

"Uurge me no further," said the stranger; "but answer to what I shall demand.
Schedoni -- "

"I have told you all that I certainly know concerning him," interrupted
Vivaldi, the rest is only conjecture."

"What is that conjecture? Does it relate to a confession made in the church of
the Black Penitents of the Santa Maria del Pianto?

"It does!" replied Vivaldi with surprise.

"What was that confession?"

"I know not," answered Vivaldi.

"Declare the truth," said the stranger, sternly.

"A confession," replied Vivaldi, "is sacred, and forever buried in the bosom
of the priest to whom it is made. How then, is it to be supposed that I can be
acquainted with the subject of this?"

"Did you never hear, that father Schedoni had been guilty of some great
crimes, which he endeavors to erase from his conscience by the severity of
penance?

"Never! said Vivaldi.

"Did you never hear that he had a wife -- a brother?"

"Never!"

"Nor the means he used -- no hint of -- murder, of" --

"The stranger paused, as if he wished Vivaldi to fill up his meaning. Vivaldi
was silent and aghast.

"You known nothing then, of Schedoni," resumed the monk after a deep pause --
"nothing of his past life?"

"Nothing, except what I have mentioned," replied Vivaldi.

"Then listen to what I shall unfold!" continued the monk, with solemnity. To
morrow night you will be again carried to the place of torture; you will be
taken to a chamber beyond that in which you were this night. You will there
witness many extraordinary things, of which you have not now any suspicion. Be
not dismayed; I shall be there, though, perhaps, not visible."

"Not visible!" exclaimed Vivaldi.

"Interrupt me not, but listen. -- When you are asked of father Schdoni, say --
that he has lived for fifteen years in the disguise of a monk, a member of the
Dominicans of the Sprito Santo, at Naples. When you are asked who he is, reply
-- Fernando Count di Bruon. You will be asked the motive for such disguise. In
reply to this, refer them to the Black Penitents of the Santa Maria del Pianto,
near that city; bid the inquisitors summon before their tribunal one father
Ansaldo di Rovalli, the grand penitentiary of the society, and command him to
divulge the crimes confessed to him in the year 1752, on the evening of the
twenty-fourth of April, which was then the vigil of Santo Marco in a
confessional of the Santo del Pianto,"

"It is probable he may have forgotten such confession, at this distance of
time," observed Vivaldi.

"Fear not but he will remember," replied the stranger.

"But will his conscience suffer him to betray the secrets of a confession?"
said Vivaldi.

"The tribunal command, and his conscience is absolved," answered the monk. "He
may not refuse to obey! You are further to direct your examiners to summon
father Schedoni, to answer for the crimes which Ansaldo shall reveal." The monk
paused, and seemed waiting the reply of Vivaldi, who after a momentary
consideration, said.

"How can I do all this, and upon the instigation of a stranger! Neither
conscience nor prudence will suffer me to assert what I cannot prove is true,
that I have reason to believe Schedoni is my bitter enemy, but I will not be
unjust even to him. I have no proof that he is the Count di Bruno, nor that he
is the perpetrator of the crimes you allude to, whatever those may be; and I
will not be made an instrument to summon any man before a tribunal, where
innocence is no protection from ignominy, and where suspicion alone may inflict
death."

"You doubt, then, the truth of what I assert?" said the monk, in a haughty
tone.

"Can I believe that of which I have no proof?" replied Vivaldi.

"Yes, there are cases which do not admit of proof; under your peculiar
circumstances, this is one of them; you can act only upon assertion. I attest,"
continued the monk, raising his hollow voice to a tone of singular solemnity,
"I attest the powers which are beyond this earth, to witness to the truth of
what I have delivered!"

As the stranger uttered this adjuration, Vivaldi observed, with emotion, the
extraordinary expression, of his eyes; Vivaldi's presence of mind, however, did
not forsake him, and, in the next moment, he said, "But who is he that thus
attests? It is upon the assertion of a stranger that I am to rely, in defect of
proof! It is a stranger who calls upon me to bring solemn charges against a
man, of whose guilt I know nothing!

"You are not required to bring charges; you are only to summon him who will."

"I should still assist in bringing forward accusations, which may be founded
in error," replied Vivaldi. "If you are convinced of their truth, why do you
not summon Ansaldo yourself?"

"I shall do more," said the monk.

"But why not summon also?" urged Vivaldi.

"I shall appear," said the stranger, with emphasis.

Vivaldi, though somewhat awed by the manner, which accompanied these words,
still urged his inquiries, "As a witness! said he.

"Aye, as a dreadful witness!" replied the monk.

"But may not a witness summon others before the tribunal of the inquisition?"
continued Vivaldi faulteringly.

"He may," said the stranger.

"Why when," observed Vivaldi," am I, a stranger to you, called upon to do that
which you could perform yourself?"

"Ask no further," said the monk, "but answer, whether you will deliver the
summons?"

"The charges which must follow," replied Vivaldi, "appears to be of a nature
too solemn to justify my promoting them. I resign the task to you."

"When I summon," said the stranger, "you shall obey!"

Vivaldi, again awed by his, manner, again justified his refusal, and concluded
with repeating his surprise, that he should be required to assist in his
mysterious affair, "Since I neither know you, father," he added, "nor the
Penitentiary Ansaldo, whom you bid me admonish to appear."

"You shall know me hereafter," said the stranger, frowningly; and he drew from
beneath his garment a dagger!

Vivaldi remembered his dream.

"Mark those spots," said the Monk.

Vivaldi looked, and beheld blood!

"This blood, added the stranger, pointing to the blade, "would have saved
yours! Here is some (...) of truth! Tomorrow night you will meet me in the
chambers of death!"

As he spoke, he turned away; and, before Vivaldi had recovered from his
consternation, the light disappeared. Vivaldi knew that the stranger had
quitte^ the prison; only by the silence which prevailed there.

He remained sunk in thought, till, at the dawn o^ day, the man on watch,
unfastened the door of his cell, and brought as usual a jug of water, and some
bread. Vivaldi inquired the name of the stranger who had visited him in the
night. The sentinel looked surprised, and Vivaldi repeated the question before
he could obtain an answer.

"I have been on guard since the first hour,* said the man, and no person, in
that time, has passed through this door!"

Vivaldi regarded the sentinel with attention, while he made this assertion,
and did not receive in his manner any consciousness of falsehood; yet he knew
not how to believe what he had affirmed. "Did you hear no noise, either?" said
Vivaldi. "Has all been silent during the night?"

"I have heard only the bell of San Dominico strike upon the hour," replied the
man, "and the watch word of the sentinels."

"This is incomprehensible!" exclaimed Vivaldi, "What! no footsteps, no voice?"

The man smiled contemptuously. "None, but of the sentinels," he replied.

"How can you be certain you heard only the sentinels, friend?" added Vivaldi.

"They speak only to pass the watch word, and the clash of their arms is heard
at the same time."

"But their footsteps! -- how are they distinguished from those of other
persons?"

"By the heaviness of their tread; our sandals are braced with iron. But why
these questions, Signor?"

"You have kept guard at the door of this chamber?" said Vivaldi.

"Yes, Signor."

"And you have not once heard, during the whole night, a voice from within it?"

"None, Signor."

"Fear nothing from discovery, friend; confess that you have slumbered."

"I had a comrade," replied the sentinel, angrily, "has he, too, slumbered! and
if he had, how could admittance be obtained without our keys?"

And those might easily have been procured, friend; if you were overcome with
sleep. You may rely upon my promise of secrecy."

"What! said the man, "have I kept guard for three years in the inquisition, to
be suspected, by a heretic, of neglecting my duty?"

"If you were suspected by an heretic" replied Vivaldi, "you ought to console
yourself by recollecting that his opinions are considered to be erroneous.

"We were watchful every minute of the night," said the sentinel, going.

"This is incomprehensible!" said Vivaldi. "By what means could the stranger
have entered my prison?"

"Signor, you still dream!" replied the sentinel, pausing. "No person has been
here."

"Still dream!" repeated Vivaldi, "how do you know that I have dream^ at all?"
His mind deeply affected by the extraordinary circumstances of the dream, and
the yet more extraordinary incident that had followed, Vivaldi gave a meaning
to the words of the sentinel, which did not belong to them.

"When people sleep, they are apt to dream," replied the man, dryly. "I
supposed you had slept, Signor."

"A person, habited* like a monk, came to me in the night," resumed Vivaldi,
"and he described the appearance of the stranger. The sentinel, while he
listened, became grave and thoughtful."

"Do you know any person resembling the one I have mentioned?" said Vivaldi.

"No!" replied the guard.

"Though you have not seen him enter my prison," continued Vivaldi, "you may,
perhaps, recollect such a person, as an inhabitant of the Inquisition."

"San Dominico forbid!"

Vivaldi, surprised at this exclamation, inquired the reason for it.

"I know him not," replied the sentinel, changing countenance, and abruptly
left the prison. Whatever consideration might occasion this sudden departure,
his assertion that he had been for three years a guard of the inquisition could
scarcely be credited, since he had held so long a dialogue with the prisoner,
and was, apparently, insensible of the danger he incurred by so doing.

CHAP. X.
-- "Is it not dead midnight?
Cold fearful drops stand on my trembling flesh.
What do I fear?
SHAKESPEARE.
AT about the same hour, as on the preceding night, Vivaldi heard persons
approaching his prison, and, the door unfolding, his former conductors
appeared. They threw over him the same mantle as before, and in addition, a
black veil, that completely (...) his eyes; after which, they led him from the
chamber. Vivaldi heard the door shut, on his departure, and the sentinels
followed his steps, as if their duty was finished, and he was to return thither
no more. At this moment, he remembered the words of the stranger, when he had
displayed the poignard, and Vivaldi apprehended the worst, from having thwarted
the designs of a person apparently so malignant; but he exulted in the
rectitude, which had preserved him from debasement; and, with the magnanimous
enthusiasm of virtue, he almost welcomed sufferings, which would prove the
firmness of his justice toward an enemy; for he determined to brave every
thing, rather than impute to Schedoni circumstances, the truth of which he
possessed no means of ascertaining.

While Vivaldi was conducted, as on the preceding night, through many
passages, he endeavored to discover, by their length, and the abruptness of
their turnings, whether they where the same he had traversed before. Suddenly,
one of his conductors cried 'Steps!' It was the first word Vivaldi had ever
heard him utter immediately perceived that the ground sunk, and, he began to
descend; as he did whch, he tried to count, the number of steps, that he might
form some judgment whether this was the flight he had passed before. When he
had reached the bottom, he inclined to believe it was not so; and the care
which had been observed i^ blinding him, seemed to indicate that he was going
(...) some new place.

He passed through several avenues, and then ascended; soon after which, he
again descended a very long staircase, such as he had not a remembrance of,
and they passed over a considerable extent of level ground. (...) the hollow
sounds which his steps returned, he judged that he was walking over vaults. The
footsteps of the sentinels who had followed from the cell were no longer heard,
and he seemed to be left with his conductor only. A second flight appeared to
lead him into subterraneous vaults, for he perceived the air change, and felt a
damp vapor wrapped round him. The menace of the monk, that he should meet him in
the chambers of death, frequently occurred to Vivaldi.

His conductors stopped in this vault, and seemed to hold a consultation, but
they spoke in such low accents, that their words were not distinguishable,
except a few unconnected ones, that hinted of more than Vivaldi could
comprehended. He was, at length, again led forward; and soon after, he heard
the heavy grating of hinges, and perceived that he was passing through several
doors, by the situation of which Vivaldi judge^ they were the same he had
entered the night before, and concluded, that he was going to the hall of the
tribunal.

His conductors stopped again, and Vivaldi heard the iron ^od strike three
times upon a door; immediately a strange voice spoke from within, and the door
unclosed. Vivaldi passed on, and imagined that he was admitted into a spacious
vault; for the air was freeer, and his steps sounded to a distance.

Presently a voice, as on the preceding night, summoned him to come forward,
and Vivaldi understood that he was again before the tribunal. It was the voice
of the inquisitor who had been his chief examiner.

"You, Vincentio di Vivaldi," it said, "answer to your name, and to the
questions which shall be (...) to you, without equivocation, on pain of the
torture."

As the monk had predicted, Vivaldi was asked what he knew of father Schedoni,
and, when he replied, as he had formerly done to his mysterious visitor, he was
told that he knew more than he acknowledged.

"I know no more," replied Vivaldi.

"You equivocate," said the inquisitor. "Declare what you have heard, and
remember that you formerly took an oath to that purpose."

Vivaldi was silent, till a tremendous voice from the tribunal commanded him to
respect his oath.

"I do respect it," said Vivaldi; and I conjure to believe that I also respect
truth, when I declare, that what I am going to relate, is a report to which I
give no confidence, and concerning even the probability of which I cannot
produce the smallest proof."

"Respect truth!" said another voice from the tribunal, and Vivaldi fancied he
distinguished the tones of the monk. He paused a moment, and the exortation was
repeated. Vivaldi then related what the stranger had said concerning the family
of Schedoni, and the disguise which the father had assumed in the convent of
the Spirito Santo; but forbore even to name the penitentiary Ansaldo, and any
circumstance connected with the extraordinary confession. Vivaldi concluded,
with again declaring, that he had not sufficient authority to justify a belief
in those reports.

"On what authority do you repeat them?" said the vicar-generally.

Vivaldi was silent.

"On what authority?" inquired the inquisitor. sternly.

Vivaldi, after a momentary hesitation, said, "what I am about to declare, holy
fathers, is so extraordinary -- "

"Tremble!" said a voice close to his ear, which he instantly knew to be the
monk's, and the suddenness of which electrified him. He was unable to conclude
the sentence.

"What is your authority for the reports?" demanded the inquisitor.

"It is unknown, even to myself!" answered Vivaldi.

"Do not equivocate!" said the vicar general.

"I solemnly protest," rejoined Vivaldi, "that I know not either the name or
the condition of my informer, and that I never even beheld his face, till the
period when he spoke of father Schedoni.

"Tremble!' repeated the same low, but emphatic voice in his ear. Vivaldi
started, and turning involuntary toward the sound, though his eyes could not
assist (...) curiosity.

"You did well to say, that you had something extraordinary to add," observed
the inquisitor. "(...) evident, also, that you expected something extraordinary
from your judges, since you supposed they would credit these assertions."

Vivaldi was too proud to attempt the justifying himself against so gross an
accusation, or to make any reply.

"Why do you not summon father Ansaldo?" said the voice. "Remember my words!"

Vivaldi, again awed by the voice, hesitated, for an instant, how to act, and
in that instant his courage returned.

"My infomer stands beside me!" said Vivaldi boldly; "I know his voice! Detain
him; it is of consequence"

"Whose voice?" demanded the inquisitor. No person spoke but myself!"

"Whose voice?" said the vicar general.

"The voice was close beside me," replied Vivaldi. "It spoke low but I knew it
well."

"This is either the cunning, or the frenzy of despair!" observed the
vicar general.

"Not any person is now beside you, except the familiars," said the inquisitor,
"and they wait to do their office, if you shall refuse to answer the questions
put to you."

"I persist in my assertion," replied Vivaldi; "and I supplicate that my eyes
may be unbound, that I may know my enemy."

The tribunal after a long private consultation, granted the request; the veil
was withdrawn, and Vivaldi perceived beside him only the familiars! Their
faces, as is usual, were concealed. It appeared that one of these torturers
must be the mysterious enemy, who pursued him, if, indeed, that enemy was an
inhabitant of the earth! and Vivaldi requested that they might be ordered to
uncover their features. He was sternly rebuked for so presumptuous a
requisition, and reminded of the inviolable law and faith, which the tribunal
had pledged, that persons appointed to their awful office should never be
exposed to the revenge of the criminal, whom it might be their duty to punish.

"Their duty!" exclaimed Vivaldi, thrown from his guard by strong indignation.
"And is faith held sacred with demons!"

Without awaiting the order of the tribunal, the familiars immediately covered
Vivaldi's face with the veil, and he felt himself in their grasp. He
endeavored, however, to disentangle his hands, and, at length, shook these men
from their hold, and again unveiled his eyes; but the familiars were instantly
ordered to replace the veil.

The inquisitor bade Vivaldi to recollect in whose presence he then was, and to
dread the punishment which his resistance had incurred, and which would be
inflicted without delay, unless he could give some instance, that might tend to
prove the truth of his late assertions.

"If you expect that I should say more," replied Vivaldi, "I claim, at least,
protection from the unbidden violence of the men who guard me. If they are
suffered, at their pleasure, to sport with the misery of their prisoner, I will
be inflexibly silent; and, since I must suffer, it shall be according to the
laws of the tribunal."

The vicar general, or, as he is called, the grand inquisitor, promised Vivaldi
the degree of protection he claimed, and demanded, at the same time, what were
the words he had just heard.

Vivaldi considered, that though justice bade him avoid accusing an enemy of
suspicious circumstances, concerning which he had no proof, yet, that neither
justice nor common sense required he should make a sacrafice of himself to the
dilemma in which he was placed: he, therefore, without further scruple,
acknowledged, that the voice had bidden him require of the tribunal to summon
one father Ansaldo, the grand penitentiary of the Santa del Pianto, near
Naples, and also father Schedoni, who was to answer to extraordinary charges,
which would be brought against him by Ansaldo. Vivaldi anxiously and repeatedly
declared, that he knew not the nature of the charges, nor that any just grounds
for them existed.

These assertions seemed to throw the tribunal into new perplexity. Vivaldi
heard their busy voices in low debate, which continued for a considerable time.
In this interval he had leisure to perceive the many improbabilities that
either of the familiars should be the stranger who so mysteriously haunted him;
and among these was the circumstance of his having resided so long at Naples

The tribunal, after some had time elapsed in consultation, proceeded on the
examination, and Vivaldi was asked what he knew of father Ansaldo. He
immediately replied, that Ansaldo was an utter stranger to him, and that he was
not even acquainted with a single person residing in the Santa del Pianto who
had any knowledge of the penitentiary.

"How!" said the grand inquisitor, "You forget that the person, who bade you
require of this tribunal to summon Ansaldo, has knowledge of him."

"Pardon me, I do not forget," replied Vivaldi; "and I request it may be
remembered that I am not acquainted with that person. If, therefore, he had
given me any account of Ansaldo, I could not have relied upon its
authenticity." Vivaldi again required of the tribunal to understand that he did
not summon Ansaldo, or any other person, before them, but had merely obeyed
their command to repeat what the stranger had said.

The tribunal acknowledged the justness of this injunction and exculpated him
from any harm that should be the consequence of the summons. But this assurance
of safety for himself was not sufficient to appease Vivaldi, who was alarmed
lest he should be the means of bringing an innocent person under suspicion. The
grand inquisitor again addressed him, after a general silence had been
commanded in the court.

"The account you have given of your informer," said he, "is so extraordinary,
that it would not deserve credit, but that you have discovered the utmost
reluctance to reveal the charges he gave you, from which it appears, that, on
your part, at least, the summons is not malicious. But are you certain that you
have not deluded yourself, and that the voice beside you was not an imaginary
one, conjured up by your agitated spirits?"

"I am certain," replied Vivaldi, with firmness*

"It is true," resumed the grand inquisitor, "that several persons were near
you, when you exclaimed, that you heard the voice of your informer; yet no
person heard it besides yourself!"

"Where are those persons now?" demanded Vivaldi.

"They are dispersed; alarmed at your accusation."

"If you will summon them," said Vivaldi, "and order, that my eyes may be
uncovered, I will point out to you, without hesitation, the person of my
informer, should he remain among them."

The tribunal commanded that they should appear, but new difficulties arose. It
was not remembered of whom the crowd consisted, a few individuals only were
recollected, and these were summoned.

Vivaldi, in solemn expectation, heard steps and the hum of voices gathering
round him, and impatiently awaited for the words that would restore him to
sight, and, perhaps release him from uncertainty. In a few moments he heard the
command given: the veil was once more removed from his eyes, and he was ordered
to point out the accuser. Vivaldi threw an hasty glance upon the surrounding
strangers.

"The lights burn dimly," said he, "I cannot distinguish these faces."

It was ordered that a lamp should be lowered from the roof, and that the
strangers should arrange themselves on either side of Vivaldi. When this was
done* and he glanced his eyes again upon the crowd, "He is not here!" said
Vivaldi; not one of these countenances resembles the monk of Paluzzi. Yet,
stay* who is he that stands in the shade behind those persons on the left? Bid
him lift his cowl!"

The crowd fell back, and the person, to whom Vivaldi had pointed, was left
alone within the circle.

"He is an officer of the Inquisition, "said a (...) near Vivaldi, "and he may
not be compelled to discover his face, unless by an express command from the
tribunal."

"I call upon the tribunal to command it!" said Vivaldi.

"Who calls!" exclaimed a voice, and Vivaldi recognized the tones of the monk,
but he knew not exactly whence they came.

"I Vincentio di Vivaldi," replied the prisoner, "I claim the privilege that
has been awarded me, and bid you unveil your countenance."

There was a pause of silence in the court, except that a dull murmur ran
through the tribunal* Meanwhile, the figure within the circle stood motionless,
and remained veiled.

"Spare him," said the man, who had before addressed Vivaldi; "he has reasons
for wishing to remain unknown, which you cannot conjecture. He is an officer of
the Inquisition, and not the person you apprehend.

"Perhaps I can conjecture his reasons," replied Vivaldi, who, raising his
voice, added, "I appeal to this tribunal, and command you, who stand alone
within the circle, you in black garments, to unveil your features!"

Immediately a loud voice issued from the tribunal, and said,

"We command you, in the name of the most holy Inquisition, to reveal yourself!"

The stranger trembled, but, without presuming to hesitate, uplifted his cowl.
Vivaldi's eyes were eagerly fixed upon him; but the action disclosed, not the
countenance of the monk? but an official whom ^e recollected to have seen once
before, though exact^y on what occasion he did not now remember.

"This is not my informer!" said Vivaldi, turning from him with deep
disappointment, while the stranger dropped the cowl, and the crowd closed upon
him. At the assertion of Vivaldi, the members of the tribunal looked upon each
other doubtingly, and were silent, till the grand inquisitor waving his hand,
as if to command attention, addressed Vivaldi.

"It appears, then, that you have formerly seen the face of your informer!"

"I have already declared so," replied Vivaldi.

The grand inquisitor demanded when, and where, he had seen it.

"Last night, and in my prison," answered Vivaldi.

"In your prison!" said the ordinary inquisitor, contemptuously, who had before
examined him, "and in your dreams, too, no doubt!"

"In your prison!" exclaimed several members of the lower tribunal.

"He dreams still!" observed an inquisitor. "Holy fathers! he abuses your
patience, and the frenzy of terror has deluded his credulity. We neglect the
moments."

"We must inquire farther into this," said another inquisitor. "Here is some
deception. If you, Vincentio di Vivaldi, have asserted a falsehood -- tremble!"

Whether Vivaldi's memory still vibrated with the voice of the monk, or that
the tone in which this same word was now pronounced, did resemble it, he almost
started, when the inquisitor had said tremble! and he demanded who spoke then.

"It is ourself," answered the inquisitor.

After a short conversation among the members of the tribunal, the grand
inquisitor gave orders that the sentinels, who had watched on the preceding
night at the prison door of Vivaldi, should be brought into the hall of
justice. The persons, who had been lately summoned into the chamber, were now
bidden to withdraw, and all further examination was suspended till the arrival
of the sentinels: Vivaldi heard only the low voices of the inquisitors, as they
conversed privately together, and he remained silent, thoughtful, and amazed.

When the sentinels appeared, and were asked who had entered the prison of
Vivaldi during the last night, they declared, without hesitation, or confusion;
that not any person had passed through the door after the hour when the
prisoner had returned from examination, till the following morning, when the
guard had carried in the usual allowance of bread and water. In this assertion,
they persisted, without the least equivocation, notwithstanding which they were
ordered into confinement, till the affair should be cleared up.

The doubts, however, which were admitted, as to the integrity of these men,
did not contribute to dissipate those, which had prevailed over the opposite
side of the question. On the contrary, the suspicions of the tribunal,
augmenting with their perplexity, seemed to fluctuate equally over every point
of the subject before them, till, instead of throwing any light upon the truth,
they only served to involve the whole in deeper obscurity. More doubtful than
before of the honesty of Vivaldi's extraordinary assertions, the inquisitor
informed him, that if, after further inquiry into this affair, it should appear
he had been trifling with the credulity of his judges, he would be severely
punished for his audacity; but that on the other hand, should there be reason
to believe that the sentinels had failed in their duty, and that some person
had entered his prison during the night, the tribunal would proceed in a
different manner.

Vivaldi, perceiving that, to be believed, it was necessary he should be more
circumstantial, described, with exactness, the person and appearance of the
monk, without, however, mentioning the poignard which had been exhibited. A
profound silence reigned in the chamber while he spoke; it seemed a silence not
merely of attention, but of astonishment. Vivaldi himself was awed, and, when
he had concluded, almost expected to hear the voice of the monk uttering
defiance, or threatening vengeance; but all remained hushed, till the
inquisitor, who had first examined him, said in a solemn tone.

"We have listened with attention to what you have delivered, and will give the
case a full inquiry. Some points, on which you have touched, excite our
amazement, and call for particular regard. Retire whence you came -- and sleep
this night without fear; you will soon know more."

Vivaldi was immediately led from the chamber, and still blindfolded,
re-conducted to the prison to which he had supposed it was designed he should
return no more. When the veil was withdrawn, he perceived that his guard was
changed.

Again left to the silence of his cell, he reviewed all that had passed in the
chamber of justice; the questions which had been put to him; the different
manners of the inquisitors; the occurrence of the monk's voice; and the
similarity, which he had fancied he perceived between it and that of an
inquisitor, when the latter pronounced the word tremble; but the consideration
of all these circumstances did not in any degree relieve him from his
perplexity. Sometimes he was inclined to think that the monk was an inquisitor,
and the voice had more than once appeared to proceed from the tribunal; but he
remembered, also, that, more than once, it had spoken close to his ear, and he
knew that a member of this tribu^al might not leave his station during the
examination of a prisoner, and that, even if he had dared to do so, his
singular dress would have pointed him out to notice, and consequently to
suspicion, at the moment when Vivaldi had exclaimed, that he heard the voice of
his informer.

Vivaldi, however, could not avoid meditating, with surprise, on the last words
which the inquisitor, who had been his chief examiner, had addressed to him,
when he was dismissed from before the tribunal. These were the more surprising,
because they were the first from him that had in any degree indicated a wish to
console or quiet the alarm of the prisoner; and Vivaldi even fancied that they
betrayed some foreknowledge that he would not be disturbed this night by the
presence of his awful visitor. He would entirely have ceased to apprehend,
though not to expect, had he been allowed a light, and any weapon of defense,
if, in truth, the stranger was of a nature to fear a weapon; but, to be thus
exposed to the designs of a mysterious and powerful being, whom he was
conscious of having offended, to sustain such a situation, without fuffering
anxiety, required somewhat more than courage, or less than reason.

CHAP. XI.
" -- It came over my soul as does the thunder,
While distant yet, with an unexpected burst,
It threats the trembling ear. Now to the trial,"
CARACTACUS.
IN consequence of what had transpired at the last examination of Vivaldi, the
grand penitentiary Ansaldo, together with the father Schedoni, were cited to
appear before the table of the holy office.

Schedoni was arrested on his way to Rome, whither he was going privately to
make further efforts for the liberation of Vivaldi, whose release he had found
it more difficult to effect, than his imprisonment; the person upon whose
assistance the Confessor relied in the first instance, having boasted of more
influence than he possessed, or perhaps thought it prudent to exert. Schedoni
had been the more anxious to procure an immediate release for Vivaldi, lest a
report of his situation should reach his family, notwithstanding the
precautions, which are usually employed to throw an impenetrable shroud over
the prisoners of this dreadful tribunal, and bury them for ever from the
knowledge of their friends. Such premature discovery of Vivaldi's
circumstances, Schedoni apprehended might include also a discovery of the
persecutor, and draw down upon himself the abhorrence and the vengeance of a
family, whom it was now, more than ever, his wish and his interest to
conciliate. It was still his intention, that the nuptials of Vivaldi and Ellena
should be privately solemnized immediately on the release of the prisoner, who,
even if he had reason to suspect Schedoni for his late persecutor, would then
be interested in concealing his suspicions for ever, and from whom therefore,
no evil was to be apprehended.

How little did Vivaldi foresee, that in repeating to ^he tribunal the
stranger's summons of father Schedoni, he was deferring, or, perhaps, wholly
preventing his own marriage with Ellena di Rosalba! How little, ^lso, did he
apprehend what would be the further consequence of a disclosure, which the
peculiar circumstances of his situation had hardly permitted him to withhold,
though, could he have understood the probable event of it, he would have braved
all the terrors of the tribunal, and death itself, rather than incur the
remorse of having promoted it.

The motive for his arrestation was concealed from Schedoni, who had not the
remotest suspicion of its nature, but attributed the arrest, to a discovery,
which the tribunal had made of his being the accuser of Vivaldi. This
disclosure he attributed to his own imprudence, in having stated as an instance
of Vivaldi's contempt for the Catholic faith, that he had insulted a priest
while doing penance in the church of the spirito Santo. But by what art the
tribunal had discovered that he was the priest alluded to, and the author of
the accusation, Schedoni could by no mean conjecture. He was willing to believe
that this arrest was only for the purpose of obtaining proof of Vivaldi's
guilt; and the Confessor knew that he could so conduct himself in evidence, as
in all probability to exculpate the prisoner, from whom, when he should explain
himself, no resentment on account of his former conduct was to be apprehended.
Yet Schedoni was not perfectly at ease; for it was possible that a knowledge of
Vivaldi's situation, and of the author of it, had reached his family, and had
produced his own arrest. On this head, however, his fears were not powerful;
since, the longer he dwelt upon the subject, the more improbable it appeared
that such a disclosure, at least so far as it related to himself, could have
been affected.

Vivaldi, from the night of his late examination, (...) not called upon, till
Schedoni and father Ansaldo appeared together in the (...) of the tribunal. The
two latter had already been separately examined, and Ansaldo had privately
stated the particulars of the (...) he had received on the vigil of the Santo
Marco in the year 1752, for which disclosure he had received formal absolution.
What had passed at that examination does not appear, but on this his second
interrogation, he was required to repeat the subject and the circumstances of
the confession. This was probably with a veiw of observing its effect upon
Schedoni and on Vivaldi, which would direct the opinion of the tribunal ^s to
the guilt of the confessor, and the veracity of the young prisoner.

On this night a very exact inquiry was made, concerning every person, who had
obtained admission into the hall of justice; such officials as were not
immediately necessary to assist in the ceremonies of the tribunal were
excluded, together with every other person belonging to the Inquisition not
material to the evidence, or to the judges. When this scrutiny was over, the
prisoners were brought in, and their conductors ordered to withdraw. A silence
of some moments prevailed in the hall; and, however different might be the
reflections of the several prisoners, the degree of anxious expectation was in
each, probably, nearly the same.

The grand-vicar having spoken a few words in private to a person on his left
hand, an inquisitor rose.

"If any person in this court," said he, "is known by the name of father
Schedoni, belonging to the Dominican society of the Spirito Santo at Naples,
let him appear!"

Schedoni answered the summons. He came forward with a firm step, and having
crossed himself, and bowed to the tribunal, awaited in silence its commands.

The penitentiary Ansaldo was next called upon. Vivaldi observed that he
faultered as he advanced: and that ^is obeisance to the tribunal was more
profound than Schedoni's had been. Vivaldi himself was then summoned; his air
was calm and dignified, and his countenance expressed the solemn energy of his
feelings, but nothing of dejection.

Schedoni and Ansaldo were now, for the first time, confronted. Whatever might
be the feelings of Schedoni on beholding the penitentiary of the Santa del
Pianto, he effectually concealed them.

The grand-vicar himself opened the examination. "you father Schedoni, of the
Spirito Santo," he said, "answer and say whether the person who stands before
you, bearing the title of grand penitentiary of the order of the Black
Penitents, and presiding over the convent of the Santa Maria del Pianto at
Naples, is known to you."

To this requisition, Schedoni replied with firmness in the negative.

"You have never, to your knowledge, seen him before this hour?"

"Never!" said Schedoni.

"Let the oath be administered*" added the grand-vicar. Schedoni having
accepted it; the same questions were put to Ansaldo concerning the Confessor,
when to the astonishment of Vivaldi and of the greater part of the court, the
penitentiary denied all knowledge of Schedoni. His negative was given, however,
in a less decisive manner than that of the Confessor, and when the usual oath
was offered, Ansaldo declined to accept it.

Vivaldi was next called upon to identify Schedoni: he declared, that the
person who was then pointed out to him, he had never known by any other
denomination than that of father Schedoni; and that he had always understood
him to be a monk of the Spirito Santo; but Vivaldi was at the same time careful
to repeat, that he knew nothing further relative to his life.

Schedoni was somewhat surprised at this apparent candor of Vivaldi toward
himself, but accustomed to impute an evil motive to all conduct, which he could
not clearly comprehend, he did not scruple to believe, that some latent
mischief was directed against him in this seemingly honest declaration.

After ^ome further preliminary forms had passed, Ansaldo was ordered to relate
the particulars of the confession, which had been made to him on the eve of the
Santo Marco. It must be remembered, that this was still what is called in the
Inquisition, a private examination.

After he had taken the customary oaths to relate neither more nor less than
the truth of what had passed before him, Ansaldo's depositions were written
down nearly in the following words; to which Vivaldi listened with almost
trembling attention, for besides the curiosity which some previous
circumstances had excited respecting them, he believed that his own fate in a
great measure depended upon a discovery of the fact to which they led. What, if
he had surmised how much! and that the person, whom he had been in some degree
instrumental in citing before this tremendous tribunal was the father of his
Ellena di Rosalba!

Ansaldo having again answered to his name and titles, gave his deposition as
follows:

"It was on the eve of the twenty-fifth of April, and in the year 1752, that as
I sat, according to my custom, in the confessional of San Marco, I was alarmed
by deep groans, which came from the box on my left hand."

Vivaldi observed, that the date now mentioned agreed with that recorded by the
stranger, and he was thus prepared to believe what might follow, and to give
his confidence to this extraordinary and unseen personage.

Ansaldo continued, "I was more alarmed by these sounds, because I had not been
prepared for them; I knew not that any person was in the confessional nor had
observed any one pass along the aisle -- but the duskiness of the hour may
account for my having failed to do so; it was after sunset, and the tapers at
the shrine of San Antonio as yet burned feebly in the twilight."

"Be brief, holy father," said the inquisitor, who had formerly been most
active in examining Vivaldi; speak closely to the point."

"The groans would sometimes cease," resumed Ansaldo, "and long pauses of
silence follow; they were those of a soul in agony, struggling with the
consciousness of guilt, yet wanting resolution to confess it. I tried to
encourage the penitent, and held forth every hope of mercy and forgiveness
which my duty would allow, but for a considerable time without effect; -- the
enormity of the sin seemed too big for utterance, yet the penitent appeared
equally unable to endure the concealment of it. His heart was bursting with the
secret, and required the comfort of absolution, even at the price of the
severest penance."

"Facts!" said the inquisitor; "these are only surmises."

"Facts will come too soon?" replied Ansaldo, and bowed his head: "the mention
of them will petrify you, holy fathers! as they did me, though not for the same
reasons. While I endeavored to encourage the penitent, and assured him, that
absolution should follow the acknowledgement of his crimes, however heinous
those crimes might be if accompanied by sincere repentance, he more than once
began his confe^sion, and abruptly dropped it. Once, indeed, he quitted the
confessional; his agitated spirit required liberty; and it was then, as he
walked with perturbed steps along the aisle, that I first observed his figure.
He was in the habit of a white friar, and as nearly as I can recollect, was
about the stature of him, the father, Schedoni, who now stands before me."

As Ansaldo delivered these words, the attention of the whole trib^nal was
turned upon Schedoni, who stood unmoved, and with his eyes bent toward the
ground.

"His face." continued the penitentiary, "I did not see; he was, with good
reason, careful to conceal it; other resemblance, therefore, than the stature,
(...) cannot point out between them. The voice, indeed, the voice of the
penitent, I think I shall never forget; I should know it again at any distance
of time."

"Has it not struck your ear, since you came within these walls!" said a member
of the tribunal.

"Of that hereafter," observed, the inquisitor, "you wander from the point
father."

The vicar general remarked, that the circumstances just related were
important, and ought not to be passed over as irrevalent. The inquisitor
submitted to this opinion, but objected that they were not pertinent to the
moment; and Ansaldo was again bidden to repeat what he had heard at confession.

"When the stranger returned to the steps of the confessional, he had acquired
sufficient resolution to go through with the task he had imposed upon himself,
and a thrilling voice spoke through the grate the facts I am about to relate."

father Ansaldo paused, and was somewhat agitated; he seemed endeavoring to
recollect courage to go through with what he had begun During this pause, the
silence of expectation rapt the court, and the eyes of the tribunal were
directed alternately to Ansaldo and Schedoni, who certainly required something
more than human firmness to support unmoved the severe scrutiny, and the yet
severer suspicions, to which he stood exposed. Whether, however, it was the
fortitude of conscious innocence, or the hardihood of atrocious vice, that
protected the Confessor, he certainly did not betray any emotion. Vivaldi, who
had unceasingly observed him from the commencement of the depositions, felt
inclined to believe that he was not the penitent described. Ansaldo, having, at
length, recollected himself, proceeded as follows:

"I have been through life," said the penitent, the ^lave of my passions, and
they have led me into horriexcesses. I had once a brother!" -- He stopped, and
deep groans again told the agony of his soul; at length, he added, -- "that
brother had a wife." -- Now listen, father, and say, whether guilt like mine
may hope for absolution? She was beautiful -- I loved her: she was virtuous,
and I despaired. You, father,' he continued in a frightful tone, 'never knew
the fury of despair! It overcame or communicated its own force to every other
passion of my soul, and I sought to release myself from its tortures by any
means." My brother died!' -- The penitent paused again,' continued Ansaldo, 'I
trembled while I listened; my lips were sealed. At length, I bade him proceed,
and he spoke as follows. -- 'My brother died a distance from home.' -- Again
the penitent paused, and the silence continued so long, that I thought it
proper to enquire of what disorder the brother had expired, 'Father, I was his
murderer?' said the penitent, in a voice which I never can forget; it sunk into
my heart."

Ansaldo appeared affected by the remembrance, and was for a moment silent. At
the last words Vivaldi had particularly noticed Schedoni, that he might judge
by their effect upon him whether he was guilty; but he remained in his former
attitude, and his eyes were still fixed upon the ground.

"Proceed, father!" said the inquisitor, "what was your reply to this
confession?"

"I was silent," said Ansaldo; "but at length I (...) the penitent go on. 'I
contrived, said he, that my brother should die at a distance from home, and I
so conducted the affair that his widow never suspected the cause of his death.
It was not till long, after the usual time of mourning had expired, that I
ventured to solicit her hand: but she had not yet forgotten my brother, and she
rejected me. My passion would no longer be trifled with. I caused her to be
carried from her house, and she was afterward willing to retrieve her honor
by the marriage vow. I had sacrified my conscience, without having found
happiness; -- she did not even condescend to conceal her disdain. Mortified,
exasperated by her conduct, I began to suspect that some other emotion than
resentment occasioned this disdain; and last of all, jealousy -- jealousy came
to crown my misery -- to light up all my passions into madness!"

"The penitent," added Ansaldo, "appeared, by the manner in which he uttered
this, to be nearly frantic at the moment, and convulsive sobs soon stifled his
words* when he resumed his confession, he said, "I soon found an object for my
jealousy. Among the few persons who visited us in the retirement of our country
residence, was a gentleman, who, I fancied, loved my wife I fancied too, that
whenever he appeared, an air of particular satisfaction was visible on her
countenance.' She seemed to have pleasure in conversing with, and showing him
distinction. I even sometimes thought, she had pride in displaying to me the
preference she entertained for him, and that an air of triumph, and even of
scorn, was addressed to me, whenever she mentioned his name. Perhaps I mistook
resentment for love, and she only wished to punish me, by exciting my jealousy.
Fatal error! she punished herself also.

"Be less circumstantial, father," said the inquisitor.

Ansaldo bowed his head, and continued, "One evening" continued the penitent,
"that I returned home unexpectedly, I was told that a visitor was with my wife!
As I approached the apartment where they sat, I heard the voice of Sacchi; it
seemed mournful and supplicating. I stopped to listen, and distinguished though
to fire me with vengeance. I restrained myself, however, so far as to step
softly to a lattice that opened from the passage, and overlooked the apartment.
The traitor was on his knee before her. Whether she had heard my step, or
observed my face, through the high lattice, or that she resented his conduct, I
know not, but she rose immediately from her chair. I did not pause to question
her motive; but, seizing my stiletto, I rushed into the room, with intent to
strike it to the villain's heart. The supposed assassin of my honor escaped
into the garden, and was heard of no more" -- But your wife? said I. "Her bosom
receives the poignard!" replied the penitent."

Ansaldo's voice faultered, as he repeated this part of the confession, and he
was utterly unable to proceed. The tribunal, observing his condition, allowed
him a chair, and, after a struggle of some moments, he added, "Think, holy
father, O think! what must have been my feelings at that instant! I was myself
the lover of the woman, whom he confessed himself to have murdered."

"Was she innocent?" said a voice; and Vivaldi, whose attention had latterly
been fixed upon Ansaldo, now, on looking at Schedoni, perceived that it was he
who had spoken. At the sound of his voice, the penitentiary turned instantly
toward him. There was a pause of a general silence, during which Ansaldo's
eyes were earnestly fixed upon the accused. At length, he spoke, "She was
innocent!" He replied, with solemn emphasis, "She was most virtuous!"

Schedoni had shrunk back within himself; he asked no further. A murmur ran
through the tribunal, which rose by degrees, till it broke forth into audible
conversation; at length, the secretary was directed (...) note the question of
Schedoni.

"Was that the voice of the penitent, which you have just heard?" demanded the
inquisitor of Ansaldo. "Remember, you have said that you should know it again!"

"I think it was," replied Ansaldo; "but I cannot swear to that."

"What infirmity of judgment is this!" said the same inquisitor, who himself
was seldom troubled with the modesty of doubt, upon any subject. Ansaldo was
bidden to resume the narrative.

"On this discovery of the murderer," said the penitentiary, "I quitted the
confessional, and my senses forsook me before I could deliver orders for the
detection of the assassin. When I recovered it was too late; he had escaped!
From that hour to the present, I have never seen him, nor dare I affirm that
the person now before me is he."

The inquisitor was about to speak, but the grand-vicar waved his hand, as a
signal for attention, and addressing Ansaldo, said, "Although you may be
unacquainted with Schedoni, the monk of the Spirito Santo reverend father, can
you not recollect the person of the Count di Bruno, your former friend?"

Ansaldo again looked at Schedoni, with a scrutinizing eye* he fixed it long;
but the countenance of Schedoni suffered no change.

"No!" said the penitentiary, at length, "I dare not take upon me to assert
that this is the Count di Bruno. If it is he, years have wrought deeply on his
features. That the penitent was the Count di Bruno I have proof; he mentioned
my name as his visitor, and particular circumstances known only to the Count
and myself; but that father Schedoni was the penitent, I repeat it, I dare not
affirm."

"But that dare I!" said another voice; and Vivaldi, turning toward it, beheld
the mysterious stranger advancing, his cowl now thrown back, and an air of
(...) overspreading very terrific features. Schedoni, in the instant that he
perceived him, seemed agitated; his countenance, for the first time, suffered
some change.

The tribunal was profoundly silent, but surprise, and a kind of restless
expectation, marked every brow. Vivaldi was about to exclaim, "That is my
informer!" when the voice of the stranger checked him.

"Do thou know me?" said he sternly, to Schedoni, and his attitude became
fixed.

Schedoni gave no reply.

"Do thou know me?" repeated the accuser, in a steady solemn voice.

"Know thee?" uttered Schedoni, faintly,

"Do thou know this?" cried the stranger, raising his voice, as he drew from
his garment what appeared to be a dagger. "Do thou know these indelible
stains?" said he, lifting the poignard, and with an outstretched arm, pointing
it toward Schedoni.

The confessor turned away his face; it seemed as if his heart sickened.

"With this dagger was thy brother slain!" said the terrible stranger. "Shall I
declare myself?"

Schedoni's courage forsook him, and he sunk against a pillar of the hall for
support.

The Consternation was now general: the extraordinary appearance and conduct of
the stranger seemed to strike the greater part of the tribunal, a tribunal of
the inquisition itself! with dismay. Several of the members rose from their
seats; others called aloud for the officials, who kept guard at the doors of
the hall, and inquired who had admitted the stranger, while the vicar general
and a few inquisitors conversed privately together, during which they
frequently looked (...) the stranger and at Schedoni, as if they were the
subjects of the discourse. Meanwhile the Monk remained with the dagger in his
grasp, and his eyes fixed on the Confessor, whose face was still averted; and
who yet supported himself against the pillar.

At length, the vicar general called upon the members who had risen to return
to their seats, and ordered that the officials should withdraw to their posts.

"Holy brethern!" said the vicar, we recommend to you, at this important hour,
silence and deliberation. Let the examination of the accused proceed; and
hereafter let us inquire as to the admittance of the accuser. For the present,
suffer him also to have hearing and the father Schedoni to reply.

"We suffer him!" answered the tribunal, and bowed their heads.

Vivaldi, who, during the tumult, had ineffectually endeavored to make himself
heard, now profited by the pause which followed the assent of the inquisitors,
to claim attention: but the instant he spoke, several members impatiently bade
that the examination should proceed, and the grand-vicar was again obliged to
command silence, before the request of Vivaldi could be understood. Permission
to speak being granted him, "That person," said he, pointing to the stranger,
"is the same who visited me in my prison; and the dagger the same he now
displays! It was he, who commanded me to summon the penitentiary Ansaldo, and
the father Schedoni. I have acquitted myself, and have nothing further to do in
this struggle."

The tribunal was again agitated, and the murmurs of private conversation again
prevailed.

Meanwhile Schedoni appeared to have recovered some degree of self-command; he
raised himself, and ^owing to the tribunal, seemed preparing to speak; but
waited till the confusion of sound that filled the hall should subside. At
length he could be heard, and, addressing the tribunal, he said,

"Holy fathers! the stranger who is now before you is an impostor! I will prove
that my accuser was once my friend; -- you may perceive how much the discovery
of his perfidy affects me. The charge (...) brings is most false and malicious!"

" Once thy friend!" replied the stranger, with peculiar emphasis, "and what
has made me thy enemy! View these spots," he continued, pointing to the blade
of the poignard, "are they also false and malicious? are they not, on the
contrary, reflected on thy conscience!"

"I know them not," replied Schedoni, "my conscience is unstained."

"A brother's blood has stained it!" said the stranger in a hollow voice.

Vivaldi, whose attention was now fixed upon Schedoni, observed a lived hue
overspread his complexion, and that his eyes were averted from this
extraordinary person with horror; the spectre of his deceased brother could
scarcely have called forth a stronger expression. It was not immediately that
he could command his voice; when he could, he again appealed to the tribunal,

"Holy fathers!" said he, suffer me to defend myself."

"Holy fathers!" said the accuser, with solemnity, "hear! hear what I shall
unfold!"

Schedoni, who seemed to speak by a strong effort only, again addressed the
inquisitors; "I will prove," said he, "that this evidence is not of a nature to
be trusted."

"I will bring such proof to the contrary, said the monk "And here," pointing
to Ansaldo, "is sufficient testimony, that the Count di Bruno did confess
himself guilty of murder."

The court commanded silence, and upon the (...) of the stranger to Ansaldo,
the penitentiary was asked whether he knew him. He replied that he did not,

"Recollect yourself," said the grand inquisitor:* it is of the utmost
consequence that you should be correct on this point."

The penitentiary observed the stranger with deep attention, and then repeated
his assertion.

"Have you never seen him before?" said an inquisitor.

"Never, to my knowledge!" replid Ansaldo.

The inquisitors looked upon each other in silence.

"He speaks the truth," said the stranger.

This extraordinary fact did not fail to strike the tribunal, and to astonish
Vivaldi. Since the accuser confirmed it, Vivaldi was at a loss to understand
the means by which he could have become acquainted with the guilt of Schedoni,
who it was not to be supposed, would have acknowledged crimes of such magnitude
as those contained in the accusation, to any person, except, indeed, to his
confessor, and this confessor, it appeared, was so far from having betrayed his
trust to the accuser, that he did not even know him. Vivaldi was no less
perplexed as what would be the nature of the testimony with which the accuser
designed to support his charges; but the pause of general amazement, which had
permitted Vivaldi these considerations, was now at an end: the tribunal resumed
the examination, and the grand inquisitor called aloud.

"You, Vincentio di Vivaldi, answer with exactness to the questions that shall
be put to you."

He was then asked some questions relative to the person who had visited him in
prison. In his answers, Vivaldi was clear and concise, constantly affirming,
that the stranger was the same who now accused Schedoni.

When the accuser was interogated, he acknowledged, without hesitation, that
Vivaldi had spoken the truth. He was then asked his motive for that
extraordinary visit.

"It was," replied the monk, "that a murderer might be brought to justice."

"This," observed the grand inquisitor, "might have been accomplished by fair
and open accusation. If you had known the charge to be just, it is probable
that you would have appealed directly to this tribunal, instead of endeavoring
insiduously to obtain an influence over the mind of a prisoner, and urging him
to become the instrument of bringing the accused to punishment."

"Yet I have not shrunk from discovery," observed the stranger, calmly; I have
voluntarily appeared,"

At these words, Schedoni seemed again much agitated, and even drew his hood
over his eyes.

"That is just," said the grand inquisitor, addressing the stranger: -- but you
have neither declared your name, or whence you come!"

To this remark the monk made no reply; but Schedoni, with reviving spirit,
urged the circumstance, in evidence of the malignity and falsehood of the
accuse^.

"Will thou compel me to reveal my proof?" said the stranger: "Dare thou to
do so?"

"Why should I fear thee?" answered Schedoni.

"Ask thy conscience, said the stranger, with a terible frown.

The tribunal again suspended the examination, and consulted in private
together.

To the last exhortation of the monk, Schedoni was silent. Vivaldi observed,
that during this short dialogue, the Confessor had never once turned his eyes
toward the stranger, but apparently avoided him, as an object too affecting to
be looked upon. He judged, from this circumstance, and from some other
appearances in his conduct, that Schedoni was guilty* yet the consciousness of
guilt alone did not perfectly account, he thought, for the strong emotion, with
which he avoided the sight of his accuser -- unless, indeed, he knew the
accuser to have been, not only an accomplice in his crime, but the actual
assassin. In this case, it appeared natural even for the stern and subtle
Schedoni to betray his horror, on beholding the person of the murderer, with
the very instrument of the crime in his grasp. On the other hand, Vivaldi could
not but perceive it to be highly improbable, that the very man who had really
committed the deed, should come voluntarily into a court of justice, for the
purpose of accusing his employer; that he should dare publicly to accuse him,
whose guilt, however enormous, was not more so than his own.

The extraordinary manner, also, in which the accuser had proceeded in the
commencement of the affair, engaged Vivaldi's consideration; his apparent
reluctance to be seen in this process, and the artful and mysterious plan by
which he had caused Schedoni to be summoned before the tribunal, and had
endeavored that he should be (...) accused by Ansaldo, indicated, at least to
Vivaldi's apprehension, the fearfulness of guilt, and, still more, that malice,
and a thirst of vengeance, had instigated his conduct in the prosecution. If
the stranger had been actuated only by a love of justice, it appeared that he
would not have proceeded toward it in a way thus dark and circuitous, but have
sought it by the usual process, and have produced the proofs which he even now
asserted he possessed, of Schedoni's crimes. In addition to the circumstances,
(...) seemed to strengthen a supposition of the guiltlessness of Schedoni was
that, of the accuser's avoiding to acknowledge who he was, and whence he came.
But Vivaldi paused again upon this point; it appeared to be inexplicable, and
he could not inagine why the accuser had adopted a style of secrecy, which, if,
he persisted in it, must probably defeat the very purpose of the accusation;
for Vivaldi did not believe that the tribunal would condemn a prisoner upon the
testimony of a person, who, when called upon* should publicly refuse to reveal
himself, even to them. Yet the accuser must certainly have considered this
circumstance before he ventured into court; notwithstanding which, he had
appeared!

These reflections led Vivaldi to various conjectures relative to the visit he
had himself received from the monk, the dream that had preceded it, the
extraordinary means by which he had obtained admittance to the prison, the
declaration of the continels, that not any person had passed the door, and many
other unaccountable particulars; and while Vivaldi now looked upon the wild
physiognomy of the stranger, he almost fancied, as he had formerly done, that
he beheld something not of this earth.

"I have heard of the spirit of the murdered." said he, to himself -- "restless
for justice, becoming visible in our world -- " But Vivaldi checked the
imperfect thought, and, though his imagination inclined him to the mavelous
and to admit ideas which, filling and expanded all the faculties of the soul,
produce feelings that partake of the sublime, he now resisted the propensity,
and dismissed, as absurd, a supposition which had begun to thrill his every
nerve with horror. He awaited, however the result of the examination, and what
might be the further conduct of the stranger, with intense expectation.

When the tribunal had, at length, finally determined on the method of their
proceedings, Schedoni was first called upon, and examined as to his knowledge
of the accuser." It was the same inquisitor who had formerly interrogated
Vivaldi, that now spoke. "You, father Schedoni, a monk of the Spirito Santo
convent, at Naples, otherwise Ferando Count di Bruno, answer to the questions
which shall be put to you. Do you know the name of this man who now appears as
your accuser?"

"I answer not to the title of Count di Bruno," replied the Confessor, "but I
will declare that I know this man. His name is Nicola di Zampari."

"What is his condition?"

"He is a monk of the Dominican convent of the Spirito Santo," replied
Schedoni. "Of his family I know little."

Where have you seen him?"

"In the city of Naples, where he has resided, during some years, beneath the
same roof with me, when I was of the convent of San Angiolo, and since that
time, in the Spirito Santo."

"You have been a resident at the San Angiolo?" said the inquisitor.

"I have," replied Schedoni; "and it was there that we first lived together in
the confidence of friendship."

"You now perceive how ill placed was that confidence," said the inquisitor,
"and repent, no doubt, of your imprudence?"

The very Schedoni was not entrapped by this observation.

"I must lament a discovery of ingratitude," he replied, calmy, "but the
subjects of my confidence were too pure to give occasion for repentance."

"This Nicola di Zampari was ungrateful, then? You had rendered him services?
said the inquisitor.

"Explain," said the stranger, solemnly.

Schedoni hesitated, some sudden consideration seemed to occasion him
perplexity.

"I call upon you, in the name of your deceased brother," said the accuser, "to
reveal the cause of my enmity!"

Vivaldi, struck by the tone in which the stranger spoke this, turned his eyes
upon him, but knew not how to interpret the emotion visible on his countenance

The inquisitor commanded Schedoni to explain himself; the latter could not
immediately reply, but, when he recovered a self-command he added,

"I promised this accuser, this Nicola di Zampari, to assist his preferment
with what little interest I possessed; it was but little. Some succeeding
circumstances encouraged me to believe that I could more than fulfill my
promise. His hopes were elevated, and in the fullness of expectation -- he was
disappointed, for I was myself deceived, by the person in whom I had trusted.
To the disappointment of a choleric man, I am to attibute this unjust
accusation."

Schedoni paused, and an air of dissatisfaction and anxiety appeared upon his
features. His accuser remained silent, but a malicious smile announced his
triumph.

You must declare, also the services," said the inquisitor, "which merited the
reward you promised."

"Those services were inestimable to me," resumed Schedoni, after a momentary
hesitation; "though they cost di Zampari little: they were the consolations of
sympathy, the intelligence of friendship, which he administered, and which
gratitude told me never could be repaid."

"Of sympathy! of friendship!" said the grand-vicar. Are we to believe that a
man, who brings false accusation of so dreadful a nature as the one now before
us, is capable of bestowing the consolations of sympathy, and of friendship?
You must either acknowledge, that services of a less disinterested nature won
your promises of reward; or we must conclude hat your accuser's charge is just.
Your assertions (...) inconsistent, and your explanation too trivial, to (...)
for a moment."

"I have declared the truth," said Schedoni haughtily.

"In which instance?" asked the inquisitor; "for your assertions contradict
each other!

Schedoni was silent. Vivaldi could not judge whether the pride which
occasioned his silence was that of innocence or of remorse.

"It appears from your own testimonies," said the inquisitor, "that the
ingratitude was yours, not your accuser's, since he consoled you with
kindness, which you have never returned him! -- Have you any thing further to
say?"

Schedoni was still silent.

"This, then, is your only explanation?" added the inquisitor.

Schedoni bowed his head. The inquisitor, then addressing the accuser, demanded
what he had to reply.

"I have nothing to reply," said the stranger, with malicious triumph; "the
accused has replied for me!"

"We are to conclude, then, that he has spoken truth, when he asserted you to
be a monk of the Spirito Santo, at Naples?" said the inquisitor.

"You holy father," said the stranger, gravely, appealing to the inquisitor,
"can answer for me whether I am."

Vivaldi listened with emotion.

The inquisitor rose from his chair, and with solemnity replied, "I answer
then, that you are not a monk of Naples."

"By that reply," said the vickar-general, in a low voice to the inquisitor, "I
perceive you think father Schedoni is guilty."

The rejoinder of the inquisitor was delivered in so low a tone that Vivaldi
could not understand it. He (...) perplexed to interpret the answer given to
the appeal of the stranger, He thought that the inquisitor would not have
ventured an assertion thus p^^tive, if his opinion had been drawn from
inference only; and that he should know the accuser, while he was conducting
himself toward him as a stranger, amazed Vivaldi, no less than if he had
understood the character of an inquisitor to be as artless as his own. On the
other hand he had so frequently seen the stranger at Paluzzi, and in the habit
of a monk, that he could hardly question the assertion of Schedoni, as to his
identity.

The inquisitor, addressing Schedoni, said. -- "Your evidence we know to be in
part erroneous your accuser is not a monk of Naples, but a servant of the most
holy Inquisition. Judging from this part of your evidence, we must suspect the
whole."

"A servant of the Inquisition!" exclaimed Schedoni, with unaffected surprise.
Reverend father! your assertion astonishes me! You are deceived! You doubt the
cre^it of my word; I, therefore, will assert no more. But enquire of Signor
Vivaldi ask him, whether he has not often, and lately, seen my accuser at
Naples, and in the habit of a monk."

"I have seen him at the ruins of Paluzzi, near Naples, and in the
ecclesiastical dress," replied. Vivaldi, without waiting for the regular
question, "and under circumstances no less extraordinary than those which have
attended him here, But, in retur^ ^or this frank acknowledgement, I require of
you, father Schedoni, to answer some questions which I shall venture to suggest
to the tribunal: By what means were you informed that I have often seen the
stranger at Paluzzi -- and was you interrested or not in his mysterious conduct
toward me there?"

To these questions, though formally delivered from the tribunal, Schedoni did
not deign to reply.

"It appears, then," said the vicar general, "that the accuser and the accused
were once accomplices."

The inquisitor objected, that this did not certainly appear; and that, on the
contrary, Schedoni seemed to have given his last questions in despair; an
observation which Vivaldi thought extraordinary from an Inquisitor.

"Be it accomplices, if it so please you," said Schedoni, bowing to the grand
vicar, without noticing the inquisitor: you may call us accomplices -- but, I
say, that we were friends. Since it is necessary to my own peace, that I should
more fully explain some circumstances attending our intimacy, I will own that
my accuser was occasionally my agent, and assisted in preserving the dignity of
an illustrious family at Naples, the family of the Vivaldi. And there, holy
father," added Schedoni, pointing to Vincentio, "is the son of that ancient
house, for whom I have attempted so much!"

Vivaldi was almost overwhelmed by this confession of Schedoni, though he had
already suspected a part of the truth. In the stranger he believed he saw the
slanderer of Ellena, the base instrument of the Marchesa's policy, and of
Schedoni's ambition; and the whole of his conduct at Paluzzi, at least, seemed
now intelligible. In Schedoni he beheld his secret accuser, and the inexorable
enemy whom he believed to have occasioned the imprisonment of Ellena. At this
latter consideration, all circumspection, all prudence, forsook him; he
declared, with energy, that, from what Schedoni had just acknowledged to be his
conduct, he knew him for his secret accuser, and the accuser also, of Ellena di
Rosalba; and he called upon the tribunal to examine into the Confessor's
motives for the accusation, and afterward to give hearing to what he would
himself unfold.

To this the grand-vicar replied, that Vivaldi's appeal would be taken into
consideration: and he then ordered that the present business should proceed.

The inquisitor, addressing Schedoni said, -- "The disinterested nature of your
friendship is now sufficiently explained, and the degree of credit, which is
due to your late assertions, understood. Of you we ask no more, but turn to
father Nicola di Zampari, and demand what he has to say in support of his
accusation. What are your proofs, Nicola di Zampari, that he who calls himself
father Schedoni is Ferando Count di Bruno; and that he has been guilty of
murder, the murder of his brother, and of his wife? Answer to our charge!"

"To your first question," said the monk, I reply, that he has himself
acknowledged to me, on an occasion, which it is not necessary to mention, that
he was the Count di Bruno; to the last, I produce the poigdard which I
received, with the dying confession of the assassin whom he employed."

"Still these are not proofs, but assertions," observed the vicar general, "and
the first forbids our confidence in the second. -- If as you declare, Schedoni
himself acknowleaged to you that he was Count di Bruno, you must have been to
him the intimate friend he has declared you were, or he would not have co^ided
to you a secret so dangerous to himself and if you were that friend, what
confidence ought we to give to your assertions respecting the dagger? since,
whether our accusations be true or false, you prove yourself guilty of
treachery in bringing them forward at all.

Vivaldi was surprised to hear such candor from an Inquisitor.

"Here is my proof," said the stranger, who now produced a paper containing
what he asserted to be the dying confession of the assassin It was signed by a
priest of Rome, as well as by himself, and appeared, from the date, to have
been given only a very few weeks before. The priest, he said, was living, and
might be summoned. The tribunal issued an order for the apprehension of this
priest, and that he should (...) brought to give evidence on the following
evening; after which, the business of this night proceeded without further
interruption, toward its conclusion.

The vicar general spoke again, "Nicola di Zampari, I call upon you to say,
why, if your proof of Schedoni's guilt is so clear, as the confession of the
assassin himself must make it, why you thought it necessary to summon father
Ansaldo to attest the criminality of the Count di Bruno! the dying confession
of the assassin is certainly of more weight than any other evidence."

"I summoned the father Ansaldo," replied the stranger, "as a means of proving
that Schedoni is the Count di Bruno. The confession of the assassin
sufficiently proves the Count to have been the instigator of the murder, but
not that Schedoni is the Count."

"But that is more than I will engage to prove," replied Ansaldo. "I know it
was the Count di Bruno who confessed to me, but I do not know that the father
Schedoni, who is now before me, was the person who ^o confessed."

"Conscientiously observed!" said the vicar general, interruptihg the stranger,
who was about to reply, but you, Nicola di Zampari, have not on this head, been
sufficiently explicit. How do you know that Schedoni is the penitent who
confessed to Ansaldo on the vigil of San Marco?"

"Reverend father, that is the point I was about to explain," replied the monk.
"I myself accompanied Schedoni, on the eve of San Marco, to the church of the
Santa Maria del Pianto, at the very hour when the confession is said to have
been made. Schedoni told me he was going to confession; and, when I observed to
him his unusual agitation, his behavior implied a consciousness of
extraordinary guilt; he even betrayed it by some words which he dropped in the
confusion of his mind. I parted with him at the gates of (...) church. He was
then of an order of white friars, and habited as father Ansaldo has described.
Within a few weeks after this confession, he left his convent, for what reason
I never could learn, though I have often surmised it, and came to reside at the
spirito Santo, whither I also had removed;"

"Here is no proof," said the vicar general: "other friars, of that order,
might confess at the same hour, in the same church."

"But here is a strong presumption for proof," observed the inquisitor. "Holy
father, we must judge from probabilities, as well as from proof."

"But probabilities themselves," replied the vicar general, "are strongly
against the evidence of a man, who would betray another, by means of words
dropped in the ungarded moments of powerful emotion."

"Are these the sentiments of an Inquisitor!" said Vivaldi to himself, "can
such glorious candor appear amidst the tribunal of an Inquisition!" Tears fel^
fast on Vivaldi's cheek, while he gazed upon this just judge, whose candor,
had it been exerted in his cause, could not have excited more powerful
sensations of esteem and admiration. "An Inquisitor!" he repeated to himself,
"an Inquisitor!"

The inferior Inquisitor, howevr, was so far from possessing any congeniallity
of character with his superior, that he was evidently disappointed by the
appearance of liberality, which the vicar general discovered, and immediately
said, "Has the accuser any thing further to urge in evidence, that the father,
Schedoni, is the penitent, who confessed to the penitentiary Ansaldo?"

"I have," replied the monk, with asperity "When I had left Schedoni in the
church, I lingered without ^he walls for his return, according to appointment.
But he appeared considerably sooner than I expected, and in a state of
disorder, such as I had never witnessed in him before. In an instant he passed
me, nor could my voice arrest his progress. Confusion seemed to reign within
the church and the convent, and, when I would have entered, for the purpose of
inquiring the occasion of it, the gates were suddenly closed, and all entrance
forbidden. It has since appeared, that the monks were then searching for the
penitent. A rumor afterward reached me, that a confession had caused this
disturbance; that the father-confessor, who happened at that time to be the
grand penitentiary Ansaldo, had left the chair in horror of what had been
divulged from the grate, and had judged it necessary that a search should be
made for the penitent. who was a white friar. This report, reverend fathers,
excited general attention; with me it did more -- for I thought I knew the
penitent. When on the following day, I questioned Schedoni as to his sudden
departure from the Black Penitents, his answers were dark, but emphatic, and he
extorted from me a promise, thoughtless that I was! never to disclose his visit
of the preceding evening to the Santa del Pianto. I then certainly discovered
who was the penitent,"

"Did he, then confess to you also?" said the vicar general.

"No father. I understood him to be the penitent to whom the report alluded,
but I had no suspicion of the nature of his crimes, till the assassin began his
confession, the conclusion of which clearly explained the subject of
Schedoni's; it explained also his motive for endeavoring ever after to attach
me to his interest."

"You have now, said the Vicar General," you have now confessed yourself a
member of the covent of the Spirito Santo at Naples, and an intimate of the
father Schedoni; one whom for many years he has endeavored to attach to him.
Not an hour has passed since you denied all this; the negative to the latter
circumstance was given, it is true, by implication only; but to the first, a
direct and absolute denial was pronounced!"

"I denied that I am a monk of Naples," replied the accuser, "and I appealed to
the Inquisitor for the truth of my denial. He has said, that I am now a servant
of the most holy Inquisition."

The vicar general, with some surprise, looked at the Inquisitor for
explanation, other members of the tribunal did the same; the rest appeared to
understand more than they had thought it necessary to avow. The Inquisitor --
who had been called upon, rose, and replied.

"Nichola di Zampari has spoken the truth. It is not many weeks since he
entered the holy office. A certificate from his convent at Naples bears
testimony to the truth of what I advance, and procured him admittance here."

"It is extraordinary, that you should not have disclosed your knowledge of
this person before!" said the vickar general.

"Holy father, I had reasons," replied the Inquisitor, "you will recollect that
the accused was present, and you will understand them."

"I comprehend you, said the vicar general, "but I do neither approve of, nor
perceive any necessity for your countenancing the subterfuge of this Nicola di
Zampari, relative to his identity. But more of this in private."

"I will explain all there," answered the Inquisitor.

"It appears then" resumed the vicar general, speaking aloud, "that this Nicola
di Zampari was formerly the friend and confidant of father Schedoni, whom he
now accuses. The accusation is evidently malicious; whether it be also false,
remains to be decided. A material question naturally arises out of the subject
-- Why was not the accusation brought forward before this period?"

The monk's visage brightened with the satisfaction of anticipated triumph, and
he immediately replied.

"Most holy father! as soon as I ascertained the crime, I prepared to prosecute
the perpetrator of it -- A short period only has elapsed since the assassin
gave his confession. In this interval I discovered, in these prisons, Signor
Vivaldi, and immediately comprehended by whose means he was confined. I knew
enough both of the accuser and the accused, to understand which of these was
innocent, and had then a double motive for causing Schedoni to be summoned; --
I wished equally to deliver the innocent and punish the criminal. The question
as to the motive for my becoming the enemy of him, who was once my friend, is
already answered: it was a sense of justice, not a suggestion of malice."

The grand-vicar smiled, but asked no further; and this long examination
concluded with committing Schedoni again into close custody, till full evidence
should be obtained of his guilt, or his innocence should appear. Respecting the
manner of his wife's death, there was yet no other evidence than that which was
asserted to be his own confession, which though perhaps sufficient to condemn a
criminal before the tribunal of the Inquisition, was not enough to satisfy the
present vicar general, who gave direction, that means might be employed toward
obtaining proof of each article of the accusation; in order that, Schedoni be
acquitted of the charge of having murdered his brother, documents might appear
for prosecuting him respecting the death of his wife.

Schedoni, when he withdrew from the hall, bowed respectfully to the tribunal,
and whether, notwithstanding late appearances, he were innocent, or that
subtlety enable him to reassume his usual address, it is certain his manner no
longer betrayed any symptom of conscious guilt. His countenance was firm and
even tranquil, and his air dignified. Vivaldi, who, during the greater part of
this examination, had been convinced of his criminality, now only doubted his
innocence. Vivaldi was himself reconducted to his prison, and the fitting of
the tribunal was dissolved.

CHAP. XII.
"The time shall come w hen Glo'ster's heart shall bleed
In life's last hours with horrors of the deed;
When dreary visions sh all at last present
Thy vengeful image." --
COLLINS.
WHEN the night of Schedoni's trial arrived, Vivaldi was again summoned to the
hall of the tribunal. Every circumstance was now arranged according to the full
ceremonies of the place; the members of the tribunal were more numerous than
formerly at the examinations; the chief inquisitors wore habits of a fashion
different from those, which before distinguished them, and their turbans, of a
singular form and larger size, seemed to give an air of sterner ferocity to
their features. The hall, as usual, was hung with black, and* every person who
appeared there, whether inquisitor, official, witness or prisoner, was habited
in the same dismal hue, which together with the kind of light diffused through
the chamber from lamps hung high in the vaulted roof, and from torches held by
parties of officials who kept watch at the several doors, and in different
parts of this immense hall, gave a character of gloomy solemnity to the
assembly, which was almost horrofic.

Vivaldi was situated in a place, whence he beheld the whole of the tribunal,
and could distinguish whatever was passing in the hall. The countenance of
every member was now fully displayed to him by the torchmen, who, arranged at
the steps of the platform on which the three chief inquisitors were elevated,
extended in a semicircle on either hand of the place occupied by the inferior
members. The red glare, which the torches threw upon the latter, certainly did
not soften the expression of faces, for the most part sculptured by passions of
dark malignity, or fiercer cruelty? and Vivaldi could not bear even to examine
them long.

Before the bar of the tribunal, he distinguished Schedoni, and little did he
suspect that in him, a criminal brought thither to answer for the guilt of
murder -- the murder of a brother, and of a wife, he beheld the parent of
Ellena di Rosalba!

Near Schedoni was seated the penitentiary Ansaldo: the Roman priest, who was
to be a principal witness, and father Nicola di Zampari, upon whom Vivaldi
could not even now look without experiencing some what of the awe, which had
prevailed over his mind when he was inclined to consider the stranger, rather
as the vision of another world, than as a being of this. The same wild and
indescribable character still distinguished his air, his very look and
movement, and Vivaldi could not but believe that something in the highest
degree extraordinary would yet be discovered concerning him.

The witnesses being called over, Vivaldi understood the he was placed among
them, though he had only repeated the words which father Nicola had spoken, and
which, since Nicola himself was present as a witness against Schedoni, he did
not perceive could be in the least material on ^he trial.

When Vivaldi had, in his turn, answered to his name, a voice, bursting forth
from a stistant part of the hall, exclaimed, "It is my master! my dear master!"
and on directing his eyes whence it came, he perceived the faithful Paulo
struggling with his guard. Vivaldi called to him to be patient, and to forbear
resistance, an exhortation, however, which served only to increase the efforts
of the servant for liberty, and in the next instant he broke from the grasp of
the officials, and darting toward Vivaldi, fell at his feet, sobbing, and
clasping his knees, and exclaiming, "O my master! my master! have I found you
at last?"

Vivaldi, much affected by this meeting as Paulo, could not immediately speak.
He would, however, have raised and embraced his affectionate servant, but
Paulo, still clinging to his knees and sobbing, was so much agitated that he
scarcely understood any thing said to him, and to the kind assurances and
gentle remonstrances of Vivaldi constantly replied as if to the officers, whom
he fancied to be forcing him away.

"Remember your situation, Paulo," said Vivaldi, "consider mine also, and be
governed by prudence."

"You shall not force me hence!" cried Paulo, "you can take my life only once;
if I must die, it shall be here."

"Recollect yourself, Paulo, and he composed. Your life, I trust, is in no
danger."

Paulo looked up, and again, bursting into a passion of tears, repeated, "O! my
master! my master! where have you been all this while? are you indeed alive? I
thought I never should see you again! I have dreamt an hundred times that you
were dead and buried! and I wished to be dead and buried with you. I thought
you was gone out of this world into the next. I feared you was gone to heaven,
and so believed we should never meet again. But now, I see you once more, and
know that you live! O! my master! my master!"

The officers who had followed Paulo, now endeavoring to withdraw him, he
became more outrageous.

"Do your worst at once," said Paulo, "but you shall find tough work of it, if
you try to force me from hence; so you had better be contented with killing me
here."

The incensed officials were laying violent hands upon him, when Vivaldi
interposed. "I entreat, I supplicate you, said he, "that you will suffer him to
remain near me."

"It is impossible," replied an officer, "we dare not."

"I will promise that he shall not even speak to me, if you will allow him to
be near," added Vivaldi.

"Not speak to you, master!" exclaimed Paulo, "but I will stay by you, and
speak to you as long as I like, till my last gasp. Let them do their worst at
once; I defy them all, and all the devils of inquisitors it their heels too, to
force me away. I can die but once, and they ought to be satisfied with that, --
so what is there to be afraid of? Not speak!

"He knows not what he says," said Vivaldi to the officials, while he
endeavored to silence Paulo with his hand: "I am certain that he will submit
to whatever I shall require of him, and will be entirely silent; or if he does
speak now and then, it shall be only in a whisper."

"A whisper!" said an officer, sneeringly, "do you suppose, Signor, that any
person is suffered to speak in a whisper here?"

"A whisper!" shouted Paulo, "I scorn to speak in a whisper. I will speak so
loud, that every word I say shall ring in the ears of all these old black
devils on the benches yonder; aye, and those on that mountebank stage too, that
sit there looking so grim and angry as if they longed to tear us in pieces.
They" --

"Silence," said Vivaldi, with emphasis: "Paulo, I command you to be silent."

"They shall know a bit of my mind," continued Paulo, without noticing Vivaldi:
"I will tell them what they have to expect for all their cruel usage of my poor
master. Where do they expect to go when they die. I wonder? though for that
matter, they cannot go to a worse place than they are in already, and I suppose
it is, knowing that, which makes them not afraid of being ever so wicked. They
shall hear a little plain truth, for once in their lives, however, they shall
hear" --

During the whole of this harangue, Vivaldi, alarmed for the consequence of
such imprudent, though honest indignation, had been using all possible, effort
to silence him, and was the more alarmed, since the officials made no further
attempt to interrupt Paulo, a forbearance, which Vivaldi attributed to
malignity, and to a wish that Paulo might be entrapped by his own act. At
length, he made himself heard.

"I entreat," said Vivaldi.

Paulo stopped for a moment.

"Paulo!" rejoined Vivaldi, earnestly; "do (...) love your master?"

"Love my master!" said Paulo resentfully, without allowing Vivaldi to finish
his sentence, "Have I (...) gone through fire and water for him? or, what is
(...) good, have I not put myself into the Inquisition, and all on his account?
and now to be asked, "Do I (...) my master!" If you believe, Signor, that any
thing, else made me come here, into these dismal holes, you are quite entirely
out; and when they have made an end of me, as I suppose they will do, before
all is over, you will, perhaps, think better of me than to suspect that I came
here for my own pleasure."

'All that may be as you say, Paulo,' replied Vivaldi coldly, while he, with
difficulty, commanded his tears "but your immediate submission is the only
conduct that can convince me of the sincerity of your professions. I entreat
you to be silent."

" Entreat me!" said Paulo, "O my master! what have I done that it should come
to this? Entreat me!" he repeated, sobbing.

"You will then give me this proof of your attachment?" asked Vivaldi.

"Do not use such a heartbreaking word again, master," replied Paulo, while he
dashed the tears from (...) cheek, "such a heartbreaking word, and I will do
(...) thing."

"You submit to what I require then, Paulo?"

"Aye, Signor, if -- if it is even to kneel, at the feet of that devil of an
Inquisitor, yonder."

"I shall only require you to be silent," replied Vivaldi, "and you may then be
permitted to remain (...) me."

"Well, Signor, well; I will do as you bid me, then, (...) only just say" --

"Not a syllable! Paulo," interrupted Vivaldi.

"Only just say, master" --

"Not a word, I entreat you!" added Vivaldi, "or you will be removed
immediately."

"His removal does not depend on that," said one of the officials, breaking
from his watchful silence he must go, and that without more delay."

"What! after I have promised not to open my (...)!" said Paulo, "do you
pretend to break your agreement?"

"There is no pretense, and there was no agreement," replied the man sharply,
"so obey directly, or will be the worse for you."

The officials were provoked, and Paulo became (...) more enraged and
clamorous, till, at length, the roar reached the tribunal, at the other end of
the (...), and silence having been commanded, an inspiry was made into the
cause of the confusion. The consequence of this was, an order that Paulo ^ould
withdraw from Vivaldi; but, as at this moment, he feared no greater evil, he
gave his refusal to the tribunal with as little ceremony as he had (...) before
to the officials.

At length, after much difficulty, a sort of compromise was made, and Paulo
being soothed by his master into some degree of compliance, was suffered to
remain within a short distance of him.

The business of the trial soon after commence^. Ansaldo, the penitentiary, and
father Nicola, appeared as witnesses, as did, also the Roman priest, who ha^
assisted in taking the depositions of the dying assassin. He had been privately
interrogated, and had given clear and satisfactory evidence as to the truth of
the paper produced by Nicola. Other witnesses, also, (...) been subpoenaed,
whom Schedoni had no expection a meeting.

The deportment of the Confessor, on first entering the hall, was collected and
firm; it remained unchanged when the Roman priest was brought forward; but,
(...) the appearance of another witness his courage seem^^ to faulter. Before
this evidence was however, (...) for, the depositions of the assassin were
publicly (...). They stated, with the closest conciseness, the chief fact^ of
which the following as a somewhat more (...) narrative.

It appeared, that about the year 1742, the late Count di Bruno had passed over
into Greece, a journey which his brother, the present Confessor, having long
^^pected, had meditated to take advantage of. Though a lawless passion had
first suggested to the dark (...) of Schedoni, the atrocious act, which should
destroy brother, many circumstances and considerations he conspired to urge him
toward its accomplishment. Among these was the conduct of the law Count
toward himself. which however reasonable as it had contradicted his own
selfish gratification and added strong reproof to opposition, had (...) his
most inveterate hatred. Schedoni, who, as younger brother of his family, bore,
at that time, (...) title of Count di Marinella, had dissipated his small
patrimony at a very early age; but, though, suffering, might then have taught
him prudence, it had only encouraged him in duplicity, and rendered him more
eager to seek a temporary refuge in the same habits of extravagance which had
led to it. The Count di Bruno, though his fortune was very limited, had
afforded frequent supplies to his brother; till, finding that he was
incorrigible, and that the sums which he himself spared with difficulty from
his family were wished, without remorse, by Marinella, instead of ^eing
applied, with economy, to his support, he refused further aid than was
sufficient for his absolute necessities.

It would be difficult for a candid mind to believe how a conduct so reasonable
could possibly excite hatred in any breast, or that the power of selfishness
could so far warp any understanding, as to induce Marinella, whom we will, in
future again call Schedoni, to look upon his brother with detestation, because
he had refused to ruin himself that his kinsman might level! Yet it is certain
that Schedoni, terming the necessary prudence of di Bruno to be meanness and
cold insensibility to the comfort of others, suffered full as much resentment
toward him from system, as he (...) from passion, though the meanness and the
insensibility he imagined in his brother's character were not only real traits
in his own, but were displaying themselves in the very arguments he urged
against them.

The rancour this excited was cherished by innumerable circumstances, and
ripened by envy, that meanest and most maligment of the human passions; by envy
of di Bruno's blessings, of an unencumbered estate, and, of a beautiful wife,
he was tempted to perpetrate the deed, which might transfer these blessings ^o
himself. Spalatro, whom he (...) to this purpose, was well known to him, and he
did not fear to confide the conduct or the crime to this man, who was to
purchase a little habitation on the remote she of the Adriatic, and, with a
certain stipend, to reside there. The ruinous dwelling, to which Ellena had
been carried, as its solitary situation suited Schedoni's views, was taken for
him.

Schedoni, who had good intelligence of all di Bruno's movement, acquainted
Spalatro, from time to time with his exact situation; and it was after di
Bruno, on his return, had crossed the Adriatic, from Ragusi to Manfredonia, and
was entering upon the woods of the Garganus, that Spalatro, with his comrade
overtook him. They fired at the Count and his attendants, who were only a
valet, and a guide of the country^ and concealed among the thickets, they
securely repeated the attack. The shot did not immediately succeed, and the
Count, looking round to discover his enemy, prepared to defend himself, but the
firing was so rapidly sustained, that, at length, both di Bruno and his servant
fell, covered with wounds. The guide fled.

The unfortunate travelers were buried by their assassins on the spot; but,
whether the suspicion which attends upon the consciousness of guilt prompted
Spalatro to guard against every possibility of being betrayed by the accomplice
of his crime, or whatever was the motive, he returned to the forest alone; and,
shrouded by night, removed the bodies to a pit, which he had prepared under the
flooring of the house where he lived; thus displacing all proof, should his
accomplice hereafter point out to justice the spot in which he had assisted to
deposit the mangled remains of di Bruno.

Schedoni contrived a plausible history of the shipwreck of his brother upon
the Adriatic, and of the loss of the whole crew; and, as no persons but the
assassins were acquainted with the real cause of his death, the guide, who had
fled, and the people at the only town he had passed through, since he landed,
being ignorant even of the name of di Bruno, there was not any circumstance to
contradict the falsehood. It was universally credited, and even the widow of the
Count had, perhaps, never doubted its truth; or if, after her compelled
marriage with Schedoni, his conduct did awaken a suspicion, it was too vague to
produce any serious consequence.

During the reading of Spalatro's confession, and particularly at the
conclusion of it, the surprise and dismay of Schedoni were too powerful for
concealment; and it was not the least considerable part of his wonder, that
Spalatro should have come to Rome for the purpose of making these depositions;
but further consideration gave him a conjecture of the truth.

The account, which Spalatro had given of his motive for this journey to the
priest, was, that, having lately understood Schedoni to be resident at Rome, he
had followed him thither, with an intention of relieving his conscience by an
acknowledgment of his own crimes, and a disclosure of Schedoni's. This,
however, was not exactly the fact. The design of Spalatro was to extort money
from the guilty Confessor; a design, from which the latter believed he had
protected himself, as well as from every other evil consequence, when he missed
his late accomplice, respecting his place of residence; little foreseeing that
the very artifice, which should send this man in search of him to Rome, instead
of Naples, would be the means of bringing his crimes before the public.

Spalatro had followed the steps of Schedoni as far as the town at which he
steps, on the first night of his journey; and, having there passed him, had
reached the villa di Cambrusca, when, perceiving the Confessor approaching, he
had taken shelter from observation, within the ruin. The motive, which before
made him shrink from notice, had contributed, and still did so, to a suspicion
that he aimed at the life of Schedoni, who in wounding him, believed he had
saved himself from an assassin. The wounds, however, of Spalatro did not so
much disable him, but that he proceeded toward Rome from the town whence the
parting road had conducted his master toward Naples.

The fatigue of a long journey, performed chiefly on foot, in Spalatro's
wounded condition, occasioned a fever, that terminated together his journey and
his life; and in his last hours he had unburdened his conscience by a full
confession of his guilt. The priest, who, on this occasion, had been sent for
alarmed by the importance of the confession, since it implicated a living
person, called in a friend as witness to the depositions This witness was
father Nicola, the former intimate of Schedoni, and who was of a character to
rejoice in any discovery, which might punish a man from whose repeated promises
he had received only severe disappointments.

Schedoni now perceived that all his designs against Spalatro had failed, and
he had meditated more than have yet been fully disclosed. It may be remembered,
that on parting with the peasant, his conductor, the Confessor, gave him a
stiletto to defend him, as he said, from the attack of Spalatro, in case of
encountering him on the road. The point of this instrument was tipped with
poison; so that a scratch from it was sufficient to inflict death. Schedoni
had, for many years secretly carried about him such an envenomed instrument,
for reasons known only to himself. He had hoped, that, should the peasant meet
Spalatra, and he provoked to defend himself, this stiletto would terminate the
life of his accomplice, and relieve him from all probability of discovery,
since the other assassin, whom he employed, had been dead several years. The
expedient failed in every respect; the peasant did not even see Spalatro; and,
before he reached his home, he luckily lost the fatal stiletto, which, as he
had discovered himself to be acquainted with some circumstances connected with
the crimes of Schedoni, the Confessor would have wished him to keep, from the
chance, that he might some time injure himself in using it. The poignard, as he
had no proper means of fastening it to his dress, had fallen, and was carried
away by the torrent he was crossing at that moment.

But, if Schedoni had been shocked by the confession of the assassin, his
dismay was considerably greater, when a new witness was brought forward, and he
perceived an ancient domestic of his house. This man identified Schedoni for
Ferando Count di Bruno, with whom he had lived as a servant after the death of
the Count his brother. And not only did he bear testimony to the person of
Schedoni, but to the death of the Countess, his wife. Giovanni declared himself
to be one of the domestics who had assisted in conveying her to her apartment,
after she had been struck by the poignard of Schedoni, and who had afterward
attended her funeral in the church of the Santa del Miracoli, a convent near
the late residence of di Bruno. He further affirmed, that the physicians had
reported her death to be in consequence of the wound she had received, and he
bore witness to the flight of his master, previous to the death of the
Countess, and immediately upon the assassination, and that he had never
publicly appeared upon his estate since that period.

An inquisitor asked, whether any measures had been taken by the relations of
the deceased lady toward a prosecution of the Count.

The witness replied, that a long search had been made for the Count, for such
a purpose, but that he had wholly eluded discovery, and that, of course, no
further step had been taken in the affair. This reply appeared to occasion
dissatisfaction; -- the tribunal was silent, and seemed to hesitate: the
vicar general then addressed the witness.

"How can you be certain that the person now before you, calling himself father
Schedoni, is the Count di Bruno, your former master, if you have never seen him
during the long interval of years you mention?"

Giovanni, without hesitation, answered, -- that though years had worn the
features of the Count he recollected them the moment he beheld him; and not the
Count only, but the person of the penitentiary Ansaldo, whom he had seen a
frequent visiter at the house of di Bruno, though his appearance, also, was
considerably changed by time, and by the ecclesiastical habit which he now wore.

The vicar general seemed still to doubt the evidence of this man, till Ansaldo
himself, on being called upon remembered him to have been a servant of the
Count, though he could not identify the Count himself.

The grand inquisitor remarked, that it was extraordinary he should recollect
the face of the servant, yet forget that of the master, with whom he had lived
in habits of intimacy. To this Ansaldo replied, that the stronger passions of
Schedoni, together with (...) particular habits of life, might reasonably be
supposed to have wrought a greater change upon the features of the Count than
the character and circumstances of Giovanni's could have effected on his.

Schedoni, not without reason, was appalled, on the appearance of this servant,
whose further testimony gave such clearness and force to some other parts of
the evidence, that the tribunal pronounced sentence upon Schedoni, as the
murderer of the Count his brother; and as this, the first charge, was
sufficient for his condemnation to death, they did not proceed upon the second,
that which related to his wife.

The emotion betrayed by Schedoni on the appearance of the last witness, and
during the delivery of the evidence, disappeared when his fate became certain;
and when the dreadful sentence of the law was pronounced, it made no visible
impression on his mind. From that moment, his firmness or his hardihood never
forsook him.

Vivaldi, who witnessed his condemnation, appeared infinitely more affected by
it than himself, and, though in revealing the circumstance of father Nicola's
summons, which had eventually led to the discovery of Schedoni's crimes, he had
not been left a choice in his conduct, he felt, at this moment, as miserable as
if he had actually borne witness against the life of a fellow being: what,
then, would have been his feelings, had he been told that this Schedoni, thus
condemned, was the father of Ellena di Rosalba! But, whatever these might be,
he was soon condemned to experience them. One of the most powerful of
Schedoni's passions appeared even in this last scene; and as, in quitting the
tribunal, he passed near Vivaldi he uttered these words -- "In me you have
murdered the father of Ellena di Rosalba!

Not with any hope that the intercession of Vivaldi, himself also a prisoner,
could in the least mitigate a sentence pronounced by the Inquisition, did he
say this, but for the purpose of revenging himself for the evil, which
Vivaldi's evidence had contributed to produce, and inflicting the exquisite
misery such information must give. The attempt succeeded too well.

At first, indeed, Vivaldi judged this to be only the desperate assertion of a
man, who believed his last chance of escaping the rigor of the law to rest
with him; and, at the mention of Ellena, forgetting every precaution, he loudly
demanded to know her situation. Schedoni, throwing upon him an horrible smile
of triumph and derision, was passing forward without replying, but Vivaldi,
unable to support this state of uncertainty, asked permission, of the tribunal
to converse a few mements, with the prisoner; a request which was granted with
extreme reluctance, and only on condition that the conversation should be
public.

To Vivaldi's questions, as to the situation of Ellena, Schedoni only replied,
that she was his daughter, and the solemnity, which accompanied these repeated
assertions, though it failed to convince Vivaldi of this truth, occasioned him
agonizing doubt and apprehension; but when the Confessor, perceiving the policy
of disclosing her place of residence to Vivaldi, softened from his desire of
vengeance of secure the interest of his family, and named the Santa della Pieta
as her present asylum, the joy of such intelligence overcame for a short time,
every other consideration.

To this dialogue, however, the officials put a speedy conclusion; Schedoni was
led back to his cell, and Vivaldi was soon after ordered to his former close
confinement.

But Paulo became again outrageous, when he was about to be separated from his
master, till the latter, having petitioned the tribunal, that his servant might
accompany him to his prison, and received an absolute refusal, endeavored to
calm the violence of his despair. He fell at his master's feet, and shed tears,
but he uttered no further complaints. When he rose he turned his eyes in
silence upon Vivaldi, and they seemed to say "Dear master! I shall never see
you more!" and with this sad expression, he continued to gaze on him till he
had left the hall.

Vivaldi notwithstanding the various subjects of his distress, could no^ bear
to meet the piteous looks of this poor man, and he withdrew his eyes; yet, at
every other step he took, they constantly returned to his faithful servant,
till the doors folded him from sight.

When he had quitted the hull, Vivaldi pleaded, however hopelessly, to the
officials, in favor of Paulo, entreating that they would speak to the persons
who kept guard over him, and prevail with them to show him every allowable
indulgence.

"No indulgence can be allowed him," replied one of the men, "except bread and
water, and the liberty of walking in his cell."

"No other!" said Vivaldi.

"None," repeated the official. "This prisoner has been near getting one of his
guards into a scrape already, for, somehow or other, he so talked him over, and
won upon him, (for he is but a young one here) that the man let him have a
light, and a pen and ink; but luckily, it was found out before any harm was
done."

"And what became of this honest; fellow?" inquired Vivaldi.

"Honest! he was none so honest, either Signor, if he could not mind his duty."

"Was he punished, then?"

"No, Signor," replied the man, pausing, and looking back upon the long avenue
they were passing, to inquire whether he was observed to hold this conversation
with a prisoner: "no, Signor, he was a younker, so they let him off for once,
and sent him to guard a man, who was not so full of his coaxing ways."

"Paulo made him merry, perhaps?" asked Vivaldi. "What were the coaxing ways
you spoke of?"

"Merry, Signor! no! he made him cry, and that was as bad."

"Indeed!" said Vivaldi, "The man must have been here, than, a very short time."

"Not more than a month, or so, Signor."

"But the coaxing ways you talked of," repeated Vivaldi, "what were they; -- a
ducat, or so?"

"A ducat!" exclaimed the man, "no! not a Poolo!"

"Are you sure of that? cried Vivaldi, shrewdly.

"Aye, sure enough, Signor. This fellow is not worth a ducat in the world!"

"But his master is friend," observed Vivaldi, in a very low voice, while he
put some money into his hand.

The officer made no answer, but concealed the money, and nothing further was
said.

Vivaldi had given this as a bribe to procure some kindness for his servant,
not from any consideration of himself, for his own critical situation had
ceased at this time to be a subject of anxiety with him. His mind was at
present strangely agitated between emotions the most opposite in their nature,
the joy which a discovery of Ellena's safety inspired, and the horrible
suspicions that Schedoni's assurances of relationship occasioned. That his
Ellena was the daughter of a murderer, that the father of Ellena should be
brought to an ignominious death, and that he himself, however unintentionally,
should have assisted to this event, were considerations almost too horrible to
be sustained! Vivaldi sought refuge from them in various conjectures as to the
motive, which might have induced Schedoni to assert a flashood in this
instance; but that of revenge alone appeared plausible; and even this surmise
was weakened, when he considered that the confessor had assured him of Ellena's
safety, an assurance which, as Vivaldi did not detect the selfish policy
connected with it, he believed Schedoni would not have given, had his general
intent toward him been malicious. But it was possible, that this very
information, on which all his comfort reposed might be false, and had been
given only for the purpose of inflicting the anguish a discovery of the truth
must load to! With an anxiety so intense, as almost to overcome his faculty of
judging, he examined every minute probability relative to this point, and
concluded with beleiving that Schedoni, had in this last instance, at least,
spoken honestly.

Whether he had done so in his first assertion was a question, which had raised
in Vivald's mind a tempest of conjecture and of horror; for, while the subject
of it was too astonishing to be fully believed, it was, also, too dreadful, not
to be apprehended even as a possibility.

CHAP. XIII.
O holy nun! why bend the mournful head?
Why fall those tears from lids uplift in prayer?
Why over thy pale cheek steals the feeble blush,
Then fades, and leaves it wan as the lily
On which a moon-beam falls?

WHILE these events were passing in the prisons of the Inquisition at Rome,
Ellena, in the sanctuary of Our Lady of Pity, remained ignorant of Schedoni's
arrest, and of Vivaldi's situation. She understood that the Confessor was
preparing to acknowledge her for his daughter, and believed that she
comprehended also the motive for his absence; but, though he had forbidden her
to expect a visit from him till his arrangement should be completed, he had
promised to write in the mean time, and inform her of all the present
circumstances of Vivaldi; his unexpected silence had excited, therefore
apprehensions as various, though not so terrible, as those Vivaldi had suffered
for her; nor did the silence of Vivaldi himself appear less extraordinary.

"His confinement must be severe indeed," said the afflicted Ellena, "since he
cannot relieve my anxiety by a single line of intelligence. Or, perhaps,
harrassed by unceasing opposition, he has submitted to the command of his
family, and has consented to forget me. Ah! why did I leave the opportunity for
that command to his family; why did I not enforce it myself!

Yet, while she uttered this self-reproach, the tears she shed contradicted the
pride which had suggested it; and a conviction lurking in her heart that
Vivaldi could not so resign her, soon dissipated those tears. But other
conjectures recalled them; it was possible that he was ill -- that he was dead!

In such vague and gloomy surmise, her days passed away; employment could no
longer withdraw her from herself, nor music, even for a moment, charm away the
sense of sorrow; yet she regularly partook of the various occupations of the
nuns; and was so far from permitting herself to indulge in any useless
expression of anxiety, that she had never once disclosed the sacred subject of
it; so that, though she could not assume an air of cheerfulness, she never
appeared otherwise than tranquil. Her most soothing, yet perhaps most
melancholy hour, was when about sunset she could wit draw unnoticed, to the
terrace among the rocks, that overlooked the convent, and formed a part of its
domain. There, alone and relieved from all ceremonial restraints of the
society, her very thoughts seemed more at liberty As, from beneath the light
foliage of the accacias, or the more majestic shade of the plane-trees that
waved their branches over the many colored cliffs of this terrace, Ellena
looked down upon the magnificent scenery of the bay, it brought back to memory,
in sad, yet pleasing detail, the many happy days she had passed on those blue
waters, or on the shores, in the society of Vivaldi and her departed relative
Bianchi; and every point of the prospect marked by such remembrance, which the
veiling distance stole, was rescued by imagination, and pictured by affection
in tints more animated than those of brightest nature.

One evening Ellena had lingered on the terrace later than usual. She had
watched the rays retiring from the highest points of the horizon, and the
fading imagery of the lower scene, till, the sun having sunk into the waves,
all coloring was withdrawn, except an empurpling and reposing hue, which
overspread the waters and the heavens, and blended in soft confusion every
feature of the landscape. The roofs and slender spires of the Santa del Pieta,
with a single tower of the church rising loftily over every other part of the
buildings that composed the convent, were fading fast from the eye; but the
solemn tint that invested them accorded so well with their style, that Ellena
was unwilling to relinquish this interesting object. Suddenly she perceived
through the dubious light an unusual number of moving figures in the court of
the great cloister, and listening, she fancied she could distinguish the
murmuring of many voices. The white drapery of the nuns rendered them
conspicuous as they moved, but it was impossible to ascertain who were the
individuals engaged in this bustle. Presently the assemblage dispersed; and
Ellena, curious to understand the occasion, of what she had observed, prepared
to descend to the convent.

She had left the terrace, and was about to enter a long avenue of chestnuts
that extended to a part of the convent, communicating immediately with the
great court, when she heard approaching steps, and, on turning into the walk,
perceived several persons advancing in the shady distance. Among the voices, as
they drew nearer, she distinguished one whose interesting tone engaged all her
attention, and began also to awaken memory. She listened, wondered, doubted,
hoped and feared! -- It spoke again! Ellena though she could not be deceived in
those tender accents, so full of intelligence, so expressive of sensibility and
refinement. She proceeded with quicker steps, yet faltered as she drew near the
group, and paused to discern whether among them was any figure that might
accord with the voice and justify her hopes.

The voice spoke again; it pronounced her name; pronounced it with the
tremblings of tenderness and impatience, and Ellena scarcely dared to trust her
senses, when she beheld Olivia, the nun on San Stefano, in the cloisters of the
Della Pieta!

Ellena co^ld find no words to express her joy and surprise on beholding her
preserver in safety, and in these quiet groves; but Olivia repaid all the
affectioate caresses of her young friend, and, while she promised to explain
the circumstance that had led to her present appearance here, she, in her turn,
made numerous enquiries relative to Ellena's adventures after she had quitted
San Stefano. They were now, however, surrounded by too many auditors to allow
of unresered conversation; Ellena, therefore, led the nun to her apartment, and
Olivia then explained her reasons for having left the convent of San Stefano,
which were indeed sufficient to justify, even with the most rigid devotee, her
conduct as to the change. This unfortunate recluse, it appeared, persecuted by
the suspicions of the abbess, who understood that she had assisted in the
liberation of Ellena, had petitioned the bishop of her diocese for leave to
remove to the Santa della Picta. The abbess had not proof, to proceed formally
against her, as an accomplice in the escape of a novice, for though Jeronimo
could have supplied the requisite evidence, he was too deeply implicated in
this adventure to do so, without betraying his own conduct. From his having
withheld such proof, it appears, however, that accident, rather than design,
had occasioned his failure on the evening of Ellena's departure from the
monastery. But, though the abbess had not testimony enough for legal
punishment, she was acquainted with circumstances sufficient to justify
suspicions, and had both the inclination and the power to render Olivia very
miserable.

In her choice of the Santa della Pieta, the nun was influenced by many
considerations some of which were the consequence of conversations she had held
with Ellena respecting the state of that society. Her design she had been
unable to disclose to her friend, lest by a discovery of such correspondence,
the abbess of San Stefano should obtain grounds on which to proceed against
her. Even in her appeal to the bishop the utmost caution and secrecy had been
necessary, till the order for her removal, procured not without considerable
delay and difficulty, arrived, and when it came, the jealous anger of the
superior rendered an immediate departure necessary.

Olivia, during many years, had been unhappy in her local circumstances, but it
is probable she would have concluded her days within the walls of San Stefano,
had not the aggravated oppression of the abbess aroused her courage and
activity, and dissipated the despondency, with which severe misfortune had
obscured her views.

Ellena was particular in her inquiries whether any person of the monastery had
suffered for the assistance they had given her; but learned, that not one,
except Olivia, had been suspected of befriending her; and then understood, that
the venerable friar, who had dared to unfasten the gate which restored her with
Vivaldi to liberty, had not been involved by his kindness.

"It is an embarrassing and rather an unsual circumstance," concluded Olivia,
"to change one's convent; but you perceive the strong reasons which determined
me upon a removal. I was, however, perhaps, the more impatient of severe
treatment, since you, my sister, had described to me the society of Our Lady of
Pity, and since I believed it possible that you might form a part of it. When,
on my arrival here, I learned that my wishes had not deceived me on this point,
I was impatient to see you once more, and as soon as the ceremonies attending
an introduction to the superior were over, I requested to be conducted to you,
and was in search of you when we met in the avenue. It is unnecessary for me to
insist upon the satisfaction, which this meeting gives me; but, you may not,
perhaps, understand how much the manners of our lady abbess, and of the
sisterhood in general, as far as a first interview will allow me to judge of
them, have re-animated, me. The gloom, which has long hung over my prospects,
seems now to open, and a distant gleam promises to light up the evening of my
stormy day."

Olivia paused and appeared to recollect herself; this was the first time she
had made so direct a reference to own her misfortunes: and, while Ellena
silently remarked it, and observed the dejection, which was already stealing
upon the expressive countenance of the nun, she wished, yet feared to lead her
back toward the subject of them.

Endeavoring to dismiss some painful remembrance, and assuming a smile of
languid gaiety, Olivia said, "Now that I have related the history of my
removal, and sufficiently indulged my egotism, will you, let me hear what
adventures have befallen you, my young friend, since the melancholy adieu you
gave me in the gardens of San Stefano."

This was a task, to which Ellena's spirits, though revived by the presence of
Olivia, were still unequal, Over the scenes of her past distress. Time had not
yet drawn his shadowing veil; the colors were all too fresh and garish for the
meek dejection of her eye, and the subject was too intimately connected with
that of her present anxiety, to be reviewed without very painful feelings. She
therefore requested Olivia to spare her from a detail of particulars, which she
could not recollect but with extreme reluctance; and, scrupulously observing
the injunction of Schedoni, she merely mentioned her separation from Vivaldi
upon the banks of the Celano, and that a variety of distressing circumstances
had intervened before she could regain the sanctuary of the della Pieta.

Olivia understood too well the kind of feelings, from which Ellena was
desirous of escaping, willingly to subject her to renewal of them and felt too
much generous compassion for her sufferings not to endeavor to soothe the
sense of them by an exertion of those delicate and nameless arts, which, while
they mock detection, fascinate, the weary spirits as by a charm of magic!

The friends continued in conversation, till a chime from a chapel of the
convent summoned them to the last vespers; and when the service had concluded,
they separated for the night

With the society of the Santa della Pieta, Olivia had this found an asylum
such as till lately she had never dared to hope for; but though she frequently
expressed her sense of this blessing, it was seldom without tears; and Ellena
observed, with some surprise and more disappointment, within a few days after
her arrival, a cloud of melancholy spreading again over her mind.

But a nearer interest soon withdrew Ellena's attention from Olivia to fix it
upon Vivaldi; and, when she saw her infirm old servant, Beatrice, enter a
chamber of the convent, she anticipated that the knowledge of some
extraordinary, and probably unhappy event, had brought her. She knew too well
the circumspection of Schedoni to believe that Beatrice came commissioned from
him: and as the uncertain situation of Vivaldi was so constantly the subject of
her anxiety, she immediately concluded that her servant came to announce some
evil relative to him. -- His indisposition, perhaps his actual confinement in
the Inquisition, which lately she had sometimes been inclined to think might
not have been a mere menace to Vivaldi, though it had proved to be no more to
herself; -- or possibly she came to tell of his death -- his death in those
prisons! This last was a possibility that almost incapacitated her for
inquiring what was the errand of Beatrice.

The old servant, trembling and wan, either from the fatigue of her walk, or
from a consciousness of disastrous intelligence, seated herself without
speaking, and some moments elapsed before she could be prevailed with to give
an answer the repeated inquiries of Ellena.

"O Signora!" said she, at length, "you do not know what it is to walk up hill
such a long way, at my age! Well! heaven protect you, I hope you never will!"

"I perceive you bring ill news," said Ellena; "I am prepared for it, and you
need not fear to tell me all you know."

"Holy San Marco!" exclaimed Beatrice, "if death be ill news, you have guessed
right, Signora, for I do bring news of that, it is certain. How came you, Lady,
to know my errand? They have been beforehand with me, I see, though I have not
walked so fast up hill this many a day, as I have now to tell you what has
happened."

She stopped on observing the changing countenance of Ellena, who tremulously
called upon her to explain what had happened -- who was dead; and entreated her
to relate the particulars as speedily as possible.

"You said you was prepared, Signora," said Beatrice, "but your looks tell
another tale." --

"What is the event you would disclose?" said Ellena, almost breathless. "When
did it happen? -- be brief."

"I cannot tell exactly when it happened, Signora, but it was an own servant of
the Marchese's that I had it from.

"The Marchese's?" interrupted Ellena in a faultering voice.

"Aye, Lady; you will say that is pretty good authority."

"Death! and in the Marchese's family!" exclaimed Ellena.

"Yes, Signora, I had it from his own servant. He was passing by the
garden-gate just as I happened to be speaking to the maccaroni-man. -- But you
are ill, Lady! --

"I am very well, if you will but proceed," replied Ellena, faintly, while her
eyes were fixed upon Beatrice, as if they only had power to enforce her meaning.

"Well, dame," he says to me, "I have not seen you of along time." "No," says
I, "that is a great grievance truly! for old women, nowadays, are not much
thought of; out of sight, out of mind with them, now adays!"

"I beseech you to the purpose," interrupted Ellena. "Whose death did he
announce?" She had not courage to pronounce Vivaldi's name.

"You shall hear, Signora. I saw he looked in a sort of bustle, so I asked him
how all did at the Palazzo; so he answers, "Bad enough, Signora Beatrice, have
not you heard?" "Heard," says I; "what should I have heard?" "Why," says he,
"of what has just happened in our family."

"O heavens!" exclaimed Ellena, "he is dead! Vivaldi is dead!"

"You shall hear, Signora," continued Beatrice."

"Be brief!" said Ellena, "answer me simply yes or no,"

"I cannot, till I come to the right place, Signora; if you will but have a
little patience, you shall hear all. But if you fluster me so, you will put me
quite out."

"Grant me patience!" said Ellena, endeavoring to calm her spirits.

"With that, Signora, I asked him to walk in and rest himself, and tell me all
about it. He answered, he was in a great hurry, and could not stay a moment,
and a great deal of that sort; but I, knowing that whatever happened in that
family, Signora, was something to you, would not let him go off so easily; and
so, when I asked him to refresh himself with a glass of lemon-ice, he forgot
all his business in a minute, and we had a long chat."

And Beatrice might now have continued her circumlocution, perhaps, as long as
she had pleased, for Ellena had lost all power to urge inquiry, and was
scarcely sensible of what was said. She neither spoke, nor shed a tear; the one
image that possseed her fancy, the image of Vivaldi dead, seemed to held all
her faculties, as by a spell.

"So, when I asked him," added Beatrice, "again what had happened, he was ready
enough to tell all about it. "It is near a month ago," said he, "since she was
first taken; the Marchesa had been" --

"The Marchesa!" repeated Ellena, with whom that one word had dissolved the
spell of terror -- "the Marchesa!"

"Yes, Signora, to be sure. Who else did I say it was!"

"Go on, Beatrice; the Marchesa?" --

"What makes you look so glad all of a sudden, Signora? I thought just now you
were very sorry about it. What! I warrant you was thinking about my young lord,
Vivaldi."

"Proceed," said Ellena.

"Well added Beatrice, "It was about a month ago that the Marchesa was first
taken," continued the varlet. "She had seemed poorly a long time, but it was
from a conversazione at the di Voglio palazzo, that she came home so ill. It is
supposed she had been long in a bad state of health, but nobody thought her so
near her end, till the doctors were called together; and then matters looked
very bad indeed. They found out that she had been dying, or as good, for many
years, though nobody else had suspected it, and the Marchesa's own physician
was blamed for not finding it out before. But he added the rougue, "He had a
regard for my lady. He was very obstinate too, for he kept saying almost to the
last, there was no danger, when every body else saw how it was going. The other
doctors soon made their words good, and my lady died."

"And her son', -- said Ellena, "was he with the Marchesa when she expired?"

"What, Signor Vivaldi, lady? No, the Signor was not there."

"That is very extraordinary!" observed Ellena, with emotion' "Did the servant
mention him?"

Yes, Signora; he said what a sad thing it was that he should be out of the way
at that time, and nobody know where?"

"Are his family, then, ignorant where he is?" asked Ellena with increased
emotion.

"To be sure they are, lady, and have been for these many weeks. They have
heard nothing at all of the Signor, or one Paulo Mendrico, his servant, though
the Marchesa's people have been riding post after them from one end of the
kingdom to the other all the time!"

Shocked with the conviction of a circumstance, which, till lately she scarcely
believed was possible, the imprisonment of Vivaldi in ^he Inquisition, Ellena
lost for a while all power of further inquiry; but Beatrice proceeded.

"The Lady Marchesa seemed to lay something much to heart, as the man told me,
and often inquired for Signor Vincentio."

"The Marchesa you are sure then was ignorant where he was?" said Ellena, with
new astonishment and perplexity as to the person who, after betraying him into
the Inquisition, could yet have suffered her, though arrested at the same time
to escape.

"Yes, Signora, for she wanted sadly to see him. And when she was dying, she
sent for her Confessor, one father Schedoni, I think they call him and" --

"What of him?" said Ellena incautiously.

"Nothing, Signora, for he could not he found."

"Not to be found!" repeated Ellena.

"No, Signora, not just then; he was Confessor, I warrant, to other people
beside the Marchesa, and I dare say they had sins enough to confess, so he
could not get away in a hurry."

Ellena recollected herself sufficiently to ask no further of Schedoni; and
when she considered the propable cause of Vivaldi's arrest, she was again
consoled by a belief that he had not fallen into the power of ^eal officials,
since the comrades of the men who had arrested him, had proved themselves
otherwise; and she thought it highly probable, that while undiscovered by his
family, he had been, and was still engaged in searching for the place of her
confinement.

"But I was saying," proceeded Beatrice, "what a bustle there was when my lady,
the Marchesa was dying. As this father Schedoni was not to be found, another
Confessor was sent for, and shut up with her for a long while indeed! And then
my Lord Marchese was called in, and there seemed to be a deal going forward,
for my Lord was heard every now and then by the attendants in the antichamber,
talking loud, and sometimes my Lady Marchesa's voice was heard too, though she
was so ill! At last all was silent, and after some time my Lord came out of the
room, and he seemed very much flustered they say, that he is, very angry and
yet very sorrowful. But the Confessor remained with my Lady for a long while
after; and, when he departed, my Lady appeared more unhappy than ever. She
lived all that night and part of the next day, and something seemed to lie very
heavy at her heart, for she sometimes wept, but oftener groaned, and would look
so that, it was piteous to see her. She frequently asked for the Marchese, and
when he came, the attendants were sent away, and they held long conferences by
themselves. The Confessor, also was sent for again, just at the last, and they
were all shut up together. After this, my Lady appeared more easy in her mind,
and not long after she died."

Ellena, who had attended closely to this little narrative, was prevented, for
the present from asking the few questions which it had suggested by the
entrance of Olivia, who, on perceiving a stranger, was retiring, but Ellena,
not considering these inquiries as important, prevailed with the nun to take a
chair at the embroidery frame she had lately quitted.

After conversing for a few moments with Olivia, she returned to a
consideration of her own interests. The absence of Schedoni still appeared to
her as something more than accidental; and, and though she could not urge any
inquiry with Beatrice, concerning the monk of the Spirito Santo, she ventured
to ask whether she had lately seen the stranger, who had restored her to
Altieri, for Beatrice knew him only in the character of Ellena's deliver.

"No, Signora," replied Beatrice, rather sharply, "I have never seen his face
since he attended you to the villa, though for that matter, I did not see much
of it there; and then how he contrived to let himself out of the house that
night without my seeing him, I cannot divine, though I have thought of it often
enough since. I am sure he need not to have been ashamed to have shown his face
to me, for I should only have blessed him for bringing you safe home again."

Ellena was somewhat surprised to find that Beatrice had noticed a circumstance
apparently so trivial, and replied, that she had herself opened the door for
her protector.

While Beatrice spoke, Olivia raising her eyes from the embroidery, had fixed
them upon the old servant, who respectfully withdrew here is; but, when the nun
was again engaged on her work, she resumed her observation. Ellena fancied she
perceived something extraordinary in this mutual examination, although the
curiosity of strangers toward each other might have accounted for it,

Beatrice then received directions from Ellena as to, some drawings, which she
wished to have sent to the convent, and when the servant spoke in reply, Olivia
again raised eyes, and fixed them on her face with intense curiosity.

"I certainly ought to know that voice," said the nun, with great emotion,
"thought I dare not judge from your features. Is it, -- can it be possible? --
is it Beatrice Olca, to whom I speak? So many years have passed." -- Beatrice,
with equal surprise, answered, "It is, Signora; you are right in my name. But,
lady, who are you that know me?"

While she earnestly regarded Olivia, there was an expression of dismay in her
look, which increased Ellena's perplexity. The nun's complexion varied every
instant, and her words failed when she attempted to speak. Beatrice meanwhile,
exclaimed "My eyes deceive me! yet there is a strange likeness. Santa della
Pieta! how it has fluttered me! my heart beats still -- you are so like her,
lady, yet you are very different too."

Olivia, whose regards were now entirely fixed upon Ellena, said in a voice
that was scarcely articulate, while her whole frame seemed sinking beneath some
irresistible feeling, "Tell me, Beatrice, I conjure you, quickly say, who is
this?" -- She pointed to Ellena, and the sentence died on her lips.

Beatrice, wholly occupied by interests of her own, ^ave no reply, but
exclaimed, "It is, in truth, the Lady Olivia! It is herself! In the name of all
that is sacred, how came you here? O! how glad you must have been to find one
another out!" She looked, still gasping with astonishment at Olivia, while
Ellena unheard, repeatedly enquired the meaning of her words, and in the next
moment found herself pressed to the bosom of the nun, who seemed better to have
understood them, and who weeping, trembling, and almost fainting, held her
there in silence.

Ellena, after some moments had thus passed, requested an explanation of what
she witnessed, and Beatrice, at the same time, demanded the cause of all this
emotion. "For can it be that you did not know one another?" she added.

"What new discovery is this?" said Ellena, fearfully to the nun. "It is but
lately that I have found my father! O tell me by what tender name I am to call
you?"

"Your father! exclaimed Olivia.

"Your father, lady!" echoed Beatrice.

Ellena, betrayed by strong emotion into this premature mention of Schedoni,
was embarrassed and remained silent.

"No, my child!" said Olivia, softening from amazement into tones of ineffable
sorrow, while she again pressed Ellena to her heart -- "No! thy father is in
the grave!"

Ellena no longer returned her caresses; surprise and doubt suspended every
tender emotion; she gazed upon Olivia with an intenseness that partook of
wildness. At length, she said, slowly -- "It is my mother, then, whom I see!
When will these discoveries end!"

"It is your mother!" replied Olivia, solemnly: a mother's blessing rests with
you!"

The nun endeavored to soothe the agitated spirits of Ellena, though she was
herself nearly overwhelmed by the various and acute feelings this disclosure
occasioned. For a considerable time they were unable to speak but in short
sentences of affectionate exclamation, but joy was evidently a more predominant
feeling with the parent than with the child. When, however, Ellena could weep,
she became more tranquil, and, by degrees, was sensible of a degree of
happiness, such as she had, perhaps, never experienced.

Meanwhile Beatrice seemed lost in amazement mingled with fear. She expressed
no pleasure, notwithstanding the joy she witnessed, but was uniformly grave and
observant.

Olivia, when she recovered some degree of composure, inquired for her sister
Bianchi. The silence and sudden dejection of Ellena indicated the truth. On
this mention of her late mistress, Beatrice recovered the use of speech.

"Alas! lady," said the old servant, "she is now where I believed you were! and
I should as soon have expected to see my dear mistress here as yourself.

Olivia, though affected by this intelligence, did not feel it with the
acuteness she would have done probably at any other moment. After she had
indulged her tears, ^he added, that from the unusual silence of Bianchi, she
had suspected the truth, and particularly since not any answer had been
returned to the letter she had sent to Altieri upon her arrival at the Santa
della Pieta.

"Alas!" said Beatrice, "I wonder much my lady abbess failed to tell you the
sad news, for she knew it too well! -- My dear mistress is buried in the church
here! as for the letter, I have brought it with me for Signora Ellena to open."

"The lady abbess is not informed of our relationship," replied Olivia, "and I
have particular reasons for wishing that at present she should remain ignorant
of it. Even you my Ellena, must appear only as my friend, till some enquiries
have been made which are essential to my peace."

Olivia required an explanation of Ellena's late extraordinary assertion
respecting her father, but this was a request made with emotions very different
from those which hope or joy inspire. Ellena believing that the same
circumstances which had deceived herself during so many years, as to his death,
had also misled Olivia, was not surprised at the incredulity her mother had
shown, but she was considerably embarrassed how to answer her enquiries. It was
now too late to observe the promise of secrecy extorted from her by Schedoni:
the first moments of surprise had betrayed her; yet while she trembled further
to transgress his injunction, she perceived that a full explanation was now
unavoidable. And, since Ellena considered, that as Schedoni could not have
foreseen her present peculiar situation, his command had no reference to her
mother, her scruples on this head disappeared. When, therefore, Beatrice had
withdrawn, Ellena repeated her assertion, that he father still lived; which,
though it increased the amazement of Olivia, did not vanquish her incredulity.
Olivia's tears flowed fast, while in contradiction to this assurance, she
mentioned the year in which the Count di Bruno died, with some circumstances
relative to his death; which however, as Ellena understood that her mother had
not witnessed it, she still believed it had not happened. To confirm her late
assertion, Ellena then related a few particulars of her second interview with
Schedoni, and some confirmation that he lived, offered to produce the portrait,
which he had claimed as his own. Olivia, in great agitation, requested to see
the minature, and Ellena left the apartment in search of it.

Every moment of her absence was to Olivia's expectation (...) hour; she p^ced
the room listened ^or a (...) endeavored to tranquilize her spirit^, and (...)
did not return. Some strange mystery seemed to lurk in the narrative she had
just (...), which she wished, yet dreaded to develope; and when, at length,
Ellena appeared with the minaure, she took it in trembling (...) and having
gazed upon it for an instant, her complexion faded and she fainted.

Ellena had now no doubt respecting the truth of Schedoni's declaration, and
blamed herself for not having more gradually prepared her mother for the
knowledge of a circumstance, which she believed had overwhelmed her with joy.
The usual applications, however, soon restored Olivia, who, when she was again
alone with her daughter, desired to behold once more the portrait. Ellena
attributing the strong emotion with which she still regarded it, to surprise,
and fear lest she wa^ admitting a fallacious hope, endeavored to comfort her
by renewed assurances, that not only the Count di Bruno yet existed, but that
he lived at this very time in Naples, and further, that he would probably be in
her presence within the hour. "When I quitted the room for the minature," added
Ellena, "I dispatched a person with a note, requesting to see my father
immediately, being impatient to realize the joy, which such a meeting between
my long lost parents must occasion."

In this instance, Ellena had certainly suffered her generous sympathy to
overcome her discretion, for, though the contents of the note to Schedoni could
not positively have betrayed him, had he even been in Naples at this time, her
sending it to the Spirito Santo, instead of the place which he had appointed
for his letters, might have led to a premature inquiry respecting herself.

While Ellena had acquainted Olivia that Schedoni would probably be with them
soon, she watched eagerly for the joyful surprise she expected would appear on
her countenance; how severe th^n was her disappointment when only terror and
dismay were expressed there! and, when, in the next moment, her mother uttered
exclamations of distress and even of despair!

"If he sees me," said Olivia, "I am irrecoverably lost! O! unhappy Ellena!
your precipitancy has destroyed me. The original of this portrait is not the
Count di Bruno, my dear lord, nor, your parent, but his brother, the cruel
husband." --

Olivia, left the sentence unfinished, as if she was betraying more than was at
present discreet; but Ellena, whom astonishment had kept silent, now entreated
that she would explain her words, and the cause of her distress.

"I know not said Olivia, "by what means that portrait has been conveyed to
you; but it is the resemblance of the Count Ferando di Bruno, the brother of my
lord, and my" -- second husband she should have said, but her lips refused to
honor him with the title.

She paused and was much affected, but presently added --

"I cannot at present explain the subject more fully, for it is to me a very
distressing one. Let me rather consider the means of avoiding an interview with
di Bruno, and even of concealing, if possible, that I exist."

Olivia was however, soothed when she understood that Ellena had not named her
in the note, but had merely desired to see the Confessor upon a very particular
occasion.

While they were consulting upon the excuse it would be necessary to form for
this imprudent summons, the messenger returned with the note unopened, and with
information that father Schedoni was abroad on a pilgrimage, which was the
explanation the brothers of the Spirito Santo chose to give of his absence;
judging it prudent, for the honor of their convent, to conceal his real
situation.

Olivia, thus released from her fears, consented to explain some points of the
subject so interesting to Ellena; but is was not till several days after this
discovery, that she could sufficiently command her spirits to relate the whole
of her narrative. The first part of it agreed perfectly with the account
delivered in the confession to the penitentiary Ansaldo; that which follows was
known only to herself, her sister Bianchi, a physician, and one faithful
servant, who had been considerably entrusted with the conduct of the plan.

It may be recollected that Schedoni left his house immediately after the act,
which was designed to be fatal to the Countess his wife, and that she was
carried senseless to her chamber. The wound as appears was not mortal. But the
atrocity of the intent determined her to seize the opportunity thus offered by
the absence of Schedoni, and her own peculiar circumstances to release herself
from his tyranny without having recourse to a court of justice, which would
have covered with infamy the brother of her first husband. She withdrew,
therefore, from his house for ever, and with the assistance of the three
persons before mentioned, retired to a remote part of Italy, and sought refuge
in the convent of San Stefano, while at home the report of her death was
confirmed by a public funeral. Bianchi remained for some time after the
departure of Olivia, in her own residence near the villa di Bruno, having taken
under her immediate care the daughter of the Countess and of the first Count di
Bruno, as well as an infant daughter of the second.

After some time had clapsed, Bianchi withdrew with her young charge, but not
to the neighborhood of San Stefano. The indulgence of a mother's tenderness
was denied to Olivia, for Bianchi could not reside near the convent without
subjecting her to the hazard of discovery, since Schedoni, though he now
believed the report of her death, might be led to doubt it by the conduct of
Bianchi, whose steps would probably be observed by him. She chose a refider^^,
therefore, at a distance from Olivia, though not yet at Altieri. At this
period, Ellena was not two years old; the daughter of Schedoni was scarcely as
many months, as she died before the year concluded. It was this his child for
whom the Confessor, who had too well concealed himself to permit Bianchi to
acquaint him with her death, had mistaken Ellena, and to which mistake his own
portrait, affirmed by Ellena to be that of her father, had contributed. This
minature she had sound in the cabinet of Bianchi after her aunt's decease, and,
observing it inscribed with the title of Count di Bruno, she had worn it with a
filial fondness ever since that period.

Bianchi, when she had acquainted Ellena with the secret of her birth, was
withheld both by prudence and humanity, from intrusting her with a knowledge
that her mother lived; but this, no doubt, was the circumstance she appeared so
anxious to disclose on her deathbed, when the suddenness of her disorder had
deprived her of the power. The abruptness of that event had (...) contributed
to keep the mother and daughter unknown to each other, even when they
afterward accidentally met, to which concealment the name of Rosalba, given to
Ellena from her infancy by Bianchi, for the purpose of protecting her from
discovery by her uncle, had assisted. Beatrice, who was not the domestic
entrusted with the escape of Olivia, had believed the report of her death, and
thus, though she knew Ellena to be the daughter of the Countess di Bruno, she
could never have been a means of discovering them to each other, had it not
happened that Olivia recognized this ancient servant of Bianchi, while Ellena
was present.

When Bianchi came to reside in the neighborhood of Naples, she was
unsuspicious that Schedoni, who has never been heard of since the night of the
assassination, inhabited there; and she so seldom left her house, that it is
not surprising she should never happen to meet him, at least consciously; for
her veil, and the monk's cowl, might easily have concealed them from each other
if they had met.

It appears to have been the intention of Bianchi to disclose to Vivaldi the
family of Ellena, before their nuptials, were solemnized; since, on the evening
of their last conversation, she had declared, when her spirits were exhausted
by the exertion she had made, that much remained for her to say, which weakness
obliged her to defer till another opportunity. Her unexpected death prevented
any future meeting. That she had not sooner intended to make a communication,
which might have removed, in a considerable degree, the objection of the
Vivaldi to a connection with Ellena, appears extraordinary till other
circumstances of her family, than that of its nobility, are considered. Her
present indigence, and yet more, the guilt attached to an individual of the di
Bruno, it was reasonable to suppose would operate as a full antidote of the
allurement of rank, however jealous of birth the Vivaldi had proved themselves.

Ferando di Bruno had contrived, even in the short interval between the death
of his brother and the supposed decease of his wife, again to embarrass his
affairs, and soon after his flight, the income arrising from what remained of
his landed property had been seized upon by his creditors, whether lawfully or
not, he was then in a situation which did not permit him to contest and Ellena
was thus left wholly dependant upon her aunt. The small fortune of Bianchi had
been diminished by the assistance she afforded Olivia, for whose admittance
into the convent of San Stefano it had been necessary to advance a considerable
sum; and her original income was afterward reduced by the purchase of the
villa Altieri. This expenditure, however, was not an imprudent one, since she
preferred the comforts and independence of a pleasant home; with industry, to
the indulgence of an indolence which must have confined her to an inferior
residence; and was acquainted with the means of making this industry profitable
without being dishonorable. She excelled in many elegant and ingenious arts,
and the productions of her pencil and needle were privately disposed of to the
nuns of the Santa della Pieta. When Ellena was of an age to assist her, she
resigned much of the employment and profit to her niece, whose genius having
unfolded itself, the beauty of her designs and the elegance of her execution,
both in drawing and embroidery, were so highly valued by the purchasers at the
grace of the convent, that Bianchi committed to Ellena altogether the exercise
of her art

Olivia meanwhile had dedicated her life to devotion in the monastery of San
Stefano, a choice which was willingly made while her mind was yet softened by
grief for the death of her first lord, and wearied by the cruelty she had
afterward experienced. The first years of her retirement were passed in
tranquillity, except when the remembrance of her child, whom she did not dare to
see at the convent, awakened a parental pang. With Bianchi, she, however,
corresponded as regularly as opportunity would allow, and had at least the
consolation of knowing, that the object most dear to her lived, till, within a
short period of Ellena's arrival at the very asylum chosen by her mother, her
apprehensions were in some degree excited by the unusual silence of Bianchi.

When Oliva had first seen Ellena in the chapel of San Stefano, she was struck
with a slight resemblance she bore to the late Count di Bruno, and had
frequently afterward examined her features with a most painful curiosity; but,
circumstanced as she was, Olivia could not reasonably suspect the stranger to
be her daughter. (...), however, a sense of this possibility so far overcame
her judgment, as to prompt an inquiry for the surname of Ellena; but the
mention of Rosalba had checked all further conjecture. What would have been the
feelings of the nun, had she been told when her generous compassion was
assisting a stranger to escape from oppression, that she was preserving her own
child! It may be worthy of observation, that the virtues of Olivia, exerted in
a general cause, had thus led her unconsciously to the happiness of saving her
daughter; while the vices of Schedoni had as unconsciously urged him nearly to
destroy his niece, and had always been preventing by the means they prompted
him to employ, the success of his constant aim.

CHAP. XIV.
"Those hours, which lately smiled, where are they now Pallid to thought and
ghastly!"
YOUNG.
THE Marchesa di Vivaldi, of whose death Beatrice had given an imperfect
account, struck with remorse of the crime she had meditated against Ellena, and
with terror of the punishment due to it, had sent, when on her death bed, for a
Confessor, to whom she unburthened her conscience and from whom she hoped to
receive, in return, an alleviation of her despair. This confessor was a man of
good sense and humanity; and, when he fully understood the story of Vivaldi and
Ellena di Rosalba, he declared, that her only hope of forgiveness both for the
crime she had meditated, and the undeserved sufferings she had occasioned,
rested upon her willingness to make those now happy, whom she had formerly
rendered miserable. Her conscience had already given her the same lesson; and,
now that she was sinking to that grave which levels all distinctions, and had
her just fear of retribution no longer opposed by her pride, she became as
anxious to promote the marriage of Vivaldi with Ellena, as she had ever been to
prevent it. She sent, therefore, for the Marchese; and, having made an avowal
of the arts she had practiced against the peace and reputation of Ellena,
without, however, confessing the full extent of her intended crimes, she made
it her last request, that he would consent to the happiness of his son.

The Marchese, however, shocked as he was at this discovery of the duplicity
and cruelty of his wife, had neither her terror of the future, or remorse for
the past, to overcome his objection to the rank of Ellena; and he resisted all
her importunity, till anguish of her last hours overcame every consideration
but that of affording her relief; he then gave a solemn promise, in the
presence of the Confessor, that he would no longer oppose the marriage of
Vivaldi and Ellena, should the former persist in his attachment to her. This
promise was sufficient for the Marchesa, and she died with some degree of
resignation. It did not, however, appear probable, the Marchese would soon be
called upon to fulfill the engagements, into which he had so unwillingly
entered, every inquiry after Vivaldi having been hitherto ineffectual.

During the progress of this fruitless search for his son, and while the
Marchese was almost lamenting him as dead, the inhabitants of the Vivaldi place
were, one night, aroused from sleep by a violent knocking at the great gate of
the court. The noise was so loud and incessant, that, before the porter could
obey the summons, the Marchesa, whose apartment looked upon the court, was
alarmed, and sent an attendant from his anti-room, to inquire the occasion of
it.

Presently a voice was heard from the first antichamber, exclaiming, "I must
see my Lord Marchese directly; he will not be angry to be waked, when he knows
all about it," and, before the Marchese could order that no person, on
whatever, pretense should be admitted, Paulo, haggard, ragged, and covered with
dirt, was in the chamber. His (...) and affrighted countenance, his disordered
dress, and his very attitude, as on entering he half turned to look back upon
the antirooms, like one, who just escaped from bondage, listens to the fancied
sounds of (...), were altogether so striking and and terrific, that the
Marchese, anticipating some dreadful news of Vivaldi, had scarcely power to
inquire for him. Paulo, however, rendered questions unnecessary; for, without
any circumlocation or preface, he immediately informed the Marchese, that the
Signor, his dear master was in the prisons of the Inquisition, at Rome, if,
indeed, they had not put an end to him before that time."

"Yes, my Lord," said Paulo, "I am just got out myself, for they would not let
me be with the Signor so it was of no use to stay there any longer. Yet it was
a hard matter with me to go away, and leave my dear master within those dismal
walls; and nothing should have persuaded me to do so, but that I hoped, when
your Lordship knew where the Signor was, yet might be able to get him out. But
there is not minute to be lost, my Lord, for when once a gentleman has got
within the claws of those inquisitors, there as no knowing how soon they may
take it in their heads to tear him in pieces. Shall I order horses for Rome, my
Lord? I am ready to set off again directly.

The suddenness of such intelligence, concerning an only son, might have
agitated stronger nerves that those of the Marchese, and so much was he shocked
be it, that he could not immediately determine how (...) proceed or give any
answer to Paulo's repeated questions. When, however, he became sufficiently
(...) collected to make further inquiry into the situation Vivaldi he perceived
the necessary of an (...) journey; but, first, it would be prudent to consult
with some friends, whose connections at Rome might be means of greatly
facilitating the important purpose which led him thither, and this could not be
done (...) the following morning. Yet he gave orders, that preparation should
be made for his setting out at a moment's notice; and, having listened to as
full an account as Paulo could give of the past and present circumstances of
Vivaldi, he dismissed him to repose for the remainder of the night.

Paulo, however, though much in want of rest, (...) in too great an agitation
of Spirits either to seek or find it; and the fear he had indicated, on
entering the Marchese's apartment, proceeded from the hurry of his mind, rather
than from any positive apprehension of new evil. For his liberty he was
indebted to the young sentinel, who had, on a former occasion, been removed
from the door of his prison, but who, by means of the guard, to whom Vivaldi
had given money, as he returned one night from the tribunal, had since been
able to communicate with him. This man, of a nature too humane for his
situation, was become wretched in it, and he determined to escape from his
office before the expiration of the time, for which he had been engaged. He
thought, that to be a guard ^ver prisoners was nearly as miserable as being a
prisoner himself. "I see no difference between them," (...) he, "except that
the prisoner watches on one side of the door, and the sentinel on the other."

With the resolution to release himself, he conferred with Paulo, whose good
nature and feeling heart, among so many people of a contrary character, had won
^is confidence and affection, and he laid his plan of escape so well, that it
was on the point of succeeding, when Paulo's obstinacy, in attempting an
impossibility and nearly counteracted the whole. It went to his heart, he said,
to leave his master in prison, while he himself was to march off in safety, and
he would run (...) risk of his neck, rather than have such a deed upon (...)
head. He proposed, therefore, as Vivaldi's guards were of too ferocious a
nature to be tampered with, to scale, a wall of the court into which a grate of
Vivaldi's dungeon looked. But had this lofty wall been practicable, the grate
was not; and the attempt had nearly cost Paulo not only his liberty, but his
life.

When, at length, he had made his way through the perilous avenues of the
prison, and was fairly beyond the walls, he could hardly be prevailed upon by
his companion to leave them. For near an hour, he wandered under their shade,
weeping and exclaiming, and calling upon his dear master, at the evident hazard
of being retaken; and probably would have remained there much longer, had not
the dawn of morning rendered his companion desperate. Just, however, as the man
was forcing him away, Paulo fancied he distinguished, by the strengthening
light, the roof of that particular building, in whose dungeon his master was
confined, and the appearance of Vivaldi himself, could scarcely have occasioned
a more sudden burst of joy; succeeded, by one of grief, "It is the roof, it is
the very roof!" exclaimed Paulo, vaulting from the ground, and clapping his
hands: "it is the roof, the roof! O, my master, my master! the roof, the roof!"
He continued, alternately, to exclaim, "My master! the roof! my master! the
roof! till his companion began to fear he was frantic, while tears streamed
down his cheeks, and every look and gesture expressed the most extravagant and
whimsical union of joy and sorrow. At length the absolute terror of discovery
compelled his companion to force him from the spot; when, having lost sight of
the building which enclosed Vivaldi, he set off for Naples with a speed that
defied all interruption, and arrived there in the condition, which has been
mentioned, having taken no sleep, and scarcely any sustenance, since he left
the inquisition. Yet, though in this exhausted state, the spirit of his
affection remained unbroken and when, on the following morning, the Marchese
quitted Naples neither his weariness, nor the iminent danger, to which this
journey must expose him, could prevent his attending him to Rome.

The rank of the Marchese, and the influence he was known to possess at the
court of Naples, were circumstances that promised to have weight with the Holy
Office, and to procure Vivaldi a speedy release; but yet more than these, were
the high connections which the Count di Maro, the friend of the Marchese, had
in the church of Rome.

The applications, however, which were made to the Inquisitors, were not so
soon replied to as the wishes of the Marchese had expected, and he had been
above a fortnight in that city, before he was even permitted to visit his son.
In this interview, affection predominated on both sides over all ^emembrance of
the past. The condition of Vivaldi, his faded appearance to which the wounds he
had received at Celano, and from which he was scarcely recovered, had
contributed; and his situation in a melancholy and terrible prison, were
circumstances that awakened all the tenderness of the father; his errors were
forgiven, and the Marchese felt disposed to consent to all that might restore
him to happiness, could he but be restored to liberty.

Vivaldi, when informed of his mother's death, shed bitter tears of sorrow and
remorse, for having occasioned her so much uneasiness. The unreasonableness of
her claims was forgotten, and her faults were extenuated; happily, indeed, for
his peace, the extent of her criminal designs he had never understood; and when
he learned that her dying request had been intended to promote his happiness,
the cruel consciousness of having interrupted here is, occasioned him severe
anguish, and he was obliged to recollect her former conduct toward Ellena at
San Stefano, before he could become reconciled to himself.

CHAP. XV.
Yours in the ranks of death."
SHAKESPEARE.
NEAR three weeks had elapsed since the Marchese's arrival at Rome, and not any
decisive answer was returned, by the Inquisition, to his application when he
and Vivaldi received, at the same time, a summons to attend father Schedoni in
his dungeon. To meet the man who had occasioned so much suffering to his
family, was extremely painful to the Marchese, but he was not allowed to refuse
the interview; and at the hour appointed he called at the chamber of Vivaldi;
and, followed by two officials, they passed on together to that of Schedoni.

While they waited at the door of the prison-room, till the numerous bars and
locks were unfastened, the agitation, which Vivaldi had suffered, on receiving
the summons, returned with redoubled force, now that he was about to behold,
once more, that wretched man, who had announced himself to be the parent of
Ellena di Rosalba. The Marchese suffered emotions of a different nature, and
with his reluctance to see Schedoni, was mingled a degree of curiosity, as to
the event, which had occasioned this summons.

The door being thrown open, the officials entered first, and the Marchese and
Vivaldi, on following, discovered the confessor lying on a mattress. He did not
rise to receive them, but, as he li^ted his head, and bowed it in obeisance,
his countenance, upon which the little light admitted through the triple grate
of his dungeon gleamed, seemed more than usually ghastly; his eyes were hollow,
and his shrunk features appeared as if death had already touched them. --
Vivaldi, on perceiving him, groaned, and averted his face; but, soon recovering
a command of himself, he approached the mattress.

The Marchese, suppressing every expression of resentment toward an enemy, who
was reduced to this deplorable condition, inquired what he had to communicate.

"Where is father Nicola?" said Schedoni, to an official, without attending to
the question: "I do not, see him here. Is he gone so soon, and without having
heard the purport of my summons? Let him be called."

The official spoke to a sentinel, who immediately left the chamber.

"Who are these that surround me?" said Schedoni. "Who is he that stands at the
foot of the bed?" While he spoke, he bent his eyes on Vivaldi, who rested in
deep dejection there, and was lost in thought, till aroused by Schedoni's
voice, he replied,

"It is I, Vincentio di Vivaldi; I obey your requisition, and inquire the
purpose of it?"

The Marchese repeated the demand. Schedoni appeared to meditate; sometimes he
fixed his eyes upon Vivaldi, for an instant, and when he withdrew them, he
seemed to sink into deeper thoughtfulness. As he raised them once again, they
assumed a singular expression of wildness, and then settling, as if on vacancy,
a sudden glare shot from them, while he said -- "Who is he that glides there in
the dusk?"

His eyes were directed beyond Vivaldi, who, on turning, perceived the monk,
father Nicola, passing behind him.

"I am here," said Nicola: "what do you require of me?"

"That you will bear testimony to the truth of what I shall declare," replied
Schedoni.

Nicola and an Inquisitor who had accompanied him, immediately arranged
themselves on one side of the bed, while the Marchese stationed himself on the
other. Vivaldi remained at its foot.

Schedoni, after a pause began: "That which I have to make known relates to the
cabal formerly carried on by him, the father Nicola, and myself, against the
peace of an innocent young woman, whom, at my instigation, he has basely
traduced."

At these words, Nicola attempted to interrupt the Confessor, but Vivaldi
restrained him.

"Ellena di Rosalba is known to you?" continue Schedoni, addressing the
Marchese.

Vivaldi's countenance changed at this abrupt mention of Ellena, but he
remained silent.

"I have heard of her," replied the Marchese, coldly.

"And you have heard falsely of her rejoined Schedoni, "Lift your eyes, my lord
Marchese, and say, do you not recollect that face?" pointing to Nicola.

The Marchese regarded the monk attentively. "It is a face not easily to be
forgotten," he replied; "I remember to have seen it more than once."

"Where have you seen him, my Lord?"

"In my own palace, at Naples; and you yourself introduced him to me there."

"I did," replied Schedoni.

"Why, then, do you now accuse him of falsehood," observed the Marchese, "since
you acknowledge yourself to have been the instigator of his conduct?"

"O heavens!" said Vivaldi: "this monk, then, this father Nicola, is, as I
suspected, the slanderer of Ellena di Rosalba!"

"Most true," rejoined Schedoni; "and it is for the purpose of vindicating -- "

"And you acknowledge yourself to be the author of those infamous slanders!"
passionately interrupted Vivaldi: -- "you, who but lately declared yourself to
be her father!"

In the instant, that Vivaldi had uttered this, he became sensible of his
indiscretion, for till now he had avoided informing the Marchese that Ellena
had been declared the daughter of Schedoni. This abrupt disclosure, and at such
a moment, he immediately perceived might be fatal to his hopes, and that the
Marchese would not consider the promise he had given to his dying wife,
however, solemn, as binding, under circumstances so peculiar and unforeseen as
the present. The astonishment of the Marchese, upon this discovery, cannot
easily be imagined; he looked at his son for an explanation of what he had
heard, and then, with increased detestation, at the Confessor; but Vivaldi was
not in a state of mind to give any explanation at this moment, and he requested
his father to suspend even his conjectures till he could converse with him
alone.

The Marchese desisted, for the present, from further inquiry, but it was
obvious that his opinion and his resolution, respecting the marriage of
Vivaldi, was already formed.

"You, then, are the author of those slanders!" repeated Vivaldi.

"Hear me!" cried Schedoni, in a voice which the strength of his spirit,
contending with the feebleness of his condition, rendered hollow and terrible
-- "Hear me!"

He stopped, unable to recover immediately from the effect of the exertion he
had made. -- At length, he resumed:

"I have declared, and I continue to declare, that Ellena di Rosalba, as she
has been named for the purpose, I conjecture, of concealing her from an
unworthy father, as my daughter!"

Vivaldi groaned in the excess of his despair, but made no further attempt to
interrupt Schedoni, The Marchese was not equally passive. -- "And was it to
listen to a vindication of your daughter," said he, "that I have been summoned
hither? But let this Signora Rosalba, be who she may, of what inportance can it
be to me whether she is innocent or otherwise!"

Vivaldi, with the utmost difficulty, forbore to express the feelings, which
this sentence excited. It appeared to recall all the spirit of Schedoni. "She
is the daughter of a noble house, "said the Confessor, haughtily, while he half
raised himself from his mattress. "In me you behold the last of the Count's di
Bruno."

The Marchese smiled contemptuously."

Schedoni proceeded. "I call upon you, Nicola di Zampari, who have declared
yourself, on a late occasion so strenuous for justice, I call upon you now to
do justice in this instance, and to acknowledge, before these witnesses, that
Ellena Rosalba is innocent of every circumstance of misconduct, which you have
formerly related to the Marchese di Vivaldi!"

"Villain! do you hesitate," said Vivaldi to Nicola, "to retract the cruel
slanders which you have thrown upon her name, and which have been the means of
destroying her peace, perhaps for ever? Do you persist -- "

The Marchese interrupted his son: --

"Let me put an end to the difficulty, by concluding the interview; I perceive
that my presence has been required for a purpose that does not concern me."

Before the Confessor could reply, the Marchese had turned from him to quit the
chamber; but the vehemence of Vivaldi's distress prevailed with him to pause,
and thus allowed him to understand from Schedoni, that the justification of the
innocent Ellena, though it had been mentioned first, as being the object
nearest to his heart, was not the only one that had urged him to require this
meeting.

"If you consent," added Schedoni, "to listen to the vindication of my child,
you shall afterwads perceive, Signor, that I, fallen though I am, have still
been desirous of counteracting, as far as remains for me, the evil I, have
occasioned. You shall acknowledge, that what I then made known is of the utmost
consequence to the repose the of Marchese di Vivaldi, high in influence, and
haughty in prosperity as he now appears."

The latter part of this assurance threatened to overcome the effect of the
first; the pride of the Marchese swelled high; he took some steps toward the
door, but then stopped, and conjecturing that the subject, to which Schedoni
alluded, concerned the liberation of his son, he consented to attend to what
Nicola should disclose.

This monk, meanwhile, had been balancing the necessity for acknowledging
himself a slanderer against the possibility of avoiding it; and it was the
resolute manner of Vivaldi, who appeared to have no doubt as to his guilt in
this instance, that made him apprehend the consequence of persisting in
falsehood, not either remorse of conscience, or the appeal of Schedoni. He
acknowledged then, after considerable circumlocution, in which he contrived to
defend himself, by throwing all the odium of the original design upon the
Confessor, that he had been prevailed upon by his arts to impose on the
credulity of the Marchese, respecting the conduct of Ellena di Rosalba. This
avowal was made upon oath, and Schedoni, by the questions he put to him, was
careful it should be so full and circumstantial that even the most prejudiced
hearer must be convinced of its truth; while the most unfeeling must have
yielded for once to indignation against the asperser, and pity of the aspersed.
Its effect upon the present auditors was various. The Marchese had listened to
the whole explanation with an unmoved countenance, but with profound attention.
Vivaldi had remained in a sixth attitude, with eyes bent on father Nicola, in
such eager and stern regard, as seemed to search into his very soul; and, when
the monk concluded, a smile of triumphant joy lighted up his features, as he
looked upon the Marchese, and claimed an acknowledgment of his conviction, that
Ellena had been calumniated. The cold glance, which the Marchese, returned,
struck the impassioned and generous Vivaldi to the heart, who perceived that he
was not only totally indifferent as to the injustice, which an innocent and
helpless young woman had suffered, but fancied that he was unwilling to admit
the truth, which his judgment would no longer allow him to reject.

Schedoni, meanwhile, appeared almost to writhe under the agony, which his mind
inflicted upon him, and it was only by strong effort, that he sustained his
spirit so far as to go through with the interrogations he had judged it
necessary to put to Nicola. When the subject was finished, he sunk back on his
pillow, and, closing his eyes, a hue so pallid, succeeded by one so livid,
overspread his features, that Vivaldi for an instant believed he was dying; and
in this supposition he was not singular, for even an official was touched with
the Confessor's condition, and had advanced to assist him, when he unclosed his
eyes, and seemed to revive.

The Marchese, without making any comment upon the avowal of father Nicola,
demanded on its conclusion, the disclosure, which Schedoni had asserted to be
intimately connected with his peace; and the latter now inquired of a person
near him, whether a secretary of the Inquisition was in the chamber, who he had
requested might attend, to take a formal deposition of what he should declare.
He was answered, that such an one was already in waiting. He then, asked, what
other persons were in the room, adding, that he should require Inquisitorial
witnesses to his deposition; and was answered, that an Inquisitor and two
officials were present, and that their evidence was more than sufficient for
his purpose.

A lamp was then called for by the Secretary; but, as that could not
immediately be procured, the torch of one of the sentinels, who watched in the
dark avenue without, was brought in its stead, and this discovered to Schedoni
the various figures assembled in his dusky chamber, and to them the emaciated
form and ghastly visage of the Confessor. As Vivaldi now beheld him by the
stronger light of the torch, he again fancied that death was in his aspect.

Every person was now ready for the declaration of Schedoni; but he himself
seemed not fully prepared. He remained for some moments reclining on his pillow
in silence, with his eyes shut, while the changes in his features indicated the
strong emotion of his mind. Then, as if by a violent effort, he half raised
himself, and made an ample confession of the arts he had practiced against
Vivaldi. He declared himself to be the anonimous accuser who had caused him to
be arrested by the Holy-Office, and that the charge of heresy, which he had
brought against him, was false and malicious.

At the moment when Vivaldi received this confirmation of his suspicions, as to
the identity of his accuser, he discovered more fully that the charge was not
what had been stated to him at the chapel of San Sebastian, in which Ellena was
implicated; and he demanded an explanation of this circumstance. Schedoni
acknowledged, that the persons, who had there arrested him, were not officers
of the inquisition, and that the instrument of arrest, containing the charge of
elopement with a nun, was forged by himself, for the purpose of empowering the
ruffians to carry off Ellena without opposition from the inhabitants of the
convent, in which she was then lodged.

To Vivaldi's enquiry, why it had been thought necessary to employ stratagem in
the removal of Ellena, since, if Schedoni had only claimed her for his
daughter, he might have removed her without any, the Confessor replied, that he
was then ignorant of the relationship which existed between them. B^^t to the
further enquiries, with what design, and whither Ellena had been removed, and
the means by which he had discovered her to be his daughter, Schedoni was
silent; and he sunk back, overwhelmed by the recollections they awakened.

The depositions of Schedoni having been taken down by the Secretary, were
formally signed by the Inquisitor and the officials present; and Vivaldi thus
saw his innocence vindicated by the very man who had thrown him among the
perils of the Inquisition. But the near prospect or release now before him
failed to affect him with joy, while he understood that Ellena was the daughter
of Schedoni, the child of a murderer, whom he himself had been, in some degree,
instrumental in bringing to a dreadful and ignominous death. Still, however,
willing to hope, that Schedoni had not spoken the truth concerning his
relationship to Ellena he claimed, in consideration of the affection he had so
long cherished for her, a full explanation of the circumstance connected with
the discovery of her family.

At this public avowed of his attachment, a haughty impatience appeared on the
countenance of the Marchese, who forbade him to make further enquiry on the
subject, and was immediately retiring from the chamber.

"My presence is no longer necessary," he added: "the prisoner has concluded
the only detail which I could be interested to hear from him; and, in
consideration of the confession he has made as to the innocence of my son, I
pardon him the suffering, which his false charge has occasioned to me and my
family The paper containing his depositions is given to your responsibility,
holy father," addressing the Inquisitor; "and you are required to lay it upon
the table of the Holy Office, that the innocence of Vincentio di Vivaldi may
appear, and that he may be released from these prisons without further delay.
But first I demand a copy of those declarations, and that the copy also shall
be signed by the present witnesses."

The secretary was now bidden to copy them, and, while the Marchese waited to
receive the paper, (for he would not leave the chamber till he had secured it)
Vivaldi was urging his claim for an explanation respecting the family of
Ellena, with unconquerable perseverance. Schedoni, no longer permitted to evade
the inquiry, could not, however, give a circumstantial explanation, without
partly disclosing, also, the fatal designs which had been meditated by him and
the late Marchesa di Vivaldi, of whose death he was ignorant; he related,
therefore, little more respecting Ellena than that a portrait, which she wore
as being her father's, had first led to the discovery of her family.

While the Confessor had been giving this brief explanation, Nicola, who was
somewhat withdrawn from the circle, stood gazing at him with the malignity of a
demon. His glowing eyes just appeared under the edge of his cowl, while, rolled
up in his dark drapery, the lower features of his face were muffled; but the
intermediate part of his countenance, receiving the full glare of the torch,
displayed all its speaking and terrific lines. Vivaldi, as his eye glanced upon
him, saw again the very monk of Paluzzi, and he thought he beheld also a man
capable of the very crimes of which he had accused Schedoni. At this instant he
remembered the dreadful garment that had been discovered in a dungeon of the
fortress; and, yet more, he remembered the extraordinary circumstances
attending the death of Bianchi, together with the immediate knowledge which the
monk had displayed of that event. Vivaldi's suspicions respecting the cause of
her death, being thus revived, he determined to obtain, if possible, either a
relief from or a confirmation of them; and he solemnly called upon Schedoni,
who, already condemned to die, had no longer any thing to fear from a
disclosure of the truth, whatever it might be to declare all that he knew on
the subject. As he did so, he looked at Nicola, to observe the effect of this
demand, whose countenance was, however, so much shrouded, that little of its
expression could be seen; but Vivaldi remarked, that while he had spoken, the
monk drew his garment closer over the lower part of his face, and that he had
immediately turned his eyes from him upon the Confessor.

With most solemn protestations, Schedoni declared himself to be both innocent
and ignorant of the cause of Bianchi's death.

Vivaldi then demanded by what means his agent, Nicola, had obtained such
immediate information, as the warning he had delivered at Paluzzi proved him to
have, of an event, in which it appeared that he could be so little interested;
and why that warning had been given.

Nicola did not attempt to anticipate the reply of Schedoni, who, after a
momentary silence, said, "That warning, young man, was given to deter you from
visiting Altieri, as was every circumstance of advice or intelligence, which
you received beneath the arch of Paluzzi."

"Father," replied Vivaldi, "you have never loved, or you would have spared
yourself the practice of artifices so ineffectual to mislead or to conquer a
lover. Did you believe that an anonymous adviser could have more influence with
me than my affection, or that I could be terrified by such stratagems into a
renunciation of its object?"

"I believed," rejoined the Confessor, "that the disinterested advice if a
stranger might have some weight with you; but I trusted more to the impression
of awe, which the conduct and seeming foreknowledge of that stranger were
adapted to inspire in a mind like yours; and I thus endeavored to avail
myself of your prevailing weakness."

"And what do you term my prevailing weakness?" said Vivaldi, blushing.

"A susceptibility which renders you especially liable to superstition,"
replied Schedoni.

"What! does a monk call superstition a weakness!" rejoined Vivaldi. "But grant
he does, on what occasion have I betrayed such weakness?"

"Have you forgotten a conversation which I once held with you on invisible
spirits?" said Schedoni.

As he asked this, Vivaldi was struck with the tone of his voice; he thought it
was different from what he had remembered ever to have heard from him; and he
looked at Schedoni more intently, that he might be certain it was he who had
spoken. The Confessor's eyes were fixed upon him, and the repeated slowly in
the same tone, "Have you forgotten?

"I have not forgotten the conversation to which you allude," replied Vivaldi,
"and I do not recollect that I then disclosed any opinion that may justify your
assertion."

"The opinions you avowed were rational," said Schedoni, "but the ardour of
your imagination was apparent, and what ardent imagination ever was contended
to trust to plain reasoning, or to the evidence of the senses? It may not
willingly confine itself to the dull truths, of this earth, but, eager to
expand its faculties, to fill its capacity, and to experience its own peculiar
delights, soars after new wonders into a world of its own!"

Vivivaldi blushed at this reproof, now conscious of its justness; and was
surprised that Schedoni should so well have understood the nature of his mind,
while he himself, with whom conjecture had never assumed the stability of
opinion, on the subject to which the Confessor alluded, had been ignorant even
of its propensities,

"I acknowledge the truth of your remark," said Vivaldi, "as far as it concerns
myself. I have, however, enquiries to make on a point less abstracted, and
toward explaining which the evidence of my senses themselves have done little.
To whom belonged the bloody garments, I found in the dungeon of Paluzzi, and
what became of the person to whom they had pertained?

Consternation appeared for an instant on the features of Schedoni. "What
garments?" said he.

"They appeared to be these of a person who had died by violence," replied
Vivaldi, "and they were discovered in a place frequented by your avowed agent,
Nicola the monk."

As he concluded the sentence, Vivaldi looked at Nicola, upon whom the
attention of every person present now directed.

"They were my own," said this monk.

"Your own! and in that condition!* exclaimed Vivaldi. "They were covered with
gore!"

"They were my own." repeated Nicola. "For their condition, I have to thank
you, -- the wound your pistol gave me occasioned it."

Vivaldi was astonished by this apparent subterfuge. "I had no pistol," he
rejoined, "my sword was my only weapon!"

"Pause a moment," said the monk.

"I repeat that I had no firearms," replied Vivaldi.

"I appeal to father Schedoni*' rejoined Nicola, "whether I was not wounded by
a pistol shot."

"To me you have no longer any right of appeal," said Schedoni. "Why should I
save you from suspicions, that may bring you to a state like this, to which you
have reduced me!"

"Your crimes have reduced you to it," replied Nicola, "I have only done my
duty, and that which another person could have affected without my aid -- the
priest to whom Spalatro made his last confession."

"It is, however a duty of such a kind," observed Vivaldi, "as I would not
willingly have upon my conscience. You have betrayed the life of your former
friend, and have compelled me to assist in the destruction of a fellow being,"

"You, like me, have assisted to destroy a destroyer," replied the monk. "He
has taken life, and deserves, therefore, to lose it. If, however, it will
afford you consolation to know that you have not materially assisted in his
destruction, I will hereafter give you proof for this assurance. There were
other means of showing that Schedoni was the Count di Bruno, than the testimony
of Ansaldo, though I was ignorant of them when I bade you summon the
penitentiary."

"If you had sooner avowed this," said Vivaldi, "the assertion would have been
more plausible. Now, I can only understand that it is designed to win my
silence, and present my retorting upon you your own maxim -- that he who has
taken the life of another deserves to loose his own. To whom did those bloody
garments belong?"

"To myself, I repeat," said Nicola, "Schedoni can bear testimony that I
received at Paluzzi a pistol wound"

"Impossible", said Vivaldi, "I was armed only with my sword!"

"You had a companion," observed the monk, "had not he firearms?"

Vivaldi, after a momentary consideration, recollected that Paulo had pistols,
and that he had fired one beneath the arch of Paluzzi, on the first alarm
occasioned by the strangers voice. He immediately acknowledged the
recollection. "But I heard no groan, no symptom of distress!" he added.
"Besides, the garments were at a considerable distance from the spot where the
pistol was fired! How could a person, so severely wounded as those garments
indicated, have silently withdrawn to a remote dungeon, or, having done so, is
it probable he would have thrown aside his dress!"

"All that is nevertheless true," replied Nicola. "My resolution enabled me to
stifle the expression of my anguish; I withdrew to the interior of the ruin, to
escape from you, but you pursued me even to the dungeon, where I threw off my
discolored vestments, in which I dared not return to my convent, and departed
by a way which all your ingenuity failed to discover. The people who were
already in the fort, for the purpose of assisting to confine you and your
servant during the night on which Signora Rosalba was taken from Altieri,
procured me another habit, and relief for my wound. But, though I was unseen by
you during the night, I was not entirely unheard, for my groans reached you
more than once from an adjoining chamber, and my companions were entertained
with the alarm which your servant testified. -- Are you now convinced?"

The groans were clearly remembered by Vivaldi, and many other circumstances of
Nicola's narration accorded so well with others, which he recollected to have
occurred on the night alluded to, that he had no longer a doubt of its
veracity. The suddenness of Bianchi's death, however, still occasioned him
suspicions as to its cause; yet Schedoni had declared not only that he was
innocent, but ignorant of this cause, which it appeared from his unwillingness
to give testimony in favor of his agent, he would not have affirmed, had he
been conscious that the monk was in any degree guilty in this instance. That
Nicola could have no inducement for attempting the life of Bianchi other than a
reward offered him by Schedoni, was clear; and Vivaldi, after more fully
considering these circumstances, become convinced that her death was in
consequence of some accident or natural decay.

While this conversation was passing, the Marchese, impatient to put a
conclusion to it, and to leave the chamber, repeatedly urged the secretary to
dispatch; and, while he now earnestly renewed his request, another voice
answered for the secretary, that he had nearly concluded. Vivaldi thought that
he had heard the voice on some former occasion, and on turning his eyes upon
the person who had spoken, discovered the stranger to be the same who had first
visited him in prison. Perceiving by his dress, that he was an officer of the
Inquisition, Vivaldi now understood too well the purport of his former visit,
and that he had come with a design to betray him by affected sympathy into a
confession of some heretical opinions. Similar instances of treachery Vivaldi
had heard were frequently practiced upon accused persons, but he had never
fully believed such cruelty possible till now, that it had been attempted
toward himself.

The visit of this person bringing to his recollection the subsequent one he
had received from Nicola, Vivaldi inquired whether the sentinels had really
admitted him to his cell, or he had entered it by other means! a question to
which the monk was silent, but the smile on his features, if so strange an
expression deserved to be called a smile, seemed to reply, "Do you believe that
I, a servant of the Inquisition, will betray its secrets?"

Vivaldi, however, urged the inquiry, for he wished to know whether the guard,
who appeared to be faithful to their office, had escaped the punishment that
was threatened.

"They were honest," replied Nicola, "seek no further."

"Are the tribunal convinced of their integrity?"

Nicola smiled again in derison, and replied, "They never doubted it."

"How!" said Vivaldi. "Why were these men put under arrest, if their
faithfulness was not even suspected?"

"Be satisfied with the knowledge, which experience has given you of the
secrets of the Inquisition," replied Nicola solemnly, "seek to know no more!"

"It has terrible secrets!" said Schedoni, who had been long silent. "Know,
young man, that almost every cell of every prisoner has a concealed entrance,
by which the ministers of death may pass unnoticed to their victims. This
Nicola is now one of those dreadful summoners, and is acquainted with all the
secret avenues, that lead to murder."

Vivaldi shrunk from Nicola in horror, and Schedoni paused; but while he had
spoken, Vivaldi had again noticed the extraordinary change in his voice, and
shuddered at its sound no less than at the information it had given. Nicola was
silent; but his terrible eyes were fixed in vengeance on Schedoni.

"His office has been short," resumed the Confessor, turning his heavy eyes
upon Nicola, "and his task is almost done!" As he pronounced the last words,
his voice faultered, but they were heard by the monk, who drawing nearer to the
bed demanded an explanation of them. A ghastly smile triumphed in the features
of Schedoni; "Fear not but that an explanation will come full soon," said he.

Nicola fixed himself before the Confessor, and bent his brows upon him as if
he would have searched into his very soul, When Vivaldi again looked at
Schedoni, he was shocked on observing the sudden alteration in his countenance,
yet still a faint smile of triumph lingered there. But, while Vivaldi gazed,
the features suddenly became agitated: in the next instant his whole frame was
convulsed, and heavy groans labored from his breast. Schedoni was now
evidently dying.

The honor of Vivaldi, and of the Marchese, who endeavoring to leave the
chamber, was equalled only by the general confusion that reigned there; every
person present seemed to feel at least a momentary compassion, except Nicola,
who stood unmoved, beside Schedoni, and looked steadfastly upon his pangs, while
a smile of derison marked his countenance. As Vivaldi observed, with
detestation, this expression, a slight spasm darted over Nicola's face, and his
muscles also seemed to labor with sudden contraction; but the affection was
transient, and vanished as abruptly as it had appeared. The monk, however,
turned from the miserable spectacle before him, and as he turned he caught
involuntarily at the arm of a person near him, and leaned on his shoulder for
support. His manner appeared to betray that he had not been permitted to
triumph in the sufferings of his enemy, without participating at least in their
horror.

Schedoni's struggles now began to abate, and in a short time he lay
motionless. When he unclosed his eyes, death was in them. He was yet nearly
insensible; but presently a faint gleam of recollection shot from them, and
gradually lighting them up, the character of his soul appeared there; the
expression was indeed feeble, but it was true. He moved his lips as if he would
have spoken, and looked languidly round the chamber, seemingly in search of
some person. At length, he uttered a sound but he had not yet sufficient
command of his muscles, to modulate that sound into a word, till by repeated
efforts the name of Nicola became intelligible. At the call, the monk raised
his head from the shoulder of the person on whom he had reclined, and turning
round, Schedoni, as was evident from the sudden change of expression in his
countenance, discovered him; his eyes, as they settled on Nicola seemed to
recollect all their wonted fire, and the malignant triumph, lately so prevalent
in his physiognomy, again appeared as in the next moment, he pointed to him.
His glance seemed suddenly empowered with the destructive fascination
attributed to that of the basilisk, for while it now met Nicola's that monk
seemed as if transfixed to the spot, and unable to withdraw his eyes from the
glare of Schedoni's; in their expression he read the dreadful sentence of his
fate, the triumph of revenge and cunning. Struck with this terrible conviction,
a pallid hue overspread his face; at the same time an involuntary motion
convulsed his features, cold trembling seized open his frame, and, uttering a
deep groan, he fell back, and was caught in the arms of the people near him. At
the instant of his fall, Schedoni uttered a sound so strange and horrible, so
convulsed, yet so loud, so exulting, yet so unlike any human voice, that every
person in the chamber, except those who were assisting Nicola, struck with
irresistible terror, endeavored to make their way out of it. This, however,
was impracticable, for the door was fastened, until a physician, who had been
sent for, should arrive, and some investigation could be made into this
mysterious affair. The consternation of the Marchese and of Vivaldi, compelled
to witness this scene of horror, cannot easily be imagined.

Schedoni, having uttered that demonical sound of exultation, was not permitted
to repeat it, for the pangs he had lately suffered, returned upon him, and he
was again in strong convulsions, when the physician entered the chamber. The
moment he beheld Schedoni, he declared him to be poisoned; and he pronounced a
similar opinion on father Nicola^ affirming, also, that the drug, as appeared
from the violence of the effect, was of two subtle and inveterate a nature to
allow of antidote. He was however, willing to administer the medicine usual in
such cases.

While he was giving orders to an attendant, with respect to this, the violence
of Schedoni' convulsions once more relaxed; but Nicola appeared in the last
extremity. His sufferings were, incessant, his senses never for a moment
returned, and he expired, before the medicine, which had been sent for, could
he brought. When it came, however, it was administered with some success to
Schedoni, who recovered not only his recollection, but his voice; and the first
word he uttered was, as formerly, the name of Nicola.

"Does he live? added the Confessor with the utmost difficulty, and after a
long pause. The persons around him were silent, but the truth, which this
silence indicated, seemed to revive him.

The inquisitor, who had attended, perceiving that Schedoni had recovered the
use of his intellects, now judged it prudent to ask some questions relative to
his present condition, and to the cause of Nicola's death.

"Poison," replied Schedoni readily.

"By whom administered?" said the inquisitor, "consider that while you answer,
you are on your deathbed."

"I have no wish to conceal the truth," rejoined Schedoni, "nor the
satisfaction" -- he was obliged to cause, but presently added, "I have
destroyed him, who would have destroyed me, and -- and I have escaped an
ignominous death."

He paused again; it was with difficulty that he had said thus much, and he was
now overcome by the exertion he had made. The secretary, who had not been
permitted to leave the chamber, was ordered to note Schedoni's words.

"You avow then," continued the Inquisitor, "that the poison was administered,
both in the case of father Nicola, and in your own, by yourself?"

Schedoni could not immediately reply; but when he did he said "I avow it."

He was asked by what means he had contrived to procure the poison, and was
bidden to name his accomplice.

"I had no accomplice," replied Schedoni.

"How did you procure the poison then?"

Schedoni, slowly and with difficulty, replied, "It was concealed in my vest."

"Consider that you are dying," said the inquisitor, "and confess the truth. We
cannot believe what you, have last asserted. It is improbable that you should
have had an opportunity of providing yourself with poison after your arrest,
and equally improbable that you should have thought such provision necessary
before that period. Confess who is your accomplice.'

This accusation of falsehood recalled the spirit of Schedoni, which,
contending with, and conquering, for a moment, corporeal suffering, he said in
a firmer tone, "It was the person, in which I dip my poignard, the better to
defend me."

The Inquisitor smiled in contempt of this explanation, and Schedoni, observing
him, desired a particular part of his vest might be examined, where would be
found some remains of the drug concealed as he had affirmed. He was indulged in
his request, and the poison was discovered within the broad hem of his garment.

Still it was inconceivable how he had contrived to administer it to Nicola,
who, though he had been for some time alone with him on this day, would
scarcely have so far confided in an enemy, as to have accepted any seeming
sustenance that might have been offered by him. The Inquisitor, still anxious
to discover an accomplice, asked Schedoni who had assisted to administer the
drug to Nicola, but the Confessor was no longer in a condition to reply. Life
was now sinking a pace: the gleam of spirit and of character that had returned
to his eyes, was departed, and left them haggard and fixed; and presently a
lived corpse was all that remained of the once terrible Schedoni!

While this awful event had been accomplishing, the Marchese, suffering under
the utmost perturbation, had withdrawn, to the distant grate of the dungeon,
where he conversed with an official as to what might be the probable
consequence of his present situation to himself; but Vivaldi, in an agony of
horror, had been calling incessantly for the medicine, which might possibly
afford some relief to the anguish he witnessed; when it was brought, he had
assisted to support the sufferers.

At length, now that the worst was over, and when several witnesses had signed
to the last avowal of Schedoni, every person in the chamber was suffered to
depart; and Vivaldi was reconducted to his prison, accompanied by the Marchese,
where he was to remain till the decision of the holy office respecting his
innocence, as asserted by the deposition of Schedoni, should be known. He was
too much affected by the late scene to give the Marchese any explanation at
present, respecting the family of Ellena di Rosalba, and the Marchese, having
remained for some time with his son, withdrew to the residence of his friend.

CHAP. XVI.
"Master, go on, and I well follow the
To the last gasp, with truth, and loyalty,
SHAKESPEARE.
IN consequence of the dying confession of Schedoni, an order was sent from the
holy office for the release of Vivaldi, within a few days after the death of
the Confessor; and the Marchese conducted his son from the prisons of the
inquisition to the mansion of his friend the Count di Maro, with whom he had
resided since his arrival at Rome.

While they were receiving the ceremonious congratulations of the Count, and of
some nobles assembled to welcome the emancipated prisoner, a loud voice was
heard from the antichamber exclaiming, "Let me pass! It is my Master, let me
pass! May all those who attempt to stop me, be sent to the Inquisition
themselves!"

In the next instant Paulo burst into the saloon, followed by a group of
lacqueys, who, however, paused at the door, fearful of the displeasure of their
lord, yet scarcely able to stifle a laugh; while Paulo, springing forward, had
nearly overse some of the company, who happened at that moment to be bowing
with profound joy to Vivaldi.

"It is my master! it is my master!" cried Paulo, and, sending off a nobleman
with each elbow, as he made his way between them, he hugged Vivaldi in his
arms, repeating, "O, my master! my master!" till a a passion of joy and
affection overcame his voice and he fell at his master's feet and wept.

This was a moment of finer joy to Vivaldi, than he had known since his meeting
with his father, and he was too much interested by his faithful servant, to
have leisure to apoligize to the astonished company for his rudeness. While the
lacqueys were repairing the mischief Paulo had occasioned, were picking up the
rolling snuff-boxes he had jerked away in his passage, and wiping the snuff
from the soiled clothes, Vivaldi was participating in all the delight, and
returning all the affection of his servant, and was so wholly occupied by these
pleasurable feelings as scarcely to be sensible that any persons, besides
themselves, were in the room. The Marchese, meanwhile, was making a thousand
apologies for the disasters Paulo had occasioned; was alternately calling upon
him to recollect in whose presence he was, and to quit the apartment
immediately: explaining to the company that he had not seen Vivaldi since they
were together in the inquisition and remarking profoundly, that he was much
attached to his master. But Paulo, insensible to the repeated commands of the
Marchese, and to the endeavors of Vivaldi to raise him, was still pouring
forth his whole heart at his master's feet. "Ah! my Signor," said he, "If you
could but know how misrable I was when I got out of the inquisition!" --

"He raves!" observed the count to the Marchese, "you perceive that joy had
rendered him delirious!"

"How I wandered about the walls half the night, and what it cost me to leave
them! But when I lost sight of them, Signor, O! San Dominico! I thought my
heart would have broke. I had a great mind to have gone back again and given
myself up: and perhaps, should I too, if it had not been for my friend, the
sentinel, who escaped with me, and I would not do him an injury, poor fellow!
for he meant nothing but kindness when he let me out. And sure enough, as (...)
has proved, it was all for the best, for now I am here, too, Signor, as well as
you; and can tell you all I felt when I believed I should never see you again."

The contrast of his present joy, to his remembered grief, again brought tears
into Paulo's eyes: he smiled and wept, and sobbed and laughed with such rapid
transition, that Vivaldi began to be alarmed for him; when, suddenly becoming
calm, he looked up in his master's face, and said gravely, but with eagerness,
"Pray Signor, was nor the roof of your little prison peaked, and was there not
a little turret stuck up at one corner of it? and was there not a battlement
round the turret? and was there not" -- Vivaldi, after regarding him for a
moment, replied smilingly, "Why, truly, my good Paulo, my dungeon was so far
from the roof, that I never had an opportunity of observing it."

"This is very true Signor." replied Paulo, "very true, indeed; but I did not
happen to think of that. I am certain, though it was as I say, and I was sure
of it at the time. O Signor! I thought that roof would have broke my heart, O
how I did look at it! and now to think that I am here, with my dear master once
again!"

As Paulo concluded, his tears and sobs returned with more violence than
before; and Vivaldi, who could not perceive any necessary connection between
this mention of the roof of his late prison, and tee joy his servant expressed
on seeing him again, began to fear that his senses were bewildered, and desired
an explanation of his words. Paulo's account, rude and simple as it was, soon
discovered to him the relation of these apparently heterogeneous circumstances
to each other; when Vivaldi, overcome by this new instance of the power of
Paulo's affection, embraced him with his whole heart, and compelling him to
rise, presented him to the assembly as his faithful friend and chief deliverer.

The Marchese affected by the some he had witnessed, and with the truth of
Vivaldi's words, condescended to give Paulo a hearty shake by the hard, and to
thank him warmly for the bravery and fidelity he had displayed in his master's
interest. "I never can fully reward your attachment, added the Marchese, "but
what remains for me to do, shall be done. From this moment I make you
independent, and promise in the presence of this noble company, to give you a
thousand sequins as some acknowledgment of your services."

Paulo did not express all the gratitude for this gift which the Marchese
expected. He stammered, and bowed and blushed, and at length burst into tears;
and when Vivaldi inquired what distressed him, he replied, "Why, Signor, of
what use are the thousand, sequins to me, if I am to be independent! what use
if I am not to stay with you?"

Vivaldi cordially assured Paulo, that he should always remain with him, and
that he should consider it as his duty to render his future life happy. "You
shall henceforth," added Vivaldi, "be placed at the head of my household; the
management of my servants, and the whole conduct of my domestic concerns shall
be committed to you, as a proof of my entire confidence in your integrity and
attachment; and because this is a situation which will allow you to be always
near me."

"Thank you, my Signor," replied Paulo, in a voice rendered almost inarticulate
by his gratitude, "Thank you with my whole heart! if I stay with you, that is
enough for me, I ask no more. But I hope my Lord Marchese will not think me
ungrateful for refusing to accept of the thousand sequins he was so kind as to
offer me, if I would be but independent, for I thank him as much as if I had
received them, and a great deal more too."

The Marchese, smiling at Paulo's mistake, rejoined, "As I do not perceive, my
good friend, how your remaining with your master can be a circumstance to
disqualify you from accepting a thousand sequins, I command you, on pain of my
displeasures, to receive them; and whenever you marry, I shall expect that you
will show your obedience to me again, by accepting another thousand from me
with your wife, as her dower."

"This is too much, Signor," said Paulo, sobbing -- "too much to be borne!" and
ran out of the saloon. But amidst the murmur of applause which his conduct drew
from the noble spectators, for Paulo's warm heart had subdued even the coldness
of their pride, a convulsive sound from the antichamber betrayed the excess of
emotion, which he had thus abruptly withdrawn himself to conceal.

In a few hours, the Marchese and Vivaldi took leave of their friends, and set
out for Naples, where they arrived, without any interruption, on the fourth
day. But it was a melancholy journey to Vivaldi, notwithstanding the joy of his
late escape; for the Marchese having introduced the mention of his attachment
to Ellena di Rosalba, informed him, that, under the present unforeseen
circumstances, he could not consider his late engagement to the Marchesa on
that subject binding, and that Vivaldi must relinquish Ellena, if it should
appear that she really was the daughter of the late Schedoni.

Immediately on his arrival at Naples, however, Vivaldi, with a degree of
impatience, to which his utmost speed was inadequate, and with a revived joy so
powerful as to overcome every fear, and every melancholy consideration, which
the late conversation with his father had occasioned, hastened to the Santa
della Pieta.

Ellena heard his voice from the grate, enquiring for her of a nun, who was in
the parlour, and in the next instant they, beheld each other yet once again.

In such a meeting, after the long uncertainty and terror which each had
suffered for the fate of the other, and the dangers and hardships they had
really incurred, joy was exalted almost to agony. Ellena wept, and some minutes
passed before she could answer to Vivaldi's few words of tender exclamation: it
was long ere she was tranquil enough to observe the alteration, which severe
confinement had given to his appearance. The animated expression of his
countenance was unchanged; yet, when the first glow of joy had faded from it,
and Ellena had leisure to observe its wanness, she understood, too certainly,
that he had been a prisoner in the Inquisition.

During this interview, he related, at Ellena's request, the particulars of his
adventures, since he had been separated from her in the chapel of San
Sebastain; but, when he came to that part of the narration where it was
necessary to mention Schedoni, he paused in unconquerable embarrassment and a
distress not unmingled with horror. Vivaldi could scarcely endure even to hint
to Ellena any part of the unjust conduct, which the confessor had practiced
toward him, yet it was impossible to conclude his account without expressing
much more than hints; nor could he bear to afflict her with a knowledge of the
death of him who he believed to be her parent, however the dreadful
circumstances of that event might be concealed. His embarrassment became
obvious, and was still increased by Ellena's inquiries.

At length, as an introduction to the information it was necessary to give, and
to the fuller explanation he wished to receive upon a subject, which, though it
was the one that pressed most anxiously upon his mind, he had not yet dared to
mention, Vivaldi ventured to declare his knowledge of her having discovered her
parent to be living. The satisfaction immediately apparent upon Ellena's
countenance heightened his distress, and his reluctance to proceed; believing,
as he did, that the event he had to communicate must change her gladness to
grief.

Ellena, however, upon his mention of a topic so interesting to them both,
proceeded to express the happiness she had received from the discovery of a
parent, whose virtues had even won her affection long before she understood her
own interest in them. It was with some difficulty, that Vivaldi could conceal
his surprise at such an avowal of prepossession; the manners of Schedoni, of
whom he believed her to speak, having certainly never been adapted to inspire
tenderness. But his surprise soon changed its objects when Olivia, who had
heard that a stranger was at the grate entered the parlour, and was announced
as the mother of Ellena di Rosalba.

Before Vivaldi left the convent, a full explanation, as to family, was given
on both sides, when he had the infinite joy of learning, that Ellena was not
the daughter of Schedoni; and Olivia had the satisfaction to know that she had
no future evil to apprehend from him who had hitherto been her worst enemy. The
manner of his death, however, with all the circumstances of his character, as
unfolded by his late trial, Vivaldi was careful to conceal.

When Ellena had withdrawn from the room, Vivaldi made a full acknowledgment to
Olivia of his long attachment to her daughter, and supplicated for her consent
to their marriage. To this application, however, Olivia replied, that, though
she had long been no stranger to their mutual affection, or to the several
circumstances which had both proved its durability, and tried their fortitude,
she never could consent that her daughter should become a member of any family,
whose principal was either insensible of her value, or unwilling to acknowledge
it; and that in this instance it would be necessary to Vivaldi's success, not
only that he, but that his father should be a suitor; on which condition only,
she allowed him to hope for her acquiescence.

Such a stipulation scarcely chilled the hopes of Vivaldi, now that Ellena was
proved to be the daughter, not of the murderer Schedoni but of a Count di Bruno
no, who had been no less respectable in character than in rank; and he had
little doubt that his father would consent to fulfill the promise he had given
to the dying Marchesa.

In this belief he was not mistaken. The Marchese, having attended to Vivaldi's
account of Ellena's family, promised, that if it should appear there was no
second mistake on the subject, he would not longer oppose the wishes of his son.

The Marchese immediately caused a private inquiry to be made, as to the
identity of Olivia the present Countess di Bruno; and though this was not
pursued without difficulty, the physician, who had assisted in the plan of her
escape from the cruelty of Ferando di Bruno, and who was living, as well as
Beatrice, who clearly remembered the sister of her late mistress, at length
rendered Olivia's identity unquestionable. -- Now, therefore, that the
Marchese's every doubt was removed he paid a visit to the Santa della Pieta,
and solicited, in due form, Olivia's consent to the nuptials of Vivaldi with
Ellena; which she granted him with an entire satisfaction. In this interview,
the Marchese was so fascinated by the manners of the Countess, and pleased with
the delicacy and sweetness, which appeared in those of Ellena, that his consent
was no longer a constrained one, and he willingly relinquished the views of
superior rank and fortune, which he had formerly looked to for his son, for
those of virtue and permanent happiness that were now unfolded to him.

On the twentieth of May, the day on which Ellena completed her eighteenth
years, her nuptials with Vivaldi were solemnised in the church of the Santa
Maria della Pieta, in the presence of the Marchese and of the Countess di
Bruuo. As Ellena advanced through the church, she recollected, when on a former
occasion she had met Vivaldi at the altar, and, the scenes of San Sebastian
rising to her memory, the happy character of those, which her present situation
opposed to them, drew tears of tender joy and gratitude to her eyes. Then,
irresolute, desolate, surrounded by strangers, and ensnared by enemies, she had
believed she saw Vivaldi for the last time; now, supported by the presence of a
beloved parent, and by the willing appro^^oation of the persons, who had
hitherto so strenuously opposed her, they were met to part no more; and, as a
recollection of the moment when she had been carried from the chapel glanced
upon her mind, that moment when she had called upon him for succor,
supplicated even to hear his voice once more, and when a blank silence, which,
as she believed, was that if death, had succeeded; as the anguish of that
moment was now remembered, Ellena became more than ever sensible of the
happiness of the present.

Olivia, in thus relinquishing her daughter so soon after she had found her,
suffered some pain, but she was consoled by the fair prospect of happiness,
that opened to Ellena, and cheered by considering, that, though she
relinquished, she should not lose her, since the vicinity of Vivaldi's
residence to La Pieta, would permit a frequent intercourse with the convent.

As a testimony of singular esteem, Paulo was permitted to be present at the
marriage of his master, when as perched in a high gallery of the church, he
looked down upon the ceremony, and witnessed the delight in Vivaldi's
countenance, the satisfaction in that of my "old Lord Marchese," the pensive
happiness in the Countess di Bruno's, and the tender complacency of Ellena's
which her veil, partly undrawn, allowed him to observe, he could scarcely
refrain from expressing the joy he felt, and shouting aloud, " O! giorno
felice! O! giorno felice!" O happy day! O happy day!


CHAP. XVII.
"Ah! where shall I so sweet a dwelling find!
For all around, without, and all within,
Nothing save what delightful was and kind,
Of goodness favoring and a tender mind,
Ever rose to view.
THOMPSON.
THE fete which, some time after the nuptials, was given by the Marchese, in
celebration of them, was held at a delightful villa, belonging to Vivaldi, a
few miles distant from Naples, upon the border of the gulf, and on the opposite
shore to that which had been the frequent abode of the Marchese. The beauty of
its situation, and its interior elegance induced Vivaldi and Ellena to select
it as their chief residence. It was, in truth, a scence of fairy-land. The
pleasure grounds extended over a valley, which opened to the bay, and the house
stood at the entrance of this valley, upon a gentle slope that margined the
water, and commanded the whole extent of its luxuriant shores, from the lofty
cape of Miseno to the bold mountains of the south, which, stretching across the
distance, appeared to rise out of the sea, and divided the gulf of Naples, from
that of Salerno.

The marble porticoes and arcades of the villa were shadowed by groves of the
beautiful magnolia flowering ash, cedrati camellias, and majestic palms; and
the cool and airy hills, opening on two opposite fires to a colonade, admitted
beyond the rich foliage all the seas and shores of Naples, from the west; and
to the cast, views of the valley of the domain, withdrawing among winding
hills, wooded ^o their sum (...), except where cliffs of various colored
granites, ^low, green, and purple, lifted their tall heads, and threw gay
gleams of light amidst the umbrageous landscape.

The style of the gardens, where lawns and groves and woods varied the
undulating surface, was that of England, and of the present day, rather than of
Italy; except "Where a long alley peeping on the main," exhibited such gigantic
loftiness of shade, and grandeur of perspective, as characterize the Italian
taste.

On this jubilee, every avenue and grove, and pavilion was richly illuminated.
The villa itself, where each airy hall and arcade was resplendent with lights,
and lavishly decorated with flowers and the most beautiful shrubs, whose buds
seemed to pour all Arabia's presumes upon the air, this villa resembled a
fabric called up by enchantment, rather than a structure of human art.

The dresses of the higher rank of visitors were as splendid as the scenery, of
which Ellena was, in every respect, the queen. But this entertainment was not
given to persons of distinction only, for both Vivaldi and Ellena had wished
that all the tenants of the domain should partake of it, and share the abundant
happiness which themselves possessed; so that the grounds, which were extensive
enough to accommodate each rank, were relinquished to a general gaiety. Paulo
was on this occasion, a sort of master of the revels; and surrounded by a party
of his own particular associates, danced once more, as he had so often wished,
upthe moonlight shore of Naples.

As Vivaldi and Ellena were passing the spot, which Paulo, had chosen for the
scene of his festivity, they paused to observe his strange capers and
extravagant gesticulation, as he mingled in the dance, while every
now-and-then, he shouted forth, though half breathless with the heartiness of
the exercise -- " O! giorno felice! O! giorno felice!"

On perceiving Vivaldi, and the smiles with which he and Ellena regarded him,
he quitted his sports, and advancing, "Ah! my dear master," said he, "do you
remember the night, when we were traveling on the banks of the Celano, before
that diabolical accident happened in the chapel of San Sebastian; don't you
remember how these people, who were tripping it away so joyously, by moonlight,
reminded me of Naples and the many merry dances I had footed on the beach here?"

"I remember it well," replied Vivaldi.

"Ah! Signor mi^, you said at the time, that you hoped we should soon be here,
and that then I should frisk it away with as glad a heart as the best of them.
The first part of your hope, my dear master, you was out in; for, as it
happened, we had to go through purgatory before we could reach paradise; but
the second part is come at last; for here I am, sure enough! dancing by
moonlight, in my own dear bay of Naples, with my own dear master and mistress,
in safety, and as happy almost as myself; and with that old mountain yonder,
Vesuvius, which I, forsooth! thought I was never to see again, spouting up
fire, just as it used to do before we got ourselves put into the Inquisition!
O! who could have foreseen all this! O! giorno felice! O! giorno felice!

"I rejoice in your happiness my good Paulo," said Vivaldi, "almost as much as
in my own; though I do not entirely agree with you as to the comparative
proportion of ^ach."

"Paulo!" said Ellena, "I am indebted to you beyond any ability to repay: for,
to your intrepid affection your master owes his present safety. I will not
attempt to thank you for your attachment to him; my care of your welfare shall
prove how well I know it; but I wish to give to all your friends this
acknowledgment of your worth, and of my sense of it."

Paulo, bowed, and stammered, and writhed and blushed, and was unable to reply;
till, at length, giving a lofty spring from the ground, the emotion which had
nearly stifled him burst forth in words, and " O! giorno felice! O! giorno
felice!" flew from his lips with the force of an electric shock. They
communicated his enthusiasm to the whole company, the words passed like
lightning from one individual to another, till Vivaldi and Ellena withdrew
amidst a choral shout, and all the woods and strands of Naples re-echoed with
-- " O! giorno felice! O! giorno felice!"

"You see," said Paulo, when they had departed and he came to himself again,
"you see how people get through their misfortunes, if they have but a heart to
bear up against them, and do nothing that can lie on their conscience
afterward: and how suddenly one comes to be happy, just when one is beginning
to think one never is to be happy again! Who would have guessed that my dear
master and I, when we were clapped up in that diabolical place, the
Inquisition, should ever come out again into this world! Who would have guessed
when we were taken before those old devils of Inquisitors, sitting there all of
a row in a place under ground, hung with black, and nothing but torches all
around, and faces grinning at us, that but looked as black as the gentry
aforesaid; and when I was not so much as suffered to open my mouth, no I they
would not let me open my mouth to my master! -- who, I say, would have guessed
we should ever be let loose again! who would have thought we should ever know
what it is to be happy! Yet here we are all abroad once more! All at liberty!
And may run, if we will, straight forwards, from one end of the earth to the
other, and back again without being stopped! May fly in the sea, or swim in the
sky, or tumble over head and heels into the moon! For, remember, my good
friends, we have no lead in our consciences to keep us down!"

"You mean swim in the sea, and fly in the sky, I suppose," observed a grave
personage near him, "but as for tumbling over head and heels into the moon! I
don't know what you mean by that!"

"Pshaw!" replied Paulo, "who can stop, at such a time as this, to think about
what he means! I wish that all those, who on this night are not merry enough to
speak before they think, may ever after be grave enough to think before they
speak! But you, none of you, no! not one of you! I warrant, ever saw the roof
of a prison, when your master happened to be below in the dungeon, nor know
what it is to be forced to run away, and leave him, behind to die by himself.
Poor souls! But no matter for that, you can be tolerably happy, perhaps,
notwithstanding; but as for guessing how happy I am, or knowing any thing about
the matter -- O! its quite beyond what you can understand. O! giorno felice! O!
giorno felice!" repeated Paulo, as he bounded forward to mingle in the dance,
and " O! giorno felice" was again shouted in chorus by his joyful companions.


