A SERMON, PREACHED IN HARTFORD, JUNE 10th, 1797, AT THE EXECUTION OF RICHARD
DOANE. By Nathan Strong, MINISTER OF THE NORTH PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN HARTFORD.
TO WHICH IS ADDED, A SHORT ACCOUNT OF HIS LIFE, AS GIVEN BY HIMSELF: ALSO OF
THE STATE OF HIS MIND DURING THE TIME OF HIS CONFINEMENT, AND AT HIS DEATH.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY ELISHA BABCOCK. 1797.

SERMON, AT THE EXECUTION OF RICHARD DOANE.
HOSEA vi. 6. For I desire mercy and not sacrifice, and the knowledge of God
more than burnt offerings. The preacher is sensible that many will suppose the
text improper for the occasion. It was chosen by the prisoner, and he could not
be so well pleased with another. It appeared that what he supposed Divine
light, and an astonishing view of God's character, broke in upon his mind, in
reading this passage.

I HAVE chosen these words for the subject of my discourse, by the particular
desire of the unhappy man, who is to be executed this day. -- He considers
himself held up before mankind, as a warning of the bitter consequences of sin;
and the danger of living immorally and thoughtless of God. He has desired me to
employ the present short opportunity, which we have for religious worship, both
in advising him for his solemn appearance before the tribunal of his Judge, and
in reminding those who are spectators, that unless we repent we shall all
likewise perish; and that those who forget God, and disobey his commandments,
though they may escape an ignominious end in this world, must in eternity
expect to meet evils more dreadful than the pain or shame of an execution by
the hands of men.

THE occasion is very solemn and affecting. I hope we may improve the hour in
receiving instruction from this spectacle, and in earnest prayer that the man
who is soon to die, may find mercy and salvation in God before whom he is soon
to come.

THE scripture of which my text is a part, describes the sin of men; the reason
of God's displeasure with them; and the necessity and wisdom of his judgments.

I shall, First, paraphrase the text in connection with the context.

SECONDLY, make such an improvement as naturally arises from the passage and
from the occasion of our meeting.

IN the verses before the text God says, O Ephraim what shall I do unto thee? O
Judah what shall I do unto thee? for your goodness is as a morning cloud, and
as the early dew it passes away. -- Therefore have I hewed them by my
prophets; I have slain them by the words of my mouth: and thy judgments are as
the light that goes forth. They like men have transgressed the covenant, there
have they dealt treacherously against me. This is a description of their
conduct, as it was seen by the eye of Omniscience. Our text also describes the
temper and practice to which forgiveness is encouraged. For I desire mercy more
than sacrifice; and the knowledge of God more than burnt offerings. Mercy and a
knowledge of God, in this passage, mean true holiness and a conformity of heart
to the moral character of God, and spiritual obedience to his commandments. The
men whom our text reproved, had the means of religion and a doctrinal
acquaintance with their duty. They had knowledge, instruction, and warning, as
we have at the present day. They sometimes resolved and promised a religious
life, and from these transient resolutions of an awakened hour, they hoped God
would be merciful; but God says, their goodness or consideration was as the
morning cloud, and as the early dew that passes away. They resolved to serve
God, only when they feared his judgments, and were forced to consideration, by
some melancholy spectacle of the danger of sin, as we are at the present
moment. God hewed them by his prophets -- He warned them by the ministers of
religion, of the end to which they must come without repentance; -- He flew
them by the words of his mouth, -- by his law and threatenings, denounced the
certain consequences of forgetting him and his commandments. Because judgment
against their evil works was not instantly executed, they determined God to be
like themselves, and hoped there was no evil to come. To teach them there was
an evil to come, his judgments were as a light that shines. The judgments of
God in this world are most wonderfully appointed. The state of probation in
which men are placed, forbids the full execution of justice upon them. -- This
would be inconsistent with such use of means as are appointed unto repentance;
still if there were no judgments they would wholly forget God. He therefore
appoints his judgments in wonderful wisdom, so as not to prevent a state of
trial, and at the same time remind us that the wages of sin are death. There
are so many of God's judgments on sin, that if our hearts are set to do evil
because the full punishment is not speedily executed, the conduct is most
unreasonable. His judgments are as a light that goes forth, confirming the
sentence of his law, that the wages of sin are death. They have been so from
the beginning, and are before our eyes on this solemn occasion.

IN further describing those whom God reproved, he says, they like men
transgressed the covenant, and dealt treacherously against him. -- A sinful
life, in the greatest part of those who indulge themselves, may fitly be called
treachery. In some general sense, they profess to believe he is God, and
promise to obey him; but where the heart is disobedient, and his character and
law are not reverenced and loved, the whole is a treacherous profession; and if
those who make it, are ever brought to see God and themselves truly, they will
be sensible it is the case.

THE character drawn in the context applies to a great variety of persons. To
those who against knowledge live in the vicious indulgence of their passions
and appetites: -- Who having sufficient evidence there is a God, go through days
and years in forgetfulness of him, in impiety, profaneness, thinking only of
time, the world and present amusements: -- To those who do not realize their
obligation to live for the glory of their maker: -- To those, whose minds are
so much taken up with present things, as to forget they are soon to die and
come into judgment: -- To those who live without prayer and in neglect of the
institution of religion; and to all who have not a supreme love of God, his law
and government. -- The great defect of all such persons, is, they have not that
holiness, mercy and knowledge of God in their hearts and practice, in which
true obedience consists. Being destitute of a true love of God, and carnal and
selfish in their whole disposition, and unfeeling of moral obligation, it is
strange they do not commit more of those crimes that must be punished by the
hand of civil justice.

A want of love and obedience to God implies a heart capable of any other
crime. He who fails in love, and is unjust and treacherous to his God is
certainly, by the same disposition, capable of enmity and treachery to his
fellow creatures. And when we see very many, who give no evidence of a delight
in God; it must be imputed to special divine respect and care, that we are not
much oftener called to such solemn scenes as are before us this day. -- When we
look on an unhappy man whom God has left to expose himself to this death, we
may fitly realize a distinguishing goodness of God, that we are not in his
place. -- Though not under the sentence of human laws, we are condemned by the
divine law. The goodness of the best has been too much like a morning cloud.
It is God's providence and not our own natural dispositions, which has
preserved us from punishable crimes. There is no safety in that evil heart,
which deals treacherously toward God, by not loving him; and which is
destitute of an experimental knowledge of his sanctifying grace. If we are
sanctified by his holy spirit, sovereign grace has done the work; and if not
sanctified, the only cause which preserves, is that Almighty power, which means
to uphold a certain degree of order in the world. The best preservative is
mercy and a knowledge of God. These in our text, stand opposed to sacrifice and
burnt offering. The first means a holy conformity to the divine goodness, and a
sanctifying knowledge of God and his commandments. This is a divine temper of
the soul, which resists temptation -- makes sin appear hateful -- and delights
in glorifying God, and doing good to men. The last, sacrifice and burnt
offering, as they stand opposed in the text to mercy and a knowledge of the
Lord, mean that general or formal or unaffecting belief of God, his law and our
own duty; and that inconstant attention to the institutions of religion, which
are consistent with a greater love of the world and its interests, of ourselves
and our own lusts, than we have of God himself. In this, there is little
efficacy for preservation. -- And all of this character, ought to feel that it
is God's care of the world and not their own principles, which keep them from
sudden ruin in time and eternity. In those principles of sin which deny God his
right, men can find no safety to themselves; nor can there be any safety to the
world. Public safety in the midst of such principles, must be ascribed to the
controling power of the Almighty; and when the time comes, either in this or
the next world, that the shining of his judgments is necessary for general
good, he will leave the sinner to show himself and meet deserved punishment.

SECONDLY, I am to make such an improvement of the subject, as naturally arises
from the passage that has been paraphrased, and from the occasion of our
meeting. And I shall do this, First, with reference to the congregation at
large. Secondly, in special application to the unhappy man, who is to go from
hence to the place of his execution.

1. BOTH the subject and the occasion teach how much God is displeased with us,
if we are not holy and sanctified in our temper and practice. If we have not
that true knowledge of God, which implies pure affections of the heart, our
state is full of danger, both for time and eternity. The common mercies and
bounties of providence, are no evidence God is pleased with us, for these he
bestows both on the good and the evil, the just and the unjust. How many
ungrateful men he feeds and clothes. To how many vicious men does he grant the
common preservation of life, even preserving them for a season, from the
destruction that naturally follows their criminal appetites and passions. God
does not this to encourage sin; but by an exhibition of his forbearance, to
draw them to repentance, and to preserve the world in such a state of peace, as
is the best probation for eternity. All who have not a true knowledge of God,
are under his displeasure. He does not preserve because he is pleased with
them. Their doctrinal knowledge will not avert the final judgment. Their
general profession of Christianity will not save them. Unless their hearts be
changed the time will soon come, either in this or another world, when the
judgment of God will go forth against them, to show his own holiness, and to
make his own kingdom very glorious.

2dly. WE ought to consider the danger to ourselves, that is inbred with the
principles of sin and a departure from God. Sin cannot be made a safe thing.
The ingredients of a hell, both present and future, are in its very nature. Why
are not the sinners of this world perfectly miserable beings at this moment?
Not because their principles do not lead to it; but God to answer his
infinitely wise purposes, holds them from it. Sin admits no happiness in the
enjoyment of God, nor in a view of his law and government. It destroys peace of
conscience and that inward harmony, which makes existence blessed. It
counteracts all social felicity, turning men's hands and hearts against one
another. While a sinful creature dreads God as his Judge, he ought to dread
himself as the immediate instrument of his own wretchedness. He carries in his
own bosom the cause and means of his unhappiness, and there can be no safety to
him in his own principles. Instead of thinking hard of God, for those evils
which his sins bring upon him, he ought to adore that preserving goodness,
which has hitherto kept him from utter ruin.

3dly. THIS occasion is a solemn instruction, not only in the dangerous nature
of sinful principles in general, but of several particular kinds of sin, which
are very prevalent among mankind. Intemperance is a sinful habit, which ruins a
great number of mankind, and leads them to such high crimes as are capitally
punished by the laws of men. I am charged by my own conscience, and desired by
the unhappy man who suffers this day, on the present occasion to speak freely
of the danger of this sin. Though this man has hitherto denied any prepense,
malicious intention of murder, he speaks in most feeling terms of the danger of
sin, of forgetting God, and of an unchaste, intemperate life. He traces back
most of his unhappiness in life, and especially this awful scene, to impure
connexions and to intemperance. The sin of drunkenness has been a principal
means of bringing him to this case. And he is only one of many thousands of
mankind, who have come to the same end by the same means. A mind intoxicated
with liquor, is prepared to mingle with the most impure and abandoned
companions, and to commit any violence. Almost every violence that takes place
in civilized society, and family unhappiness may be traced to intemperance as
their cause. How many rational creatures it turns into beasts of prey! how many
families it clothes with rags and deprives of bread! how often it disturbs the
otherwise peaceful neighborhood! how many it brings to death by the hand of
public justice! how many souls it ruins for both worlds! -- Those, who give
themselves up to this sin, rashly defy all possible misery. This prevailing
vice, is greatly promoted by tippling houses and dram shops, where the
incautious gradually acquire a habit which proves their ruin. Every such place
is a deep evil in society, and a nursery for murder and eternal ruin. I do not
know any way in which the civil authority can make themselves more worthy of
respect, or do greater good to the public, who are placed under their care,
than by a faithful execution of our good laws, against such places and against
those persons who give themselves up to intemperance. If any think I speak too
freely on this subject, as my vindication, I beg them to look to that spectacle
now in our eyes. -- Look to yonder place of execution, around which we shall
soon be gathered, to behold the most awful of all sights. And let us remember
that this event is as a light which shines, teaching us the present nature of
sin, and the more awful judgments of God on such as live and die unreformed.

I am in the last place to apply myself to the man who is soon to die.

My unhappy Fellow Creature,

I call you unhappy in the sight of men, as one whom the holy providence of God
appoints to an ignominious death. There is, nevertheless, room for you to be
eternally happy in the world to which you are soon going. It is the glory of
the gospel, that it proclaims salvation to the chief of repenting sinners,
through Jesus Christ. If you have repented of all your sins, you may go by this
death to which you are appointed, to a heaven of glorious and eternal
happiness. If you have truly repented, the riches of divine grace in Jesus
Christ and the sovereignty of divine love will be glorified in plucking you as
a brand out of the burning, from that vicious, inconsiderate and prayerless
life, in which you acknowledge you have generally lived. If you have truly
repented, you will thank God forever, even for these severe means of saving you
from your sin. But remember that it is a hard question for men to determine,
whether they have repented, and you have only an hour or two more to examine. I
am sensible that you prosess to believe most of those doctrines, which
Christians generally receive; and also to hope that you have been forgiven by
God, through a true repentance and faith. But as your eternal happiness is
depending, you cannot review this matter too closely in the few moments you
have left. Pray, pray earnestly to God, that he would enlighten, while I make
some remarks for your assistance. The infinite goodness of God is an
acknowledged truth; but this is no certain evidence you are going to happiness,
for his goodness may require him to punish you in another world as he does in
this. -- Your doctrinal knowledge will not save; for the heart is often very
bad, where the understanding is well indoctrinated. -- Your own righteousness
will not save you; for certainly, you have nothing of your own, but a life of
sin to present before your Judge, -- visible sins, and a heart full of sin and
forgetfulness of your maker. It must be pure gospel -- pure sovereign grace --
pure sanctifying grace, that saves you if you be saved. If you feel as though
there ever has been, or now is, any thing in you deserving of God's favor; if
you think your cries and prayers form any kind of challenge on God; this would
prove you destitute of true Christian humility and still unforgiven. Christ's
promises in the gospel are many and glorious; but you have no right to place
any dependence on these, of being ever happy; unless your heart has complied
with the conditions on which they are made. They are made only to a holy
repentance, and other gracious affections of the same moral nature. Every man
will in some sense repent, when he meets the bitter fruits of sinning; but this
is more properly called, mourning for the punishment than for the sin. --
Hating misery is no evidence of hating sin. -- Flying from punishment, is no
evidence of flying from transgression.

IF your repentance be holy and sincere, you will mourn for your sins, more on
account of the dishonor done to God, and his kingdom, than for the shame and
condemnation it brings on yourself. -- You will hate it as unreasonable -- as
contrary to the most solemn moral obligation -- and base in its very nature.

A holy love, does not arise from an apprehension, that God will bestow great
benefits on you personally. -- To love God, only because we think he loves us,
is what every unforgiven, unholy sinner may do. The infinite perfection of
God's nature, law and government, is the reason for which a true penitent loves
him; and if he supposed that he should never be forgiven himself, he would
still say the Lord's character is lovely.

A saving faith is a receiving of Christ, as glorious in his nature, whole
character and offices. -- To rely on him as a deliverer from punishment and not
from sin, is not a gracious exercise. -- To the true believer, Christ's power
to sanctify appears like a most excellent part of his mediatorial character. --
If you are a gospel penitent, you will feel a sensible love of God's law, and
choose it as the rule of your affections, though you know it condemns you. You
will say his providence is right -- you will rejoice that he reigns, and have
no desire to take the government from his hands.

I have plainly expressed to you some principal Christian exercises, by which
you are in this solemn moment to try yourself. A consciousness that you possess
these exercises, is the only certain evidence of God's mercy to you, and that
you are prepared to die. If you have become a penitent man; though conscious of
your own total unworthiness, it will be a pleasure to you to pray to God, and
to humble yourself before him in the deepest expressions of self abasement. --
Prayer to God is the most useful manner in which you can spend the short
remainder of your life. -- Prayer will bring God into your view; and the more
truly you see God, the more truly also you will see yourself, and feel your
guilt. Look to him to forgive a sinner, who deserves nothing but to be
eternally cast off. Ask mercy and the forgiveness of your sins, for the sole
sake of Jesus Christ. If you have any thing in your heart against any man, now
forgive and pray for him; for he who does not forgive, shall not be forgiven.
Feel as though you had no enemies but your own sins; and realize that none but
God can sanctify you.

MAY the Lord go with you from this place, and give you a humble fortitude in
the event you are to meet; and when your eyes are closed in death, may God have
mercy on your soul. AMEN.

A SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE OF RICHARD DOANE, AS GIVEN BY HIMSELF; ALSO OF THE
STATE OF HIS MIND DURING THE TIME OF HIS CONFINEMENT, AND AT HIS DEATH.
THE man who was lately executed by the name of RICHARD DOANE, was sentenced to
death, by the Superior Court in September, 1796, to be executed December 14th.
-- The General Assembly, on his application at their October Session, reprieved
him until June 10th, 1797, at which time he was executed for the murder of
DANIEL M'IVER.

HE gave the following account of himself: -- That he was born in a large city
of Great Britain, in the year 1755, of reputable parents. -- That his father
was a man of activity and business; his mother, apparently, a woman of piety
and much devoted to the duties of religion. He was instructed in the principles
of the Christian religion, in his youth, under one of the most eminent divines
of the day. He said that his connection in marriage with a virtuous woman, to
whom he was attached in affection from his early youth, contrary to the wishes
of friends, was the cause of bringing him to America. That he refused more
lucrative employments offered him by his friends, for the sake of living with
the object of his affections. His business was a stone-cutter. He came into the
southern part of the United States, where he lived regularly and industriously,
until the death of his wife and their only child. He represented her as a
person of much virtue and discretion, and considered her death as the beginning
of his real misfortunes. Her death threw him into a state of great dejection,
for a considerable time, and disqualified him for business, when he began an
intemperate life as a remedy for sorrow. After several years he emerged from
the gloom, and would labor industriously for a number of weeks, and then in a
fit of intoxication spend his earnings and give himself up to profaneness and
impiety.

IT does not appear that he was a malicious man, when free from the influence
of spiritous liquor; but in his periods of intoxication was often abusive, and
was under this influence when he put an end to the life of M'Iver. A number of
his last years were spent in various towns of Connecticut and the vicinity of
the state. In his last confinement he spoke with great abhorrence of his past
life. Drunkenness, profaneness, and a connection with evil women were the actual
crimes of which he appeared most sensible. He spoke in most feeling terms of
the dreadful state of those who indulge in these vices. -- That they not only
destroy reputation and health, and disqualify for the confidence of mankind;
but lead to every other sin, and provoke a Holy God to give up the sinner to
the most awful punishments, in this and another world.

MANY reports have circulated concerning supposed crimes committed by this man,
which are doubtless without foundation. It was common for him in his seasons of
intoxication, to be abusive both in words and actions, as is usual in drunken
people; but there is no evidence that when free from liquor he was malicious or
dangerous.

THE man whom he murdered was one of his friends and companions, and the fatal
affray arose wholly from intoxication.

PERHAPS none will question that accidental intoxication, lessens the
criminality of the violence done in an irrational hour. The case is far
different with wilful and habitual drunkards. These persons, even if they lose
memory, must have been often informed of their own abuse and violence. They
ought to consider, that taking the bottle is taking the dagger; and though they
have not any malice against particular individuals, the very act of drinking
may be considered as malice against human nature. In this view Doane in his
hours of repentance acknowledged his sentence to be a just one, though he had
no enmity against the man whose life was destroyed.

SUCH instances as these, warn us, that it is the duty of those who have
authority, due both to the public, and to habitual drunkards themselves, to
place them in a state of confinement. Had this man, in due time, received the
correction of the workhouse, it might have saved him from the halter.

THOUGH it be not common for those who have long lived a vicious life to find
repentance, God sometimes grants it to magnify the sovereignty and greatness of
his mercy, and teach us to seek his favor to the last hour.

IT is hoped, that this man was one of those uncommon instances of true
repentance and grace. -- Much pains were taken by neighboring Christians, from
the beginning of his confinement, to converse and pray with him. It appeared
that he had been early indoctrinated in the principles of Christianity, though
many of its truths were much effaced by a long course of vice.

SOON after his condemnation, he appeared deeply convinced of guilt in the
sight of God, and the terrors of future misery hung upon him. He was led to see
a heart, as well as life, full of sin and rebellion against God; and that he
might in perfect justice be forever cast off. -- After this his mind was
strongly affected with a sense of the goodness of God, in giving a Savior for
the salvation of penitents; and to himself in particular, for sparing him so
long while he had lived without prayer and in the practice of sin.

HIS hope of his own salvation was very gradually formed, and in the last part
of his life appeared to be very strong.

HE uniformly spoke of himself, as a creature guilty and justly condemned, and
that nothing but infinite mercy through the blood of Christ, could save him;
and appeared strong in a belief that he did rely on this mercy, and approve the
character and law of God.

THE distinction, which men often make between little and great sins, appeared
to him improper; and he often said, that among all his sins of heart and life,
he never had committed one that was small, when considered as against an
infinite God. His conduct was very decent and proper through the day of
execution. In going to the place of death, he said that he felt himself
strangely strengthened both in body and mind, and ascribed all to the goodness
of God.

AFTER having on the scaffold confessed his irreligious life, warned the
spectators against those vices which ruined him, and declared himself free from
any murderous intentions against M'Iver, the sentence was executed.

HE committed the names of his connexions in Great Britain, to the Rev. NATHAN
STRONG and Rev. ABEL FLINT, Ministers of the Presbyterian Churches in Hartford,
to whom any who are interested in making an inquiry concerning him may apply.


