MR. SYMMES's ORATION. July 4th. 1797.

AN ORATION, DELIVERED BEFORE THE CITIZENS OF PORTLAND, AND THE SUPREME
JUDICIAL COURT OF MASSACHUSETTS, ON THE FOURTH DAY OF JULY, A. D. 1797, BEING
THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

BY WILLIAM SYMMES.

PRINTED AT PORTLAND, BY JOHN K. BAKER. -- 1797

THE following sketch prepared, delivered, and now published at the request of
the Committee appointed to conduct the celebration of this anniversary, is
given to the public with the sincerest wish that the overthrow of FOREIGN
INFLUENCE may regenerate the independence of the United States; and that
realizing the yet unformed idea that we are a separate nation, we may learn to
REVERENCE OURSELVES.

AN ORATION.
AMERICANS!
WHILE other nations celebrate the birth, the restoration* or the death of a
King, as the strange caprice of mankind makes one or the other the order of the
day -- you characteristica^ly observe the birthday of the People -- when they
became a Nation! This is an anniversary of dignified and affectionate feelings.
To know that at this moment throughout our extensive continent a great and
happy people are assembled round the altar of freedom to offer before it that
incense most acceptable to heaven* a grateful heart -- To see them in the
sublime delight of their souls stretch forth their hands as one man and swear
to preserve the liberty with which God ha^ made them free -- To behold them
with disdainful aspect ranging themselves in front of the government which they
have seen sit to choose -- how noble and how affecting is the spectacle! The
blood of a hermit grows warm at it, and the countenance of angels becomes
animated!

Let your souls then kindle, and give free scope to an idea which can never be
too well established, that you are, and that you will be one of the g^e^t
nations of the earth, and that the name of an American shall shortly be as
proud a style, and as firm a character, as any in the world. The consciousness
that you despise the sword as the criterion of truth among yourselves, and have
submitted, and can again submit your greatest questions to your own discretion*
while it is elevating every feature of the individual, is preparing foreign
honors for the nation. And the high minded moderation which you are called
upon to preserve, evincing the value you place upon the government which it
attends upon, is slowly proving to the world the possibility of a republican,
and the steadiness of a balanced, constitution. Time will come, when, after
suitable trials and escapes* the public mind will be versed in difficulty and
familiar with resources, when there will be no more self-denial in doing right;
and then the will of Heaven will be accomplished that mankind shall perceive
that knowledge, not ignorance, freedom not slavery, is the true secret of
government.

It was indeed fortunate for these now United States, when in the order of
things the time of emancipation from the state of pupillage was come, that they
were furnished with as good forms of government as any which then existed. From
a rigid and unreasonable parent they had inherited good constitutions at least,
and such as after passing the ordeal of philosophy have only become a little
more popular than before. I am aware that same will expect from the speaker a
language that has now become improper. Great Britain, on this occasion, will be
tre^ted with the respect due to one of the friends of the United States by
treaty. It was highly fit, while any doubt of our ultimate independence
remained, to cherish the resentment of indignation; and habit or apprehension
fully justified the continuance of it a few years longer while no connection
subsisted: But just sentiments of national character and obligations, together
with that dignity of mind which we must cultivate, will teach us to lay aside
alike the hacknied epithet, the tortured stigma, and the threadbare jest.
What! professing and allowed to be the school of political investigation, shall
we be unable to surmount a prejudice no longer founded in a doubt of complete
success?

But it is always useful to retrace the progress of power freely and
periodically delegated by the people, usurped on the ground of precedent or
practice to accumulate forever, or assumed with no appearance of one or the
other justification. An accurate history of all times and nations respecting
this particular would be a revelation of inestimable value. As it would thunder
the truth, so possibly it might be celestial lightning upon our extravagant
dispositions. Of the little history we have, scarcely two centuries and those
the last, are exempt from fable, and not a year from fallacy. The true causes
of known consequences are seldom discernible through the interested coloring,
or the implicit credulity of the historian. So true it is that mankind have
never yet had the heroism to know and to beware of themselves, or have not had
power to preserve either the knowledge or the example.

But our date is recent. Less than two hundred years ago the territory of the
United States was a wilderness, and the now embellished scene of six millions
of people had for ages been only beaten with mutual dread by the wary foot of
the wild beast and solitary savage. The truly great, because truly useful
Columbus had imagined, sought, and explored this asylum from the misfortunes,
discontents or persecutions of the old world. Our ancestors came hither to
enjoy the freedom of their minds, and faithfully have they transmitted the same
freedom to us. Gloomy was the immense forest which they had to penetrate; but
with a courage which too I hope we inherit* they encountered and by degrees
subdued it. What a birthright have they left to us! A territory near two
thousand miles square* with all the climates of the temperate zone* abounding
even to wantonness in all the blessings of nature, is the noble legacy of these
poor persecuted men! -- A thousand leagues from Europe, where every thing was
artificial and vicious, they recovered a simplicity of mind, which was a yet
m^re preci^us perquisite of the present generation -- Thus possessed or ample
territory and undebi^itated vigor of mind, what was wanting to ^^use the
natural indo^ence of society, and compel us to press our for^unes to their
destination, but the jealousy of Great Britain and the consequent war? -- Even
the latter was a necess^ry school for our generals and statesmen, and well -- I
spe^k without forgetting that some of them are present -- well did they improve
it. By their means the tre^ty of 1783 gave us all the rights of men and of
nati^ns* never again to be disputed, and future destinies so high that the very
contemplation of them might regenerate a people.

Eventful indeed has been the period in which we have lived. Neither history
nor fable have mentione^, neither fancy nor fiction have dreamed of any thing
so vari^us and so great. In five years after the p^ace, our c^untry had fallen
into a state of debility and spasm (...) removed from dissolution. Then it was
that by an eff^^t astonishing to all the world, THE PEOPLE assembled, and
peaceably took down the crazy frame of the (...) revolutionary compact, laid
foundations, and er^cted the fair and superb, the solid and magnificent castle
of the Constitution. -- Splendid moment for my country! Precious instance to
the world! An attempt, which if ever it was made before, has always ended in
war, and that most violent of the remedies of war, despotic monarchy, in this
temperate and enlightened nation has complete effect! An elective republican
government, by express compact of all the people of the United States, now bids
fair not only to be sufficient to rule millions of men in spite of the
interested maxims of reigning families and their venal philosophers, but to
make the nation more respectable than all the falling despotisms of Europe,
Asia, and Africa together. -- Cherish it citizens, as you cherish those you
most dearly love. The experiment is yet in infancy, and though in its cradle it
has strangle^ several serpents a^ready -- yet oh! lean over it -- watch for it
-- indeed it will amply repay you!

Wonderful age! No sooner had America taken the firm ground which was so
necessary for her, than France, leavened by her legions sent to these shores
with very different views, perceived within herself the revolutionary
fermentation. The States had become independent and united; but excepting these
two grand epochas, things remained essentially the same. France began with
reformation; but the difference between us and France was in circumstance
immense. In France a despotic monarchy, not less fantastical in government than
the popedom is in religion, consisting of all the abuses of a thousand years,
was to be corrected. The empiricism of financiers was in vain resorted to, for
the cant of ages would no longer persuade. Whether it was through dreadful
necessity, or the desperation of leaders, time will disclose; but the
catastrophe was not the change of a dynasty as theretofore -- The Monarchy
itself fell! -- and the artificial balance of Europe, so much boasted of in
latter times, was probably destroyed. I am very unwilling to deduce from our
moderate and defensive revolution the monstrous theories, and the abandonment
to crime, which sudden freedom exposed poor human nature to betray. Alas! it
could not be expected that France should understand the true nature of liberty,
which is subjection to law. But we assuredly know that sooner or later this
idea will be conceived in France, and then we shall shudder less at the horrors
which too sl^wly lead to it. Shall we not pause a moment and ejaculate a
bl^ssing for our own condition? Shall we not fervently pray the God of H^^^ven
that whatever awaits us in the formidab^e future, we may never be disorganized,
and left to ourse^ves!

In the question whether old establishments should be modified or
unconditionally subverted, all mankind, wherever folded in their various
cantonments, were obviously c^ncerned. The argument, therefore, to which
physical force was app^ied, was whether the discussi^n o^ it should be opened.
France was central, powe^ful and active. She gallantly met b^th men and b^^ks
in support of the affi^mative, in a just confidence that where she could weaken
government^, she could proportiona^^y direct the people. Whether this conduct
was the c^use or the effect of the general combination against her, to us is
immateria^ -- We have only to see how its principle affected the United States.

America, though providentially already safe by her c^nstitu^ion from intrigues
which in her former situation would certainly have ruined her, was young in
experience, and very important to France. She was by no means l^ft out of their
earliest calcu^ations. -- Mr Genet* who had subv^rted Ge^eva, and even had the
hardiness to plot against the imperial Catharine in the heart of her own
dominions, was selected as the messenger of fraterna^ greeting to the United
States. It would be ridiculous at this day to maintain that the very selection
did not prove the design. Accordingly Mr. Genet made a well concerted series of
attempts to commit this country to a war with the combined powers long before
he even delivered his dip^omatic papers to our Executive. He and his success^rs
have termed our fair neutrality " insidious" upon no better ground than a sort
of cabalistical gratitude by which they claimed that we were bound to France,
though Mr. Genet has v^ry consistently exposed to us the endeavors of the old
French court to prevent or destroy the success of our revolutionary war. The
ambassador of France affected to receive and answer addresses which were
intended, at least by him, to control the government, and paralise the
constitution, of the United States. The too amiable hospitality of the people
encouraged him to arm and commission vessels in our ports, and troops in our
territory, against the express orders of the President. -- And when the
conflict between foreign influence and our own constituted authorities could no
longer be suppressed, wi^h an insolence most affrontive to the American
understanding, he threatened to appeal from the government to the people.

Administration had such a people to confide in, that with a tone worthy of
that people it demanded the recall of this too fascinating man. The pr^jects of
France were yet unripe -- and her government but momentary -- he was readily
reca^led. His successor appears to have fomented the commotion which M. Genet
had excited, and only to have retired when the true nature of his mission was
discovered in an intercepted letter. But it was reserved to the third and last
minister to close the drama by a new and most artful diplomatic stroke -- not
war -- not even asperity -- but a reserve on the part of France easy to be
reconciled when some affronts should be repaired.

But what eventually are the points which the people of America are invited to
consider as concessible to a foreign nation? -- The repeal of a law, the
reversal of judiciary decisions, and the abolition of a treaty. Citizens, does
not indignation warm your cheeks at the developement of a design so long and so
well concealed? The friendship of America for France was sincere and full of a
noble simplicity and singleness of heart. Was it well then, was it generous, to
elevate esteem to love in order to betray? -- What! repeal a law on foreign
demand, without the least right to deliberate? Reverse judicial decisions,
which by our constitution it is impossible for the legislative or executive
power to do, which in no possible manner can be brought again before the
courts, and would depress American justice below the idea of chance if they
were thus to be reversed? Annul a treaty with a foreign nation, and so forever
commit our inconstancy and persidy to history and to the world? -- Modest
demands indeed from a nation but little longer fated to speak imperiously to
this, if you do not suffer them to despise a government which they affect to
imitate.

Citizens, there is naturally no such thing as party in these highly favored
and enlightened States. The full horn of plenty forms the body, and an elective
government the soul of our contentment. Depend upon it, that when you feel a
great commotion, the hand of some foreign nation is inserted. The apostles of
disaffection to your government are foreigners, and do you think disinterested
and purely benevolent! -- No, surely! their design is to dissolve your only
cement by your own hands; and in the terrible event to laugh at your calamity
and mock when your fear comes. Good God! what would have become of our country
with thirteen heads instead of one!

France, having as she imagined a party in America which in some way or other
would be able to perplex the government, by her own act, and at a very critical
time, the election of the President, suspended all intercourse with the United
States to give her party the last chance of laying the odium of her defection
upon the President and Senate. Consummate politicians! But the cupidity of the
nation has been a sad marplot to these really fine maneuvers. The immense
captures and detentions of our commercial property have opened all eyes, and
the salvation of the country may yet result from its losses.!

Is this language which has not yet been heard? With a dignity that is his own,
and which infinitely becomes his country, the President has laid before us a
state of facts which it would be something more than heresy to misbelieve. It
is a new era in this country. The Executive, in obedience to the constitution,
declares that this can no longer be concealed. Both houses reverberate the
sound. France has intermeddled with our domestic affairs, and attempted what
she has every where attempted, by dividing the people from their government, TO
TAKE AWAY LIBERTY FROM THE NATION. She has endeavored to throw us into
situations with none or desperate alternatives. She has plowed with the heifer,
and abused the generous but imprudent confidence of the people. She has put to
hazard the existence of your constitution.

Is there one who hears me so infatuated by his errors, is there one so callous
to the electric name of his country, so lost, and so abandoned, as not to see,
and to see with indignation, that these things are true? -- Are we then the
degraded, divided, and dispirited people which the whole conduct of France
implies that she dares to think us? Americans! -- But you feel the p(...)se.

It is made because the dignified moderation of our government has thought it
not inconsistent with national honor to institute a fresh attempt at
negotiation, after the haughty rejection of a minister. -- Death is a trifle
compared with the forlorn necessity of believing that my countrymen have the
"colonial spirit of fear." There must, and I thank God there will be another
trial before one particle of our absolute freedom is resigned to France,
however grateful we may be requested to be. But let us at present wish well to
the new negotiation.

Citizens* you are to expect that your forms of government will be weighed in
Europe, and that while they preserve your liberty by being known, by being
known they will also present the handle to plausible interference. If you
desire any better judgment than your own, I do not know but you may find it in
France, or any where else. But if you rely on your own, I am sure there is none
so good.

It is no great boast that Great-Brita^n does not rule you, if y^u are to be
ruled by France. Are you, or are you not, able to rule yourselves? -- that is
the question. It is indeed the question before the universe at this moment. You
can decide it in the clearest affirmative: if you do not, the opinion of the
world, though slow, will be sure, and abundantly fatal.

Is it to France, then, that you are about to extend the menacing look? -- No*
citizens* the magic name of France may amuse you, and if you please, may ruin
you: But France has not solely the honor to concenter observation. She has
indeed, like an epidemic pestilence, the glory of being our immediate dread --
but the name of the demon which that party, ^o called, which you have been
pleased to style your government, would destroy, if they could, is -- FOREIGN
INFLUENCE! the invisible hand which writes your fate upon the wall!

Considering this as the second great experiment to which our country has been
committed, and more dangerous than the other, because more impalpable to sense
I could not but wish you to fix an immovable eye upon it. Settle its lattitude
and longitude, as you would that of a comet, and then l^se not sight of it ever
for a moment. Paltry are your losses by plunder compared with very possible
events. Let us see whether the care of its concerns is safe with a people --
You cannot be mo^e free -- There will be no excuse -- Your bane and antidote
are both before you -- Let us see which you will take.

Strange it is perhaps that I should for a moment fancy myself addressing the
whole American people. But if such a thing were possible, thus exactly would I
commit them -- it is of no importance how soon we throw aside a constitution
which is not tenable. If you cannot continue republicans -- confess the fact --
and other governments are in reserve.

Oh Americans! -- Shall the laurels of your youth, and the unfinished honors
of your maturity, be tarnished? Will you forfeit the esteem of F^ance by
submitting to France? Gallant nation! It is best for her, that you should
resist her and prevail. Perhaps she will have the good sense to know this
truth, so interesting to her present mode of existence. Perhaps she can even
see that duration is an article not to be omitted in her estimate. But if,
which is too probable, she has doomed the universe to her purposes, and will
continue to put morality itself in occasional requisition, you must say what
figure you choose to make. The figure you will make will certainly be the
figure you choose.

Spread over so vast a surface, the people of the United States can never be
united in a single measure, much less in a train of policy but by one maxim,
not more plain and easy to be understood than safe and honorable to the people.
This only maxim by which the power as well as the intelligence of the citizens
can become operative to great and essential ends, is that We ought always to
support the government, and more especially against foreign powers. Surely we
are not addressing a region, a period, or a class of mankind addicted to the
mean belief that their is no confidence to be reposed in any administration,
and that there is always merit in cavilling at public services. How does it
happen that in this fine country, under circumstances highly favorable to the
reign of good sense, and with more obligations to its various representatives
than any nation ever had, so much jealousy of elected servants should exist? --
Would it not be natural to suppose that after gaining so great a point beyond
all other nations, as free and frequent elections, the mind of man would be
even more than quiet -- that it would be satisfied? -- Yet perhaps there never
was a country nor an age wherein so much vile abuse and infamous calumny was
heaped upon good and great men in the actual discharge of high offices, as has
been witnessed in the United States. -- This is a problem.

The habits of Americans have been formed upon the English model and I do not
know, if no war had broken ^ut between the two nations, whether any American
wou^d have been more querulous and irritable than before. To the British habit
of generally, and often with good reason, execrating ministers, the war added
an eight years fever of the public mind; and the period subsequent to the war
was a convalescence precarious and fretful. And then, no sooner had our
excellent constitution placed us in the state of acquiring its correspondent
turn of mind, than foreign influence, for want of more honest means among so
happy a people, administered the dregs of former infelicities, and so forced us
in some measure to relapse.

It is a truth that where the government is most despotic, there the people
will complain the least; but ought it to f^llow that where the government is
most free, there the people should complain the most? This seems to be the
fact, however, in that inundation of deadly bitterness which appears in every
form, and among others in that most detestable shape of wit which can be
scurrilous on great affairs, but has yet no name. It tends to prostrati^n and
revolution -- Bu^ what need have we of prostration and revolution?

The constitution has hitherto stood firm against foreign designs, and domestic
errors. The sophistry which has ^ss^^^ed it under the forms of false patriotism
and meretricious p^pularity, like all fruitless attempts upon opinion, failing
to shake, will probably establish it. If the people, steadily awake to their
true interest, give no encouragement to that flood of detraction which has
poured in upon us -- If they discern between the all important liberty of the
press, and the most immoral prostitution of it -- If they continue to bestow
their confidence on chief magistrates of impregnable integrity and firmness --
If they, as early as possible, distinguish between THEMSELVES and a clamorous
faction -- If they preserve their habits of industry, virtue and piety -- To
sum up all, if they resolve that, as they have deliberately formed, so they
will firmly support their government in all cases; THE COUNTRY IS SAVED! --
This dangerous crisis will pass away, prosperity and with it serenity will
return, and one more great lesson will be added to our political education.

Look round upon this great and flourishing nation -- Regard it as separate
from all others, and at peace with all -- Remember the distressing war which it
has already sustained -- Contemplate the immense addition to its wealth and
resources -- Reflect on the indissoluble union made by the constitution --
Consider the firm and patriotic President and Congress now in office -- See the
federal spirit of your own and other States -- And, if necessary, recollect
that Washington still lives -- Is this a country to be enslaved? --

But there is yet no need to extinguish the sincere regard of our nation
toward France. She appears to be magnanimous in success, and may yet repair
the wrongs of which we so justly complain. War has run its usual course, and
weary human nature begs for peace. Heaven may accord it -- and in that event,
returning philanthropy and kindness will hardly suffer us to be the only
exception. In the mean time let us keep alive the fervent wish that France may
see the final establishment, and live in the peaceable enjoyment of a free
constitution -- that under its influence, she may become a blessing, and not a
terror to the world -- and that the name of liberty may yet be sacred where it
is known!

And now, fellow-citizens, abounding as you do with every thing delightful upon
earth, Freedom, Plenty, Government, Peace, Order, Virtue and Happiness* with no
more anxiety than just to keep you watchful over these blessings; what remains
but that you make holy the tie which binds you to them by that grat^^ude to the
Supreme Ruler of the Universe for which he will certainly preserve them! -- May
you have the discernment, in this your day, to see the things which belong to
your peace! As you possess inestimable things, so remember that the use of them
only is yours. You must neither alienate, destroy, nor even impair them. For
such prudence, vigilance* and firmness, history now at length become worth
preserving, will reward your memories, and long! very long after you shall have
obeyed the universal decree, your poste^ity shall rise up and call you blessed!

THE END.
ERRATUM.
In the 15th page, 18th line, for "ever" read even.


