TREATIES OF AMITY AND COMMERCE, AND OF ALLIANCE EVENTUAL AND DEFENSIVE,
BETWEEN His Most Christian Majesty and the Thirteen United States of America;
THE DEFINITIVE TREATY BETWEEN Great Britain and the Thirteen United States of
America; AND THE TREATY OF AMITY, COMMERCE, AND NAVIGATION, BETWEEN His
Britannic Majesty and the United States of America.

BOSTON: Printed and sold by SAMUEL HALL, No. 53, Cornhill. 1797.

TREATY of Amity and Commerce between his Most Christian Majesty, and the
thirteen United States of America.
THE Most Christian King, and the thirteen United States of North America, to
wit, New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York,
New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina,
South Carolina, and Georgia, willing to fix, in an equitable and permanent
manner, the rules which ought to be followed relative to the correspondence and
commerce which the two parties desire to establish between their respective
countries, states, and subjects; his Most Christian Majesty, and the said
United States, have judged, that the said end could not be better obtained,
than by taking for the basis of their agreement, the most perfect equality and
reciprocity, and by carefully avoiding all those burdensome preferences, which
are usually sources of debate, embarrassment, and discontent -- by leaving also
each party at liberty to make, respecting commerce and navigation, those
interior regulations, which it shall find most convenient to itself -- and by
founding the advantage of commerce solely upon reciprocal utility, and the just
rules of free intercourse -- reserving withal, to each party, the liberty of
admitting, at its pleasure, other nations to a participation of the same
advantages. It is in the spirit of this intention, and to fulfill these views,
that his said Majesty having named and appointed for his Plenipotentiary,
Conrod Alexander Gerard, royal syndic of the city of Strasbourg, secretary of
his Majesty's council of state -- and the United States on their part, having
fully empowered Benjamin Franklin, deputy from the state of Pennsylvania to the
general Congress, and president to the convention of said state -- Silas Deane,
late deputy from the state of Connecticut, to the said Congress -- and Arthur
Lee, counselor at law: the said respective plenipotentiaries, after exchanging
their powers, and after mature deliberation, have concluded and agreed upon the
following articles:

ART. I. THERE shall be a firm, inviolable, and universal peace, and a true and
sincere friendship, between the Most Christian King, his heirs and successors,
and the United States of America, and the subjects of the Most Christian King,
and of the said states, and between the countries, islands, cities, and towns,
situate under the jurisdiction of the Most Christian King, and of the said
United States, and the people and inhabitants of every degree, without
exception of persons or places, and the terms herein after mentioned, shall be
perpetual between the Most Christian King, his heirs, and successors, and the
said United States.

II. The Most Christian King, and the United States, engage mutually not to
grant any particular favor to other nations, in respect of commerce and
navigation, which shall not immediately become common to the other party, who
shall enjoy the same favor freely, if the concession was freely made -- or on
allowing the same compensation, if the concession was conditional.

III. The subjects of the Most Christian King, shall pay in the ports, havens,
roads, countries, islands, cities, or towns of the United States, or any of
them, no other or greater duties or imposts, of what nature soever they may be,
or by what name soever called, than those which the nations most favored are
or shall be obliged to pay: and they shall enjoy all the rights, liberties,
privileges, immunities, and exemptions in trade, navigation, and commerce,
whether in passing from one port in the said states to another, or in going to
and from the same, from and to any part of the world, which the said nations do
or shall enjoy.

IV. The subjects, people, and inhabitants of the said United States, and each
of them, shall not pay in the ports, havens, roads, isles, cities, and places,
under the domination of his Most Christian Majesty in Europe, any other or
greater duties or imposts, of what nature soever they may be, or by what name
soever called, than those which the most favored nations are or shall be
obliged to pay: and they shall enjoy all the rights, liberties, privileges,
immunities, and exemptions in trade, navigation, and commerce, whether in
passing from one port in the said dominions in Europe, to another, or in going
to and from the same, from and to any part of the world, which the said nations
do or shall enjoy.

V. In the above exemption is particularly comprised the imposition of one
hundred sols per ton, established in France on foreign ships, unless when the
ships of the United States shall load with the merchandise of France, for
another port of the same dominion: in which case, the said ships shall pay the
duty above mentioned, so long as other nations the most favored shall be
obliged to pay it: but it is understood, that the said United States, or any of
them, are at liberty, when they shall judge it proper, to establish a duty
equivalent in the same case.

VI. The Most Christian King shall endeavor, by all the means in his power, to
protect and defend all vessels, and the effects, belonging to the subjects,
people, or inhabitants of the said United States, or any of them, being in his
ports, havens, or roads, or on the seas near to his countries, islands, cities,
or towns; and to recover and restore to the right owners, their agents, or
attorneys, all such vessels and effects, which shall be taken within his
jurisdiction: and the ships of war of his Most Christian Majesty, or any convoy
sailing under his authority, shall upon all occasions, take under their
protection, all vessels belonging to the subjects, people, or inhabitants of
the said United States, or any of them, and holding the same course, or going
the same way, and shall defend such vessels as long as they hold the same
course, or go the same way, against all attacks, force, and violence, in the
same manner as they ought to protect and defend the vessels belonging to the
subjects of the Most Christian King.

VII. In like manner the said United States, and their ships of war sailing
under their authority, shall protect and defend, conformably to the tenor of
the preceding article, all the vessels and effects belonging to the subjects of
the Most Christian King, and use all their endeavors to recover, and cause to
be restored, the said vessels and effects that shall have been taken within the
jurisdiction of the said United States, or any of them.

VIII. The Most Christian King will employ his good offices and interposition
with the King or Emperor of Morocco or Fez -- the Regencies of Algiers, Tunis,
and Tripoli, or with any of them -- and also with every other prince, state, or
power, of the coast of Barbary in Africa -- and the subjects of the said king,
emperor, states, and powers, and each of them, in order to provide, as fully
and efficaciously as possible, for the benefit, convenience, and safety of the
United States, and each of them, their subjects, people, and inhabitants, and
their vessels and effects, against all violence, insult, attacks, or
depredations, on the part of the said princes and states of Barbary, or their
subjects.

IX. The subjects, inhabitants, merchants, commanders of ships, masters, and
mariners of the states, provinces, and dominions of each respectively, shall
abstain and forbear to fish in all places possessed, or which shall be
possessed by the other party. The Most Christian King's subjects shall not fish
in the havens, bays, creeks, roads, coasts, or places, which the said United
States hold, or shall hereafter hold: and in like manner, the subjects, people,
and inhabitants of the said United States, shall not fish in the havens, bays,
creeks, roads, coasts, or places, which the most Christian King possesses, or
shall hereafter possess: and if any ship or vessel shall be found fishing,
contrary to the tenor of this treaty, the said ship or vessel with its lading
(proof being made thereof) shall be confiscated: it is, however, understood
that the exclusion stipulated in the present article, shall take place only so
long and so far, as the Most Christian King or the United States shall not, in
this respect, have granted an exemption to some other nation.

X. The United States, their citizens and inhabitants, shall never disturb the
subjects of the Most Christian King, in the enjoyment and exercise of the right
of fishing on the banks of Newfoundland -- nor ^n the indefinite and exclusive
right which belongs to them on that part of the coast of that island, which is
designed by the treaty of Utrecht -- nor in the rights relative to all and each
of the isles, which belong to his Most Christian Majesty, the whole conformable
to the true sense of the treaties of Utrecht and Paris.

XI. The subjects and inhabitants of the said United States, or any of them,
shall not be reputed aubains in France; and consequently shall be exempted from
the droit d'aubaine, or other similar duty, under what name soever. They may,
by testament, donation, or otherwise, dispose of their goods, moveable and
immovable, in favor of such persons as to them shall seem good; and their
heirs, subjects of the said United States, residing whether in France or
elsewhere, may succeed them, ab intestat, without being obliged to obtain
letters of naturalization, and without having the effect of this concession
contested or impeded, under pretext of any rights or prerogatives of provinces,
cities, or private persons. And the said heirs, whether such by particular
title, or ab intestat, shall be exempt from all duty called droit de
detraction, or other duty of the same kind; saving nevertheless the local
rights or duties, as much and as long as similar ones are not established by
the United States, or any of them. The subjects of the Most Christian King
shall enjoy on their part, in all the dominions of the said States, an entire
and perfect reciprocity, relative to the stipulations contained in the present
article: but it is at the same time agreed, that its contents shall not affect
the laws made, or that may be made hereafter in France, against emigrations,
which shall remain in all their force and vigor: and the United States on
their part, or any of them, shall be at liberty to enact such laws, relative to
that matter, as to them shall seem proper.

XII. The merchant-ships of either of the parties, which shall be making into a
port belonging to the enemy of the other ally, and concerning whose voyage, and
the species of goods on board her, there shall be just grounds of suspicion,
shall be obliged to exhibit, as well upon the high seas, as in the ports and
havens, not only her passports, but likewise certificates, expressly showing
that her goods are not of the number of those which have been prohibited as
contraband.

XIII. If, by the exhibiting of the abovesaid certificates, the other party
discover there are any of those sorts of goods which are prohibited and
declared contraband, and consigned for (...) port under the obedience of its
enemies, it shall not be lawful to break up the hatches of such ship, or to
open any chests, coffers, packs, casks, or any other vessele found therein, or
to remove the smallest parcels of her goods, whether such ship belongs to the
subjects of France, or the inhabitants of the said United States, unless the
lading be brought on shore, (...) the presence of the officers of the court of
admiralty, and an inventory thereof made: but there shall be no allowance to
sell, exchange, or alienate the same in any manner, until after that due and
lawful process shall have been had against such prohibited goods, and the court
of admiralty shall, by a sentence pronounced, have confiscated the same; saving
always as well the ship itself, as any other goods found therein, which by this
Treaty are to be esteemed free: neither may they be detained on pretense of
their being as it were infected by the prohibited goods; much less shall they
be confiscated as lawful prize; but if not the whole cargo, but only part
thereof shall consist of prohibited or contraband goods, and the commander of
the ship shall be ready and willing to deliver them to the captor, who has
discovered them, in such case the captor having received those goods, shall
forthwith discharge the ship, and not hinder her by any means freely to
prosecute the voyage on which she was bound: but in case the contraband
merchandises cannot be all received on board the vessel of the captor, then the
captor may, notwithstanding the offer of delivering him the contraband goods,
carry the vessel into the nearest port, agreeable to what is above directed.

XIV. On the contrary, it is agreed, that whatever shall be found to be laden
by the subjects and inhabitants of either party on any ship belonging to the
enemies of the other, or to their subjects, the whole, although it be not of
the sort of prohibited goods, may be confiscated in the same manner as if it
belonged to the enemy, except such goods and merchandises as were put on board
such ship before the declaration of war, or even after such declaration if so
be it were done without knowledge of such declaration: so that the goods of the
subjects and people of either party, whether they be of the nature of such as
are prohibited or otherwise, which, as is aforesaid, said, were put on board
any ship belonging to an enemy before the war, or after the declaration of the
same, without the knowledge of it, shall no ways be liable to confiscation, but
shall well and truly be restored without delay to the proprietors demanding the
same; but so as that if the said merchandises be contraband, it shall not be
any-ways lawful to carry them afterward to any ports belonging to the enemy.
The two contracting parties agree, that the term of two months being passed
after the declaration of war, their respective subjects, from whatever part of
the world they come, shall not plead the ignorance mentioned in this article.

XV. And that more effectual care may be taken for the security of the subjects
and inhabitants of both parties, that they suffer no injury by the men of war
or privateers of the other party, all the commanders of the ships of his Most
Christian Majesty and of the said United States, and all their subjects and
inhabitants, shall be forbidden doing any injury or damage to the other side;
and if they act to the contrary, they shall be punished: and shall moreover be
bound to make satisfaction for all matter of damage, and the interest thereof,
by reparation, under the pain and obligation of their person and goods.

XVI. All ships and merchandises, of what nature soever, which shall be rescued
out of the hands of any pirates or robbers on the high seas, shall be brought
into some port of either state, and shall be delivered to the custody of the
officers of that port, in order to be restored entire to the true proprietor,
as soon as due and sufficient proof shall be made concerning the property
thereof.

XVII. It shall be lawful for the ships of war of either party, and privateers,
freely to carry, whithersoever they please, the ships and goods taken from
their enemies, without being obliged to pay any duty to the officers of the
admiralty, or any other judges: nor shall such prizes be arrested or seized,
when they come to, and enter the ports of either party: nor shall the searchers
or other officers of those places search the same, or make examination
concerning the lawfulness of the prizes: but they may hoist sail at any time,
and depart, and carry their prizes to the places expressed in their
commissions, which the commanders of such ships of war shall be obliged to
(...): on the contrary, no shelter or refuge shall be given in their ports to
such as shall have made prize of the subjects, people, or property of either of
the parties; but if such shall come in, being forced by stress of weather, or
the danger of the sea, all proper means shall be vigorously used, that they go
out and retire from thence as soon as possible.

XVIII. If any ship, belonging to either of the parties, their people, or
subjects, shall, within the coasts or dominions of the other, stick upon the
sands, or be wrecked, or suffer any other damage -- all friendly assistance and
relief shall be given to the persons ship-wrecked, or such as shall be in
danger thereof. And letters of safe conduct shall likewise be given to them,
for their free and quiet passage from thence, and the return of every one to
his own country.

XIX. In case the subjects and inhabitants of either party, with their
shipping, whether public and of war, or private and of merchants, be forced
through stress of weather, pursuit of pirates, or enemies, or any other urgent
necessity for seeking of shelter and harbor, to retreat and enter into any of
the rivers, bays, roads, or ports belonging to the other party, they shall be
received and treated with all humanity and kindness, and enjoy all friendly
protection and help: and they shall be permitted to refresh and provide
themselves, at reasonable rates, with victuals, and all things needful for the
sustenance of their persons, or reparation of their ships, and convenience of
their voyage: and they shall no ways be detained or hindered from returning out
of the said ports or roads, but may remove and depart, when, and whither they
please, without any let or hindrance.

XX. For the better promoting of commerce on both sides, it is agreed, that if
a war shall break out between the said two nations, six months after the
proclamation of war, shall be allowed to the merchants, in the cities and towns
where they live, for selling and transporting their goods and merchandises:
and, if any thing be taken from them, or any injury be done them within that
term, by either party, or the people or subjects of either, full satisfaction
shall be made for the same.

XXI. No subjects of the Most Christian King shall apply for, or take any
commission or letters of marque, for arming any ship or ships to act as
privateers against the said United States, or any of them, or against the
subjects, people, or inhabitants of the said United States, or any of them, or
against the property of any of the inhabitants of any of them, from any prince
or state with which the said United States shall be at war: nor shall any
citizen, subject, or inhabitant of the said United States, or any of them,
apply for, or take any commission or letters of marque, for arming any ship or
ships, to act as privateers against the subjects of the Most Christian King, or
any of them, or the property of any of them, from any prince or state with
which the said king shall be at war: and if any person of either nation shall
take such commissions or letters of marque, he shall be punished as a pirate.

XXII. It shall not be lawful for any foreign privateers, not belonging to
subjects of the Most Christian King, nor citizens of the said United States,
who have commissions from any other prince or state in enmity with either
nation, to fit their ships in the ports of either the one or the other of the
aforesaid parties, to sell what they have taken, or in any other manner
whatsoever, to exchange their ships, merchandises, or any other lading: neither
shall they be allowed even to purchase victuals, except such as shall be
necessary for their going to the next port of that prince or state from which
they have commissions.

XXIII. It shall be lawful for all and singular the subjects of the Most
Christian King, and the citizens, people, and inhabitants of the said United
States, to sail with their ships with all manner of liberty and security, no
distinction being made who are the proprietors of the merchandises laden
thereon, from any port, to the places of those who now are or hereafter shall
be at enmity with the Most Christian King or the United States. It shall
likewise be lawful for the subjects and inhabitants aforesaid, to sail with the
ships and merchandises aforementioned, and to trade with the same liberty and
security from the places, ports and havens of those who are enemies of both or
either party, without any opposition (...) disturbance whatsoever, not only
directly from the places of the enemy aforementioned, to neutral places; but
also from one place belonging to an enemy, to another place belonging to an
enemy, whether they be under the jurisdiction of the same prince, or under
several. And it is hereby stipulated, that free ships shall also give a freedom
to goods; and that every thing shall be deemed to be free and exempt, which
shall be found on board the ships belonging to the subjects of either of the
confederates, although the whole lading or any part thereof should appertain to
the enemies of either, contraband goods being always excepted. It is also
agreed in like manner, that the same liberty be extended to persons who are on
board a free ship, with this effect, that although they be enemies to both or
either party, they are not to be taken out of that free ship, unless they are
soldiers and in actual service of the enemy.

XXIV. This liberty of navigation and commerce shall extend to all kinds of
merchandises, excepting those only which are distinguished by the name of
contraband, and under this name of contraband or prohibited goods shall be
comprehended arms, great guns, bombs, with the fusees and other things
belonging to them, cannon-ball, gunpowder, match, pikes, swords, lances,
spears, halberds, mortars, petards, grenades, saltpetre, muskets, musket ball,
bucklers, helmets, breast-plates, coats of mail, and the like kinds of arms,
proper for arming soldiers, musket-rests, belts, horses with their furniture,
and all other warlike instruments whatever. These merchandises that follow,
shall not be reckoned among contraband or prohibited goods; that is to say, all
sorts of cloths, and all other manufactures woven of any wool, flax, silk,
cotton, or any other materials whatever; all kinds of wearing apparel, together
with the species whereof they are used to be made; gold and silver, as well
coined as uncoined, tin, iron, latten, copper, brass, coals; as also wheat and
barley, and any other kind of corn, and pulse, tobacco, and likewise all manner
of spices, salted and smoaked flesh, salted fish, cheese and butter, beer,
oils, wines, sugars, and all sorts of salts, and in general all provisions
which serve for the nourishment of mankind and the sustenance of life;
furthermore, all kinds of cotton, hemp, flax, tar, pitch, ropes, cables, sails,
sail-cloths, anchors, and any parts of anchor, also ships, masts, planks,
boards, and beams of what trees soever: and all other things proper either for
building or repairing ships, and all other goods whatever which have not been
worked into the form of any instrument or thing prepared for war by land or by
sea, shall not be reputed contraband, much less such as have been already
wrought and made up for any other use; all which shall be wholly reckoned among
free goods; as likewise all other merchandises and things which are not
comprehended and particularly mentioned in the foregoing enumeration of
contraband goods, so that they may be transported and carried in the freest
manner by the subjects of both confederates, even to places belonging to an
enemy -- such towns or places being only excepted, as are at that time
besieged, blocked up, or invested.

XXV. To the end that all manner of dissentions and quarrels may be avoided and
prevented, on one side and the other, it is agreed, that in case either of the
parties hereto should be engaged in war, the ships and vessels belonging to the
subjects or people of the other ally, must be furnished with sea letters or
passports, expressing the name, property, and bulk of the ship, as also the
name and place of habitation of the commander of the said ship, that it may
appear thereby that the ship really and truly belongs to the subjects of one of
the parties, which passport shall be made out and granted according to the form
annexed to this treaty. They shall likewise be recalled every year, that is, if
the ship happens to return home within the space of a year; it is likewise
agreed, that such ships, being laden, are to be provided not only with
passports as above mentioned, but also with certificates, containing the
several particulars of the cargo, the place whence the ship sailed, and whither
she is bound; that so it may be known whether any forbidden or contraband goods
be on board the same; which certificates shall be made out by the officers of
the place whence the ship set sail, in the accustomed form: and if any one
shall think it fit or advisable to express in the said certificates the person
to whom the goods on board belong, he may freely do so.

XXVI. The ships of the subjects and inhabitants of either of the parties
coming upon any coasts belonging to either of the said allies, but not willing
to enter into port, or being entered into port, and not willing to unload their
cargoes or break bulk, they shall be treated according to the general rules
prescribed or to be prescribed relative to the object in question.

XXVII. If the ships of the said subjects, people, or inhabitants of either of
the parties, shall be met with, either sailing along the coasts, or on the high
seas, by any ships of war of the other, or by any privateers, the said ships of
war or privateers for the avoiding of any disorder, shall remain out of cannon
shot, and may send their boats on board the merchant ship, which they shall so
meet with; and may enter her to the number of two or three men only: to whom
the master or commander of such ship or vessel shall exhibit his passport,
concerning the property of the ship, made out according to the form inserted in
this present Treaty: and the ship, when she shall have showed such passport,
shall be free and at liberty to pursue her voyage, so as it shall not be lawful
to molest or search her in any manner, or to give her chase, or force her to
quit her intended course.

XXVIII. It is also agreed, that all goods, when once put on board the ships or
vessels of either of the two contracting parties, shall be subject to no
further visitation; but all visitation or search shall be made beforehand; and
all prohibited goods shall be stopped on the spot before the same be put on
board, unless there be manifest tokens or proofs of fraudulent practice: nor
shall either the persons or goods of the subjects of his Most Christian
Majesty, or the United States, be put under any arrest, or molested by any
other kind of embargo for that cause: and only the subject of that state to
whom the said goods have been or shall be prohibited, and who shall presume to
sell or alienate such sort of goods, shall be duly punished for the offense.

XXIX. The two contracting parties grant mutually the liberty of having each in
the ports of the other, consuls, vice-consuls, agents and commissaries, whose
functions shall be regulated by a particular agreement.

XXX. And the more to favor and facilitate the commerce which the subjects of
the United States may have with France, the Most Christian King will grant them
in Europe, one or more free ports, where they may bring and dispose of all the
produce and merchandise of the thirteen United States: and his Majesty will
also continue to the subjects of the said States, the free ports which have
been and are open in the French islands of America; of all which free ports the
said subjects of the United States shall enjoy the use, agreeably to the
regulations which relate to them.

XXXI. The present Treaty shall be ratified on both sides, and the
ratifications shall be exchanged in the space of six months, or sooner, if
possible.

In faith whereof the respective plenipotentiarics have signed the above
articles, both in the French and English languages; declaring nevertheless,
that the present Treaty was originally composed and concluded in the French
language; and they have hereto affixed their seals.

Done at Paris, this sixth day of February, one thousand seven hundred and
seventy-eight. C. A. GERARD, (L. S.) B. FRANKLIN, (L. S.) SILAS DEANE, (L. S.)
ARTHUR LEE, (L. S.)


TREATY of Alliance Eventual and Defensive, between his Most Christian Majesty,
and the thirteen United States of America.
THE Most Christian King, and the United States of North America, to wit,
New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York,
New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina,
South Carolina, and Georgia, having this day concluded a Treaty of Amity and
Commerce, for the reciprocal advantage of their subjects and citizens, have
thought it necessary to take into consideration the means of strengthening
those engagements, and of rendering them useful to the safety and tranquillity
of the two parties; particularly in case Great Britain, in resentment of that
connection, and of the good correspondence which is the object of the said
treaty, should break the peace with France, either by direct hostilities, or by
hindering her commerce and navigation in a manner contrary to the rights of
nations, and the peace subsisting between the two crowns. And his Majesty and
the said United States, having resolved in that case, to join their councils
and efforts against the enterprises of their common enemy --

The respective Plenipotentiaries, empowered to concert the clauses and
conditions proper to fulfill the said intentions, have, after the most mature
deliberation, concluded and determined on the following articles.

I. If war should break out between France and Great Britain, during the
continuance of the present war between the United States and England, his
Majesty and the said United States shall make it a common cause, and aid each
other mutually with their good offices, their counsels, and their forces,
according to the exigence of conjunctures, as becomes good and faithful allies.

II. The essential and direct end of the present defensive alliance is, to
maintain effectually the liberty, sovereignty, and independence, absolute and
unlimited, of the said United States, as well in matters of government, as of
commerce.

III. The two contracting parties shall, each on its own part, and in the
manner it may judge most proper, make all the efforts in its power against
their common enemy, in order to attain the end proposed.

IV. The contracting parties agree, that in case either of them should form any
particular enterprise, in which the concurrence of the other may be desired,
the party, whose concurrence is desired, shall readily and with good faith join
to act in concert for that purpose, as far as circumstances and its own
particular situation will permit. And in that case, they shall regulate by a
particular convention, the quantity and kind of succor to be furnished, and
the time and manner of its being brought into action, as well as the advantages
which are to be its compensation.

V. If the United States should think fit to attempt the reduction of the
British power, remaining in the northern parts of America, or the islands of
Bermudas, those countries or islands, in case of success, shall be confederated
with, or dependent upon the said United States.

VI. The Most Christian King renounces forever, the possession of the islands
of Bermudas, as well as of any part of the continent of North America, which
before the Treaty of Paris, in 1763, or in virtue of that Treaty, were
acknowledged to belong to the crown of Great Britain, or to the United States,
heretofore called British colonies, or which are at this time, or have lately
been under the power of the king and crown of Great Britain.

VII. If his Most Christian Majesty shall think proper to attack any of the
islands situated in the gulf of Mexico, or near that gulf, which are at present
under the power of Great Britain, all the said isles, in case of success, shall
appertain to the crown of France.

VIII. Neither of the two parties shall conclude either trace or peace with
Great Britain, without the formal consent of the other first obtained: and they
mutually engage not to lay down their arms, until the independence of the
United States shall have been formally or tacitly assured, by the treaty or
treaties that shall terminate the war.

IX. The contracting parties declare, that being resolved to fulfill each on its
own part, the clauses and conditions of the present Treaty of Alliance,
according to its own power and circumstances, there shall be no after-claim of
compensation, on one side or the other, whatever may be the event of the war.

X. The Most Christian King and the United States, agree to invite or admit
other powers, who may have received injuries from England, to make a common
cause with them, and to accede to the present alliance, under such conditions
as shall be freely agreed to, and settled between all the parties.

XI. The two parties guarantee mutually from the present time and forever,
against all other powers, to wit, the United States to his Most Christian
Majesty, the present possessions of the crown of France in America, as well as
those which it may acquire by the future Treaty of Peace: and his Most
Christian Majesty guarantees on his part to the United States, their liberty,
sovereignty, and independence, absolute and unlimited, as well in matters of
government, as commerce -- and also their possessions, and the additions or
conquests that their confederation may obtain during the war, from any of the
dominions now or heretofore possessed by Great Britain in North America,
conformable to the fifth and sixth articles above-written; the whole, as their
possessions, shall be fixed and assured to the said states, at the moment of
the cessation of their present war with England.

XII. In order to fix more precisely the sense and application of the preceding
article, the contracting parties declare, that in case of a rupture between
France and England, the reciprocal guarantee declared in the said article,
shall have its full force and effect, the moment such war shall break out: and
if such (...) shall not take place, the mutual obligations of the said
guarantee shall not commence until the momen^ of the ^^^^^tion of the present
war, between the United State^ and England, shall have ascertained their
possession.

XIII. The present Treaty shall be ratified on both sides, and the ratification
shall be exchanged in the space of six months, or sooner, if possible.

In faith whereof the respective Plenipotentiaries, to wit, on the part of the
Most Christian King, Conrad Alexander Gerard, royal syndic of the city of
Strasbourg, and secretary of his Majesty's council of state -- and on the part
of the United States, Benjamin Franklin, deputy to the general Congress from
the state of Pennsylvania, and president of the Convention of said state --
Silas Deane, heretofore deputy from the state of Connecticut -- and Arthur Lee,
counselor at law, have signed the above articles both in the French and
English languages; declaring, nevertheless, that the present Treaty was
originally composed and concluded in the French language; and they have
hereunto affixed their seals.

Done at Paris, this sixth day of February, one thousand seven hundred and
seventy-eight. C. A. GERARD, (L. S.) B. FRANKLIN, (L. S.) SILAS DEANE, (L. S.)
ARTHUR LEE, (L. S.)


The Definitive Treaty between Great Britain and the Thirteen United States of
America.
In the Name of the Most Holy and Undivided Trinity.
IT having pleased the Divine Providence to dispose the hearts of the most
serene and most potent prince George the Third, by the grace of God, king of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith, duke of Brunswick
and Lunenburg, arch treasurer and prince elector of the holy Roman empire, etc.
and of the United States of America, to forget all past misunderstandings and
differences, that have unhappily interrupted the good correspondence and
friendship which they mutually wish to restore -- and to establish such a
beneficial and satisfactory intercourse between the two countries, upon the
ground of reciprocal advantages and mutual convenience, as may promote and
secure to both perpetual peace and harmony -- and having for this desirable
end already laid the foundation of peace and reconciliation, by the provisional
articles, signed at Paris, on the 30th of November, 1782, by the commissioners
empowered on each part, which articles were agreed to be inserted in, and to
constitute the treaty of peace proposed to be concluded between the crown of
Great Britain, and the said United States, but which treaty was not to be
concluded until terms of peace ^^^uld be agreed upon between Great Britain and
France, and his Britannic majesty should be ready to conclude such treaty
accordingly -- and the treaty between Great Britain and France having since
been concluded, his Britannic majesty and the United States of America, in
order to carry into full effect the provisional articles above mentioned,
according to the tenor thereof, have constituted and appointed, that is to say,
his Britannic majesty on his part, David Hartley, Esquire. member of the parliament
of Great Britain; and the said United States on their part, John Adams, Esquire.
late a commissioner of the United States of America, at the court of
Versailles, late delegate in Congress from the state of Massachusetts, and
chief justice of the said state, and minister plenipotentiary of the said
United States, to their high mightinesses the States General of the United
Netherlands; Benjamin Franklin, Esquire. late delegate in Congress, from the state
of Pennsylvania, president of the convention of the said state, and minister
plenipotentiary from the United States of America, at the court of Versailles;
and John Jay, Esquire. late president of Congress, chief justice of the state of
New York, and minister plenipotentiary from the said United States, at the
court of Madrid -- to be the plenipotentiaries for concluding and signing the
present definitive treaty; who, after having reciprocally communicated their
respective full powers, have agreed upon and confirmed the following articles.

ART. I. His Britannic majesty acknowledges the said United States, viz.
New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island and Providence plantations,
Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia,
North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia, to be free, sovereign, and
independent states; that he treats with them as such, and for himself, his
heirs and successors, relinquishes all claims to the government, propriety, and
territorial rights of the same, and every part thereof.

II. And that all disputes, which might arise in future, on the subject of the
boundaries of the said United States, may be prevented, it is hereby agreed and
declared, that the following are and shall be their boundaries, viz. from the
north-west angle of Nova Scotia, viz. that angle which is formed by a line
drawn due north from the source of St. Croix river to the highlands, along the
said highlands, which divide those rivers that empty themselves into the river
St. Lawrence, from those which fall into the Atlantic ocean, to the
north-westernmost head of Connecticut river; thence down along the middle of
that river to the forty-fifth degree of north latitude; from thence by a line
due west on said latitude, until it strikes the river Iriquois or Cataraquy;
thence along the middle of said river into Lake Ontario; through the middle of
said lake until it strikes the communication by water between that lake and
Lake Erie; thence along the middle of said communication into Lake Erie;
through the middle of said lake until it arrives at the water communication
between that lake and Lake Huron; thence along the middle of said water
communication into the Lake Huron; thence through the middle of said lake to
the water communication between that lake and Lake Superior; thence through
Lake Superior northward of the isles Royal and Philipeaux to the Long Lake;
thence through the middle of said Long Lake and the water communication between
it and the Lake of the Woods, to the said Lake of the Woods; thence through the
said lake to the most north-western point thereof, and from thence on a due
west course to the river Mississippi; thence by a line to be drawn along the
middle of the said river Mississippi until it shall intersect the northernmost
part of the thirty-first degree of north latitude. South, by a ^^^e to be drawn
due east from the determination of the line last mentioned in the latitude of
thirty-one degrees north of the equator, to the middle of the river
Apalachicola, or Catahouche; thence along the middle thereof to its junction
with the Flint river; thence strait to the head of St. Mary's river; and thence
down along the middle of St. Mary's river to the Atlantic ocean. East, by a
line to be drawn along the middle of the river. St. Croix, from its mouth in
the bay of Fundy, to its source; and from its source directly north to the
aforesaid highlands, which divide the rivers that fall into the Atlantic ocean,
from those which fall into the river St. Lawrence, comprehending all islands
within twenty leagues of any part of the shores of the United States, and lying
between lines to be drawn due east from the points where the aforesaid
boundaries between Nova Scotia on the one part, and Fast-Florida on the other,
shall respectively touch the bay of Fundy, and the Atlantic ocean, excepting
such islands as now are, or heretofore have been within the limits of the said
province of Nova Scotia.

III. It is agreed, that the people of the United States shall continue to
enjoy, unmolested, the right to take fish of every kind on the Grand Bank, and
on all the other banks of Newfoundland, also in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, and
at all other places in the sea, where the inhabitants of both countries used at
any time heretofore to fish. And also, that the inhabitants of the United
States shall have liberty to take fish of every kind on such part of the coast
of Newfoundland, as British fishermen shall use (but not to dry or cure the
same on that island) and also on the coasts, bays and creeks of all other of
his Britannic majesty's dominions in America; and that the American fishermen
shall have liberty to dry and cure fish in any of the unsettled bays, harbors
and creeks of Nova Scotia, Magdalen Islands, and Labrador, so long as the same
shall remain unsettled; but so soon as the same or either of them shall be
settled, it shall not be lawful for the said fishermen to dry or cure fish at
such settlement, without a previous agreement for that purpose, with the
inhabitants, proprietors, or possessors of the ground.

IV. It is agreed, that creditors on either side, shall meet with no lawful
impediment to the recovery of the full value, in sterling money, of all bona
fide debts heretofore contracted.

V. It is agreed, that the Congress shall earnestly recommend it to the
legislatures of the respective states, to provide for the restitution of all
estates, rights, and properties, which have been confiscated, belonging to real
British subjects: and also of the estates, rights, and properties of persons
resident in districts in the possession of his majesty's arms, and who have not
borne arms against the said U. States; and that persons of any other
description, shall have free liberty to go to any part or parts of any of the
thirteen United States, and therein to remain twelve months unmolested in their
endeavors to obtain the restitution of such of their estates, rights, and
properties, as may have been confiscated; and that Congress shall also
earnestly recommend to the several states, a re-consideration and revision of
all acts or laws regarding the premises, so as to render the said laws or acts
perfectly consistent, not only with justice and equity, but with that spirit of
conciliation, which, on the return of the blessings of peace, should
universally prevail: and that Congress shall also earnestly recommend to the
several sta^es, that the estates, rights, and properties of such last mentioned
persons shall be restored to them, they refunding to any persons who may be now
in possession, the bona fide price (where any has been given) which such
persons may have paid, on purchasing any of the said lands, rights, or
properties since the confiscation. And it is agreed, that all persons, who have
any interest in confiscated lands, either by debts, marriage settlement^, or
otherwise, shall meet with no lawful imp^^l^^^nt at in the prosec^tion of their
just rights.

VI. That there shall be no future confiscations made, nor any prosecutions
commenced against any person or persons for, or by reason of the part which he
or they may have taken in the present war: and that no person shall, on that
account, suffer any future loss or damage, either in his person, liberty, or
property: and that those, who may be in confinement on such charges, at the
time of the ratification of the treaty in America, shall be immediately set at
liberty, and the prosecution, so commenced, be discontinued.

VII. There shall be a firm and perpetual peace between his Britannic majesty
and the said states, and between the subjects of the one, and the citizens of
the other: wherefore, all hostilities, both by sea and land, shall from
henceforth cease: all prisoners, on both sides, shall be set at liberty: and
his Britannic majesty shall, with all convenient speed, and without causing any
destruction, or carrying away any negroes, or other property of the American
inhabitants, withdraw all his armies, garrisons, and sleets from the said
United States, and from every post, place, and harbor within the same, leaving
in all fortifications the American artillery that may be therein; and shall
also order and cause all archives, records, deeds, and papers belonging to any
of the said states, or their citizens, which in the course of the war may have
fallen into the hands of his officers, to be forthwith restored, and delivered
to the proper states and persons to whom they belong.

VIII. The navigation of the river Mississippi, from its source to the ocean,
shall forever remain free and open to the subjects of Great Britain, and the
citizens of the United States.

IX. In case it should so happen, that any place or territory belonging to
Great Britain, or to the United States, should have been conquered by the arms
of either from the other, before the arrival of the said provisional articles
in America, it is agreed, that the same shall be restored without difficult,
and without requiring any compensation.

X. The solemn ratifications of the present treaty, expedited in good and due
form, shall be exchanged between the contracting parties in the space of six
months, or sooner, if possible, to be computed from the day of the signature of
the present treaty. In witness whereof, we the undersigned, their ministers
plenipotentiary, have, in their name, and in virtue of our full powers, signed
with our hands, the present definitive treaty, and caused the seals of our arms
to be affixed thereto.

Done at Paris, this third day of September, one thousand, seve^ hundred and
eighty-three. DAVID HARTLEY, (L. S.) JOHN ADAMS, (L. S.) B. FRANKLIN, (L. S.)
JOHN JAY, (L. S.)


TREATY of Amity, Commerce, and Navigation, between his Britannic Majesty and
the United States of America, conditionally ratified by the Senate of the
United States, at Philadelphia, June 24, 1795.
HIS Britannic Majesty and the United States of America, being desirous, by a
Treaty of Amity, Commerce, and Navigation, to terminate their differences in
such a manner, as, without reference to the merits of their respective
complaints and pretensions, may be the best calculated to produce mutual
satisfaction and good understanding: and also to regulate the Commerce and
Navigation between their respective countries, territories and people, in such
a manner as to render the same reciprocally beneficial and satisfactory; they
have, respectively, named their Plenipotentiaries, and given them full power to
treat of, and conclude, the said Treaty, that is to say: his Britannic Majesty
has named for his Plenipotentiary, the Right Honorable William Windham, Baron
Grenville, of Wotton, one of his Majesty's Privy Council, and his Majesty's
Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs; and the President of the said
United States, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, has
appointed for their Plenipotentiary, the Honorable John Jay, Chief Justice of
the said United States, and their Envoy Extraordinary to his Majesty, who have
agreed and concluded the following articles:

ARTICLE I.
There shall be a firm, inviolable, and universal peace, and a true and sincere
friendship between his Britannic Majesty, his heirs and successors, and the
United States of America; and between their respective countries, territories,
cities, towns, and people of every degree, without exception of persons or
places.

ARTICLE II.
His Majesty will withdraw all his troops and garrisons from all posts and
places within the boundary lines assigned by the Treaty of Peace to the United
States. This evacuation shall take place on or before the first day of June,
one thousand seven hundred and ninety-six, and all the proper measures shall,
in the interval, be taken by concert between the government of the United
States, and his Majesty's Governor General in America, for settling the
previous arrangements, which may be necessary respecting the delivery of the
said posts: The United States, in the mean time, at their discretion, extending
their settlements to any part within the said boundary line, except within the
precincts or jurisdiction of any of the said posts. All settlers and traders
within the precincts or jurisdiction of the said posts, shall continue to
enjoy, unmolested, all their property of every kind, and shall be protected
therein. They shall be at full liberty to remain there, or to remove with all
or any part of their effects; and it shall also be free to them to sell their
lands, houses, or effects, or to retain the property thereof, at their
discretion; such of them as shall continue to reside within the said boundary
lines, shall not be compelled to become citizens of the United States, or to
take any oath of allegiance to the government thereof; but shall be at full
liberty so to do if they think proper; and they shall make and declare their
election within one year after the evacuation aforesaid. And all persons who
shall continue there after the expiration of the said year, without having
declared their intention of remaining subjects of his Britannic Majesty, shall
be considered as having elected to become citizens of the United States.

ARTICLE III.
It is agreed, that it shall, at all times, be free to his Majesty's subjects,
and to the citizens of the United States, and also to the Indians dwelling on
either side of the said boundary line, freely to pass and repass by land or
inland navigation, into the respective territories and countries of the two
parties, on the continent of America (the country within the limits of the
Hudson's bay company only excepted) and to navigate all the lakes, rivers, and
water^ thereof, and freely to carry on trade and commerce with each other. But
it is understood, that this article does not extend to the admission of vessels
of the United States into the seaports, harbors, bays, or creeks of his
Majesty's said territories; nor into such parts of the rivers in his Majesty's
said territories as are between the mouth thereof, and the highest port of
entry from the sea, except in small vessels trading bona fide between Montreal
and Quebec, under such regulations as shall be established to prevent the
possibility of any frauds in this respect; nor to the admission of British
vessels from the sea into the rivers of the United States, beyond the highest
ports of entry for vessels from the sea. The river Missisippi shall, however,
according to the Treaty of Peace, be entirely open to both parties; and it is
further agreed, that all the ports and places on its eastern side, to
whichsoever of the parties belonging, may freely be resorted to, and used by
both parties, in as ample a manner as any of the Atlantic ports or places of
the United States, or any of the ports or places of his Majesty in
Great Britain.

All goods and merchandise, whose importation into his Majesty's said
territories in America shall not be entirely prohibited, may freely, for the
purposes of commerce, be carried into the same in the manner aforesaid, by the
citizens of the United States, and such goods and merchandise shall be subject
to no higher or other duties, than would be payable by his Majesty's subjects
on the importation of the same from Europe into the said territories. And in
like manner, all goods and merchandise, whose importation into the United
States shall not be wholly prohibited, may freely, for the purposes of
commerce, be carried into the same, in the manner aforesaid, by his Majesty's
subjects, and such goods and merchandise shall be subject to no higher or other
duties, than would be payable by the citizens of the United States on the
importation of the same in American vessels into the Atlantic ports of the said
States. And all goods not prohibited to be exported from the said territories
respectively, may, in like manner, be carried out of the same by the two
parties respectively, paying duty as aforesaid.

No duty of entry shall ever be levied by either party on peltries brought by
land, or inland navigation, into the said territories respectively; nor shall
the Indians passing or repassing with their own proper goods and effects, of
whatever nature, pay for the same any impost or duty whatever. But goods in
bales, or other large packages, unusual among Indians, shall not be considered
as goods belonging bona fide to Indians.

No higher or other tolls or rates of ferriage than what are or shall be
payable by natives, shall be demanded on either side; and no duties shall be
payable on any goods which shall be merely carried over any of the portages or
carrying places on either side, for the purpose of being immediately reimbarked
and carried to some other place or places. But as by this stipulation it is
only meant to secure to each party a free passage across the portages on both
sides; it is agreed, that this exemption from duty shall extend only to such
goods as are carried in the usual and direct road across the portage, and are
not attempted to be in any manner sold or exchanged during their passage across
the same; and proper regulations may be established to prevent the possibility
of any frauds in this respect.

As this article is intended to render in a great degree the local advantages
of each party common to both, and thereby to promote a disposition favorable to
friendship and good neighborhood, it is agreed, that the respective governments
will mutually promote this amicable intercourse, by causing speedy and
impartial justice to be done, and necessary protection to be extended to all
who may be concerned therein.

ARTICLE IV.
Whereas it is uncertain whether the river Missisippi extends so far to the
northward as to be intersected by a line to be drawn due west from the Lake of
the Woods, in the manner mentioned in the Treaty of Peace between his Majesty
and the United States: it is agreed, that measures shall be taken in concert
between his Majesty's government in America and the government of the United
States, for making a joint survey of the said river from one degree of latitude
below the falls of St. Anthony, to the principal source or sources of said
river, and the parts adjacent thereto; and that if on the result of such
survey, it should appear that the said river would not be intersected by such a
line as is above mentioned, the two parties will thereupon proceed by amicable
negotiation, to regulate the boundary line in that quarter, as well as all
other points to be adjusted between the said parties, according to justice and
mutual convenience, and in conformity to the intent of the said Treaty.

ARTICLE V.
Whereas doubts have arisen what river was truly intended under the name of the
river St. Croix, mentioned in the said Treaty of Peace, and forming a part of
the boundary therein described; that question shall be referred to the final
decision of Commissioners to be appointed in the following manner, viz.

One Commissioner shall be named by his Majesty, and one by the President of
the United States, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof,
and the said two Commissioners shall agree on the choice of a third; or if they
cannot so agree, they shall each propose one person, and of the two names so
proposed, one shall be drawn by lot in the presence of the two original
Commissioners. And the three Commissioners so appointed, shall be sworn,
impartially to examine and decide the said question, according to such evidence
as shall respectively be laid before them on the part of the British government
and of the United States. The said Commissioners shall meet at Halisax, and
shall have power to adjourn to such other place or places as they shall think
fit. They shall have power to appoint a Secretary, and to employ such Surveyors
or other persons as they shall judge necessary. The said Commissioners shall,
by a declaration under their hands and seals, decide what river is the river
St. Croix intended by the Treaty. The said declaration shall contain a
description of the said river, and shall particularize the latitude and
longitude of its mouth and of its source. Duplicates of this declaration and of
the statements of their accounts, and of the journal of their proceedings,
shall be delivered by them to the agent of his Majesty, and to the agent of the
United States, who may be respectively appointed and authorized to manage the
business on behalf of the respective governments. And both parties agree to
consider such decision as final and conclusive, so as that the same shall never
thereafter be called in question, or made the subject of dispute or difference
between them.

ARTICLE VI.
Whereas it is alleged by diverse British merchants and others his Majesty's
subjects, that debts to a considerable amount, which were bona fide contracted
before the peace, still remain owing to them by citizens or inhabitants of the
United States; and that by the operation of various lawful impediments since
the peace, not only the full recovery of the said debts has been delayed, but
also the value and security thereof have been, in several instances, impaired
and lessened, so that by the ordinary course of judicial proceedings, the
British creditors cannot now obtain, and actually have and receive full and
adequate compensation for the losses and damages which they have thereby
sustained. It is agreed, that in all such cases, where full compensation for
such losses and damages cannot, for whatever reason, be actually obtained, had
and received by the said creditors in the ordinary course of justice, the
United States will make full and complete compensation for the same to the said
creditors; but it is distinctly understood, that this provision is to extend to
such losses only as have been occasioned by the lawful impediments aforesaid,
and is not to extend to losses occasioned by such insolvency of the debtors, or
other causes as would equally have operated to produce such a loss, if the same
impediments had not existed: nor to such losses or damages as have been
occasioned by the manifest delay or negligence, or wilful omission of the
claimant.

For the purpose of ascertaining the amount of any such losses or damages, five
Commissioners shall be appointed, and authorized to meet and act in manner
following, viz. two of them shall be appointed by his Majesty, two of them by
the President of the United States by and with the advice and consent of the
Senate thereof, and the fifth by the unanimous voice of the other four; and if
they should not agree in such choice, then the Commissioners named by the two
parties shall respectively propose one person, and of the two names so
proposed, one shall be drawn by lot, in the presence of the four original
Commissioners. When the five Commissioners thus appointed shall first meet,
they shall, before they proceed to act, respectively take the following oath or
affirmation, in the presence of each other, which oath or affirmation, being so
taken and duly attested, shall be entered on the record of their proceedings,
viz. I A. B. one of the Commissioners appointed in pursuance of the sixth
article of the Treaty of Amity, Commerce, and Navigation, between his Britannic
Majesty and the United States of America, do solemnly swear, or affirm, that I
will honestly, diligently, impartially, and carefully examine, and to the best
of my judgment, according to justice and equity, decide all such complaints,
as, under the the said article, shall be preferred to the said Commissioners:
and that I will forbear to act as a Commissioner, in any case in which I may be
personally interested.

Three of the said Commissioners shall constitute a board, and shall have power
to do any act appertaining to the said commission, provided that one of the
Commissioners named on each side, and the fifth Commissioner, shall be present,
and all decisions shall be made by the majority of the voices of the
Commissioners then present. Eighteen months from the day on which the said
Commissioners shall form a board, and be ready to proceed to business, are
assigned for receiving complaints and applications; but they are nevertheless
authorized in any particular cases in which it shall appear to them to be
reasonable and just, to extend the same term of eighteen months for any term
not exceeding six months, after the expiration thereof. The said Commissioners
shall first meet at Philadelphia, but they shall have power to adjourn from
place to place as they shall see cause.

The said Commissioners in examining the complaints and applications so
preferred to them, are empowered and required, in pursuance of the true intent
and meaning of this article, to take into their consideration all claims,
whether of principal or interest, and balances of principal or interest, to
determine the same respectively, according to the merits of the several cases,
due regard being had to all the circumstances thereof, and as equity and
justice shall appear to them to require. And the said Commissioners shall have
power to examine all such persons as shall come before them, on oath or
affirmation, touching the premises; and also to receive in evidence, according
as they may think most consistent with equity and justice, all written
depositions, or books, or papers, or copies or extracts thereof, every such
deposition, book, or paper, or extract, being duly authenticated, either
according to the legal forms now respectively existing in the two countries, or
in such other manner as the said Commissioners shall see cause to require or
allow.

The award of the said Commissioners or of any three of them as aforesaid,
shall in all cases be final and conclusive, both as to the justice of the
claim, and to the amount of the sum to be paid to the creditor or claimant: and
the United States undertake to cause the sum so awarded to be paid in specie to
such creditor or claimant without deduction; and at such time or times, and at
such place or places as shall be awarded by the said Commissioners; and on
condition of such releases or assignments to be given by the creditor or
claimant, as by the said Commissioners may be directed: Provided always, that
no such payment shall be fixed by the said Commissioners to take place sooner
than twelve months from the day of exchange of the ratification of this Treaty.

ARTICLE VII.
Whereas complaints have been made by diverse merchants and others, citizens of
the United States, that during the course of the war in which his Majesty is
now engaged, they have sustained considerable losses and damage, by reason of
irregular or illegal captures or condemnations of their vessels and other
property, under color of authority or commissions from his Majesty; and that
from various circumstances belonging to the said cases, adequate compensation
for the losses and damages so sustained cannot now be actually obtained, had
and received by the ordinary course of judicial proceedings; it is agreed, that
in all such cases, where adequate compensation cannot, for whatever reason, be
now actually obtained, had and received by the said merchants and others in the
ordinary course of justice, full and complete compensation for the same will be
made by the British Government to the said complainants. But it is distinctly
understood that this provision is not to extend to such losses or damages as
have been occasioned by the manifest delay or negligence, or wilful omission of
the claimants.

That for the purpose of ascertaining the amount of any such losses and
damages, five Commissioners shall be appointed and authorized to act in London,
exactly in the manner directed with respect to those mentioned in the preceding
article, and after having taken the same oath or affirmation ( mutatis
mutandis), the same term of eighteen months is also assigned for the reception
of claims, and they are, in like manner, authorized to extend the same in
particular cases. They shall receive testimony, books, papers, and evidence in
the same latitude, and exercise the like discretion and powers respecting that
subject; and shall decide the claims in question according to the merits of the
several cases, and to justice, equity, and the laws of nations. The award of
the said Commissioners, or any such three of them as aforesaid, shall, in all
cases, be final and conclusive, both as to the justice of the claim and the
amount of the sum to be paid to the claimant; and his Britannic Majesty
undertakes to cause the same to be paid to such claimant in specie, without any
deduction, at such place or places, and at such time or times as shall be
awarded by the said Commissioners, and on condition of such releases or
assignments to be given by the claimants, as by the said Commissioners may be
directed.

And whereas certain merchants and others his Majesty's subjects complain, that
in the course of the war, they have sustained loss and damage, by reason of the
capture of the vessels and merchandise, taken within the limits and
jurisdiction of the states, and brought into the ports of the same, or taken by
vessels originally armed in ports of the said states:

It is agreed, that in all such cases, where restitution shall not have been
made agreeably to the tenor of the letter from Mr. Jefferson to Mr. Hammond,
dated at Philadelphia, Sept. 5, 1793, a copy of which is annexed to this
Treaty; the complaints of the parties shall be and hereby are referred to the
Commissioners to be appointed by virtue of this article, who are hereby
authorized and required to proceed in the like manner relative to these as to
the other cases committed to them; and the United States undertake to pay to
the complainants or claimants in specie, without deduction, the amount of such
sums as shall be awarded to them respectively by the said Commissioners, and at
the times and places which in such awards shall be specified; and on condition
of such releases or assignments to be given by the claimants as in the said
awards may be directed: And it is further agreed, that not-only the now
existing cases of both descriptions, but also all such as shall exist at the
time of exchanging the ratifications of this Treaty, shall be considered as
being within the provisions, intent, and meaning of this article.

ARTICLE VIII.
It is further agreed, that the Commissioners mentioned in this and the two
preceding articles, shall be respectively paid in such manner as shall be
agreed upon by the two parties; such agreement being to be settled at the time
of the exchange of the ratifications of this Treaty. And all other expenses
attending the said commissions, shall be defrayed jointly by the two parties,
the same being previously ascertained and allowed by the majority of the
Commissioners. And in the case of death, sickness, or necessary absence, the
place of every such Commissioner respectively, shall be supplied in such manner
as such Commissioner was first appointed, and the new Commissioners shall take
the same oath or affirmation, and do the same duties.

ARTICLE IX.
It is agreed, that British subjects who now hold lands in the territories of
the United States, and American citizens who now hold lands in the dominions of
his Majesty, shall continue to hold them according to the nature and tenure of
their respective estates and titles therein; and may grant, sell or devise the
same to whom they please, in like manner as if they were natives; and that
neither they nor their heirs or assigns shall, so far as may respect the said
lands and the legal remedies incident thereto, be regarded as aliens.

ARTICLE X.
Neither the debts due from individuals of the one nation to individuals of the
other, nor shares, nor moneys which they may have in the public funds, or in
the public or private banks, shall ever in any event of war or national
differences, be sequestered or confiscated, it being unjust and impolitic, that
debts and engagements contracted and made by individuals having confidence in
each other, and in their respective governments, should ever be destroyed or
impaired by national authority, on account of national differences and
discontents.

ARTICLE XI.
It is agreed, between his Majesty and the United States of America, that there
shall be a reciprocal and entirely perfect liberty of navigation and commerce
between their respective people, in the manner, under the limitations, and on
the conditions specified in the following articles:

ARTICLE XII.
His Majesty consents, that it shall and may be lawful during the time herein
after limited, for the citizens of the United States to carry to any of his
Majesty's islands and ports in the West Indies from the United States, in their
own vessels, not being above the burden of seventy tons, any goods or
merchandises, being of the growth, manufacture or produce of the said states,
which it is or may be lawful to carry to the said islands or ports from the
said states in British vessels; and that the said American vessels shall be
subject there to no other or higher tonnage duties or charges, than shall be
payable by British vessels in the ports of the United States; and that the
cargoes of the said American vessels shall be subject there to no other or
higher duties or charges, than shall be payable on the like articles if
imported there from the said states in British vessels.

And his Majesty also consents, that it shall be lawful for the said American
citizens to purchase, load, and carry away in their said vessels to the United
States, from the said islands and ports, all such articles, being of the
growth, manufacture or produce of the said islands, as may now by law be
carried from thence to the said states in British vessels, and subject only to
the same duties and charges on exportation, to which British vessels and their
cargoes are or shall be subject in similar circumstances.

Provided always, that the said American vessels do carry and land their
cargoes in the United States only, it being expressly agreed and declared, that
during the continuance of this article, the United States will prohibit and
restrain the carrying away any molasses, sugar, coffee, cocoa or cotton in
American vessels, either from his Majesty's islands, or from the United States,
to any part of the world except the United States, reasonable sea stores
excepted Provided also, that it shall and may be lawful, during the same
period, for British vessels to import from the said islands into the United
States, and to export from the United States to the said islands, all articles
whatever, being of the growth, produce or manufacture of the said islands, or
of the United States respectively, which now may, by the laws of the said
states, be so imported and exported. And that the cargoes of the said British
vessels shall be subject to no other or higher duties or charges, than shall be
payable on the same articles, if so imported or exported in American vessels.

It is agreed, that this article and every matter and thing therein contained,
shall continue to be in force during the continuance of the war in which his
Majesty is now engaged; and also for two years from and after the day of the
signature of the preliminary or other articles of peace, by which the same may
be terminated.

And it is further agreed, that at the expiration of the said term, the two
contracting parties will endeavor further to regulate their commerce in this
respect according to the situation in which his Majesty may then find himself
with respect to the West Indies, and with a view to such arrangements as may
best conduce to the mutual advantage and extension of commerce. And the said
parties will then also renew their discussions, and endeavor to agree, whether
in any and what cases neutral vessels shall protect enemy's property; and in
what cases, provisions and other articles, not generally contraband, may become
such. But in the mean time, their conduct toward each other in these respects,
shall be regulated by the articles herein after inserted on those subjects.

ARTICLE XIII.
His Majesty consents, that the vessels belonging to the citizens of the United
States of America, shall be admitted and hospitably received, in all the
seaports and harbors of the British territories in the East Indies. And that
the citizens of the said United States, may freely carry on a trade between the
said territories and the said United States, in all articles of which the
importation or exportation respectively, to or from the said territories, shall
not be entirely prohibited. Provided only, that it shall not be lawful for them
in any time of war between the British government and any other power or state
whatever, to export from the said territories, without the special permission
of the British government there, any military stores, or naval stores, or rice.
The citizens of the United States shall pay for their vessels, when admitted
into the said ports, no other or higher tonnage duty than shall be payable on
British vessels, when admitted into the ports of the United States. And they
shall pay no other or higher duties or charges, on the importation or
exportation of the cargoes of the said vessels, than shall be payable on the
same articles when imported or exported in British vessels. But it is expressly
agreed, that the vessels of the United States shall not carry any of the
articles exported by them from the said British territories, to any port or
place, except to some port or place in America, where the same shall be
unladen, and such regulations shall be adopted by both parties, as shall from
time to time be found necessary to enforce the due and faithful observance of
this stipulation. It is also understood that the permission granted by this
article, is not to extend to allow the vessels of the United States to carry on
any part of the coasting trade of the said British territories; but vessels
going with their original cargoes, or part thereof, from one port of discharge
to another, are not to be considered as carrying on the coasting trade. Neither
is this article to be construed to allow the citizens of the said states to
settle or reside within the said territories, or to go into the interior parts
thereof, without the permission of the British government established there;
and if any transgression should be attempted against the regulations of the
British government in this respect, the observance of the same shall and may be
enforced against the citizens of America in the same manner as against British
subjects, or others transgressing the same rule. And the citizens of the United
States, whenever they arrive in any port or harbor in the said territories, or
if they should be permitted in manner aforesaid, to go to any other place
therein, shall always be subject to the laws, government and jurisdiction of
what nature established in such harbor, port or place, according as the same
may be. The citizens of the United States may also touch for refreshment at the
island of St. Helena, but subject in all respects to such regulations as the
British government may from time to time establish there.

ARTICLE XIV.
There shall be between all the dominions of his Majesty in Europe and the
territories of the United States, a reciprocal and perfect liberty of commerce
and navigation. The people and inhabitants of the two countries respectively,
shall have liberty freely and securely, and without hindrance and molestation,
to come with their ships and cargoes to the lands, countries, cities, ports,
places, and rivers, within the dominions and territories aforesaid, to enter
into the same, to resort there, and to remain and reside there, without any
limitation of time. Also to hire and possess houses and warehouses for the
purposes of their commerce, and generally the merchants and traders on each
side, shall enjoy the most complete protection and security for their commerce;
but subject always, as to what respects this article, to the laws and statutes
of the two countries respectively.

ARTICLE XV.
It is agreed, that no other or higher duties shall be paid by the ships or
merchandise of the one party in the ports of the other, than such as are paid
by the like vessels or merchandise of all other nations. Nor shall any other or
higher duty be imposed, in one country, on the importation of any articles of
the growth, produce, or manufacture of the other, than are or shall be payable
on the importation of the like articles being of the growth, produce, or
manufacture of any other foreign country. Nor shall any prohibition be imposed
on the exportation or importation of any articles to or from the territories of
the two parties respectively, which shall not equally extend to all other
nations.

But the British government reserves to itself the right of imposing on
American vessels entering into the British ports in Europe, a tonnage duty
equal to that which shall be payable by British vessels in the ports of
America: and also such duty as may be adequate to countervail the difference of
duty now payable on the importation of European and Asiatic goods, when
imported into the United States in British or in American vessels.

The two parties agree to treat for the more exact equalization of the duties
on the respective navigation of their subjects and people, in such manner as
may be most beneficial to the two countries. The arrangements for this purpose
shall be made at the same time, with those mentioned at the conclusion of the
twelfth article of this Treaty, and are to be considered as a part thereof. In
the interval, it is agreed, that the United States will not impose any new or
additional tonnage duties on British vessels, nor increase the now subsisting
difference between the duties payable on the importation of any articles in
British or in American vessels.

ARTICLE XVI.
It shall be free for the two contracting parties, respectively to appoint
consuls for the protection of trade, to reside in the dominions and territories
aforesaid; and the said consuls shall enjoy those liberties and rights which
belong to them by reason of their function. But before any consul shall act as
such, he shall be in the usual forms approved and admitted by the party to whom
he is sent; and it is hereby declared to be lawful and proper, that in case of
illegal or improper conduct toward the laws or government, a consul may either
be punished according to law, if the laws will reach the case, or be dismissed,
or even sent back, the offended government assigning to the other their reasons
for the same.

Either of the parties may except from the residence of consuls such particular
places, as such party shall judge proper to be so excepted.

ARTICLE XVII.
It is agreed, that in all cases where vessels shall be captured or detained on
just suspicion of having on board enemy's property, or of carrying to the enemy
any of the articles which are contraband of war; the said vessel shall be
brought to the nearest or most convenient port; and if any property of an enemy
should be found on board such vessel, that part only which belongs to the enemy
shall be made prize, and the vessel shall be at liberty to proceed with the
remainder without any impediment. And it is agreed, that all proper measures
shall be taken to prevent delay, in deciding the cases of ships or cargoes so
brought in for adjudication; and in the payment or recovery of any
indemnification, adjudged or agreed to be paid to the master or owner of such
ships.

ARTICLE XVIII.
In order to regulate what is in future to be deemed contraband of war, it is
agreed, that under the said denomination shall be comprised all arms and
implements serving for the purposes of war, by land or sea, such as cannon,
muskets, mortars, petards, bombs, grenadoes, carcasses, saucisses, carriages
for cannon, muskets' rests, bandoliers, gun powder, match, saltpeter, ball,
pikes, swords, head-pieces, cuirasses, halberds, lances, javelins, horse
furniture, holsters, belts, and generally all other implements of war; as also
timber for ship-building, tar or rozin, copper in sheets, sails, hemp and
cordage, and generally whatever may serve directly to the equipment of vessels,
unwrought iron and sir-planks only excepted; and all the above articles are
hereby declared to be just objects of confiscation, whenever they are attempted
to be carried to an enemy.

And whereas the difficulty of agreeing on the precise cases in which alone
provisions and other articles not generally contraband may be regarded as such,
renders it expedient to provide against the inconveniences and
misunderstandings which might thence arise: It is further agreed, that whenever
any such articles so becoming contraband, according to the existing laws of
nations, shall for that reason be seized, the same shall not be confiscated,
but the owners thereof shall be speedily and completely indemnified; and the
captors, or in their default, the government under whose authority they act,
shall pay to the masters or owners of such vessels, the full value of all such
articles, with a reasonable mercantile profit thereon, together with the
freight, and also the demurrage incident to such detention.

And whereas it frequently happens that vessels sail for a port or place
belonging to an enemy, without knowing that the same is either besieged,
blockaded, or invested; it is agreed, that every vessel so circumstanced, may
be turned away from such port or place, but she shall not be detained, nor her
cargo, if not contraband, be confiscated, unless after notice she shall again
attempt to enter; but she shall be permitted to go to any other port or place
she may think proper: Nor shall any vessel or goods of either party, that may
have entered into such port or place, before the same was besieged, blockaded
or invested by the other, and be found therein after the reduction or surrender
of such place, be liable to confiscation, but shall be restored to the owners
or proprietors thereof.

ARTICLE XIX.
And that more abundant care may be taken for the security of the respective
subjects and citizens of the contracting parties, and to prevent their
suffering injuries by the men of war, or privateers of either party, all
commanders of ships of war and privateers, and all others the said subjects and
citizens, shall forbear doing any damage to those of the other party, or
committing any outrage against them, and if they act to the contrary, they
shall be punished, and shall also be bound in their persons and estates to make
satisfaction and reparation for all damages, and the interest thereof, of
whatever nature the said damages may be.

For this cause all commanders of privateers, before they receive their
commissions, shall hereafter be obliged to give before a competent judge,
sufficient security, by at least two responsible sureties, who have no interest
in the said privateer, each of whom, together with the said commander, shall be
jointly and severally bound in the sum of fifteen hundred pounds sterling, or
if such ships be provided with above one hundred and fifty seamen or soldiers,
in the sum of three thousand pounds sterling, to satisfy all damages and
injuries, which the said privateer, or her officers or men, or any of them may
do or commit during their cruise, contrary to the tenor of this Treaty, or to
the laws and instructions for regulating their conduct; and further, that in
all cases of aggressions, the said commissions shall be revoked and annulled.

It is also agreed, that whenever a judge of a court of admiralty of either of
the parties, shall pronounce sentence against any vessel, or goods or property
belonging to the subjects or citizens of the other party, a formal and duly
authenticated copy of all the proceedings in the cause, and of the said
sentence, shall, if required, be delivered to the commander of the said vessel,
without the smallest delay, he paying all legal fees and demands for the same.

ARTICLE XX.
It is further agreed, that both the said contracting parties, shall not only
refuse to receive any pirates into any of their ports, havens, or towns, or
permit any of their inhabitants to receive, protect, harbor, conceal or assist
them in any manner, but will bring to condign punishment all such inhabitants
as shall be guilty of such acts or offenses.

And all their ships, with the goods or merchandises taken by them and brought
into the port of either of the said parties, shall be seized as far as they can
be discovered, and shall be restored to the owners, or their factors or agents,
duly deputed and authorized in writing by them (proper evidence being first
given in the court of admiralty for proving the property) even in case such
effects should have passed into other hands by sale, if it be proved that the
buyers knew, or had good reason to believe, or suspect that they had been
piratically taken.

ARTICLE XXI.
It is likewise agreed, that the subjects and citizens of the two nations,
shall not do any acts of hostility or violence against each other, nor accept
commissions or instructions so to act from any foreign prince or state, enemies
to the other party; nor shall the enemies of one of the parties be permitted to
invite, or endeavor to enlist in their military service any of the subjects or
citizens of the other party; and the laws against all such offenses and
aggressions, shall be punctually executed. And if any subject or citizen of the
said parties respectively, shall accept any foreign commission, or letters of
marque, for arming any vessel to act as a privateer against the other party,
and be taken by the other party, it is hereby declared to be lawful for the
said party to treat and punish the said subject or citizen, having such
commission or letters of marque, as a pirate.

ARTICLE XXII.
It is expressly stipulated, that neither of the said contracting parties will
order or authorize any acts of reprizal against the other, on complaint of
injuries or damages, until the said party shall first have presented to the
other a statement thereof, verified by competent proof and evidence, and
demanding justice and satisfaction, and the same shall either have been refused
or unreasonably delayed.

ARTICLE XXIII.
The ships of war of each of the contracting parties shall at all times be
hospitably received in the ports of the other, their officers and crews paying
due respect to the laws and government of the country. The officers shall be
treated with that respect which is due to the commissions which they bear, and
if any insult should be offered to them by any of the inhabitants, all
offenders in this respect shall be punished as disturbers of the peace and
amity between the two countries. -- And his Majesty consents, that in case an
American vessel should, by stress of weather, danger from enemies, or other
misfortune, be reduced to the necessity of seeking shelter in any of his
Majesty's ports, into which such vessel could not in ordinary cases claim to be
admitted, she shall, on manifesting that necessity to the satisfaction of the
government of the place, be hospitably received and permitted to resit, and to
purchase at the market price, such necessaries as she may stand in need of,
conformably to such orders and regulations as the government of the place,
having respect to the circumstances of each case, shall prescribe. She shall
not be allowed to break bulk or unload her cargo, unless the same shall be bona
fide necessary to her being resitted. Nor shall she be permitted to sell any
part of her cargo, unless so much only as may be necessary to defray her
expenses, and then not without the express permission of the government of the
place. Nor shall she be obliged to pay any duties whatever, except only on such
articles as she may be permitted to sell for the purpose aforesaid.

ARTICLE XXIV.
It shall not be lawful for any foreign privateers (not being subjects or
citizens of either of the said parties) who have commissions from any other
prince or state in enmity with either nation, to arm their ships in the ports
of either of the said parties, nor to sell what they have taken, nor in any
manner to exchange the same; nor shall they be allowed to purchase more
provisions, than shall be necessary for their going to the nearest port of that
prince or state from whom they obtained their commissions.

ARTICLE XXV.
It shall be lawful for the ships of war and privateers belonging to the said
parties respectively, to carry whithersoever they please, the ships and goods
taken from their enemies, without being obliged to pay any see to the officers
of the admiralty, or to any judges whatever; nor shall the said prizes when
they arrive at, and enter the ports of the said parties, be detained or seized;
neither shall the searchers or other officers of those places visit such prizes
(except for the purpose of preventing the carrying of any part of the cargo
thereof on shore in any manner contrary to the established laws of revenue,
navigation, or commerce) nor shall such officers take cognizonce of the
validity of such prizes; but they shall be at liberty to hoist sail, and depart
as speedily as may be, and carry their said prizes to the place mentioned in
their commissions or patents, which the commanders of the said ships of war or
privateers shall be obliged to show. No shelter or refuge shall be given in
their ports to such as have made a prize upon the subjects or citizens of
either of the said parties: but if forced by stress of weather, or the dangers
of the sea, to enter therein, particular care shall be taken to hasten their
departure, and to cause them to retire as soon as possible. Nothing in this
Treaty contained shall, however, be construed or operate contrary to former and
existing public treaties with other sovereigns or states. But the two parties
agree, that while they continue in amity, neither of them will, in future, make
any Treaty that shall be inconsistent with this or the preceding article.

Neither of the said parties shall permit the ships or goods belonging to the
subjects or citizens of the other, to be taken within cannon shot of the coast,
nor in any of the bays, ports, or rivers of their territories, by ships of war,
or others having commission from any prince, republic, or state whatever. But
in case it should so happen, the party whose territorial rights shall thus have
been violated, shall use his utmost endeavors to obtain from the offending
party, full and ample satisfaction for the vessel or vessels so taken, whether
the same be vessels of war or merchant vessels.

ARTICLE XXVI.
If, at any time, a rupture should take place (which God forbid!) between his
Majesty and the United States, the merchants and others of each of the two
nations, residing in the dominions of the other, shall have the privilege of
remaining and continuing their trade, so long as they behave peaceably and
commit no offense against the laws; and in case their conduct should render
them suspected, and the respective governments should think proper to order
them to remove ^he term of twelve mouths from the publication of the o^^er,
shall be allowed them for that purpose, to remove with their families, effects
and property; but this favor shall not be extended to those who shall act
contrary to the established laws; and for greater certainty, it is declared
that such rupture shall not be deemed to exist while negociations for
accommodating differences shall be depending, nor until the respective
ambassadors or ministers, if such there shall be, shall be recalled, or sent
home on account of such differences, and not on account of personal misconduct,
according to the nature and degrees of which both parties retain their rights,
either to request the recall, or immediately to send home the ambassador or
minister of the other; and that without prejudice to their mutual friendship
and good understanding.

ARTICLE XXVII.
It is further agreed, that his Majesty and the United States, on mutual
requisitions, by them respectively, or by their respective ministers or
officers authorized to make the same, will deliver up to justice all persons,
who, being charged with murder or forgery, committed within the jurisdiction of
either, shall seek an asylum within any of the countries of the other, provided
that this shall only be done on such evidence of criminality as, according to
the laws of the place, where the fugitive or person so charged shall be found,
would justify his apprehension and commitment for trial, if the offense had
there been committed. The expense of such apprehension and delivery shall be
borne and defrayed, by those who make the requisition and receive the fugitive.

ARTICLE XXVIII.
It is agreed, that the first ten articles of this Treaty shall be permanent,
and that the subsequent articles, except the twelfth, shall be limited in
their duration to twelve years, to be computed from the day on which the
ratifications of this treaty shall be exchanged, but subject to this condition,
That whereas the said twelfth article will expire, by the limitation therein
contained, at the end of two years from the signing the preliminary or other
articles of peace, which shall terminate the present war in which his Majesty
is engaged, it is agreed, that proper measures shall by concert be taken, for
bringing the subject of that article into amicable treaty and discussion, so
early before the expiration of the said term, as that new arrangements on that
head, may by that time be perfected and ready to take place. But if it should
unfortunately happen, that his Majesty and the United States, should not be
able to agree on such new arrangements, in that case, all the articles of this
Treaty, except the first ten, shall then cease and expire together.

LASTLY.
This Treaty, when the same shall have been ratified by his Majesty, and by the
President of the United States, by and with the advice and consent of their
Senate, and the respective ratifications mutually exchanged, shall be binding
and obligatory on his Majesty and on the said States, and shall be by them
respectively executed, and observed, with punctuality, and the most sincere
regard to good faith; and whereas it will be expedient, in order the better to
facilitate intercourse, and obviate difficulties, that other articles be
proposed and added to this Treaty, which articles, from want of time and other
circumstances, cannot now be perfected -- it is agreed, that the said parties
will, from time to time, readily treat of and concerning such articles, and
will sincerely endeavor so to form them, as that they may conduce to mutual
convenience* and tend to promote mutual satisfaction and friendship; and that
the said articles, after h^^ing been only ratified* shall be added to, and make
a part of this Treaty. In faith whereof, we, the undersigned Ministers
Plenipotentiary of his Majesty the King of Great Britain, and the United States
of America, have signed this present Treaty, and have caused to be affixed
thereto the seal of our arms.

Done at London, this nineteenth day of November, One thousand seven hundred
and ninety-four. GRENVILLE. ( Seal.) JOHN JAY. ( Seal.)

ADDITIONAL ARTICLE.
It is further agreed between the said contracting parties, that the operation
of so much of the twelfth article of the said treaty as respect the trade which
his said Majesty thereby consents may be carried on between the United States
and his Islands in the West Indies, in the manner and on the terms and
conditions therein specified, shall be suspended.


EXPLANATORY ARTICLE.
Whereas by the third article of the Treaty of Amity, Commerce, and Navigation,
concluded at London on the 19th day of November, 1794, between his Britannic
Majesty and the United States of America, it was agreed, that it should at all
times be free to his Majesty's subjects and to the citizens of the United
States, and also to the Indians dwelling on either side of the boundary line
assigned by the Treaty of Peace to the United States, freely to pass and
repass, by land or inland navigation, into the respective territories and
countries of the two contracting parties on the continent of America (the bay
company only excepted) and to navigate all the lakes, rivers, and waters
thereof, and freely to carry on trade and commerce with each other, subject to
the provisions and limitations contained in the first article^ and whereas by
the 8th article of the treaty of peace and friendship concluded at Gr^^ville,
on the 3d day of August. 1795, between the United States and the nations or
tribes of Indians called the Wyandots, Delawares, Shawanees, Ottawas,
Ch^ppewas, Pattawatunies, Miamies, ^lkias, it was stipulated, that no person
should be permitted to reside at any of the towns or having camps of the said
Indian tribes as a trader, who is (...) ^^r^i^hed with a (...) for that
purpose, (...) the authority of the United States, which latter stipulation has
excited doubts whether in its operation it may not interfere with the due
execution of the said article of the Treaty of Amity, Commerce, and Navigation;
and it being the sincere desire of his Britannic Majesty, and of the United
States, that this point should be so explained as to remove all doubts, and to
promote mutual satisfaction and friendship; and for this purpose his Britannic
Majesty having named for his Commissioner, PHINEAS BOND, Esquire. his Majesty's
consul general for the middle and southern states of America (and his Majesty's
charge d'affairs to the United States) and the President of the United States
having named for their Commissioner, TIMOTHY PICKERING, Esquire. Secretary of State
for the United States, to whom, agreeably to the laws of the United States, he
has entrusted this negotiation.

They the said Commissioners, having communicated to each other their full
powers, have, in virtue of the same, and conformably to the spirit of the last
article of the said Treaty of Amity, Commerce, and Navigation, entered into
this explanatory article, and now, by these presents, explicitly agree and
declare, that no stipulations in any treaty subsequently concluded by either of
the contracting parties within any other state or nation, or with any Indian
tribe, can be understood to derogate in any manner from the rights and free
intercourse and commerce secured by the aforesaid third article of the treaty
to the subjects of his Majesty, and to the citizens of the United States, and
Indians dwelling on either side of the boundary line aforesaid; but that all
the said persons shall remain at full liberty freely to pass and repass, by
land or inland navigation, into the respective territories and countries of the
contracting parties, on either side of the said boundary line, and freely to
carry on trade and commerce with each other, according to the stipulations of
the said third article of the Treaty of Amity, Commerce, and Navigation. This
explanatory article, when the same shall have been ratified by his Majesty, and
by the President of the United States, by and with the advice and consent of
the Senate, and the respective ratifications mutually exchanged, shall be added
to make a part of the said Treaty of Amity, Commerce, and Navigation, and shall
be permanently binding upon his Majesty and the United States.

In witness whereof, we the said Commissioners of his Majesty the King of
Great Britain and the United States of America, have signed this explanatory
article, and thereto affixed our seals.

Done at Philadelphia, this fourth day of May, in the year of our Lord One
thousand seven hundred and ninety-six. P. BOND, (Seal.) T. PICKERING, (Seal.)




TREATY of Friendship, Limits and Navigation between the United States of
America, and the King of Spain.
HIS Catholic Majesty and the United States of America, desiring to
consolidate, on a permanent basis, the friendship and good correspondence,
which happily prevails between the two parties, have determined to establish,
by a convention, several points, the settlement whereof will be productive of
general advantage and reciprocal utility to both nations.

With this intention, his Catholic Majesty has appointed the most excellent
Lord, don Manuel de Godoy, and Alvarez de Faria, Rios, Sanchez, Zarzosa, Prince
de la Paz, duke de la Alcudia, lord of the Soto de Roma and of the state of
Albala, Grandee of Spain of the first class, perpetual regidor of the city of
Santiago, knight of the illustrious order of the Golden Fleece, and Great Cross
of the Royal and distinguished Spanish order of Charles the IIId. commander of
Valencia, del Ventoso, Rivera, and Acenchal in that of Santiago; Knight and
Great Cross of the religious order of St. John; Counselor of state; first
Secretary of state and despacho; Secretary to the Queen; Superintendant General
of the posts and highways; Protector of the royal Academy of the noble arts,
and of the royal societies of natural history, botany, chemistry, and
astronomy; Gentleman of the King's chamber in employment; Captain General of
his armies; Inspector and Major of the royal corpse of body guards, etc. etc.
etc. and the President of the United States, with the advice and consent of
their Senate, has appointed Thomas Pinckney, a citizen of the United States,
and their Envoy Extraordinary to his Catholic Majesty. And the said
Plenipotentiaries have agreed upon and concluded the following articles:

ARTICLE I. There shall be a firm and inviolable peace and sincere friendship
between his Catholic Majesty, his successors and subjects, and the United
States, and their citizens, without exception of persons or places.

ART. II. To prevent all disputes on the subject of the boundaries which
separate the territories of the two high contracting parties, it is hereby
declared and agreed as follows, to wit. The southern boundary of the United
States, which divides their territory from the Spanish colonies of East and
West Florida, shall be designated by a line beginning on the river Missisippi,
at the northernmost part of the thirty-first degree of latitude north of the
equator, which from thence shall be drawn due east to the middle of the river
Apalachicola, or Catahouche, thence along the middle thereof to its junction
with the Flint: thence strait to the head of St. Mary's river, and thence down
the middle thereof to the Atlantic ocean. And it is agreed, that if there
should be any troops, garrisons, or settlements of either party, in the
territory of the other, according to the abovementioned boundaries, they shall
be withdrawn from the said territory within the term of six months after the
ratification of this treaty, or sooner if it be possible; and that they shall
be permitted to take with them all the goods and effects which they possess.

ART. III. In order to carry the preceding article into effect, one
commissioner and one surveyor shall be appointed by each of the contracting
parties, who shall meet at the Natchez, on the left side of the river
Missisippi, before the expiration of six months from the ratification of this
convention, and they shall proceed to run and mark this boundary according to
the stipulations of the said article. They shall make plats and keep journals
of their proceedings, which shall be considered as part of this convention, and
shall have the same force as if they were inserted therein. And if on any
account it should be found necessary that the said commissioners and surveyors
should be accompanied by guards, they shall be furnished in equal proportions
by the commanding officer of his Majesty's troops in the two Floridas, and the
commanding officer of the troops of the United States in their southwestern
territory, who shall act by common consent, and amicably, as well with respect
to this point as to the furnishing of provisions and instruments, and making
every other arrangement which may be necessary or useful for the execution of
this article.

ART. IV. It is likewise agreed that the western boundary of the United States
which separates them from the Spanish colony of Louisiana, is in the middle of
the channel or bed of the river Missisippi, from the northern boundary of the
said states to the completion of the thirty-first degree of latitude north of
the equator. And his Catholic Majesty has likewise agreed that the navigation
of the said river, in its whole breadth from its source to the ocean, shall be
free only to his subjects and the citizens of the United States, unless he
should extend this privilege to the subjects of other powers by special
convention.

ART. V. The two high contracting parties shall, by all the means in their
power, maintain peace and harmony among the several Indian nations who inhabit
the country adjacent to the lines and rivers, which, by the preceding articles,
form the boundaries of the two Floridas. And the better to obtain this effect,
both parties oblige themselves expressly to restrain by force all hostilities
on the part of the Indian nations living within their boundary: so that Spain
will not suffer her Indians to attack the citizens of the United States, nor
the Indians inhabiting their territory; nor will the United States permit these
last-mentioned Indians to commence hostilities against the subjects of his
Catholic Majesty or his Indians, in any manner whatever.

And whereas several treaties of friendship exist between the two contracting
parties and the said nations of Indians, it is hereby agreed that in future no
treaty of alliance or other whatever (except treaties of peace) shall be made
by either party with the Indians living within the boundary of the other, but
both parties will endeavor to make the advantages of the Indian trade common
and mutually beneficial to their respective subjects and citizens, observing in
all things the most complete reciprocity, so that both parties may obtain the
advantages arising from a good understanding with the said nations, without
being subject to the expense which they have hitherto occasioned.

ART. VI. Each party shall endeavor, by all means in their power, to protect
and defend all vessels and other effects belonging to the citizens or subjects
of the other, which shall be within the extent of their jurisdiction by sea or
by land, and shall use all their efforts to recover and cause to be restored to
the right owners, their vessels and effects which may have been taken from them
within the extent of their said jurisdiction, whether they are at war or not
with the power whose subjects have taken possession of the said effects.

ART. VII. And it is agreed that the subjects or citizens of each of the
contracting parties, their vessels or effects, shall not be liable to any
embargo or detention on the part of the other, for any military expedition or
other public or private purpose whatever: And in all cases of seizure,
detention, or arrest for debts contracted, or offenses committed by any citizen
or subject of the one party within the jurisdiction of the other, the same
shall be made and prosecuted by order and authority of law only, and according
to the regular course of proceedings usual in such cases. The citizens and
subjects of both parties shall be allowed to employ such advocates, solicitors,
notaries, agents and factors, as they may judge proper, in all their affairs,
and in all their trials at law, in which they may be concerned, before the
tribunals of the other party; and such agents shall have free access to be
present at the proceedings in such causes, and at the taking of all
examinations and evidence which may be exhibited in the said trials.

ART. VIII. In case the subjects and inhabitants of either party, with their
shipping, whether public and of war, or private and of merchants, be forced,
through stress of weather, pursuit of pirates or enemies, or any other urgent
necessity, for seeking of shelter and harbor, to retreat and enter into any of
the rivers, bays, roads or ports belonging to the other party, they shall be
received and treated with all humanity, and enjoy all favor, protection and
help, and they shall be permitted to refresh and provide themselves, at
reasonable rates, with victuals and all things needful for the sustenance of
their persons, or reparation of their ships and prosecution of their voyage;
and they shall no ways be hindered from returning out of the said ports or
roads, but may remove and depart when and whither they please, without any let
or hindrance.

ART. IX. All ships and merchandise, of what nature soever, which shall be
rescued out of the hands of any pirates or robbers on the high seas, shall be
brought into some port of either state, and shall be delivered to the custody
of the officers of that port, in order to be taken care of, and restored entire
to the true proprietor, as soon as due and sufficient proof shall be made
concerning the property thereof.

ART. X. When any vessel of either party shall be wrecked, foundered, or
otherwise damaged, on the coasts or within the dominion of the other, their
respective subjects or citizens shall receive, as well for themselves as for
their vessels and effects, the same assistance which would be due to the
inhabitants of the country where the damage happens, and shall pay the same
charges and dues only as the said inhabitants would be subject to pay in a like
case: And if the operations of repair should require that the whole or any part
of the cargo be unladen, they shall pay no duties, charges or fees on the part
which they shall relade and carry away.

ART. XI. The citizens and subjects of each party shall have power to dispose
of their personal goods within the jurisdiction of the other, by testament,
donation or otherwise, and their representatives being subjects or citizens of
the other party, shall succeed to their said personal goods whether by
testament or ab intestato, and they may take possession thereof, either by
themselves or others acting for them, and dispose of the same at their will,
paying such dues as the inhabitants of the country wherein the said goods are,
shall be subject to pay in like cases.

And in case of the absence of the representatives, such care shall be taken of
the said goods, as would be taken of the goods of a native in like case, until
the lawful owner may take measures for receiving them. And if questions shall
arise among several claimants to which of them the said goods belong, the same
shall be decided finally by the laws and judges of the land wherein the said
goods are. And where, on the death of any person holding real estate within the
territories of the one party, such real estate would by the laws of the land
descend on a citizen or subject of the other, were he not disqualified by being
an alien, such subject shall be allowed a reasonable time to sell the same, and
to withdraw the proceed, without molestation, and exempt from all rights of
detraction on the part of the government of the respective states.

ART. XII. The merchant-ships of either of the parties which shall be making
into a port belonging to the enemy of the other party, and concerning whose
voyage, and the species of goods on board her, there shall be just grounds of
suspicion, shall be obliged to exhibit as well upon the high seas as in the
ports and havens, not only her passports, but likewise certificates, expressly
showing that her goods are not of the number of those which have been
prohibited as contraband.

ART. XIII. For the better promoting of commerce on both sides, it is agreed,
that if a war shall break out between the said two nations, one year after the
proclamation of war shall be allowed to the merchants, in the cities and towns
where they shall live, for collecting and transporting their goods and
merchandises: And if any thing be taken from them or any injury be done them
within that term, by either party, or the people or subjects of either, full
satisfaction shall be made for the same by the government.

ART. XIV. No subject of his Catholic Majesty shall apply for, or take any
commission or letters of marque, for arming any ship or ships to act as
privateers against the said United States, or against the citizens, people or
inhabitants of the said United States, or against the property of any of the
inhabitants of any of them, from any prince or state with which the said United
States shall be at war.

Nor shall any citizen, subject or inhabitant of the said United States apply
for or take any commission or letters of marque for arming any ship or ships to
act as privateers against the subjects of his Catholic Majesty, or the property
of any of them, from any prince or state with which the said king shall be at
war. And if any person of either nation shall take such commissions or letters
of marque, he shall be punished as a pirate.

ART. XV. It shall be lawful for all and singular the subjects of his Catholic
Majesty, and the citizens, people and inhabitants of the said United States, to
sail with their ships, with all manner of liberty and security, no distinction
being made who are the proprietors of the merchandises laden thereon, from any
port to the places of those who now are, or hereafter shall be at enmity with
his Catholic Majesty or the United States. It shall be likewise lawful for the
subjects and inhabitants aforesaid, to sail with the ships and merchandises
aforementioned, and to trade with the same liberty and security from the
places, ports and havens of those who are enemies of both or either party,
without any opposition or disturbance whatsoever, not only directly from the
places of the enemy aforementioned, to neutral places, but also from one place
belonging to an enemy, to another place belonging to an enemy, whether they be
under the jurisdiction of the same prince or under several; and it is hereby
stipulated, that free ships shall also give freedom to goods, and that every
thing shall be deemed free and exempt which shall be found on board the ships
belonging to the subjects of either of the contracting parties, although the
whole lading, or any part thereof, should appertain to the enemies of either:
Contraband goods being always excepted. It is also agreed, that the same
liberty be extended to persons who are on board a free ship, so that although
they be enemies to either party, they shall not be made prisoners or taken out
of that free ship, unless they are soldiers and in actual service of the
enemies.

ART. XVI. This liberty of navigation and commerce shall extend to all kinds of
merchandises, excepting those only, which are distinguished by the name of
contraband: And under this name of contraband or prohibited goods, shall be
comprehended arms, great guns, bombs, with the fusees, and the other things
belonging to them, cannon-ball, gunpowder, match, pikes, swords, lances,
spears, halberds, mortars, petards, grenades, saltpetre, muskets,
musquet-ball, bucklers, helmets, breast-plates, coats of mail, and the like
kinds of arms, proper for arming soldiers, musket rests, belts, horses with
their furniture, and all other warlike instruments whatever. These merchandises
which follow, shall not be reckoned among contraband or prohibited goods: That
is to say, all sorts of cloths, and all other manufactures woven of any wool,
flax, silk, cotton, or any other materials whatever; all kinds of wearing
apparel, together with all species whereof they are used to be made; gold and
silver, as well coined as uncoined, tin, iron, latten, copper, brass, coals; as
also wheat, barley and oats, and any other kind of corn and pulse; tobacco, and
likewise all manner of spices, salted and smoked flesh, salted fish, cheese and
butter, beer, oils, wines, sugars, and all sorts of salts: And in general, all
provisions which serve for the sustenance of life: Furthermore, all kinds of
cotton, hemp, flax, tar, pitch, ropes, cables, sails, sail-cloths, anchors, and
any parts of anchors, also ships' masts, planks and wood of all kind, and all
other things proper either for building or repairing ships, and all other goods
whatever, which have not been worked into the form of any instrument prepared
for war, by land or by sea, shall not be reputed contraband, much less, such as
have been already wrought and made up for any other use; all which shall be
wholly reckoned among free goods: As likewise all other merchandises and things
which are not comprehended and particularly mentioned in the foregoing
enumeration of contraband goods: So that they may be transported and carried in
the freest manner by the subjects of both parties, even to places belonging to
an enemy, such towns or places being only excepted, as are at that time
besieged, blocked up, or invested. And except the cases in which any ship of
war, or squadron shall, in consequence of storms or other accidents at sea, be
under the necessity of taking the cargo of any trading vessel or vessels, in
which case they may stop the said vessel or vessels, and furnish themselves
with necessaries, giving a receipt, in order that the power to whom the said
ship of war belongs, may pay for the articles so taken, according to the price
thereof, at the port to which they may appear to have been destined by the
ship's papers; and the two contracting parties engage, that the vessels shall
not be detained longer than may be absolutely necessary for their said ships to
supply themselves with necessaries: That they will immediately pay the value of
the receipts, and indemnify the proprietor for all losses which he may have
sustained in consequence of such transaction.

ART. XVII. To the end, that all manner of dissentions and quarrels may be
avoided and prevented on one side and the other, it is agreed, that in case
either of the parties hereto, should be engaged in a war, the ships and vessels
belonging to the subjects or people of the other party must be furnished with
sea-letters or passports, expressing the name, property, and bulk of the ship,
as also the name and place of habitation of the master or commander of the said
ship, that it may appear thereby, that the ship really and truly belongs to the
subjects of one of the parties, which passport shall be made out and granted
according to the form annexed to this treaty. They shall likewise be recalled
every year, that is, if the ship happens to return home within the space of a
year.

It is likewise agreed, that such ships being laden, are to be provided not
only with passports as abovementioned, but also with certificates, containing
the several particulars of the cargo, the place whence the ship sailed, that so
it may be known whether any forbidden or contraband goods be on board the same:
which certificates shall be made out by the officers of the place whence the
ship sailed in the accustomed form: And if any one shall think it fit or
advisable to express in the said certificates, the person to whom the goods on
board belong, he may freely do so: Without which requisites they may be sent to
one of the ports of the other contracting party, and adjudged by the competent
tribunal, according to what is above set forth, that all the circumstances of
this omission having been well examined, they shall be adjudged to be legal
prizes, unless they shall give legal satisfaction of their property by
testimony entirely equivalent.

ART. XVIII. If the ships of the said subjects, people, or inhabitants of
either of the parties, shall be met with, either sailing along the coasts or on
the high seas, by any ship of war of the other, or by any privateer, the said
ship of war or privateer for the avoiding of any disorder, shall remain out of
cannon shot, and may send their boats a-board the merchant ship, which they
shall so meet with, and may enter her to the number of two or three men only,
to whom the master or commander of such ship or vessel shall exhibit his
passports, concerning the property of the ship, made out according to the form
inserted in this present treaty, and the ship when she shall have showed such
passport, shall be free and at liberty to pursue her voyage, so as it shall not
be lawful to molest or give her chase in any manner, or force her to quit her
intended course.

ART. XIX. Consuls shall be reciprocally established, with the privileges and
powers which those of the most favored nations enjoy, in the ports where their
consuls reside or are permitted to be.

ART. XX. It is also agreed that the inhabitants of the territories of each
party shall respectively have free access to the courts of justice of the
other, and they shall be permitted to prosecute suits for the recovery of their
properties, the payment of their debts, and for obtaining satisfaction for the
damages which they may have sustained, whether the persons whom they may sue be
subjects or citizens of the country in which they may be found, or any other
persons whatsoever, who may have taken refuge therein; and the proceedings and
sentences of the said courts shall be the same as if the contending parties had
been subjects or citizens of the said country.

ART. XXI. In order to terminate all differences on account of the losses
sustained by the citizens of the United States in consequence of their vessels
and cargoes having been taken by the subjects of his Catholic Majesty, during
the late war between Spain and France, it is agreed that all such cases shall
be referred to the final decision of commissioners to be appointed in the
following manner. His Catholic Majesty shall name one commissioner, and the
President of the United States, by and with the advice and consent of their
Senate, shall appoint another, and the said two commissioners shall agree on
the choice of a third, or if they cannot agree so, they shall each propose one
person, and of the two names so proposed, one shall be drawn by lot in the
presence of the two original commissioners, and the person whose name shall be
so drawn, shall be the third commissioner: And the three commissioners so
appointed, shall be sworn impartially to examine and decide the claims in
question, according to the merits of the several cases, and to justice, equity,
and the laws of nations. The said commissioners shall meet and sit at
Philadelphia: And in the case of the death, sickness, or necessary absence of
any such commissioner, his place shall be supplied in the same manner as he was
first appointed, and the new commissioner shall take the same oaths, and do the
same duties. They shall receive all complaints and applications authorized by
this article, during eighteen months from the day on which they shall assemble.
They shall have power to examine all such persons as come before them on oath
or affirmation, touching the complaints in question, and also to receive in
evidence all written testimony, authenticated in such manner as they shall
think proper to require or admit. The award of the said commissioners, or any
two of them, shall be final and conclusive, both as to the justice of the claim
and the amount of the sum to be paid to the claimants; and his Catholic Majesty
undertakes to cause the same to be paid in specie, without deduction, at such
times and places, and under such conditions as shall be awarded by the said
commissioners.

ART. XXII. The two high contracting parties, hoping that the good
correspondence and friendship which happily reigns between them, will be
further increased by this treaty, and that it will contribute to augment their
prosperity and opulence, will in future give to their mutual commerce all the
extension and favor which the advantages of both countries may require.

And in consequence of the stipulations contained in the 4th article, his
Catholic Majesty will permit the citizens of the United States, for the space
of three years from this time, to deposit their merchandises and effects in the
port of New-Orleans, and to export them from thence without paying any other
duty than a fair price for the hire of the stores, and his Majesty promises
either to continue this permission, if he finds during that time that it is not
prejudicial to the interests of Spain, or if he should not agree to continue it
there, he will assign to them, on another part of the banks of the Missisippi,
an equivalent establishment.

ART. XXIII. The present treaty shall not be in force until ratified by the
contracting parties, and the ratifications shall be exchanged in six months
from this time, or sooner if possible.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we, the underwritten plenipotentiaries of his Catholic
Majesty and of the United States of America, have signed this present treaty of
friendship, limits and navigation, and have thereunto affixed our seals
respectively.

DONE at San Lorenzo el Real, this seven and twentieth day of October, one
thousand seven hundred and ninety-five. THOMAS PINCKNEY, (L. S.) EL PRINCIPE DE
LA PAZ, (L. S.)


TREATY of Peace and Amity between the United States of America and the Dey of
Algiers.
A Treaty of Peace and Amity concluded this present day I -- ima artasi, the
twenty-first of the Lunar safer, year of the Hegira 1210, corresponding with
Saturday, the fifth of September, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-five,
between Hassan Bashaw, Dey of Algiers, his Divan and Subjects, and George
Washington, President of the United States of North America, and the Citizens
of the said United States.
ARTICLE I. FROM the date of the present treaty, there shall subsist a firm and
sincere peace and amity between the President and citizens of the United States
of North America, and Hassan Bashaw, Dey of Algiers, his Divan and subjects;
the vessels and subjects of both nations reciprocally treating each other with
civility, honor and respect.

ART. II. All vessels belonging to the citizens of the United States of
North America, shall be permitted to enter the different ports of the Regency,
to trade with our subjects, or any other persons residing within our
jurisdiction, on paying the usual duties at our custom-house that is paid by
all nations at peace with this Regency; observing that all goods disembarked
and not sold here shall be permitted to be reimbarked without paying any duty
whatever, either for disembarking or embarking. All naval and military stores,
such as gunpowder, lead, iron, plank, sulphur, timber for building, tar, pitch,
rosin, turpentine, and any other goods denominated naval and military stores,
shall be permitted to be sold in this Regency, without paying any duties
whatever at the customhouse of this Regency.

ART. III. The vessels of both nations shall pass each other without any
impediment or molestation; and all goods, moneys or passengers, of whatsoever
nation, that may be on board of the vessels belonging to either party, shall be
considered as inviolable, and shall be allowed to pass unmolested.

ART. IV. All ships of war belonging to this Regency, on meeting with merchant
vessels belonging to citizens of the United States, shall be allowed to visit
them with two persons only beside the rowers; these two only permitted to go on
board said vessel, without obtaining express leave from the commander of said
vessel, who shall compare the passport, and immediately pe^^it said vessel to
proceed on her voyage unmolested. All ships of war belonging to the United
States of North America, on meeting with an Algerine cruiser, and shall have
seen her passport and certificate from the Consul of the United States of
North America, resident in this Regency, shall be permitted to proceed on her
cruise unmolested: No passport to be issued to any ships but such as are
absolutely the property of citizens of the United States: and eighteen months
shall be the term allowed for furnishing the ships of the United States with
passports.

ART. V. No commander of any cruiser belonging to this Regency, shall be
allowed to take any person, of whatever nation or denomination, out of any
vessel belonging to the United States of North America, in order to examine
them, or under pretense of making them confess any thing desired; neither shall
they inflict any corporal punishment, or any way else molest them.

ART. VI. If any vessel belonging to the United States of North America, shall
be stranded on the coast of this Regency, they shall receive every possible
assistance from the subjects of this Regency: all goods saved from the wreck
shall be permitted to be reimbarked on board of any other vessel, without
paying any duties at the custom-house.

ART. VII. The Algerines are not, on any pretense whatever, to give or fell any
vessel of war to any nation at war with the United States of North America, or
any vessel capable of cruising to the detriment of the commerce of the United
States.

ART. VIII. Any citizen of the United States of North America, having bought
any prize condemned by the Algerines, shall not be again captured by the
cruisers of the Regency then at sea, although they have not a passport; a
certificate from the consul resident being deemed sufficient, until such time
as they can procure such passport.

ART. IX. If any of the Barbary states at war with the United States of
North America, shall capture any American vessel and bring her into any of the
ports of this Regency, they shall not be permitted to sell her, but shall
depart the port on procuring the requisite supplies of provision.

ART. X. Any vessel belonging to the United States of North America, when at
war with any other nation, shall be permitted to send their prizes into the
ports of the Regency, have leave to dispose of them, without paying any duties
on sale thereof. All vessels wanting provisions or refreshments, shall be
permitted to buy them at market price.

ART. XI. All ships of war belonging to the United States of North America, on
anchoring in the ports of the Regency, shall receive the usual presents of
provisions and refreshments, gratis. Should any of the slaves of this Regency
make their escape on board said vessels, they shall he immediately returned: No
excuse shall be made that they have hid themselves amongst the people and
cannot be found, or any other equivocation.

ART. XII. No citizen of the United States of North America, shall be obliged
to to redeem any slave against his will, even should he be his brother: neither
shall the owner of a slave be forced to sell him against his will: but all such
agreements must be made by consent of parties. Should any American citizen be
taken on board an enemy-ship, by the cruisers of this Regency, having a regular
passport, specifying they are citizens of the United States, they shall be
immediately set at liberty. On the contrary, they having no passport, they and
their property shall be considered lawful prize; as this Regency know their
friends by their passports.

ART. XIII. Should any of the citizens of the United States of North America,
die within the limits of this Regency, the Dey and his subjects shall not
interfere with the property of the deceased; but it shall be under the
immediate direction of the consul: unless otherwise disposed of by will. Should
there be no consul, the effects shall be deposited in the hands of some person
worthy of trust, until the party shall appear who has a right to demand them;
when they shall render an account of the property. Neither shall the Dey or
Divan give hindrance in the execution of any will that may appear.

ART. XIV. No citizen of the United States of North America, shall be obliged
to purchase any goods against his will; but, on the contrary, shall be allowed
to purchase whatever it pleases him. The consul of the United States of
North America, or any other citizen, shall not be amenable for debts contracted
by any one of their own nation; unless previously they have given a written
obligation so to do. Should the Dey want to freight any American vessel that
may be in the Regency, or Turkey, said vessel not being engaged, in consequence
of the friendship subsisting between the two nations, he expects to have the
preference given him, on his paying the same freight offered by any other
nation.

ART. XV. Any disputes or suits at law, that may take place between the
subjects of the Regency and the citizens of the United States of North America,
shall be decided by the Dey in person, and no other. Any disputes that may
arise between the citizens of the United States, shall be decided by the
consul; as they are in such cases not subject to the laws of this Regency.

ART. XVI. Should any citizen of the United States of North America, kill,
wound, or strike a subject of this Regency, he shall be punished in the same
manner as a Turk, and not with more severity. Should any citizen of the United
States of North America, in the above predicament, escape prison, the consul
shall not become answerable for him.

ART. XVII. The consul of the United States of North America, shall have every
personal security given him and his household: he shall have liberty to exercise
his religion in his own house: all slaves of the same religion, shall not be
impeded in going to said consul's house, at hours of prayer. The consul shall
have liberty and personal security given him to travel whenever he pleases,
within the Regency: he shall have free license to go on board any vessel lying
in our roads, whenever he shall think fit. The consul shall have leave to
appoint his own drogaman and broker.

ART. XVIII. Should a war break out between the two nations, the consul of the
United States of North America, and all citizens of said states, shall have
leave to embark themselves and property unmolested, on board of what vessel or
vessels they shall think proper.

ART. XIX Should the cruisers of Algiers capture any vessel having citizens of
the United States of North America on board, they having papers to prove they
are really so, they and their property shall be immediately discharged. And
should the vessels of the United States capture any vessels of nations at war
with them, having subjects of this Regency on board, they shall be treated in
like manner.

ART. XX. On a vessel of war belonging to the United States of North America
anchoring in our ports, the Consul is to inform the Dey of her arrival; and she
shall be saluted with twenty-one guns; which she is to return in the same
quantity or number. And the Dey will send fresh provisions on board, as is
customary, gratis.

ART. XXI. The Consul of the United States of North America shall not be
required to pay duty for any thing he brings from a foreign country for the use
of his house and family.

ART. XXII. Should any disturbance take place between the citizens of the
United States and the subjects of this Regency, or break any article of this
treaty, war shall not be declared immediately; but every thing shall be
searched into regularly: the party injured shall be made reparation.

On the 21st of the Luna of Safer, 1210, corresponding with the 5th September,
1795, Joseph Donaldson, jun. on the part of the United States of North America,
agreed with Hassan Bashaw, Dey of Algiers, to keep the articles contained in
this treaty sacred and inviolable; which we the Dey and Divan promise to
observe, on consideration of the United States paying annually the value of
twelve thousand Algerine sequins in maritime stores. Should the United States
forward a larger quantity, the overplus shall be paid for in money, by the Dey
and Regency. Any vessel that may be captured from the date of this treaty of
peace and amity, shall immediately be delivered up on her arrival in Algiers.

Signed, VIZIR HASSAN BASHAW, JOSEPH DONALDSON, jun.
Seal of Algiers stamped at the foot of the original treaty in Arabic.
To all to whom these Presents shall come, or be made known.
WHEREAS the underwritten David Humphreys, has been duly appointed
Commissioner Plenipotentiary, by letters patent under the signature of the
President, and seal of the United States of America, dated the 30th of March
1795, for negotiating and concluding a treaty of peace with the Dey and
Governors of Algiers; whereas by instructions given to him on the part of the
Executive, dated the 28th of March and 4th of April, 1795, he has been further
authorized to employ Joseph Donaldson, junior, on an agency in the said
business; whereas, by a writing under his hand and seal, dated 21st May 1795,
he did constitute and appoint Joseph Donaldson, junior, agent in the business
aforesaid; and the said Joseph Donaldson, jun. did, on the 5th of September,
1795. agree with Hassan Bashaw, Dey of Algiers, to keep the articles of the
preceding treaty sacred and inviolable:

Now know ye, That I, David Humphreys, Commissioner Plenipotentiary aforesaid,
do approve and conclude the said treaty, and every article and clause therein
contained; reserving the same nevertheless for the final ratification of the
President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent
of the Senate of the said United States.

(Seal) In Testimony whereof, I have signed the same with my Hand and Seal, at
the City of Lisbon, this 28 th of November, 1795. DAVID HUMPHREYS.



TREATY of Peace and Friendship between the United States of America and the
Bey and Subjects of Tripoli of Barbary.
ARTICLE I. THERE is a firm and perpetual peace and friendship between the
United States of America and the Bey and subjects of Tripoli of Barbary, made
by the free consent of both parties, and guarantied by the Most Potent Dey and
Regency of Algiers.

ART. II. If any goods belonging to any nation with which either of the parties
is at war, shall be loaded on board of vessels belonging to the other party,
they shall pass free, and no attempt shall be made to take or detain them.

ART. III. If any citizens, subjects or effects belonging to either party,
shall be found on board a prize vessel taken from an enemy by the other party,
such citizens or subjects shall be set at liberty, and the effects restored to
the owners.

ART. IV. Proper passports are to be given to all vessels of both parties, by
which they are to be known. And considering the distance between the two
countries, eighteen months from the date of this treaty shall be allowed for
procuring such passports. During this interval the other papers belonging to
such vessels shall be sufficient for their protection.

ART. V. A citizen or subject of either party having bought a prize condemned
by the party or by any other nation, the certificate of condemnation and bill
of sale shall be a sufficient passport for such vessels for one year: this
being a reasonable time for her to procure a proper passport.

ART. VI. Vessels of either party putting into the ports of the other, and
having need of provisions or other supplies, they shall be furnished at the
market price. And if any such vessel shall so put in from a disaster at sea,
and have occasion to repair, she shall be at liberty to land and re-embark her
cargo, without paying any duties. But in no case shall she be compelled to land
her cargo.

ART. VII. Should a vessel of either party be cast on the shore of the other,
all proper assistance shall be given to her and her people; no pillage shall be
allowed, the property shall remain at the disposition of the owners, and the
crew protected and succored till they can be sent to their country.

ART. VIII. If a vessel of either party should be attacked by an enemy within
gun shot of the sorts of the other, she shall be defended as much as possible.
If she be in port, she shall not be seized or attacked when it is in the power
of the other party to protect her; and when she proceeds to sea no enemy shall
be allowed to pursue her from the same port within twenty-four hours after her
departure.

ART. IX. The commerce between the United States and Tripoli -- the protection
to be given to merchants, masters of vessels and seamen -- the reciprocal right
of establishing consuls in each country, and the privileges, immunities and
jurisdictions to be enjoyed by such consuls, are declared to be on the same
footing with those of the most favored nations respectively.

ART. X. The money and presents demanded by the Bey of Tripoli as a full and
satisfactory consideration on his part, and on the part of his subjects, for
this treaty of perpetual peace and friendship, we acknowledged to have been
received by him previous to his signing the same, according to a receipt which
is hereto annexed, except such part as is promised on the part of the United
States to be delivered and paid by them on the arrival of their consul in
Tripoli, of which part a note is likewise hereto annexed. And no pretense of
any periodical tribute or farther payment is ever to be made by either party.

ART. XI. As the government of the United States of America is not in any sense
founded on the Christian religion, as it has in itself no character of enmity
against the laws, religion or tranquillity of Musselmen -- and as the said
States have never entered into any war or act of hostility against any
Mohammedan nation, it is declared by the parties, that no pretext arising from
religious opinions shall ever produce an interruption of the harmony existing
between the two countries.

ART. XII. In case of any dispute arising from a violation of any of the
articles of this treaty, no appeal shall be made to arms, nor shall war be
declared on any pretext whatever. But if the consul residing on the place where
the dispute shall happen, shall not be able to settle the same, an amicable
reference shall be made to the mutual friend of the parties, the Dey of
Algiers, hereby engaging to abide by his decision. And he, by virtue of his
signature to this treaty, engages for himself and his successors, to declare
the justice of the case according to the true interpretation of the treaty, and
to use all the means in his power to enforce the observance of the same.

Signed and sealed at Tripoli of Barbary, the 3d day of Jumad, in the year of
the Hegira 1211 -- corresponding with the 4th day of November, 1796, by (L. S.)
JUSSUF BASHAW MAHOMET, Bey. (L. S.) MAMET. Treasurer. (L. S.) AMET, Minister of
Marine. (L. S.) AMET, Chamberlain. (L. S.) ALLY, Chief of the Divan. (L. S.)
SOLIMAN, KAYA. (L. S.) GALIL, General of the Troops. (L. S.) MAHOMET,
Commandant of the City. (L. S.) MAMET, Secretary.

Signed and sealed at Algiers, the 4th day of Argil. 1211, corresponding with
the 3d day of January, 1797, by (L. S.) HASSAN BASHAW, Dey. And by the Agent
Plenipotentiary of the United States of America. (L. S.) JOEL BARLOW.


